GENERAL BY-LAWS 
OF THE 
TOWN OF MANCHESTER-BY-THE-SEA 

(Revised through April 2019) 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS............................................................................................ 1 
ARTICLE II: TOWN MEETINGS..................................................................................................... 4 
ARTICLE III: DUTIES OF TOWN OFFICERS ............................................................................... 8 
ARTICLE IV: TOWN PROPERTY, FINANCES AND CONTRACTS ....................................... 11 
ARTICLE V: LEGAL AFFAIRS ..................................................................................................... 14 
ARTICLE VI: FINANCE COMMITTEE........................................................................................ 15 
ARTICLE VII: PLANNING BOARD ............................................................................................. 16 
ARTICLE VIII: WATER AND SEWER COMMISSIONERS ..................................................... 17 
ARTICLE IX: RECORDS AND REPORTS.....................................................................................21 
ARTICLE X: POLICE AND OTHER REGULATIONS ............................................................... 22 
ARTICLE XI: CIVIL DEFENSE ..................................................................................................... 46 
ARTICLE XII: EARTH REMOVAL............................................................................................... 48 
ARTICLE XIII: PERSONNEL BY-LAW ...................................................................................... 55 
ARTICLE XIV: RESIDENT PARKING ......................................................................................... 58 
ARTICLE XV: FEES........................................................................................................................ 61 
ARTICLE XVI: HISTORIC DISTRICT BY-LAW......................................................................... 62 
ARTICLE XVII: GENERAL WETLANDS BY-LAW................................................................... 65 
ARTICLE XVIII: UNDERGROUND FUEL STORAGE............................................................... 78 
ARTICLE XIX: COUNCIL ON AGING......................................................................................... 84 
ARTICLE XX:  COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE BY-LAW. .............................85 
ARTICLE XXI: AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND………………….............................87 
AN ACT REQUIRING THAT CERTAIN MEASURES IN THE TOWN OF 

MANCHESTER-BY-THE-SEA BE APPROVED AT A TOWN ELECTION................. 93 APPENDIX…………………………………………………………………….………………….94 

ARTICLE I 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 

SECTION 1 	These by-laws, adopted by vote of the Annual Meeting in 1949, shall be known as the "General By-laws." 
SECTION 2 	So far as the provisions of the General By-laws are the same as those previously existing by-laws, they shall be construed as a continuation of such by-laws, but subject to said limitation, all by-laws of the Town heretofore in force, excepting Zoning By-laws, are hereby repealed and any portion of any vote of the Town heretofore passed which is contrary to the provisions of these by-laws is hereby repealed; provided that this repeal shall not apply to or affect that portion of any by­law, vote or article heretofore adopted, accepting, adopting or exercising any option under the provisions of any statute of the Commonwealth; and further provided that this repeal and the adoption of these by-laws shall not affect any act done, any right accrued, and any penalty or liability incurred, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of such adoption; nor shall the repeal of any by-law have the effect of reviving any by-law previously repealed or suspended. 
SECTION 3 
SECTION 4 	Enforcement 
A. Criminal Complaint Whoever violates any provision of these by-laws may be penalized by indictment or on complaint brought in the district court.  Except as may be otherwise provided by law and as the district court may see fit to impose, the maximum penalty for each violation or offense brought in such manner shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) 
B. Non-criminal Disposition Whoever violates any provision of these by-laws, the violation of which is subject to a specific penalty, may be penalized by a non-criminal disposition as provided in M.G.L., Chapter 40, Section 21D.  The non-criminal method of disposition may also be used for violations of any rule or regulation of any municipal officer, board, or department which is subject to a specific penalty. 
Without intending to limit the generality of the foregoing, it is the intention of this provision that the following by-laws and sections of by-laws are to be included within the scope of this subsection, that the specific penalties as listed here shall apply in such cases, and that the municipal personnel listed shall be the enforcing agent.  Each day on which any violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
1. 	General Wetlands By-law Fine allowed: $300 Enforcement agent: Conservation Administrator and Police Officers 
Fine schedule:  
Wetlands  Non-compliance with an Order of  
Resource  Conditions, Enforcement Order or  
Buffer Zone  Area  Violation Notice  

First offense Second offense Third and subsequent offenses [Amended 2013]  Warning ($0) $ 50.00 $ 50.00 $150.00 $300.00 $300.00  $100.00 $200.00 $300.00  
2. Harbormaster Regulations  

Fine allowed: $25 Enforcement agent: Harbormaster; Assistant Harbormasters Fine schedule: $25 first and subsequent offenses 
3. 	
Water and Sewer Division Regulations Fine allowed: $300.00 Enforcement agent: Designated employees of the Water and Sewer Division Fine schedule: $300 per violation.  Every day constitutes a separate offense 

4. 
Accessible Parking By-law [Added 1997, Amended 2003] 


Illegal Parking: 
Fine allowed: $300.00 Enforcement agent: Police Officers Fine schedule: $100.00 for first offense; $300.00 for each subsequent offense. 
Failure to establish accessible parking spaces: 
Fine allowed: $100.00 Enforcement agent: Police Officers Fine schedule: $100.00 per violation.  Every day constitutes a separate offense. 
5. Tobacco Products Regulations 
Fine allowed: 	$100 for the first violation; $200 for the second violation; $300 for the third and subsequent violations. 
Enforcement agents: 	Designated employees of the Police Department and the Board of Health Agent. [Added 1997] 
6. 	Tobacco Use Regulations Fine allowed: $50.00 for the first violation; 
$100.00 for the second violation;  
$125.00 for the third violation.  
Enforcement agents:  Employees of the Police Department designated by the Police Chief  
and employees of the School Department  as  designated by the  
School Superintendent. [Added 1998]  
7. Nuisance Regulations  
Fine Allowed:  $100 for the first violation  
$200 for the second violation  
$500 for the third and subsequent violations  
Enforcement agents:  Designated employees of the Police  
Department and the Board of Health Agent.  (Added 2002)  

8. Printed Matter Vending Machines [added 2005] 
Fine Allowed: $100 for the first violation 
$200 for the second violation 
$300 for the third and subsequent violation 
Enforcement agents: Employees of the Police Department designated by the Police Chief 
SECTION 5 	Except as otherwise provided by law, prosecution for offenses under these by-laws may be made by any police officer of the Town. 
ARTICLE II 
TOWN MEETINGS 

SECTION 1 	The Annual Town Meeting shall be held on the first Monday in April of each year at 7 o'clock in the evening. [Amended 1991] 
SECTION 2 	The meeting for the election of officers and for the balloting upon such matters as may be required by law to be determined by the use of the ballot, shall be held on the third Tuesday in May of each year, the polls to be opened at 7:00 A.M. and to be closed not earlier than 8:00 P.M. [Amended 1993, 2003] 
SECTION 3 	The warrant for any Town Meeting shall be directed to any constable of the Town and notice of any Town Meeting shall be given by posting the attested copies of the warrant at the Town Hall, Post Office, Police Station and Engine House, twenty-one 
(21) days at least before the day appointed of the Annual Town Meeting and fourteen (14) days at least before the day appointed for a Special Town Meeting.  At the time of posting, as herein provided, printed copies of the warrant for any Town Meeting shall be made available by the Selectmen at their office for registered voters of the Town.  At any Town Meeting, printed copies of the warrant and the recommendations of the Finance Committee shall be made available by the Selectmen for all the voters attending said meeting.  An article to be inserted in a warrant for a Town Meeting must be delivered to the Board of Selectmen, and a copy to the Secretary of the Finance Committee, sixty (60) days prior to an Annual Meeting and twenty-eight (28) days prior to a Special Meeting.  At least seven (7) days before the Annual Town Meeting, an adequate supply of the warrant, the Annual Town Report and the Report of the Finance Committee shall be caused by the Selectmen to be made available at the Town Hall, Library, Police Station, Fire Station and the Memorial School.  At least fourteen (14) days before a Special Town Meeting, a copy of the warrant with the report of the Finance Committee contained therein shall be caused by the Selectmen to be published at least once in a newspaper having a circulation in the Town or to be left at each occupied dwelling house and apartment in the Town. [Amended 1974, 1986, 1993, 1995] 
SECTION 4 	When a Town Meeting is adjourned, excepting an adjournment from day to day, the Town Clerk shall cause notices of the time and place of holding such adjourned meeting to be duly posted in the public places referred to in Section 3 of this Article and published in a local newspaper if practicable.  These notices shall also state briefly the business to come before such adjourned meeting. 
SECTION 5 	One hundred (100) registered voters shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at any Town Meeting except such parts of meetings as are conducted under the provisions of Section 2 of this article; provided, however, that a less number may adjourn. [Amended 1974, 2004] 
SECTION 6 	The Moderator may appoint tellers who shall permit only registered voters to enter upon the floor of the place where any town meeting is held.  The Moderator may, at his discretion, permit persons other than qualified voters to attend said meetings. 
SECTION 7 	The articles of the warrant shall be acted upon in the order in which they appear unless otherwise determined by vote of the meeting. 
SECTION 8 	The Moderator may require any motion to be presented in writing. 
SECTION 9 	The Moderator may require that a motion, if susceptible of division, shall be divided and the question put separately upon each part thereof.  
SECTION 10 	When a question is under debate, until it is disposed of, no motion shall be received but to adjourn, for the previous question, to lay on the table, to commit, to recommit, to amend or substitute, to refer, or to postpone to a certain time, which several motions shall have precedence in the order in which they are herein arranged, and the first three such motions shall be decided without debate. 
SECTION 11 	In taking a vote on proposed amendments involving sums of money, the larger amount shall be put to the question first, and an affirmative vote thereon shall be a negative vote on any smaller amount. 
SECTION 12 Any person who is employed as an attorney by another interested in any matter under discussion at a town meeting shall disclose the fact of his employment before speaking thereon. 
SECTION 13 A. Except as otherwise provided in this Section 13, a vote on any question shall in the first instance be taken in the manner which the Moderator directs.  If a two-thirds vote of a town meeting is required by statute, the count need not be taken, except as provided in the following sentence.  If a vote declared by the Moderator but not counted electronically or by the tellers is immediately questioned by seven or more voters, the Moderator shall call for another vote counted electronically or by a show of hands or a standing vote, in either case counted by the tellers, or by ballot. [Added 1998, Revised 2006, 2019] 
B. Whenever any twenty (20) voters so request, the vote on any question shall be taken electronically or by ballot, as the Moderator may direct. 
C. The form of the ballot to be used for taking a ballot vote, unless the Moderator shall otherwise direct, shall bear the word "yes" printed on one half, and the word "no" printed on the other half. It shall be the responsibility of the Town Clerk to have available at every Town Meeting a supply of such ballots.  The method of issuing and collecting ballots shall be as determined by the Moderator. 
D. The Moderator and Town Clerk shall ensure that any electronic voting system used pursuant to this By-law produces an anonymous log of all votes recorded, so that a voter may retain his or her handset identifier and determine, after the meeting dissolves, how his or her votes were recorded [Added 2019]. 
SECTION 14 No vote of the meeting shall be reconsidered except by a two-thirds vote.  A motion for reconsideration shall be in order only at the same session of a meeting as the action to be reconsidered.  When a motion for reconsideration is decided, that question shall not be reconsidered, and no question shall be reconsidered more than once. [Amended 2017] 
SECTION 15 All committees shall be appointed by the Moderator unless otherwise directed by the meeting or otherwise provided by law or by these by-laws, and it shall be the immediate duty of the member first named to call the committee together for organization. 
SECTION 16 No motion to adjourn a town meeting sine die shall be in order; and no motion to dissolve a town meeting shall be in order until every article in the warrant therefore has been duly considered and acted upon. 
SECTION 17 Notwithstanding any other by-law, no appropriation exceeding $1,000,000 to be raised by issuing bonds or other evidences of indebtedness maturing in more than a year, except appropriations for a revenue producing department, shall be valid unless the motion calling for the appropriation or action shall be adopted by a vote on a printed ballot, after full opportunity for debate. [Amended 1991, 2013] 
SECTION 18 Before any Annual Town Meeting, the Moderator may select from the Warrant those articles which in the Moderator's judgment are likely to be adopted without debate and cause such articles and the motions to be made under each one to be published in a Consent Calendar.  At least seven (7) days before the Annual meeting, the Moderator shall cause an adequate supply of copies of the Consent Calendar to be made available at the Town Hall, Library, Police Station, Fire Station and the Memorial School, and cause a copy to be published in a newspaper having a circulation in the Town.  At an appropriate time in the Annual Meeting, the Moderator may announce consideration of the Consent Calendar.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 7 and 10 of this Article, a motion will then be in order to adopt the motions in the Consent Calendar without debate.  After the motion is seconded, the Moderator shall recognize any voter for the purpose of holding any article in the Consent Calendar, and shall cause any such article to be deleted from the motion to adopt.  When all requests for holds have been received, the Moderator shall put the motion as modified to a vote, without further debate.  Adoption of the motion by unanimous vote shall constitute adoption of all the motions contained therein.  Thereafter, all articles held, or if the motion to adopt is not voted unanimously, all articles in the Consent Calendar, shall be acted upon in accordance with the other provisions of this Article.  A vote to adopt the Consent Calendar shall not be subject to reconsideration, but each motion contained in the Consent Calendar as adopted may be reconsidered individually in accordance with Section 15 of this Article. [Added 1998] 
SECTION 19 	Without otherwise limiting the discretion of the Moderator pursuant to provisions of Massachusetts General Laws and of these Bylaws, the Moderator shall follow the guidance of Town Meeting Time and not other procedural handbooks. In the event of a conflict between Town Meeting Time and these Bylaws, the provisions of the Bylaws shall prevail.” (Added 2012) 
ARTICLE III 
DUTIES OF TOWN OFFICERS 

SECTION 1 General Duties 
No officer or employee of the Town, nor any agent of any such officer or employee, shall receive any compensation or commission for work done by him for the Town except the salary, wages or fees lawfully appropriated, without the permission of the Selectmen expressed in a vote, taken prior to the performance of such work, which shall appear on their records with the reason therefor. 
SECTION 2 Board of Selectmen 
A. The Selectmen shall have the general direction and management of the property and affairs of the Town in all matters not otherwise provided for by law or by these by-laws. 
B. Except as otherwise provided by law, the Selectmen shall have the custody of the bonds given by all town officers. 
C. The Selectmen shall transmit to the Town Clerk a copy of each instrument of conveyance of land or interest therein executed on behalf of the Town. 
D. The Selectmen may, from time to time, make, publish and enforce such rules and regulations as they shall deem advisable regarding the use of all town floats, docks, wharves, and similar installations belonging to the Town, and regarding the use of other public places belonging to the Town over which the Selectmen exercise jurisdiction. 
E. Whenever an article is submitted for insertion in the warrant of any town meeting, which proposes any amendment or addition to or repeal of any of these by­laws, the Selectmen shall refer such article to the Town Counsel, who shall advise the Selectmen whether the proposal is legal and in proper form and whether any other by-laws are affected thereby. 
F. The Selectmen shall appoint an inspector of wires, who shall perform the duties prescribed by law. 
G. The Board of Selectmen, with the approval of the Board of Health, shall provide and maintain some suitable place or method at which inhabitants of the Town shall have the right under suitable regulations made from time to time by the Board of Selectmen, with the approval of the Board of Health, to deposit such solid waste as may be permitted by such regulations.  Such rules and regulations shall require the separation of designated recyclable material or materials from other refuse. [Amended 1991] 
H. The Selectmen shall have the general direction and management of and shall exercise jurisdiction over Town beaches and landings and the Singing Beach Bathhouse. [Added 1995] 
SECTION 3 Town Clerk 
A. The Town Clerk shall immediately after every town meeting notify in writing all members of committees who may be elected or appointed at such meeting, stating the business upon which they are to act and the names of the persons composing the committees, and shall notify all officers, boards and committees of all votes passed at such meeting in any way affecting them. 
B. The Town Clerk shall keep in his or her office at least five (5) copies of these by­laws with all amendments thereto, which copies shall be open to inspection during reasonable hours. 
C. The Town Clerk shall properly record or cause to be recorded every instrument of conveyance to the Town of any interest in land and shall have custody of all such instruments, except as otherwise provided by law. 
D. The Town Clerk shall keep a book containing a true copy of all conveyances executed on behalf of the Town. 
E. The Town Clerk shall keep on file a copy of every standing vote of the Town made subsequent to the adoption of these by-laws and shall keep an index thereof including an index of all acts of the Legislature accepted by the Town subsequent to such adoption. 
F. All Town Boards, Committees and Commissions shall file all approved meeting minutes and adopted rules and regulations with the Town Clerk for filing and placement on the Town’s website within 7 business days of approval and/or adoption [Added 2019]. 
SECTION 4 Collector of Taxes 
A. The Town Treasurer and Collector of Taxes shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by law, and, in addition, he shall, under the title of Town Collector, collect all overdue or delinquent accounts which may be submitted to him by any board, committee, or department. 
B. The Town Treasurer and Collector of Taxes shall report to the Selectmen from time to time all uncollected accounts in his hands, and shall advise the Selectmen as to those accounts which, in his opinion, require legal action.  This sub-section shall not apply in any case where the duties and obligations of the Town Treasurer and Collector of Taxes are specified by law. 
SECTION 5 	Town Accountant The Selectmen shall appoint a Town Accountant, who shall perform the duties prescribed by law. 
SECTION 6 	Inspector of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances The Selectmen shall appoint the Chief of the Fire Department as Inspector of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances for a term of three years, who shall perform the duties prescribed by law. 
SECTION 7 	Harbormaster The Town Administrator shall appoint, subject to confirmation by the Board of Selectmen, set the annual compensation for, and assign duties to a Harbormaster for a term to run as provided by law.  The position of Harbormaster shall be a full-time position between April 1st and October 1st. The Selectmen shall set the hours of employment for the remaining months. Between April 1st and October 1st, the Harbormaster shall not hold any other town appointment. In addition to other duties assigned by the Selectmen, the Harbormaster shall post lists of all mooring permits including mooring number, sticker serial number, permit holder, and boat name, all waiting lists, and all mooring assignment transactions to a publicly accessible location in the Town Hall and to the Town’s Web site. [Added 2011] 
ARTICLE IV 
TOWN PROPERTY, FINANCES AND CONTRACTS 

SECTION 1 	An audit of the accounts of the Town shall be made annually under the supervision of the State Division of Accounts, as provided by law. 
SECTION 2 	Payments on all accounts due the Town shall be remitted to the Town Treasurer and Collector of Taxes. 
SECTION 3 	No bill, charge or account against the Town shall be paid without the approval in writing first being obtained by the person, board or committee authorized to contract the same. 
SECTION 4 	Any board or officer in charge of a department may, with the approval of the Selectmen, sell any personal property not required by said department if the market value of such property as determined by the Selectmen does not exceed the threshold as established by MGL Chapter 30B, § 15 as may be amended, and may sell any such personal property of greater value if the sale is made at public auction or by sealed bid with the joint authorization of the Selectmen and Chairman of the Finance Committee. Sealed bids shall be invited by informing a sufficient number of interested parties to insure fair competition, and by public advertisement by at least one insertion in a newspaper having a circulation in Manchester.  Such invitations shall state when and where the items for sale can be viewed, and the time and place at which bids will be opened, and shall reserve to the Town the right to reject any and all bids.  All bids shall be opened in public.  If personal property of any value instead of being separately sold can be delivered to a vendor as part of the consideration for the duly authorized purchase by the town of other personal property, the Selectmen alone may authorize such a transaction.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any specific sale of any personal property may be made on any terms if specifically authorized by a vote of the town. [Amended 1987, October 2017] 
SECTION 5 	Contracts Except as otherwise provided by law, each elected board or committee is authorized to enter into contracts against appropriations under their control or the exercise of the Town's corporate powers, on such terms and conditions as are deemed appropriate.  No contract, other than contracts for personal or professional services, involving an obligation of the Town in excess of $5,000 shall be binding upon the Town unless it is in writing, is approved by Town Counsel as to form only, and is signed by at least a majority of the board or committee duly authorized or having control of the appropriation against which such obligation is incurred; and such board or committee shall make a record of every such contract. [Amended 1991] 
SECTION 6 	Bonds Except for the collection of garbage and rubbish and except as otherwise provided by law, the performance of every contract, other than contracts for personal or professional services, or for the purchase of materials or equipment, which is estimated to cost $10,000 or more, shall be secured by bond in a penal sum not less than the amount of the contract, and the garbage and rubbish collection contracts will require bonds in the penal sum of 33 1/3% of the amount of the contract.  The contractor shall provide surety on said bond, either by a satisfactory indemnity or surety company, or by depositing with the Town Treasurer cash or United States government bonds in an amount equal to the penal sum of the bond.  This section shall not apply in cases of emergency requiring immediate action for the preservation of life or for the protection of property.  Evidence indicating that such an emergency exists shall be furnished to the Selectmen in writing by the officer, board or committee making such contract and shall be kept on file with other records of such transactions. [Amended 1991] 
SECTION 7 	[Deleted 1990] 
SECTION 8 	No conveyance or acquisition of any interest in real property shall be made by the Town unless such conveyance or acquisition is authorized by vote of the Town, and no such conveyance or acquisition shall be authorized by the Town unless the matter has been referred to the Planning Board and the Planning Board has submitted its report to the Town.  The Planning Board shall report to the Town at least seven (7) days before each Town Meeting, making a written recommendation with respect to any articles in the warrant relating to the Town's conveyance or acquisition of any interest in real property and also with respect to any other matter on which the Planning Board may be required or elects to make a recommendation.  Unless the Town votes otherwise pursuant to recommendations by the Board of Selectmen, Planning Board and the Finance Committee, a conveyance of real property owned by the Town shall be by public auction, due notice of which shall be given at least seven (7) days prior to said auction.  This section shall not apply to any conveyance of tax titles or any acquisition of land under tax title procedure.  
Notwithstanding any other by-law, non-exclusive easements in the public way and non-exclusive easements less than 1,000 square feet on other Town property may be granted by the board of Selectmen provided that any easement involving a water or sewer extension or other action affecting the public health shall require a public hearing and the advice of the Planning Board, Board of Health and Conservation Commission. [Amended 1991] 
SECTION 9 	[Deleted 1986] 
SECTION 10 Term of Contract The Town shall not award a contract for a term exceeding ten (10) years, including any renewal, extension, or option.  The Town shall not enter into a contract unless funds are available for the first fiscal year at the time of contracting.  Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal years shall depend on the availability and appropriation of funds.  (Reference MGL Chapter 30B Section 12). [Added 2001] 
SECTION 11: Revolving Funds 
Program or Purpose  Representative or Board Authorized to Spend  Department Receipts  
Costs Associated with Town of Manchester Recreation Programs  Recreation Director  Registration Fees or other funds intended to support the programs offered by the Recreation Department  

Expenditures from each revolving fund set forth herein shall be subject to the limitation established annually by Town Meeting or any increase therein as may be authorized in accordance with G.L. c.44, §53E½. [Added 2017] 
ARTICLE V 
LEGAL AFFAIRS 

SECTION 1 	Except as otherwise provided by law, the Selectmen shall have full authority as agents of the Town to appear and defend suits brought against the Town, to appear before any court, board or commission to protect the interests of the Town, and to institute and prosecute actions at law, proceedings in equity or any other legal proceeding.  In all such cases they shall report their action to the Town at the next succeeding town meeting. 
SECTION 2 	Except as otherwise provided by law, the Selectmen shall consider all claims, suits or proceedings made by or brought against the Town and may, in their discretion, settle the same. 
SECTION 3 	The Selectmen shall include in their annual report a report on all claims and suits pending or disposed of during the year. 
SECTION 4 	The Selectmen shall annually on or before the first day of June appoint a member of the bar in good standing to serve as Town Counsel for the term of one year or until his successor is appointed and enters upon the performance of his duties.  They shall likewise fill any vacancy in said office for the unexpired term and may employ special counsel to assist the said Town Counsel whenever, in their judgment, necessity therefor arises. The Selectmen shall make suitable arrangements with the Town Counsel for the employment of special counsel whenever, by reasons of adverse interest, the Town Counsel is unable to represent the Town and may reduce the amount to be paid Town Counsel as the circumstances require. [Amended 1974] 
ARTICLE VI 
FINANCE COMMITTEE 

SECTION 1 	There shall be a Finance Committee consisting of seven legal voters of the Town who shall serve without pay and no member shall be an employee or paid officer of the Town.  Each member of the Finance Committee shall serve for a term of three (3) years, and each term shall begin the 1st day of July.  Two members of the Finance Committee shall be appointed for each of two years and three members shall be appointed on the third year of an ongoing three year cycle. One member shall be appointed by the moderator each year.  One member shall be appointed by the Selectmen for each of two years and two members shall be appointed in the third year of the ongoing three year cycle of appointments. [Amended 1987, 2018] 
SECTION 2 	The original appointing authority shall promptly fill for the unexpired term any vacancies which may occur in the membership of the Committee.  An attested copy of such appointment shall be sent by the Secretary to the Town Clerk.  
SECTION 3 	After drawing the warrant for any town meeting, the Selectmen shall immediately transmit a copy thereof to the Finance Committee. 
SECTION 4 	In addition to the duties and power prescribed by law, the Finance Committee shall have the following duties and powers: 
A. The Committee shall consider all articles of a financial nature in the warrant for any town meeting and shall hold at least one public meeting for discussion of such article if so requested by three (3) voters of the Town. 
B. The Committee shall furnish the town meeting with such written recommendations as it deems for the best interests of the Town on all articles contained in the warrant involving or affecting expenditures, appropriations, debt, budgets, estimates, purchases or sales of property, or any other transactions of a financial nature in which the Town is interested. 
C. The Committee shall, whenever possible, recommend the amounts of money which in its opinion should be expended, appropriated, borrowed or received by the Town.  
D. The Committee shall have free access to all records, accounts, bills and vouchers having to do with the financial affairs of the Town, and may request any officer, board, committee, or department of the Town to furnish it with information pertaining to the financial affairs of such board, committee or department. 
E. The Committee may request any officer, board, committee or department to submit to it estimates of needs for maintenance, capital improvements or new equipment for any given period of time. 
F. The Committee shall make an annual report of all its doings with such recommendations as it deems suitable relative to any financial matters. 
ARTICLE VII 
PLANNING BOARD 

SECTION 1 
SECTION 2 	The Board of Appeals established under Section VIII of the Zoning By-laws of the Town shall act as a Board of Appeals under Section 81Z, Chapter 41, of the General Laws. 
[Amended in 1983 to reduce the term of the members of the Planning Board to three years, commencing in 1984.] 
ARTICLE VIII 
WATER AND SEWER COMMISSIONERS 

SECTION 1 	The Board of Water and Sewer Commissioners, as established under Chapter 165 of the Special Acts of 1918 and other acts relating thereto, shall adopt such regulations as they deem necessary or proper for the carrying on of the business of the Board and for regulating the use of the town water and sewer systems. 
SECTION 2 	The Commissioners shall keep all necessary and proper records pertaining to the business of the Board which shall be made available for public inspection in accordance with General Laws Chapter 39. 
SECTION 3 	Water Bans and Restrictions Any ban or restriction within the Town duly promulgated by the Board of Water & Sewer Commissioners shall have the full force and effect of a by-law and will be enforced in a like manner.  Any violation of such ban or restriction shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).  In the case of a continuing violation, each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.  Any such ban or restriction shall be posted as an advertisement for two issues of a newspaper having a general circulation in the Town, when the ban goes into effect and when the ban is lifted. [amended 1981] 
SECTION 4 	Water Use Restrictions 
A. Authority This By-law is adopted by the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea under its police powers to protect public health and welfare and its powers under M.G.L. c.40, §21 et seq. and implements the Town's authority to regulate water use pursuant to M.G.L. 
c.
 41, §69B.  This by-law also implements the Town's authority under M.G.L. c.40, §41A, conditioned upon a declaration of water supply emergency issued by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). 

B. 
Purpose The purpose of this by-law is to protect, preserve and maintain the public health, safety and welfare whenever there is in force a State of Water Supply Conservation or State of Water Supply Emergency by providing for enforcement of any duly imposed restrictions, requirements, provisions or conditions imposed by the Town or by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection. 

C.  
Definitions "Person" shall mean any individual, corporation, trust, partnership or association, or other entity. "State of Water Conservation" shall mean a State of Water Supply Conservation declared by the Town pursuant to Section (d) of this By-law. 


"Water Users" or "Water Consumers" shall mean all public and private users of the Town's water system, irrespective of any person's responsibility for billing purposes for water used at any particular facility. 
D. Declaration of a State of Water Supply Conservation The Town, through its Board of Selectmen, may declare a State of Water Supply Conservation upon a determination by a majority vote of the Board that a shortage of water exists and conservation measures are appropriate to ensure an adequate supply of water to all water consumers.  Public notice of a State of Water Conservation shall be given under Section (f) of this by-law before it may be enforced. 
E. Restricted Water Uses A declaration of a State of Water Supply Conservation shall include one or more of the following restrictions, conditions, or requirements limiting the use of water as necessary to protect the water supply.  The applicable restriction, conditions or requirements shall be included in the public notice required under Section (f). 
(i) 	
Odd/Even Day Outdoor Watering.  Outdoor watering by water users with odd numbered addresses is restricted to odd numbered days. Outdoor watering by water users with even numbered addresses is restricted to even numbered days. 

(ii) 	
Outdoor Watering Ban.  Outdoor watering is prohibited. 


(iii) 	Outdoor Watering Hours.  Outdoor watering permitted only during daily periods of low demand, to be specified in the declaration of a State of Water Supply Conservation and public notice thereof. 
(iv) 	
Filling Swimming Pools. Filling of swimming pools is prohibited. 

(v) 	
Automatic Sprinkler Use.  The use of automatic sprinkler systems is prohibited. 


F. Public Notification of a State of Water Supply Conservation; Notification of DEP Notification of any provision, restriction, requirement or condition imposed by the Town as part of a State of Water Supply Conservation shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town, or by such other means reasonably calculated to reach and inform all users of water of the State of Water Supply Conservation.  Any restriction imposed under Section (e) shall not be effective until such notification is provided. Notification of the State of Water Supply Conservation shall also be simultaneously provided to the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection. 
G. Termination of a State of Water Supply Conservation; Notice 
A State of Water Supply Conservation may be terminated by a majority vote of the 
Board of Selectmen upon a determination that the water supply shortage no longer 
exists. Public notification of the termination of a State of Water Supply 
Conservation shall be given in the same manner required by Section (f). 

H. State of Water Supply Emergency; Compliance with DEP Orders 
Upon notification to the public that a declaration of a State of Water Supply 
Emergency has been issued by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental 
Protection, no person shall violate any provision, restriction, requirement, condition 
of any order approved or issued by DEP intended to bring about an end to the State 
of Emergency. 

I. Penalties 
Any person violating this bylaw shall be liable to the Town in the amount of 
$100.00 for the first violation and $300.00 for each subsequent violation which shall 
inure to the Town for such uses as the Board of Selectmen may direct.  Fines shall 
be recovered by indictment, or on complaint before the District Court, or by non­criminal disposition in accordance with Section 21D of Chapter 40 of the general 
laws.  Each day of the violation shall constitute a separate offense.  Enforcing agents 
for issuing violation notices shall be police officers or water division employees 
designated by the Board of Selectmen. 

J.  Severability 
The invalidity of any portion or provision of this by-law shall not invalidate any 
other portion or provision thereof. 
[Added 1995] 

SECTION 5: Sewer Betterment Assessments 
A. The Board of Selectmen, acting as sewer commissioners in accordance with 
G.L. 
c.83, §§14, 15, and 23, and under the authority conferred by virtue of Chapter 373 of the Acts of 1912, as amended by Chapter 161 of the Acts of 1954, may assess betterments upon benefitted properties for all, or such lesser portion as the Board shall determine, of the cost of constructing municipal sewer system facilities; 

B. 
In fixing the amount of such betterments, the Board of Selectmen may, at their discretion, utilize the fixed uniform rate or the uniform unit rate method as set forth in G.L. c.83, §15. 

C. 
Further in accordance with G.L. c.83, §15, the Selectmen may, in assessing such betterments, separate the costs of general benefit facilities, including but not limited to pumping stations, trunk and force mains, from that of special benefit 


facilities, including but not limited to sewer mains, serving adjacent properties, 
and may apportion an equitable portion of the costs of the general benefit 
facilities by the uniform unit method on all properties benefitted by such facilities; 

D. The Selectmen may assess and collect estimated betterment assessments for the construction of sewer facilities in accordance with G.L. c.83, §15B. [Added 2017] 
ARTICLE IX 
RECORDS AND REPORTS 

SECTION 1 	All officers, boards, committees and departments of the Town shall cause records of their doings and accounts to be kept in suitable books, and shall also keep current inventories of all personal property under their control and current records of all personnel employed by them. 
SECTION 2 	Except as otherwise provided by law, all officers, boards, committees and departments of the Town shall annually report in writing to the Town in such a manner as to give the citizens a fair and full understanding of their doings and of such expenditures as they may have made and may refer to the report of the Town Accountant or Town Treasurer and Collector of Taxes for statements in detail of any receipts and payments and may make such recommendations as they deem proper. Such reports shall be submitted to the Selectmen for inclusion in the annual Town report on or before the first (1st) day of March of each year. If no report is made by a committee at the first annual town meeting following its appointment, such committee shall be deemed discharged unless the Town shall have granted an extension of time. [amended 1974] 
SECTION 3 	The annual Town Report shall contain, in addition to the reports of officers, boards, committees and departments as hereinbefore provided, a report showing what payments were made as capital outlays for permanent improvements during the prior year; a report of tax abatements made during the prior year; statements of all funds belonging to the Town or held for the benefit of its inhabitants; a statement of the liabilities of the Town on bonds, notes, certificates of indebtedness or otherwise, and of indebtedness authorized but not incurred, and the purposes thereof; a summary of Assets and Liabilities with respect to the Town’s future obligations regarding retirement and health care benefits of Town employees, which include the assumptions involved in the calculation of these matters, and a description of the plan to deal with any surplus or shortfall of assets relative to liabilities based on data of a timely nature; a statement of transfers made to or from any appropriation; abstracts of the records of the meetings of the Town held since publication of the last annual report;  and such other matters as the said report is required by law to contain, or as may be inserted by the Selectmen under the discretion granted them by law. [Amended 2011, 2013] 
SECTION 4 	The Selectmen of the Town may cause the by-laws and standing votes of the Town and the rules or regulations adopted by any officer, board, committee or department to be printed either separately or as part of the annual report. 
ARTICLE X 
POLICE AND OTHER REGULATIONS 

Streets and Sidewalks 
SECTION 1 	No person shall place or maintain a sign, advertising device, clock, marquee, permanent awning or other like structure projecting into or placed on or over a public way in the Town which projects into or over the way a distance of more than six (6) inches.  This by-law shall not apply to the maintenance of existing signs or other structures, nor to poles, wires, conduits, and appurtenances of railroad, railway, telegraph and telephone, water, gas, electric light, heat and power companies. 
Printed Matter Vending Machines 
A. 	Definition. Printed matter vending machine (referred to herein as “machine”) – Any box, container, stand, rack, storage unit or other dispenser or device installed, placed, used, operated or maintained for the display, sale, or distribution of newspapers, periodicals, or other printed matter for public use. 
B. 	Permit Required. No person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, trust or other type of entity shall place, install, use or maintain any printed matter vending machine on any public way, sidewalk, or other property owned or controlled by the Town without obtaining a written permit therefore from the Board of Selectmen. 
C. 	Application; fee.  The application for the permit shall fully and specifically describe the printed matter vending machine by setting forth its size by height, depth and width or any other relevant dimensions if varying in height, depth and width, the name and address of the applicant, the exact date or dates said machine will be in place or in operation, the exact place where the machine will be located, the manner in which said machine shall be affixed.  Further reasonable information which may affect the public safety, health or order in the community may be requested from the applicant.  An annual application fee, the amount of which will be determined upon passage of this amendment to the by-law and annually thereafter by the Board of Selectmen, which fee will be reasonably related to the costs of processing said application, shall be paid for each machine licensed.  The form of application shall be approved by town counsel. 
D. 	Insurance and Indemnification. The applicant shall agree to indemnify and save harmless the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea, its officials, agents, employees, boards, commissions, and committees, from any loss or damage and from all suits, actions and claims of any and every nature for or on account of any injuries or damage received or sustained by any person or company or other entity arising from the installation, use or maintenance of such machines.  Prior to the issuance of any permit hereunder, a certificate of insurance for the purpose of providing such indemnification shall be filed with the Board of Selectmen in a form and amount approved by the Board of Selectmen. 
E. 	Grant or denial; hearing.  Within twenty days of receipt of a completed application, including application fee, the Board of Selectmen shall grant a permit or shall order that a hearing be held within an additional ten days, giving at least five days written notice to the applicant. 
Within ten days next following the close of the hearing, the Board of Selectmen shall grant such permit or shall deny such application if it does not comply with the provisions of this by-law, or upon a finding that issuance of the permit would create a nuisance or would endanger the public health, safety, or order by: 
(1) 
Unreasonably increasing pedestrian traffic in the areas which the machine is to be located; or 

(2) 
Endangering the public safety by reason of the machine’s projection onto, into, or over any part of the roadway of any public street; by reason of its being affixed to a site or location used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or governmental use; by reason of its being located in such manner as to interfere unreasonably with or impede the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, sidewalk or street cleaning and/or snow removal, or the ingress or egress from any residence, place of business or any legally parked or stopped vehicle; or by reason of harm and defacement caused by its being affixed to poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects at or near such location. 


Notice of the denial of an application for a permit shall be in writing and accompanied by a statement of the reasons therefore.  The Board of Selectmen may impose conditions upon the permit which relate to compliance with the permit, applicable laws or by-laws, or to public safety, health or order, or to guard against the creation of a nuisance, or to ensure adequate safety and security for the public.  No applicant having been denied a permit shall submit the same or similar application within one year of the denial without including in the new application facts showing that the circumstances upon which the original denial was based have substantially changed. 
F. 	Location. No machine shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to property owned or maintained by the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea, and no machine shall be placed, installed, used or maintained on Town property, without the permission of the Board of Selectmen.  No machine shall be located within three feet of any crosswalk; within fifteen feet of any fire hydrant; within five feet of any fire or police call box or other emergency facility; within five feet of any driveway, public or private; within three feet ahead or fifteen feet to the rear of any designated bus stop, taxi stand or place whereby the clear space for the passage of pedestrians is reduced to less than four feet; or within three feet of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or other public place in such a manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes. 
G. 	Use for Advertising Prohibited. No machine shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes, other than that which identifies the printed matter offered therein. 
H. 	Maintenance. Each machine shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and in good repair at all times.  No reflecting paint, fluorescent or reflective materials may be used on any machine.  Any litter created by the contents of the machine shall be disposed of within forty-eight hours. 
I. 	Identification. The person who places or maintains such machine shall have his/her name or his/her Massachusetts agent’s name, address and telephone number affixed thereto in a place where such information may be easily seen. 
J. 	Time limit for compliance. All persons who have placed or intend to place machines in the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea shall have thirty days from the effective date of this by-law to comply with its provisions.  The Board of Selectmen may grant an extension of this time limit in its discretion for good cause. 
K. 	Violation. Violation of the terms and conditions of this by-law or of any permit granted hereunder shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100) for the first violation, two hundred dollars ($200) for the second violation, and three hundred dollars ($300) for the third and subsequent violations, and said violation(s) shall be cause for cancellation, suspension, revocation, modification, or non-renewal of the permit, after hearing, upon five days written notice sent by registered or certified mail to the name and address set forth in the annual application. 
L. 	Abandonment. Any machine that is not used for the distribution of printed material for a period of sixty calendar days or more shall be deemed abandoned, and the applicant shall remove it within forty-eight hours of being notified in writing by the Board of Selectmen to do so. 
M. 	Severability. If any section, clause, or provision of this by-law shall be found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the remainder of this by-law shall continue in full force and effect. [Amended 2005] 
SECTION 2 	No person without permission of the Superintendent of Streets or the Chief of Police shall in any manner obstruct traffic or endanger travel in or over any sidewalk, street or way open to public use nor shall any person without such permission place or throw on any such sidewalk, street or way any substance which will obstruct traffic or endanger travel. 
SECTION 3 	No person shall place or leave in or upon any sidewalk, street or way open to public use any garbage, rubbish or any substance or material which is or may become offensive or cause a nuisance. 
SECTION 3A     No person shall throw, deposit, discharge, place or cause to be thrown, deposited, discharged, or placed, any trash, refuse, rubbish, garbage or debris on any way, street, beach, park, sidewalk, recreation area or place to which the public has a right of access, or in or upon coastal or inland waters, within twenty (20) yards of any of the foregoing, or on property of another without permission of the owner thereof.  No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited refuse or garbage from his household or place of business into any trash barrel placed for the convenience of the public on any way, street, beach, park sidewalk, recreation area, or place to which the public has a right of access within the Town. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00 for each offense. [Amended 1980] 
SECTION 4 	There shall be no dumping in the Town except in areas designated by the Board of Public Works, with the approval of the Board of Health. [Amended 1981] 
SECTION 5 	No person shall suffer any horse or grazing beasts or swine to run at large in the Town or feed within the limits of any sidewalk, street or way open to public use either with or without a keeper. 
SECTION 6 	No person shall throw stones, snowballs, sticks or other missiles or kick footballs or play at any game in which a ball is used, or fly kites or balloons, or shoot with or use an air gun, bow and arrow, slingshot or other similar devices in or across any sidewalk, street or way open to public use or in any public place or common except as permitted by the Selectmen or by vote of the Town.  
SECTION 7 	A. No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, employment or business from the operator or occupant of any vehicle without the written permission from the Board or Officer having control of such roadway or highway.  [Amended 1973] 
B. No person shall leave any vehicle unattended within the limits or private ways so as to prevent access of fire apparatus, ambulances or other emergency vehicles. [Amended 1973] 
SECTION 8 	A. No resident of the Town shall operate a bicycle within the limits of the Town, no renting agency shall rent bicycles and no person shall conduct a business of buying or selling new or second hand bicycles without first complying with Chapter 85, Section 11A, as most recently amended of the Massachusetts General Laws Annotated, which requires the registration of bicycles and reports of sales of same. [Amended 1973] 
B. Operators of bicycles shall conform to the traffic rules and regulations set out in Chapter 85, Section 11B of the Massachusetts General Laws Annotated, as most recently amended.    [Amended 1973] 
SECTION 9 	No person shall coast upon or across any sidewalk, street or way open to public use except at such times and in such places as may from time to time be designated by the Selectmen. 
SECTION 10 	No person shall knowingly suffer or permit any water or other liquid substance to run or be discharged from any building owned by him or under his control onto or across any sidewalk, street or way open to public use except that any person may wash windows or other parts of a building, provided the public safety is not endangered. 
SECTION 11 	No person shall fire or discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm in or across any sidewalk, street or way open to public use or public place in the Town, but this section shall not prevent the use of such weapons in the lawful defense of one's person, family or property nor in the performance of any duty required or authorized by law. 
SECTION 12 	No person shall suffer a platform, grate or opening in any sidewalk, street or way open to public use to rise above the surface of the same, and every such opening shall be at all times covered by a suitable grate or covering. 
SECTION 13 	No owner or person having the care of any building abutting upon any sidewalk, the roof of which building slants towards the sidewalk, shall permit the building to be without a barrier, snow guard or other device to prevent the falling of snow or ice from such roof to the sidewalk. 
SECTION 14 	No person shall ride, drive or cause to be driven any horse or vehicle over that part of any street or way open to public use which is being mended, repaired or paved if a sign is posted prohibiting the same. 
SECTION 15 	No person, except one authorized by law, shall break or dig up any part of any sidewalk, street or way open to public use, remove any gravel or similar substance therefrom for any purpose whatever, except by permission of the Selectmen under such conditions and restrictions as they may deem proper, and after posting a surety bond on terms satisfactory to the Selectmen. 
[Section 15A as amended in 1987 was deleted in 2000] 
SECTION 16 	Whoever shall, by virtue of such permission, break or dig up any part of a sidewalk, street or way open to public use shall cause the same to be repaired and made safe to the satisfaction of the Selectmen. In case of neglect to repair and make safe as aforesaid, the Superintendent of Streets shall cause the same to be repaired and made safe at the expense of the person to whom permission was so granted. 
SECTION 17 	Whenever construction is to be performed on any street or way open to public use, the Selectmen shall give notice to all town departments and public utility companies concerned in order that necessary replacements may be made by such departments or utility companies during such construction. 
SECTION 18 	No vehicle shall be driven or moved nor shall any owner of any vehicle knowingly permit such vehicle to be driven or moved on any street or way open to public use unless such vehicle is so constructed or so loaded as to prevent its contents from escaping therefrom. 
SECTION 19 	The Superintendent of Streets or other officer having charge of ways for the purpose of removing or plowing snow, or removing ice, from any way, may remove or cause to be removed to some convenient place, including in such term a public garage, any vehicle interfering with such work; and the owner of such vehicle shall be liable for the reasonable cost of such removal and storage charges. 
Licenses 
SECTION 20A  In order to preserve public safety, any person, as provided for in Section 20(b), who engages in soliciting funds or who attempts to sell or solicit the sale of goods, wares, or merchandise for present or future delivery from door-to-door must register his or her true name and the name of the business or other organization for which the solicitation is authorized and the intended location of activity and times of activity with the Chief of Police.  Such registration shall be effective for fourteen (14) days, unless sooner revoked, and may be initially refused or subsequently revoked upon the failure of the applicant to supply reasonable proof of his or her identity and that of the organization, if any, which he or she represents or upon the discovery of any attempt by the applicant to falsify or obscure either such identity.  Upon such registration a certificate in such form as may be approved by the Board of Selectmen and Chief of Police shall be issued to the registrant. In all cases, the Chief of Police shall act on a request for registration within two (2) working days. [amended 1987] 
SECTION 20B. Transient Vendor; Hawker/Peddler All transient vendors, as defined by MGL Ch. 101, §1 shall obtain a license from the Board of Selectmen or its designee and all hawkers and peddlers as defined by MGL Ch. 101, §13 shall register with the Board of Selectmen or its designee before conducting business in the Town.  The Board of Selectmen shall establish such rules and regulations in order to secure the safety, comfort and convenience of the public. 
The applicant shall provide such information as the Board determines to be necessary including, but not limited to, a copy of the applicant's state license. 
A fixed fee for this license shall be set by the Board of Selectmen.  Any person failing to obtain such a license shall be subject to the fines provided for in this by­law. [Added 1997] 
SECTION 20C: Short Term Paying Guest in Homes 
Purpose: The rental of residential premises to short term paying guests, not otherwise expressly licensed for such purpose by the Town of Manchester by the Sea or other proper authority, shall be allowed only in properties whose owners have obtained an annual license in accordance with the requirements of this by­law from the Board of Selectmen.  The licensing process is designed to protect the health and welfare of the short term paying guests, to ensure an orderly and transparent process for operating small-scale rental services, and to protect the tranquility of residential neighborhoods.  
Applicability: The rental of residential premises to short term paying guests is allowed in owner-occupied residential premises pursuant to being licensed in accordance with this by-law and consistent with the Town’s Zoning By-law. Short term paying guests are those who are staying in a dwelling unit for less than 6 consecutive nights.  The Board may allow short term paying guests provided suitable accommodations exist as determined by the Board in accordance with this by-law. 
Process: Every owner of residential premises who offers rentals to short term paying guests must first obtain a license to do so from the Board of Selectmen.  Licenses are valid for a calendar year and must be renewed annually.  Application for a license can be made at any time but the license shall expire December 31 of the subject year.  A completed application will be reviewed and a decision rendered at a public meeting of the Board of Selectmen. 
Applications: Application shall be made on a form approved by the Board of Selectmen and shall contain sufficient information to determine the scope of the proposed short term rental operation, including location, number of rooms to be rented and whether meals prepared at the house will be served. Completed applications will be reviewed and acted upon within 3 weeks of submittal.  
By completing the application form, applicants shall be confirming the following: 
1. 	
The property complies with applicable Board of Health regulations and Fire Department safety measures (fire/smoke alarms and CO monitors) 

2. 	
Name of a local authorized agent who can act on behalf of the owner in the absence of the owner in the case of any problems, violations or emergencies should they arise while the owner is not present. 

3. 	
Agreement to maintain a guest registry showing the name of each guest and the night(s) of their stay. The registry shall be made available for review at any time at the request of the Enforcement Agent and/or Board of Selectmen. 


Application Fee:  The Board of Selectmen annually shall set a fee for applying for a Short Term Guest Rental Home License.  Said fee initially shall be set at $100. 
The Board of Selectmen shall grant licenses to those persons submitting applications in compliance with the requirements of this by-law.  A license issued under this by­law shall not be deemed to supersede the application of any other lawful requirements applicable to the use authorized therein, including the necessity of obtaining other licenses or permits. 
Owners are encouraged to adhere to guidelines for the short term rental of rooms that the Selectmen shall promulgate from time to time. 
Complaints and Enforcement: 
1. 	
The Board of Selectmen may designate such Town officials as they deem appropriate to carry out the enforcement duties under this by-law.  The Town Administrator shall supervise enforcement actions. 

2. 	
If the Enforcement Agent, as designated by the Board of Selectmen, concludes that there has been a violation of this by-law or of the conditions of any license issued hereunder, the agent shall send notice ordering cessation of the improper activities to the license holder, by registered mail to the address stated on the initial Application, . 

3. 	
If a license holder persists in such violation, the Enforcement Agent may seek enforcement of this bylaw through the mechanisms set forth in Article I, Section 4 of the General By-laws, and the penalty for violations of this by-law shall be a fine of $300 for each day an offense occurs.  

4. 	
In the event that a license holder persists in such violations, the Board may notify the license holder by mail, as above, of a hearing to be held not less than four (4) days thereafter to show cause why said license should not be revoked, and following said hearing, may in its discretion, modify, revoke or amend the license. 

5. 	
Upon petition of the property owner and/or license holder, abutters, or upon its own initiative, the Board of Selectmen may hold a hearing to determine whether or not the terms of this by-law, any other applicable state, federal or local law, or the license itself are being complied with, and/or whether or not activities 

conducted pursuant to a license issued under this bylaw constitute a nuisance or adversely impact the public health, safety or welfare. 

6. 	
The Board of Selectmen may, after hearing, mandate licensure, or modify, revoke or suspend a license issued hereunder.  In addition, should the Board of Selectmen, after conducting a hearing, determine that a violation has occurred; it may direct the Enforcement Agent to seek enforcement of this by-law as set forth in paragraph 3, above.  


Validity: The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate any other section or provision thereof.  This bylaw shall go into effect January 1, 2017. [Added 2016] 
SECTION 21 	Rules and orders for the regulation of carriages and vehicles in accordance with applicable provisions of law and of these by-laws shall be made by the Selectmen, and the Selectmen may issue licenses for the operation of hackneys and other vehicles for the conveyance of persons for hire, and such licenses may be revoked at the pleasure of the Selectmen. 
Hydrants and Pipes 
SECTION 22 	No person shall open a hydrant or lift or remove the cover thereof or make any opening or connection with any pipe or reservoir or turn on or turn off the water from any pipe, fountain, reservoir or hydrant under the control of the Board of Water and Sewer Commissioners except by authority of said Commissioners or their agents. 
Prohibition of Billboards 
SECTION 23 	No person shall erect or maintain a non-accessory sign within the Town of Manchester, except as may be permitted by Section 32 of Chapter 93 of the General Laws or the Zoning By-laws of the Town.  A non-accessory sign shall mean any sign other than a sign that advertises, or indicates the person occupying the premises on which the sign is erected or maintained, or the business transacted thereon, or advertises the property itself or any part thereof as for sale or rent, and which contains no other matter. [Amended 1974] 
Invasion of Privacy 
SECTION 24 	No person shall for commercial use play or use any portable recording device, amplifier, speaker or other instrument for the channeling of music, language or sound to, or on a public street or private way or place of outside assembly without a permit therefor issued by the Selectmen. 
No person shall behave in a rude, indecent or disorderly manner, or use profane, indecent or insulting language, or shout, scream and/or utter loud outcries without reasonable cause, in any public place or near any dwelling house in the Town to the annoyance or disturbance of any person there being or passing, or loiter on any sidewalk or street or about doorways or places of business to the annoyance of any person. 
No person shall willfully or negligently obstruct the free passage of any travelers in any accepted street or public way in this town.  The unnecessary sounding of car horns on public or private ways creating a loud noise or disturbance is prohibited. 
SECTION 25 	No person shall camp at or on, or utilize for sleeping purposes any property owned, controlled and/or maintained by the Town unless first obtaining permission from the Board of Selectmen. [Amended 1974] 
SECTION 26 	No person shall saunter or loiter in a street, public place or upon any sidewalk to the inconvenience of foot travelers, nor shall three or more persons obstruct or unreasonably persist in remaining upon any sidewalk or in a street or public place after having been requested by a police officer to move on.  No person shall remain upon any sidewalk, or public walk, fence, steps or porch to the annoyance of other people. [Amended 1968] 
The tenant or occupant, and in case there shall be no tenant or occupant, the owner, or any person having the care of any building or lot of land bordering on any street, lane, court, square or public place, within the Town, where there is a sidewalk, shall cause all garbage, rubbish or any substance or material which is or may become offensive or cause a nuisance to be removed therefrom within six (6) hours after the object is placed thereon and if he neglects to do so, he shall be liable to a penalty not less than two dollars nor more than ten dollars for each offense. 
Any person violating the provisions of any section of these by-laws where no specific penalty is stated shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than one nor more that twenty dollars for each offense. 
SECTION 27 	Unless granted a special permit by the Board of Selectmen, no person shall, in or on any public way, public alley, public parking area, public landing, park or playground or any way to which the public has a right of access, or any way or property to which members of the public have access as licensees or invitees, whether in or upon a vehicle, drink any alcoholic beverages, as defined in Massachusetts General Laws, Annotated, Chapter 138, Section 1.  The penalty for violating this by-law shall be a fine of up to $50.00. [Amended 1979] 
SECTION 28 	Animal Control 
SECTION 28Animal Control 
A. Purpose and Authority The purpose of this by-law is to set forth guidelines for the control of animals to prevent injury to the health, welfare and property of the residents of the Town and to prevent inhumane treatment of animals. This by-law is adopted pursuant to G.L. c.140, §173 and is intended to be administered in conjunction with and consistently with G.L. c.140, §136A to 173E inclusive while providing additional and supplemental practices, procedures and standards for animal control and welfare in the Town. 
B. Administration 
1. 	
Animal Control Board. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint annually an Animal Control Board made up of five residents of the Town. The Animal Control Board, in consultation with the Animal Control Officer, shall evaluate animal control and welfare issues within the Town and shall recommend solutions or actions necessary to resolve such issues. The Animal Control Board may also recommend to the Board of Selectmen appropriate rules, regulations or by-law amendments for the care and control of animals. 

2. 	
Animal Control Officer. The Animal Control Officer is a person or persons appointed by the Town Administrator, with recommendations from the Animal Control Board and the Chief of Police, to carry out the provisions of the Town by-laws and regulations concerning animals. The Animal Control Officer shall be duly qualified and trained in accordance with state law. 


C. Control of Domesticated Animals 
1. 	
No owner or keeper of a domesticated animal shall permit such animal to become a public nuisance or danger. For purpose of this by-law, the term “domesticated animal” shall be as defined by G.L. c.140, §136A. 

2. 	
No owner or keeper may maintain more than a total of four (4) domesticated animals of the same species over the age of three (3) months without a permit from the Board of Health. Any owner or keeper with more than four (4) dogs over three (3) months of age requires an appropriate kennel license, available at the Town Clerk's office. 

3. 	
Female Domesticated Animals in Heat. If the Animal Control Officer determines that a female domesticated animal in heat, even when confined, is attracting other animals thus causing a disturbance or damage to neighboring property or public area, he or she may require the owner or keeper to keep said domesticated animal, while in heat, in a kennel, or to remove it from the immediate area so that the nuisance is abated. 

4. 	
The following conduct is prohibited: 


(a) 	
No owner or keeper of a dog shall permit such dog to trespass on Town playgrounds and parks, Town cemeteries, or Town Hall, Public School or Public Library property or grounds in the Town. 

(b) 	
No owner or keeper of a dog shall permit such dog to trespass on any Town beaches from April 15 through October 14. [Amended 2011, 2013] 

(c) 	
No owner or keeper of a dog shall permit such dog to run at large in the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea. A dog shall be deemed running at large when it is both off 

the premises of the owner or such person in custody or control of, and is not on a leash or under direct voice command of a person able to control the dog. 

(d) 	
The owner or keeper of a dog shall remove and dispose of any feces left by such dog on any beach, sidewalk or street, in any park or other public place, or on any private property neither owned, leased nor otherwise permissibly occupied by said person. Disposal shall be accomplished by transporting feces to the property owned, leased or otherwise permissibly occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, or to an appropriate waste receptacle. Disposal in Town storm drains, or any water body or wetland, is prohibited. 


Service animals, as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act or other applicable provisions of state or federal law, may be exempt, in appropriate circumstances, to the extent that the service animal is acting in service to a person with a disability. 
D. Licensing Procedures and Identification Tags 
1. 	
Dogs, cats and ferrets six (6) months of age or older are required to be vaccinated for rabies, unless otherwise exempted by state statute. Individuals licensing dogs must present to the Town Clerk, at the time of such licensing, a current certificate or certificates signed and dated by a licensed veterinarian describing the animal and stating that it has been vaccinated against rabies, or is otherwise exempt from vaccination, under the requirements of G.L. c.140, §145B. 

2. 	
A dog required to be licensed must wear the tag issued by the Town Clerk and the tag issued by a veterinarian at all times when the animal is off the premises of the owner as required by state law. 

3. 	
Fees are as follows: $25 for male or female dogs or $20 for spayed or neutered dogs. Dog licenses expire on March 31 of each calendar year. No fee shall be charged for a license for a service animal as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act or the regulations promulgated thereunder. 

4. 	
Should any owner or keeper of a dog or kennel fail to license such before March 31 (or the first business day after March 31), that owner or keeper shall pay a graduated late fee of $10.00 per month for each month the dog or kennel is not registered up to a total late fee of $30.00, excepting a dog brought into Town as provided in M.G.L. Ch. 140 § 138. 


E. Abuse of Animals 
1. 	
No person shall abandon or neglect, abuse or intentionally injure any domesticated animal. 

2. 	
No person may permit, cause or procure any animal to be subjected to unnecessary torture, suffering or cruelty. 

3. 	
An owner or keeper of a domesticated animal is required to provide proper food and water, shelter or protection from the weather, veterinary attention needed to reduce or end suffering from disease or injury and a sanitary environment with adequate heat and ventilation. 


Nothing in this by-law is intended to limit or restrict criminal enforcement under G.L. c.272 §77 or other applicable Massachusetts General Laws or Town By-laws. 
F. Use of Animals as Prizes No person shall give away any live animal as a prize for or as an inducement to enter any contest, game or other competition, or as an inducement to enter any place of amusement or business, or offer such animal as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade. 
G. Enforcement of By-laws 
1. 
Notice	 of Violation and Assessment of Fine. Upon reasonable investigation and determination that Article X Section 28 (C), (D), (E), or (F) of the Town by-laws has been violated, the Animal Control Officer may issue a Notice of Violation and thereby assess the appropriate fine. 

2. 
Taking of Animals. The Animal Control Officer may take and impound in an animal shelter (no kill wherever possible) approved by the Animal Control Board: 


(a) 	
any domesticated animal not properly licensed and of undetermined ownership; 

(b) 	
any dog the Animal Control Officer reasonably believes to be a nuisance or dangerous dog as defined by state law; or 

(c) 	
any domesticated animal the Animal Control Officer reasonably believes may pose an immediate danger to the health, safety and public welfare of the people of the Town. 


The owner or keeper of such domesticated animal shall be responsible for the costs of care and confinement and must pay such costs as a condition of release of the domesticated animal. 
3. If the Animal Control Officer reasonably believes that a dog is a nuisance or dangerous dog, as defined by state law, he or she may order the dog humanely restrained and may file a complaint to the Board of Selectmen as the Hearing Authority, in accordance with 
G.L. 
c.140, §157 

H. 
Impoundment and Disposition of Domesticated Animals 


1. 
As soon as possible but no later than two (2) days after the impoundment of any animal, the owner or keeper shall be notified, or if the owner or keeper of the animal is unknown, or after reasonable efforts, is not contacted, written notice shall then be posted on a bulletin board in the office of the Town Police Department, in a local newspaper, and on the Town website and other reasonable media outlets describing the animal, place and time of taking and conditions required for the release of said animal. 

2. 
The owner or keeper may obtain the release of an impounded animal upon: 

(a) 	
obtaining a license and tag if required by law and the payment of a late fee; 

(b) 	
agreement of the owner or keeper to undertake restriction or control of the animal as the Animal Control Officer shall require; and 




(c) payment of all impound fees and fines, if any, before the animal is released. Nothing in this by-law is intended to limit or restrict the authority of the Board of Selectmen to act in accordance with G.L. c.140, §157. 
3. Unless reclaimed by their owners, impounded animals shall be kept for the minimum number of days required by state law in an approved animal shelter. In the case of a dog where a dangerous dog complaint was filed, a public hearing on the issue was held and euthanasia was ordered, the dog may be humanely euthanized only after consultation with a licensed veterinarian and only in accordance with state law. 
I Transportation of Injured Animals Upon the Animal Control Officer's reasonable determination that any animal is seriously injured and should receive veterinary care, and such animal is of unknown ownership and unattended, the Animal Control Officer shall make reasonable efforts to transport or arrange for transportation to a licensed veterinarian such animal. 
J. Fines 
1. 	
The Animal Control Officer and Town Police Officers shall be the enforcing authorities. 

2. 	
Any person violating any provisions of this by-law may, upon issuance by the Animal Control Officer of a Notice of Violation, be penalized by non-criminal disposition as provided in G.L. c.40, §21D and/or G.L. c.140, §173A, as applicable, in accordance with the following schedule: First offense: $10.00; Second offense: $25.00; Third and Subsequent offenses: $50.00. 

3. 	
If a dog is picked up for being unlicensed or in violation of any section of these by-laws the owner must pay, in addition to appropriate fines, a pick-up fee of $10.00 and, where applicable, a boarding fee. 


K. Severability If any part of this by-law shall be invalid, such part shall be deemed severable and the invalidity thereof shall not affect the remaining parts of this bylaw. No provision or interpretation of a provision of this by-law is intended to be either in conflict with, or an attempt to change, any statutory provision of the General Laws of the Commonwealth. 
[Amended 1987, 1994, 1998, 2011, 2013, Amended (replaced in its entirety) 2015] 
SECTION 29 Private Ways, Repairs, Liability and Assessments 
A. The Board of Selectmen is authorized to make temporary repairs under the provisions of G.L. c.40, §6N and permanent repairs and/or improvements under the provisions of Chapter 69 of the Acts of 2015 on private ways within the corporate limits of the Town that have been open to the public for a period of at least six (6) years, out of funds appropriated for said purpose by Town Meeting. In all cases, the entire cost shall be assessed as a betterment on those properties which benefit from the repairs. 
B. The Board of Selectmen shall make a determination that such repairs are required by public convenience and necessity before the repairs may be undertaken, which may include, but are not limited to, repairs and/or improvements for the purpose of providing (i) adequately drained ways; and/or (ii) adequate passable ways for public safety vehicles from public ways to residences. Temporary repairs shall not include the construction, reconstruction, or resurfacing of a way. 
C. The Town shall have no liability as a result of undertaking such repairs and/or improvements to private ways, except as may be provided by law, and shall be held harmless on account of any damages whatsoever caused by such repairs and/or improvements by agreement executed by the abutters who petitioned therefor, as provided below.  
D. Such temporary and permanent repairs and/or improvements to a private way shall be made only if the Board of Selectmen receives written agreements signed by at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the abutters on the way, stipulating that the way in question is private and is open to public use, agreeing to the repairs and/or improvements, and further indemnifying and holding harmless the Town, its officers, employees and agents, from all claims arising out of the carrying out of said repairs, or out of the Town’s failure to make repairs to any portion of the way at any time, including all claims brought pursuant to G.L. c.84, §25. 
E. The agreement to be signed by the foregoing abutters shall provide that: (i) the Town shall not be liable to such abutters by making the repairs; (ii) the abutters shall indemnify and hold harmless the Town with respect to such statutory liability and any and all other liability for claims caused by alleged defects in the way; (iii) such repair shall not constitute "maintenance" of such way, so as to give the way the status of a way "maintained and used as a public way" under the Massachusetts Subdivision Control Law; (iv) if assessed for repairs and/or improvements, the abutters shall not appeal the amount of the assessment and agree that the assessment may be apportioned over such number of years as determined in accordance with Section I below; and (v) such other provisions as may be deemed advisable by the Board of Selectmen. 
F. 	The private way shall have been opened to the public to use for six (6) years or more prior to the undertaking of such repairs, and shall remain open to the public for a period of at least twenty (20) years from the date of the last repair, for permanent repairs, and, for a period of at least seven (7) years from the date of the last repair, for temporary repairs. 
G. The Board of Selectmen shall determine the scope of repairs, including whether and to what extent any of the following shall be undertaken: grading, paving, resurfacing, scraping and filling of holes and impressions with sand, gravel or other suitable materials. Drainage repairs shall be included to the extent required by public convenience and necessity, as determined by the Board of Selectmen, upon advice and cost estimates from the Director of Public Works. 
H. The costs of the repairs and/or improvements and of borrowings undertaken by the Town pursuant to this bylaw and the Chapter 69 of the Acts of 2015 shall be assessed to and apportioned among the benefited property owners along the way so repaired or improved as a betterment pursuant to G.L. c. 80.  Benefited property owners shall be owners of those properties that can be accessed using the repaired and/or improved way. Unless otherwise required by any applicable law, the formula to be used for such assessments shall be to equally apportion such costs to the owner of each property that is listed in the records of the Board of Assessors as directly abutting along and/or adjacent to the way to be repaired/improved, whether or not such property directly abuts the way or is located along the portion of the way where the specific repairs are undertaken pursuant to this bylaw, on the basis of the total costs of such repairs and/or improvements and borrowings.  The provisions of G.L. c.80 shall govern the betterments assessed hereunder. 
I. 	The Board of Assessors may, and, at the request of the owner, shall, apportion all assessments or unpaid balances thereof into such number of equal portions, not exceeding twenty (20) years, or for such shorter period of time, as determined by the Board of Assessors in consultation with the Board of Selectmen. The Town shall accept settlement in cash of the full amount within thirty (30) days after the assessment has been committed to the Collector.  All assessments shall bear interest at a rate established by the Board of Selectmen on recommendation of the Town Treasurer, such rate to be at a minimum rate of two percent (2%) above the rate of interest charged said Town on any funds borrowed by the Town for this purpose. The Town Treasurer shall take steps to ensure that the Town shall record appropriate orders to secure payment of the amounts due under this Article in the same manner as the Town acquires liens for betterments assessed pursuant to G.L. c. 80. 
J. 	This bylaw does not confer any obligation or duty on the Town or its agents to either initially place or to thereafter maintain, repair and/or improve said private ways so that they are safe and convenient for travel by being free from defects or want of repair.  The making of such repairs and/or improvements to a private way, no matter how often or to what extent, does not constitute an acceptance by the Town of such a private way as a public ways, nor does it constitute a way being "maintained and used as a public way" under the Massachusetts Subdivision Control Law. 
[Amended 1978, Amended (replaced in its entirety) 2015] 
SECTION 30 	The Board of Selectmen are authorized to designate certain time restricted parking areas and prohibited parking areas as "Tow Away Zones". [adopted 1987] 
SECTION 30A: No Parking Zones 
A.  Parking on the following streets or portions of streets is prohibited, except (1) within 300 feet of religious institutions during organized services or special events, and (2) when temporarily authorized by the Manchester by-the-Sea Police Department: 
Beach Street (east of Tappan Street) B.  Violations of this by-law shall be punished by fines established by the Board of Selectmen.  Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
C.  The Manchester by-the-Sea Police Department shall enforce this by-law. [Added October 2017] 
SECTION 31 	Underwater Activities There shall be no skin-diving, scuba diving or any other underwater activities from Singing Beach at any time, and from Black Beach and White Beach, other than from the extreme ends of these beaches, from Memorial Day to the day following Labor Day.    [adopted 1982] 
SECTION 32 	Swimming Pools A fence of at least four (4) feet shall enclose all privately owned swimming pools. [adopted 1986] 
SECTION 33 	House Numbers All houses, businesses, and other buildings within the Town of Manchester shall conspicuously display street identification numbers to assist emergency vehicles, postal and delivery vehicles to locate specific properties in the Town. 
1. 
It shall be the duty of each owner or occupant to provide for the display of such number in such a manner that it is visible from the street. 

2. 
Said number shall be a minimum of three inches in height and contrasting in color. 

3. 
In the event that the house, building or business is not visible from the street, the number shall be displayed on a post or mailbox which is visible from the street. 

4. 
A committee consisting of the Fire Chief, one member from the Assessor’s department, one member from the Town Clerk’s department, and one member from the Police department shall have the authority to assign numbers and street names to any property in Town.  A person aggrieved by a decision of the committee make appeal to the Board of Selectmen by giving the Board and the committee written notice of appeal within 20 days after the committee gave notice of its decision. Within 30 days after receipt of the notice of appeal the Board shall hold a hearing and shall approve, modify or remand the committee’s decision or take such other action as it considers appropriate. Failure of the Board to act within the 30-day period shall be deemed a remand of the committee’s decision. [adopted 1988; amended 1998, 2000] 

5.
 Enforcement action may be taken by any duly authorized Town official. Violation of this By-law shall have a non-criminal disposition and be punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). [Added 2009] 


SECTION 34 Accessible Parking Spaces 
A. No person shall park a motor vehicle, motorcycle, or like means of transportation in a designated parking space that is reserved for vehicles owned and operated by disabled veterans or by handicapped persons unless said vehicle bears the distinctive license plate, placard, or for vehicles transporting a handicapped person, displays the special identification plate authorized by Section 2 of Chapter 90 of the Massachusetts General Laws, or for any vehicle bearing the official identification of a handicapped person issued by any other state. 
B. REQUIREMENT FOR PROPERTY OWNERS TO RESERVE SPACES 
1. 
Any person or body that has lawful control of a public or private way or of improved or enclosed property used as off-street parking for businesses, shopping malls, theaters, auditoriums, sporting or recreational facilities, cultural centers, multi-family residential dwellings or for any other place where the public has a right of access as invitees or licensees, shall be required to reserve parking spaces in said off-street parking areas for any vehicle bearing a handicapped plate or placard authorized by the state of Massachusetts or any other state or any Canadian Province or for any vehicle transporting a handicapped person and displaying the special identification plate authorized by section two of Chapter 90 according to the following formula: 

Total Parking Required Minimum Number in Lot of Accessible Spaces 15 to  25 1 26 to  50 2 51 to  75 3 76 to  100 4 101 to  150 5 151 to  200 6 One in every 8 accessible spaces, but not less than one, shall be van accessible.  At medical facilities providing medical care for persons with mobility impairments, 10% of the total number of parking spaces shall be accessible. 

2. 
Each parking space identified as reserved under the provisions of the previous section shall be identified by a permanently installed above-ground sign located at a height of not less than five (5) feet and not more than eight (8) feet to the top of the sign with white characters against a blue background and shall bear the words "Handicapped Parking, Special Plate or Placard Required.  Unauthorized Parking Subject to Fine and Towing at the Owner's Expense," and must also contain the international symbol of accessibility which is a person in a wheelchair.  Such parking spaces shall be as near as possible to a building entrance or walkway and adjacent to curb ramps or other unobstructed methods which permit sidewalk access for a handicapped person. Spaces shall meet the following specifications: 


a) Each space shall be thirteen (13) feet wide; an eight foot wide parking space and a 5 foot access aisle marked with diagonal stripes. 
b) Two accessible parking spaces may share a common access aisle. c) Van accessible spaces shall be sixteen (16) feet wide;  an eight (8) foot wide parking space and an eight (8) foot wide access aisle marked with diagonal stripes. 
All accessible spaces shall contain the international symbol of accessibility on their surface, shall be level, and space for vans shall have signs designating them van accessible. On unpaved lots, parking spaces shall be designated only by the sign as defined in this section. Where the designated space cannot be located within two hundred 
(200) 
feet of an entrance accessible to the physically handicapped, a drop-off area accessible to the physically handicapped shall be provided within one hundred (100) feet of the entrance. 

C. 
OBSTRUCTION OF ACCESS No person shall leave any unauthorized vehicles, or allow to remain standing whether attended or unattended or allow to remain live parked within spaces designated for use by disabled veterans or handicapped people as authorized by MGL 40, Section 21, Clause 


(23) 
or such manner as to obstruct a curb ramp or any other access designed as a means of egress to a street or public way as provided for in MGL C. 40, Section 21, Clause (24). 

D. 
APPLICABILITY This by-law shall apply to any existing or future parking area to which the public has a right of access as invitees or licensees and which contains fifteen (15) or more parking spaces. 

E. 
PENALTY 
The penalty for parking in violation of this by-law shall be as follows: 



1.
 Parking Fines-$100.00 for first offense and $300.00 for subsequent offenses. 


2. 
Failure to establish and/or maintain the parking spaces and signs required by Section  
of this bylaw shall be a fine of $100.00 for each day failure continues. 



F. ENFORCEMENT 
The Police Department will be charged with the enforcement of all sections of this by­law. 

G. EFFECTIVE DATE: 
Establishment of Accessible Parking Spaces and erecting of Handicapped Parking signs 
will be completed within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this by-law. [Adopted 
1997] 

SECTION 35 Railroad Regulations 
1. 
All persons traversing railroad crossings in the Town shall reduce the speed of the vehicle to a reasonable and proper rate before proceeding over the crossing, and shall proceed over the crossing at a rate of speed and with such care as is reasonable and 

proper under the circumstances; and specifically shall obey all crossing signals, coming to a complete stop upon the presence of flashing lights or crossing gates, and not traversing the tracks until the lights have ceased flashing and crossing gates have fully returned to their upright position. 

2. 
No person shall interfere with the operation of trains through the Town nor tamper or interfere in any manner with crossing signals, gates or other equipment related to trains traveling through the Town. 

3.
  Whereas the Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities has permitted an exemption to the requirement that whistles or horns be blown at all railroad crossings by trains traveling through the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea; and whereas the Federal Swift Rail Development Act, as amended, contemplates the granting of exemptions to the requirement that whistles or horns be blown at all railroad crossings, which exemption is based in part on a community's restrictions that horns and whistles not be blown, historical pattern, safety record, local by-laws, and other remedial steps taken by the community, no horn or whistle shall be sounded by any train traveling through the Town, except if the operator observes an emergency situation which in the discretion of the operator requires the blowing of such horn or whistle. 

4. 
The Superintendent of Schools and the Chief of Police shall be requested to develop and conduct regular safety education programs in the public schools and for the citizenry at large, which programs shall inform children and adults of the dangers posed by trains traveling through the Town, and precautions to take when approaching or traversing train crossings. [Adopted and amended 1997] 


SECTION 36 Tobacco Products Regulations All tobacco products sold within the Town at any location shall require a permit issued by the Board of Health.  [Adopted 1997] 
SECTION 37 Tobacco Use Regulations No person may use tobacco products in school, on school grounds, or on school property, such as buses, whether before, during, or after the school day. [Adopted 1998] 
SECTION 38 Hunting 
A. All persons hunting in the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea shall carry with them written permission from the owner, or custodial authority, of the land on which they wish to hunt.  Said permission shall be dated and signed, and must be valid for a fixed period of time.  All hunters must register annually with the Town Clerk before hunting, excepting those hunting waterfowl in coastal areas. 
B. The authorities or person(s) having control of public land shall designate on a map available at the Town Clerk’s office those public areas that are open to hunting. (Adopted, 1999) SECTION 39 Snow Emergency Parking Ban 
A. The Chief of Police, in consultation with the Director of Public Works, is authorized to declare a Snow Emergency Parking Ban when he or she determines, in his or her discretion, that the likelihood of snow, ice or other forms of precipitation will cause on-street parking to threaten or impair public safety. [Amended 2014] 
B. When the Chief of Police declares a Snow Emergency Parking Ban, residents and other motorists shall be notified of the ban through the activation by the Police Department of Blue Lights located at (1) the intersection of Pine and Pleasant Streets; (2) the intersection of School and Pleasant Streets; (3) Summer Street, near Sweeney Park; 
(4) 
Bridge Street, near the intersection with Harbor Street; and (5) the Police Station on Central Street. Information concerning a Snow Emergency Parking Ban shall also be posted on the Town website. 

C.
 While a Snow Emergency Parking Ban is in effect (the Blue Light system is on), it shall be a violation of this Bylaw to park any vehicle on any Town street, punishable in accordance with M.G.L. C. 90 S. 20A, as amended, with fines as set by the Board of Selectmen as permitted under M.G.L. C. 90 S. 20A. Each day during which the vehicle remains so parked shall constitute a separate violation. [Amended 2014, 2018] 

D.
 This Section shall be enforced by Police officers. 
(Adopted 2012) (Amended 2014) 



SECTION 40  Denial or Revocation of Permit for Non-Payment of Taxes or Fees 
In accordance with the provisions of M.G.L., C.40, §57, as amended, the Town may deny any application for, or revoke or suspend a building permit, or any local license or permit, including renewals and transfers, issued by any board, officer, or department for any person, corporation or business enterprise who has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other municipal charges, including amounts assessed under the provisions of M.G.L. c.40 §21D or with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject of such license or permit and which activity, event or matter is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate whose owner has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other municipal charges. 
A. The tax collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges, hereinafter referred to as the "tax collector," shall annually furnish to each department, board, commission or division, hereinafter referred to as the "licensing authority," that issues licenses or permits, including renewals and transfers, a list of any person, corporation or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the "party," that has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges for not less than a twelve­month period, and that such party has not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending petition before the Appellate Tax Board. 
B. The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit which it has the authority to issue, including renewals and transfers, of any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the tax collector, or with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject of such license or permit and which activity, event or matter is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate owned by any party whose name appears on said list; provided, however, that written notice is given to the party and the tax collector as required by applicable provisions of law and the party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier than fourteen (14) days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any party. The tax collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purpose of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this bylaw shall not be reissued or renewed until the licensing authority receives a certificate issued by the tax collector that the party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, payable to the municipality as of the date of issuance of said certificate. 
C. Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement, thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating said limitations to the license or permit, and the validity of said license shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law. 
D. The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it finds that there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as defined in M.G.L. C. 268, §1, in the business or activity conducted in or on said property. 
E. As limited by M.G.L. C. 40, §57, this bylaw shall not apply to licenses and permits for the following: open burning; bicycles permits; sales of articles for charitable purposes;, children work permits; clubs, associations dispensing food or beverage licenses; dog licenses; fishing, hunting, trapping licenses; marriage licenses; and theatrical events, public exhibition permits. [Adopted 2013] 
SECTION 41: Stretch Energy Code A.  Adoption. The Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea has adopted the provisions of 780 CMR 115.AA (i.e., Appendix 115.AA of the State Building Code or the “Stretch Energy Code”), as may be amended from time to time, in place of the provisions set forth under 780 CMR 13.00, 34.00, 61.00 and 93.00. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the Stretch Energy Code shall be to provide the Town with a more energy efficient alternative to the base energy code otherwise set forth under the State Building Code. [Adopted 2013] 
SECTION 42: Plastic Bag Reduction 
A. Purpose and Intent The production and use of thin-film single-use plastic bags have significant impacts on the marine and land environment of all coastal communities, including, but not limited to: contributing to the potential death of marine animals through ingestion and entanglement; contributing to pollution of the land environment; creating a burden to our solid waste collection and recycling facility; clogging our storm drainage systems; and requiring the use of millions of barrels of crude oil nationally for their manufacture. 
The purpose of this legislation is to eliminate the usage of thin-film single-use plastic bags by all retail establishments in the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea. 
B. Definitions “Thin-film single-use plastic bags” means bags with integral handles and a thickness of 2.5 mils or less that are intended to be used for the transport of products purchased at a retail establishment. . 
“ASTM D6400 standard” means the testing standard developed by the American Society for Testing and Materials for compostable plastics. “Biodegradable bag” means a bag that: 1) contains no polymers derived from fossil fuels; and 2) is intended for single use and will decompose in a natural setting at a rate comparable to other biodegradable materials such as paper, leaves, and food waste.  
Reusable bag” means a bag that is specifically designed for multiple use and is made of thick plastic, cloth, fabric or other durable materials. 
C.  Use Regulations Thin-film single-use plastic bags shall not be distributed or sold at any retail establishment within the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea. 
Customers are encouraged to bring their own reusable or biodegradable shopping bags to stores. Retail establishments may provide reusable or biodegradable thick plastic, paper, fabric or other types of bags at no charge, or charge a fee for paper or other bags, as they so desire. Retail establishments are strongly encouraged to make reusable bags available for 
sale to customers at a reasonable price.   
Thin-film plastic bags used to meat, bulk foods, wet itemswithout handles, are exempt from the p contain dry  and otherrovisions of this By-law.  cleaning, similar  newspapers, merchandise,  produce, typically  
D. Administration and Enforcement  

Retail establishments may apply to the Board of Selectmen for approval of new single-use bag products, as they come on the market, that meet, or exceed the ASTM D6400 standard . 
The Police Department will be the enforcement agent for this by-law and is authorized to issue notice of violation. 
This by-law may be enforced through any lawful means in law or in equity, including, but not limited to, non-criminal disposition pursuant to GL. 
C. 40 section 21D. Fines for civil penalties shall be issued as follows: 1) $50 
per day for each day the violation persists; 2) $100 per day for each day that 
a new violation occurs after the resolution of the first violation; 3) $200 per 
day for each day of any future violations that occur after the resolution of 
the second violation. 

E. Enactment 
This new By-law shall go into effect as of July 1, 2013. 
[Adopted 2013] 

SECTION 44: FOOD WARE AND POLYSTYRENE REDUCTION BY-LAW 
A. Purpose and Intent 
Polystyrene food containers and plastic utensils form a significant portion of the solid waste going into our landfills, they are not biodegradable and will remain in our landfills for centuries and that portion of them that makes their way into the oceans will break down into dangerous microplastics which harm and kill marine life and may affect human health. The purpose of this by-law is to reduce the usage of polystyrene and plastic products by all food-related and retail establishments in the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea. 
B. Prohibited Uses and Distribution of Food Service Products and Packaging 
(a) 
Polystyrene, polyvinyl chloride (PVC) or polyethylene terephthalate (PETE) food or beverage rigid containers shall not be used to package or serve food or beverages for sale by food establishments if that packaging takes place on the premises within the Town of Manchester by-the-Sea. 

(b) 
Food establishments using disposable food service products shall use biodegradable, compostable, reusable or recyclable products. 

(c) 
Retail establishments are prohibited from selling or distributing polystyrene disposable food service products to customers. 

(d) 
Retail establishments are prohibited from selling or distributing polystyrene foam packing material or products containing it to customers. 

C.
 Exemptions 


a) 	Foods and goods prepared or packaged outside the Town are exempt from the provisions of this By-law. 
b) Food and retail establishments may be exempted from the provisions of this By-law for specific items for up to one year based on the decision of the Building Inspector that a suitable biodegradable, compostable, reusable, or recyclable alternative does not exist for a specific product and imposing the requirements of this By-law would cause undue hardship to the establishment. An appeal of the Building Inspector’s decision may be filed with the Board of Selectmen. 
i) “Undue hardship” is a situation unique to the food or retail establishment where there are no reasonable alternative food service products or packaging and compliance with this provision would cause significant economic hardship to that food or retail establishment. 
ii) Extensions of the exemption may be granted upon application to the Building Inspector upon showing that the circumstances justifying the exemption continue to exist. 
(c) 
Containers used in the packaging of prescription medicines are exempt from the provisions of this By-law. 

D.
 Definitions 


“ASTM” shall refer the American Society for Testing and Materials whose applicable standards here are: D7081 being the standard for biodegradable plastics in the marine environment; D6400 being the standard for plastics designed for compostability in municipal aerobic composting facilities; D6868 being the standard for aerobic compostability of plastics used as coatings on a compostable substrate. 
“Biodegradable” shall mean entirely made of organic materials such as wood, paper, cellulose, or bioplastics that meet the ASTM D7081 standard or any other standard that may be developed specifically for an aquatic environment. 
“Compostable” shall mean organic or bioplastic materials certified to meet ASTM 
D6400, D6868 or that conform to other third-party standards, such as Vincotte, for home 
composting.  Any compostable product must be clearly labeled with the applicable 
standard. 

“Disposable food service products” refers to food and beverage containers, bowls, plates, 
trays, cartons, cups, lids, straws, stirrers, forks, spoons, knives, film wrap, and other items 
designed for one-time or non-durable uses on or in which any food vendor directly places 
or packages prepared foods or which are used to consume foods. This includes, but is not 
limited to, service ware for takeout foods and leftover food from partially consumed 
meals prepared at food establishments. 

“Food establishment” shall mean any operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves, 
vends, or otherwise provides food for human consumption. This includes restaurants, 
food service and food trucks. 

“Packing material” shall mean polystyrene foam used to hold, cushion, or protect items 
packed in a container for shipping, transport or storage. This includes, without limitation, 
packing "peanuts", shipping boxes, coolers, ice chests, or similar containers made, in 
whole or in part, from polystyrene foam that is not wholly encapsulated or encased within 
a more durable material. 

“Prepared food” shall mean any food or beverage prepared on the premises, using any 
cooking or food preparation technique regardless whether it is consumed on or off the 
premises. 

“Polystyrene” includes foam and rigid polystyrene. Foam polystyrene includes expanded 
polystyrene (EPS) and extruded polystyrene, such as “Styrofoam” a trademark. EPS is 
generally used to make cups, bowls, plates, trays and cartons. 
Rigid or oriented polystyrene is generally used to make clear containers, cups, plates, 
straws, lids and utensils. 

“Recyclable” shall mean material that can be sorted and reconstituted using the Town’s 
municipal recycling program or a comparable recycling program. 

“Retail establishment” shall mean any business that sells goods directly to the consumer 
including, but not limited to, grocery stores, pharmacies, liquor stores, convenience 
stores, restaurants, retail and clothing stores. 

“Reusable” means products that will be used more than once by a food establishment. 
Reusable includes tableware, flatware, cleanable durable containers, packages, or trays 
used on-premises or returnable containers such as soft drink bottles and milk containers 
that are designed to be returned to the distributor and supplier for reuse as the same food 
or beverage container. 

E. Administration and Enforcement 
The Police Department and the Building Inspector will be the enforcement agents for this 
By-law and both are authorized to issue notices of violation. Food and retail 
establishments are required to provide product, sales and any other product related 
information upon request. 

This By-law may be enforced through any lawful means in law or in equity, including, 
but not limited to, non-criminal disposition pursuant to GL. C.40 §21D. 
Fines for civil penalties shall be issued as follows: 

1) A written warning will be issued with 30 days granted to correct the violation; 2) $50 per day for subsequent violations concerning the same product(s); 3) $100 per day for violations that persist in excess of 30 days. 
F. Severability 
If any provision or section of this Law shall be held to be invalid, then such provision or section shall be considered separately and apart from the remaining provisions or sections of this law, which shall remain in full force and effect. 
G. Enactment 
This By-law shall go into effect October 1, 2019. 

[Adopted 2019] 
CONSTRUCTION SITE ACTIVITY 
Section A. Definitions. 
For purposes of this Article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section: 
Construction-Any activity requiring a building permit and any and all activity necessary or incidental to the erection, assembling, altering, installing, repair or equipping of buildings, structures, roadways, or utilities, including demolition, land clearing, grading, excavating, and filling and paving. 
Demolition-Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures or portions thereof, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property. 
Domestic Power Equipment -Electrical, gasoline, battery or generator powered equipment intended for use in residential areas by a homeowner on an intermittent basis.  Examples include, but are not limited to, chain saws, log splitters, power saws, drills, grinders, lawn and garden tools. 
Emergency-An occurrence or set of circumstances requiring immediate action involving: 
a. 
the restoration of public utilities; or 

b. 
the restoration of property to a safe condition following a public calamity; or 

c. 	
the protection of persons or property from imminent exposure to danger. 


Emergency Work -Work which is performed in an effort to alleviate an emergency. 
Emergency Vehicle-Any vehicle being operated as part of emergency work. 
Heavy Equipment-Commercial or industrial equipment such as motorized earth moving equipment, jack hammers, pavement breakers, pile drivers, trucks for loading and unloading dumpsters, tractor-trailers, rock tumblers, rock crushers, and parking lot maintenance equipment. 
Pavement Breaker -Any hydraulically or pneumatically powered impact device intended to cut or trench pavement, subbase macadam, gravel, concrete, or hard ground. 
Person-Any individual, partnership, association, firm, company, trust, corporation, department, bureau or agency, or any other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties and any person, as herein defined, operating under a contractual arrangement or agreement with the Town. 
Pile Driver -An impact device designed or used for the driving of piles, columns and other supports into soil or other material by means of impact, vibrations, pressure, or other means. 
Section B.  Exceptions. 
The provisions of this Bylaw shall not apply to: 

A. 	Emergency Alert. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency. 
B. 	Emergency Work. The emission of sound in the performance of Emergency Work. 
C. 	Emergency Vehicles. 
D. 	Snow Removal. The emission of sound for the purpose of clearance or removal of snow. 
E. 	Explosives. The emission of sound resulting from the use of explosives when authorized by the Fire Department in accordance with Board of Fire Prevention Regulations, 527 CMR 13, and other relevant regulations and statutes of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
F. 	The temporary, intermittent or occasional use of homeowner’s domestic power equipment. 
G. 	Work done by or for the municipality as approved by the Board of Selectmen. 
Section C. Daytime-Only Construction Activities. 
The operation of Heavy Equipment, Pavement Breakers or Pile Drivers at Construction or Demolition sites shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and shall be prohibited on Sundays and legal state or federal holidays.  
Section D.  Enforcement and Penalties. 
The Police Department shall be responsible for the enforcement of this Bylaw. 
This Bylaw may be enforced through any lawful means in law or equity, including, but not limited to, non-criminal disposition pursuant to G.L. c. 40, §21D.  Violations of this Bylaw shall be punished fines established by the Board of Selectmen: 
(1) 
First Offense $25.00 

(2) 
Second Offense: $50.00 

(3) 
Third and Subsequent Offenses: $100.00 


Section E. Notification. 
The Building Inspector will provide a copy of this Bylaw to any individual applying for any permit for work that might involve noise levels subject to this Bylaw but his failure to do so will not affect the enforceability of this Bylaw. 
Section F. Validity. 
The validity of any section or provision of this Bylaw shall not invalidate any other section of provision thereof. 
Section G.  Effective Date. 
This Bylaw shall take effect upon compliance with the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws, c. 40, §32. [Added October 2017] 
ARTICLE XI 
CIVIL DEFENSE 

SECTION 1 Department of Civil Defense 
There is hereby established a department of civil defense (hereinafter called the "department"). It shall be the function of the department to have charge of civil defense as defined in Section 1, Chapter 639, Acts of 1950, and to perform civil defense functions as authorized or directed by said chapter or by any and all executive orders or general regulations promulgated thereunder, and to exercise any authority delegated to it by the governor under said Chapter 639. 
SECTION 2 	Director of Civil Defense The Department shall be under the direction of a director of civil defense (hereinafter called the "director") who shall be appointed as prescribed by law.  The director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the department, subject to the direction and control of the appointing authority, and shall receive such salary as may be fixed from time to time by the appointing authority. The director may, within the limits of the amounts appropriated therefor, appoint such experts, clerks, and other assistants as the work of the department may require and may remove them, and make such expenditures as may be necessary to execute effectively the purposes of Chapter 639, Acts of 1950. 
The director shall have the authority to appoint district coordinators and may accept and may receive, on behalf of the town, services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds by way of gift, grant or loan, for purposes of civil defense, offered by the Federal government or any agency or officer thereof or any person, firm or corporation, subject to the terms of the offer and the rules and regulations if any, of the agency making the offer.  The director shall cause appropriate records to be kept of all matters relating to such gifts, grants or loans. 
SECTION 3 	Civil Defense Advisory Council There is hereby established a civil defense advisory council (hereinafter called the "council").  Said council shall serve without pay and shall consist of the director of civil defense, such other department heads and such other persons as the authority appointing said director may deem necessary.  Such member of said council, as said appointing authority shall designate, shall serve as chairman of said council.  Said council shall serve subject to the direction and control of the appointing authority and the director of matters pertaining to civil defense. 
SECTION 4 	Police Aid to Other Cities and Towns in Event of Riots or Other Violence Therein The police department is hereby authorized to go to aid another city or town at the request of said city or town in the suppression of riots or other forms of violence therein. 
SECTION 5 	Termination of By-law This by-law shall remain in force during the effective period of Chapter 639, Acts of 1950, and any act in amendment or continuation thereof or substitution therefor.  
SECTION 6 	Definition All references to Chapter 639, Acts of 1950, as now in force, shall be applicable to any act or acts in amendment or continuation of or substitution for said Chapter 639. 
ARTICLE XII 
EARTH REMOVAL 

SECTION 1 Definitions 
A. For the purposes of this by-law, "earth" shall include soil, sod, loam, peat, humus, clay, sand, gravel and rock. 
B. For the purposes of this by-law, "Board" shall mean the Planning Board. 
SECTION 2 Exemptions 
A. Notwithstanding the provisions hereof, no permit shall be required for the removal of earth from: 
1.
  any parcel in connection with the lawful construction of a residential building or structure thereon or the lawful construction of a driveway, sidewalk, path, septic system or swimming pool incidental to any such building or structure, provided that (i) the quantity of material removed does not exceed that actually displaced by the portion of building, structure, driveway, sidewalk or path below finished grade, and (ii) such construction does not excavate deeper than fifteen (15) feet from the preconstruction grade; [Amended 2007] 

2. 
any parcel of land in use by the Town of Manchester or by a higher governmental agency. 


B.  The Board, without a public hearing, may issue permits for the removal from the site of earth for the following purposes: 
1.
  where necessary as part of farm, garden, or nursery activities; 

2.
  as part of cemetery operations. 


SECTION 3 Earth Removal Procedure 
A. Permit Required -The removal of more than 250 cubic yards of earth from any parcel of land within the Town of Manchester, not in public use, shall, except as hereinafter provided, be allowed only in accordance with a written permit therefor issued by the Planning Board.  The Board may grant a permit for such removal and for temporary structures accessory thereto in accordance with the procedure hereinafter set forth for permits.  Any permit granted hereunder shall lapse within one (1) year if substantial use has not sooner commenced, except for good cause shown to the Planning Board.  No permit for removal shall be granted unless the Board finds that such removal (subject to the conditions imposed by the permit) will not be contrary to the best interests of the Town; and no removal operations subsequently conducted under such permit shall continue if contrary to such interests.  For this purpose, removal of earth material shall be considered contrary to the best interest of the Town which: 
1.
 will be injurious or dangerous to the public health or safety; 

2.
 will produce noise, dust or other effects observable at the lot lines in amounts seriously objectionable or detrimental to the normal use of adjacent property; 

3.
  will have a material adverse effect on the health or safety of persons living in the neighborhood, or the use of amenities of adjacent land; or 

4. 
will have an adverse effect on natural resources, including but not limited to the recharge of the water table or condition of the surface water. 


B. Application for Permit -Any person wishing to remove more than 250 cubic yards of earth from a property in the town shall file a formal application with the Planning Board, which application shall include the following specific information and supporting documentation: 
1. 
the location of the proposed excavation; 

2. 
the legal name and address of the owner of the property involved; 

3. 
the legal name and address of the petitioner, which address shall be used by the Board for all correspondence hereunder; 

4. 
property lines, names and addresses of all abutting property owners, including those across any streets; 

5. 
a detailed plan of the land involved, prepared by a Registered Civil Engineer, or a registered surveyor, and acceptable to the Board, at a scale of 1":20', or as determined appropriate, showing the entire parcel of land based on a perimeter survey and showing existing topography by five (5) foot contours within one hundred (100) feet of, and including, the site of the proposed excavation or to the property line.  This contour  plan shall show locations of a sufficient number of test borings made to determine the average depth of topsoil before excavation. 

6. 
a detailed plan of the land involved, prepared by a Registered Civil Engineer, or a registered surveyor, and acceptable to the Board, showing five (5) foot contours of a site as of the completion of the excavation project, all drawn to a scale acceptable to the Board.  The plan shall further show the maximum depth that the applicant intends to excavate, the type of material the applicant intends to extract from the land, the manner and depth in which he shall replace the top soil, and the type of reseeding and planting he proposes to use; 

7. 
natural features such as wetlands, the 100-year flood plain, ground cover and surface and ground water.  Water-table elevation shall be determined by test pits and soil borings.  A log of soil borings shall be included, taken to the depth of the proposed excavation, congruent with the size and geological makeup of the site; 

8. 
a topographical map showing drainage facilities, final grades, and proposed vegetation and trees; 

9. 
erosion and sediment-control plan; 

10. 
the amount and cost of proposed restoration materials; 

11. 
the location of monitoring wells which have been used to establish the high water table.  The highest elevation of the water table shall be determined by observation wells monitored during the months of April and May.  The observation wells' location shall be determined by the Conservation Commission or its designated agent.  The information 

concerning height of water table shall be gathered before application for a permit is made to the Planning Board; 

12. 
the proposed form of performance security to be used; and 

13. 
copies of the information outlined in the above articles one (1) through twelve (12) shall be filed with the Town Clerk and the Planning Board. 


SECTION 4 General Limitations 
A. In granting a permit hereunder, the Planning Board shall impose reasonable conditions especially designated to safeguard the neighborhood and the Town. These conditions shall be written upon and shall constitute part of the written permit, including, but not limited to: 
1. 
method of removal; 

2. 
type and location of temporary structures; 

3. 
fencing; 

4. 
hours of operation; 

5. 
routes for transporting the material through the Town; 

6. 
the duration of the removal operations; 

7. 
the area and depth of excavation' 

8. 
the reestablishment of ground levels and grades; 

9. 
the steepness of slopes excavated; 

10.
 provisions for temporary and permanent drainage; 

11.
 disposition of boulders and tree stumps; 

12.
 grading of slopes and replacement of loam over the area of removal; 

13.
 planting of the area to suitable cover, including trees, necessary to restore the area to usable condition; and 

14.
 distance from excavation to street and lot lines. 


B. No permit for the removal of earth shall be approved by the Board if the work extends within two hundred (200) feet, measured horizontally, of a way open to public use, whether public or private, or on an adjacent property line, or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a building or structure unless the Board is satisfied that such removal will not undermine the way or structure. 
C. No excavation not intended for approved building purposes nor other activity or building shall be within 100 feet, measured horizontally, of a stream, pond, wetland as defined under G.L., Chapter 131, or Section 40, or the 100-year flood elevation of any waterbody, except where another town board or committee has specifically ordered such excavation as a part of a compensatory-storage plan. 
D. No area shall be excavated so as to cause accumulation of freestanding water unless the Planning Board shall permit creation of a pond in an area not used for drinking water.  Permanent drainage shall be provided in accordance with good conservation practices.  Drainage shall not lead directly into streams or ponds. 
E. No earth or gravel shall be removed closer to the maximum high water table then ten (10') feet.  However, upon receipt of a permit from the Planning Board, this depth to a maximum  high water table may be decreased to seven (7') feet provided that the Planning Board determines that based upon soils, ground water flows, materials to be removed and any requirements that they may impose, such decrease in depth removal shall not be deemed to adversely affect the intent or purpose of this or other sections of the Manchester By-laws.  In determining the effect upon the Town of Manchester of increased earth or gravel removal, the Planning Board may require the applicant to submit a complete hydrological report, prepared by an individual or company selected by the applicant and approved by the Planning Board.  All costs incurred shall be borne by the applicant.  Said hydrological report shall present in detail findings relative to soils by type, ground-water direction and velocity, geologic logs describing any lines of fine material and water table depth of the subject property.  The Planning Board may restrict the use of lands excavated to seven (7') feet of the high water table and set conditions on the further and future use of said land.  All restrictions and conditions established by the Planning Board shall be noted as part of the permit.  Specific land-use restrictions and/or conditions may be amended from time to time by the Planning Board should future circumstances warrant such amendment. 
F. All topsoil and subsoil stripped from operation areas shall be stockpiled and used in restoring the area. 
G. Any shelters or buildings erected on the premises for use by personnel or storage of equipment shall be screened from public view and shall be removed from the premises within 60 days after the permit has expired or been revoked. 
H. Operation hours shall be only between 7:00 A.M. and 4:30 P.M. on weekdays. No weekend or holiday hours are permitted.  However, the Planning Board may further limit hours of operation if, after weighing factors, including impact on traffic flow and safety, it determines the public good will be served.  Trucks may enter and leave the premises only within such hours.  All loaded vehicles shall be suitably covered to prevent dust and contents from spilling and blowing from the load. 
I. Trucking routes and methods shall be subject to approval of the Chief of Police insofar as he may regulate industrial trucking. 
J. All access roads leading to public ways shall be treated with suitable material to reduce dust and mud for a distance of 200 feet back from the way.  The operator shall clean up any spillage on public ways. 
K. Access roads shall intersect a public way at right angles for a distance of no less than fifty (50') feet and shall be constructed at an angle to the public way or with a curve so as to help screen the operation from public view.  All access roads shall have at least 250 feet visibility in each travel lane entering a state-numbered or maintained highway and at least 150 feet visibility on all other streets.  Access roads shall not drain directly onto public ways. 
L. Permits for the removal of earth material shall be issued for a period of not more than three (3) years, although such a permit may be renewed by the Board, without a hearing, if the Board finds all conditions  have been complied with and that the work has been carried on continuously and in good faith. 
M. Any permit issued hereunder shall automatically expire upon the completion of the earth removal project for which it was issued, or at such other time as may be specified in such permit.  A permit issued hereunder is not transferable and no work under any such permit shall be performed except by the holder thereof. 
N. Where the duration of the permit exceeds one (1) month, the Board shall require a bond or other security of not less than seventy-five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) per acre to ensure compliance with its conditions or authorization under this by-law, unless, in a particular case, it specifically finds that such security is not warranted and so states in its decision, giving the reasons for its finding.  Where the duration of the permit is one (1) month or less, the Board may require such security as it deems necessary or desirable.  No performance bond or other security shall be released in full or in part unless and until the Planning Board is satisfied that all conditions of the permit have been met. 
O. No permit issued hereunder shall authorize any activity which is in violation of any Zoning By-laws of the Town. 
SECTION 5 	Specific Limitations No permit for removal of earth shall be approved by the Board except upon the following conditions: 
A. A cover of topsoil of not less than six (6) inches in depth shall be replaced or allowed to remain, except that it shall be no greater than the depth of topsoil, if any, shown on submitted plans, and except where due to the construction of roads, buildings or other permanent physical features, such provision is, in the judgment of the Board, impractical. 
B. Retained subsoil and topsoil shall be spread over the disturbed area and treated with appropriate fertilizer or other suitable material and seeded with an appropriate mixture of grass or legume mixture as prescribed by the Conservation District, Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture and as determined appropriate by the Planning Board, after consultation with the above noted agencies. Trees or shrubs of prescribed species will be planted to provide screening and reduce erosion during the establishment period. 
C. Restoration shall be carried on simultaneously with excavation, so that when any five (5) acres has been cleared and stumped and five (5) acres is in active mining operation, at least (5) acres shall be restored before work commences (including building haul roads) on the next contiguous five (5) acres.  Final restoration work shall be completed within 120 days after expiration or withdrawal of a permit or upon cessation of operations. 
D.  (1) Retaining walls (the location, dimensions, materials, design and specifications of which shall have been deemed satisfactory and approved by the Planning Board) and fencing shall be constructed as the Planning Board may require.  Rock cliffs, faces or outcroppings within or bordering the excavated area shall be stabilized in a manner and with such slope as shall be deemed satisfactory and approved by the Planning Board.  The owner shall maintain such retaining walls and fencing, and such rock cliffs, faces and outcroppings so stabilized, furnishing annual reports of their condition to the Building Inspector, as the Planning Board may require. [Added 2006] D. 2. Except as permitted by (d)(1) above, no slope shall be steeper than 1:2 (ratio of one foot vertical to two feet horizontal). 1:4 (ratio of one foot vertical to four feet horizontal) is preferred for erosion control and shall be required in sensitive areas. [Amended 2006] 
E. Unless the permit conditions expressly require alteration of drainage patterns, the land shall be left so that natural storm drainage shall leave the property at the original natural drainage points; and so that the total discharge at peak flow and the area of drainage at any one point, is not increased. 
F. Natural vegetation shall be left and maintained on undisturbed land for screening, noise reduction and erosion control purposes. 
SECTION 6 	Existing Operations Earth removal activities in lawful operation at the time this by-law is adopted may continue under the terms of existing permits until the expiration thereof, and thereafter application shall be made under the terms of this by-law. 
SECTION 7 	Permits for Proposed Subdivisions It is the intention of this by-law that the removal from any parcel of land for which a preliminary or definitive subdivision plan has been prepared shall be allowed only in the same manner as removal from other parcels of land in the Town. Consequently, tentative or final approval of a subdivision plan by the Planning Board shall not be construed as authorizing the removal of earth materials from the premises, except that which is to be removed in compliance with the requirements of a subdivision plan approved by the Planning Board. 
SECTION 8 	Notice and Hearing No permit for the removal of earth material shall be issued by the Board, except as provided in Sections 2B and 4L, above, until a public hearing is held thereon, by the Planning Board, due notice of which shall be given by them, at the expense of the applicant, at least fourteen (14) days in advance, in a paper commonly used for such notices in the community, the posting of copies thereof on municipal bulletin boards, and the mailing of copies thereof to abutting property owners, including those across any streets. 
SECTION 9 	General Administration 
A. The Planning Board shall exercise the powers and duties hereunder, the Inspector of Buildings shall be the enforcement officer. 
B. The Board or the Inspector of Buildings may enter upon the premises involved from time to time to inspect and ensure proper conduct of the work. 
C. Upon the petition of the owner, permit holder, abutters, or upon its own initiative, the Board may hold a new hearing and reissue or modify the permit, subject to any conditions not in conflict with the by-law. 
D. The Board may order revocation of or suspension of the permit if the conditions established hereunder are not complied with, and the permit holder in such situation shall not be relieved of his obligations thereunder. 
SECTION 10 	Fees The Board shall establish such fees for the issuance of permits as it shall find necessary for the administration of this by-law, taking into consideration the costs of clerical, civil engineering consultants, legal, and inspection expenses. 
SECTION 11 	Violations 
A. The Inspector of Buildings, if he concludes that there has been a violation of this by-law or of the conditions of any permit issued hereunder, shall send to the permit holder or other offender, by registered mail to the address stated on the initial application if an application has been filed, or shall post on the premises if no address can reasonably be ascertained, a notice ordering a cessation of the improper activities. 
B.  If a permit holder, or other offender, persists in such violation, the Inspector of Buildings shall seek the imposition of penalties authorized by clause (17) of Section 21 of Chapter 40 of the General Laws, through appropriate legal action; and the penalty for removing earth in violation of this by-law shall be a fine $300 for each offense. 
C.  In the event that permit holder persists in such violations, the Board may notify the permit holder by mail or posting as above, of a hearing to be held not less than four (4) days thereafter to show cause why said permit should not be revoked, and following said hearing, may in its discretion, revoke or amend the permit. 
SECTION 12 	Validity The validity of any section or provision of this by-law shall not invalidate any other section or provision thereof. 
SECTION 13 	Effective Date The by-law shall take effect upon compliance with the provisions of Section 32 of Chapter 40 of the General Laws. 
[Amended 1987,2001] 
ARTICLE XIII 
PERSONNEL BY-LAW 

SECTION 1 Purpose and Intent 
The purpose of the personnel by-law is to establish a system of personnel administration, classification and compensation based on principles that ensure a uniform, fair and efficient application of personnel policies.  The intent of this by­law is to provide a method of recruitment, selection, and development of a work force that is skilled and effective in accomplishing the service delivery missions of the Town.  Personnel actions are to be made without regard to sex, race, religion, color, age as defined by law, handicap, sexual orientation, political affiliation or other non-job related factors. 
The personnel by-law is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Article LXXXIX of the Constitution of the Commonwealth and General Law, Chapter 41, Sections 108A and 108C.  Nothing in this by-law shall be construed to conflict with Chapter 31 of the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts (Civil Service). 
SECTION 2 	Application All Town departments and positions shall be subject to the provisions of this by-law and any regulations adopted pursuant to this by-law, excluding elected officers of the Town. [Amended 2002] 
To the extent that any collective bargaining agreement conflicts with any provision of this by-law with respect to employees covered under such labor agreements, the provisions of the collective bargaining agreement shall prevail. 
This personnel by-law and the regulations adopted pursuant to its provisions are intended to supersede any other previously adopted personnel by-law or other regulations or policies. 
SECTION 3 Town Administrator The Town Administrator shall be responsible for the establishment and maintenance of a personnel system based on principles referred to in this by­law and shall adopt personnel rules and regulations in accordance with Section 5 of this by-law. [Amended 2002] 
SECTION 4 	Establishment of a Personnel System A personnel system shall be established by the adoption of rules and regulations pursuant to Section 5.  The personnel system may include but not be limited to the following elements: a method of administration; a method of recruiting and selecting employees; a classification and compensation plan; a centralized record keeping system; personnel rules and regulations which indicate rights and obligations of employees; disciplinary procedures; and other elements that are deemed necessary. 
SECTION 5 	Adoption of Personnel Rules and Regulations Personnel rules and regulations defining the rights, benefits and obligations of employees subject to this by-law shall be adopted or amended as follows: 
A. Preparation of Rules and Regulations The Town Administrator shall prepare proposed personnel rules and regulations. Any member of the Board of Selectmen, the Town Administrator, any appointing authority, or any two employees may suggest rules and regulations for consideration by the Town Administrator.  The Town Administrator need not consider any proposal already considered by the Town Administrator in the preceding six months. Any person suggesting a new or amended rule or regulation shall provide the substance and reason for the rule or regulation change in writing. 
B.  Public Hearing The Town Administrator shall hold a public hearing on suggested rules and regulations.  A summary of any suggested rules and regulations or amendments to rules and regulations shall be advertised in a newspaper circulated in the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea and the full text shall be posted on the Town Hall bulletin board at least five business days prior to the public hearing at which such suggestions are to be considered.  The Town Administrator shall submit a copy of any suggested rule or regulation to the Board of Selectmen. 
C.  Town Administrator Action on Suggested Rules and Regulations Within a reasonable period of time after the public hearing on any suggested rule or regulation, the Town Administrator shall determine if the suggested rule or regulation shall be recommended for adoption by the Board of Selectmen. 
D. Action by the Board of Selectmen The Town Administrator shall transmit any recommendations for the adoption of personnel rules and regulations or amendments, including the text, in writing to the Board of Selectmen.  The Board of Selectmen shall consider the recommendations of the Town Administrator and may adopt or reject the recommendations provided, however, if the Board of Selectmen fails to act, recommended rules and regulations shall be deemed adopted upon the expiration of forty-five days from the date of transmittal of the recommendations to the Board of Selectmen. 
E. Posting of Rules and Regulations The Board of Selectmen shall cause the posting of the text of adopted rules and regulations in prominent work locations. 
F. Official Record The Town Clerk shall maintain a compilation of all personnel rules and regulations adopted by the Board of Selectmen. [Amended 2002] 
SECTION 6 	Severability The provisions of this by-law and any regulations adopted pursuant to this by-law are severable.  If any by-law provision or regulation is held invalid, the remaining provisions of the by-law or regulations shall not be affected thereby. 
SECTION 7 	Effective Date/Implementation This amendment of the Personnel By-law shall take effect on July 1, 2002. Personnel rules and regulations then in effect shall remain in effect until amended in accordance with Section 5. The terms of Personnel Board members in office on July 1, 2002 shall expire at that time. [Amended 1991, 2002] 
ARTICLE XIV  
RESIDENT PARKING 

SECTION A1 Resident Parking, Permission to Park Passenger Vehicles on Certain Streets Where parking or standing of a passenger vehicle is not otherwise prohibited by the Traffic Rules and Regulations of the Town of Manchester, adopted by the Board of Selectmen on May 10, 1949, as amended, parking on certain streets designated in Schedule A of this by-law shall be limited only to passenger vehicles registered under Chapter 90 of the Massachusetts General Laws, as principally garaged in the Town of Manchester, bearing a sticker as provided for in Section A2 hereof. 
However, vehicles without sticker may park in legal parking spaces on Allen Avenue, Arbella Street, Brook Street, Lincoln Street, Norwood avenue, Pleasant Street Extension, Rosedale Avenue, and vine Street from within one hour before to one hour after all scheduled events at both the Schools and the Brook Street playground and athletic field. [Added 2010] 
SECTION A2 Resident Parking, Resident Parking Sticker, Application Procedure, Visitors' Permit, Fees The owner of a passenger vehicle having a capacity of less than one (1) ton and so garaged, who intends to park on a street designated in Schedule A of this by-law, may file with the Clerk of the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Manchester, notice of his or her intention to park in said area.  Evidence of this rendering of such notice shall be in the form of a sticker to be displayed on the left rear window of the vehicle. Such sticker shall be valid for one year and shall expire on May 31st of each year.  Application for the sticker provided for herein shall be made in writing on forms prescribed by the Board of Selectmen and shall include but not be limited to the following information: 
(a) 
Name of the owner of the vehicle to be registered for resident parking; 

(b) 
Residential address; 

(c) 
Vehicle make, color and year; 

(d)
 State registration number. 


Upon application for a sticker, the vehicle owner shall be required to present his or her vehicle registration certificate in verification of the information requested on the parking sticker application. 
Each resident parking sticker shall entitle the bearer to park his or her vehicle on any street in the Town of Manchester, provided there is space available and provided parking is permitted in said area.  Said sticker does not permit parking in an area otherwise restricted by the Traffic Rules and Regulations of the Town of Manchester. 
The resident parking sticker may be obtained at the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea.  Said parking sticker shall be valid for one (1) year and shall expire on May 31st of each year. 
Each residence located on a street designated in Schedule A shall be eligible for the issuance of two (2) portable Visitor Parking permits which shall be used by the visitors of said residence.  Said portable Visitor Parking permit shall bear the address of the residence and may be used only in the immediate vicinity of the residence. Said portable Visitor Parking permits shall be issued at the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Manchester, shall be valid for one year, and shall expire on May 31st of each year. 
This by-law shall take effect on June 30th, 1983. [Amended 1994,2010] 
SCHEDULE A 	Resident Parking Streets, Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea Motor Vehicle and Traffic By-laws 
Location 	Side From and To 
1. 
School Street 	West Entire length 

2. 
North Street 	North Entire length * 

3. 
Desmond Avenue 	North Entire length * 

4. 
Brook Street 	South Entire length * 

5. 
Putnam Court 	Both Entire length * 

6. 	
Vine Street South Norwood to Lincoln * North Norwood to School * 

7. 
Rosedale Avenue 	South Entire length * 

8. 
Arbella Street 	East Entire length * 

9. 
Lincoln Avenue 	Both Entire length * 

10. 
Lincoln Street 	North Entire length * 

11. 
Burnham Lane 	South Entire length * 

12. 
Sumac Lane 	Both Entire length * 

13. 
Friend Street 	Both Entire length * 

14. 
Pleasant Street Ext. 	Both Entire length * 

15. 
Pleasant Street 	North Entire length * 

16. 
Willmonton Avenue 	Both Entire length * 

17. 
Windemere Park Ext. 	Both Entire length * 

18. 
Knight Road 	Both Entire length * 

19. 
Pulaski Drive 	West Entire length * 

20. 
Crafts Court 	Both Entire length * 

21. 
Alpine Road 	Both Entire length * 

22. 
Tanglewood Road 	Both Entire length * 

23. 
Woodholm Road 	Both Entire length * 

24. 
Deer Hill Road 	Both Entire length * 

25. 	
Pine Street Both except for area 1600 feet on west side of Parkhurst's Garage north 

26. 	
Norwood Avenue West Entire length * 

27. 	
Allen Avenue West Entire length * 

28. 	
Washington Street South Entire length * 

29. 	
Bennett Street South Entire length * 

30. 	
Church Street None Entire length * 

31. 	
Morse Court None Entire length * 

32. 	
Elm Street east from corner to Paul Lorenze Driveway 

33. 	
Brook Street Parking Lot -under jurisdiction of the School Department 

34. 	
Bridge Street Both From Pine to Ashland * 

35. 

36. 	
Brook Street North Summer to Norwood Avenue 

37. 	
Norwood Avenue East Brook Street to Lincoln Street 

38. 	
School Street Baptist Church two-hour visitor parking 

39. 	
Brook Street Wetterlow two-hour visitor parking 

40. 	
Vine Street Magnuson two hour visitor parking 

41. 	
Harold Street Mark Street Country Club Drive Skytop Drive 

42. 	
Forest Street from Summer Street to Ledgewood Road 

43. 	
Ledgewood Road Ledgewood Circle Birch Lane Ancient County Way 

44. 	
Bennett Street northerly side to Bridge Street 

45. 	
Walker Road 

46. 	
Greenbriar Road 


*restrictions apply from May 1 to October 1 
[Adopted 1983; Amended 1984, 1986, 1993, 2010] 
ARTICLE XV 
FEES 

Except as otherwise provided by law, all fees collected by any officer of the Town on behalf of the Town shall be paid into the Town Treasurer and a true return thereof shall be made to the Town Accountant stating the accounts upon which amounts were received. The aggregate annual compensation of the Town Clerk and the Collector of Taxes, respectively, shall be limited to the amount of the appropriation therefor. 
ARTICLE XVI 
HISTORIC DISTRICT BY-LAW 

SECTION 1 	This by-law shall be known and may be cited as the Manchester Historic District by­law and is adopted pursuant to Chapter 40C of the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, as amended.  
SECTION 2 	The purpose of this by-law is to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the public through the preservation and protection of the distinctive characteristics of buildings and places significant in the history of the Town of Manchester or their architecture, and through the maintenance and improvement of settings for such buildings and places and the encouragement of design compatible therewith. 
SECTION 3 	There is hereby established under the provision of Chapter 40C of the General Laws an historic district to be known as the Manchester Historic District, which district is bounded and described as follows: 
Beginning at the northerly boundary of the B&M Railroad at the southwesterly corner of Lot 14; and thence running northerly along the westerly boundaries of Lots 14, 66, 65 and 64 to the northwesterly corner of Lot 64; thence turning and running northeasterly to the southwesterly corner of Lot 7; thence turning and running northerly along the westerly boundary of Lot 7 to the northerly boundary of Lot 7; thence turning and running northeasterly along the northwesterly boundaries of Lots 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 to the northeasterly corner of Lot 12;  thence turning and running northeasterly to the northwesterly corner of Lot 13;  thence turning and running easterly along the northerly boundaries of Lots 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 and 21 to the northeasterly corner of Lot 21; thence turning and running southeasterly to the northwesterly corner of Lot 22; thence turning and running easterly along the northerly boundaries of Lots 22, 23, 24, 25 and 26 to the northeasterly corner of Lot 26; thence turning and running southeasterly  to the northerly corner of Lot 27; and thence running southeasterly along the northeasterly boundaries of Lots 27, 26, 30 and 34 to the middle of the northwesterly boundary of Lot 35; thence turning and running northeasterly along the northwesterly boundaries of Lots 35, 36, 37 and 37a; to the northeasterly corner of Lot 37A; thence turning and running southeasterly to the northwesterly corner of Lot 38; thence turning and running southeasterly along the northeasterly boundary of Lot 38 to Lot 39; thence turning and running northeasterly along the northwesterly boundary of Lot 39 to the northwesterly corner of Lot 39; thence turning and running southeasterly along the northeasterly boundary of Lot 39; thence turning and running southwesterly along the southeasterly boundary of Lot 39 to the northeasterly boundary of Lot 41; thence turning and running southeasterly along the northeasterly boundaries of Lots 41 and 42 to Lot 43; thence turning and running northeasterly along the northwesterly boundary of Lot 43 to Lot 45; thence turning and running southeasterly on the northeasterly boundary of Lot 43 and 44 to Summer Street; thence turning and running southwesterly along Summer Street and northwesterly along Washington Street to the southwesterly corner of Lot 44; thence turning and running southeasterly to the northeasterly corner of Lot 114; thence turning and running southwesterly to the southerly corner of said Lot 114; thence turning and running southwesterly to the corner of Lots 112 and 113; thence turning and running southwesterly to the southerly corner of Lot 112; thence turning and running northwesterly along the southwesterly boundaries of Lots 112, 111, 110, 109, 108, 107, 106 to Lot 105; thence turning and running southwesterly along the southeasterly boundaries of Lots 104 and 103 to the southerly corner of Lot 103; thence turning and running northwesterly along the southwesterly boundaries of Lots 103 and 102 to Beach Street; thence turning and running southwesterly to the southerly corner of Lot 101a; thence turning and running northwesterly along the southwesterly boundaries of Lots 101a, 100 and 99 to Lot 98; thence turning and running southwesterly along the southeasterly boundaries of Lots 98 and 97 to the southerly corner of Lot 97; thence turning and running northwesterly along the southwesterly boundaries of Lot 97 to Church Street; thence turning and running northwesterly to the southerly corner of Lot 88; thence turning and running westerly along the southerly boundary of Lot 87 to the southwesterly corner of Lot 87; thence turning and running northerly along the westerly boundaries of Lots 87 and 86 to Lot 84; thence turning and running westerly along the southerly boundaries of Lots 83, 82, 81 and 80 to Lot 79; thence turning and running southwesterly along the southeasterly boundaries of Lots 79, 78, 77, 76, 75, 74 to Lot 73; thence turning and running southerly along the easterly boundary of Lot 73 to Lot 71; thence turning and running southeasterly and southerly along the northeasterly and easterly boundaries of Lots 71, 70, 69, 68 and 67 to land of the Boston and Maine Railroad; thence turning and running westerly along the northerly boundary of the B & M Railroad to the southwesterly corner of Lot 14 and point of beginning, meaning and intending to describe all lots facing Ashland Avenue, all lots on Bridge Street beginning with Lot 64, but excluding Lot 6, all lots facing on Central Street, all lots facing on Church Street, all lots facing on Union Street, all lots facing on Washington Street, and including Lot 44 on Summer Street as shown on plan entitled, "Proposed Manchester Historic District", dated March 24, 1975 by Stanley Magnuson. See Map, page 83.) 
SECTION 4 	There is hereby established under Chapter 40C of the General Laws, with all of the powers and duties of an historic district commission under such statute, a Manchester Historic District Commission consisting of seven members to be appointed in accordance with the provisions of such statute except, in addition to nominees set forth therein, four members shall be appointed from not less than six nominees submitted by the property owners in the district.  The initial appointments to membership in the Commission shall be as follows: two members appointed for a term of one year; two members appointed for a term of two years; and three members appointed for a term of three years.  Successors shall each be appointed for a term of three years.  Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the unexpired term. 
SECTION 5 	The Commission shall meet at least once a month, and shall act on all applications for certificates filed with them in accordance with Section 11 of 40C, except that when a public hearing is required, the commission shall make a determination within thirty-three days of the filing of the application, and upon failure to make a determination within such time, the commission shall thereupon issue a certificate of hardship.  
SECTION 6 	Any applicant aggrieved by a determination of the commission may, within twenty days after the filing of notice of such determination, with the Town Clerk, file a written request with the commission for a review by a person or persons of competence and experience in such matters designated by the Regional Planning Agency of which the town is a member.  The finding of the person or persons making such review shall be filed with the Town Clerk within twenty days after the request, and shall be binding on the applicant and the Commission, unless a further appeal is sought in the Superior Court, as set forth in Chapter 40C, Sec. 12A of the General Laws. 
SECTION 7 	Notwithstanding anything contained in this by-law to the contrary, the authority of the Commission shall not extend to the review of the following categories or buildings or structures or exterior architectural features in the Manchester Historic District: 
(a)
  Terraces, walks, driveways, sidewalks and similar structures, or any one or more of them, provided that any such structure is substantially at grade level. 

(b)
  Storm doors and windows, screens, window air conditioners, lightning fixtures, antennae and similar appurtenances, or any one or more of them. 

(c)
  The color of paint. 

(d)
  The color of materials used on roofs. 

(e)
  The reconstruction substantially similar in exterior design of a building, structure or exterior architectural feature damaged or destroyed by fir, storm or other disaster provided such reconstruction is begun within one year thereafter and carried forward with due diligence. 


SECTION 8 	In case any section, paragraph or part of this by-law be for any reason declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, every other section, paragraph or part shall continue in full force and effect. [Adopted 1975] 
ARTICLE XVII 
GENERAL WETLANDS BY-LAW 

SECTION I. Purpose 
1.1 The purpose of this By-Law is to protect the wetlands, water resources, flood prone areas, and adjoining upland areas in the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea (“Town”) by controlling initiatives and activities deemed by the Town Conservation Commission (“ConCom”) likely to have a significant effect, immediate or cumulative, on the: protection of public or private water supply; protection of groundwater supply; flood control; erosion and sedimentation control; storm damage prevention, including coastal storm flowage; water quality; avoidance of water pollution; protection of fisheries; protection of land containing shellfish; protection of wildlife habitat and rare species habitat;  agriculture; aquaculture; and other  resource area values deemed important to the Town. 
1.2 Subject to the rights and benefits accorded to agricultural uses and agricultural structures of all kinds under the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts (“Commonwealth”) and other relevant By-Laws of the Town, this By-Law is intended to utilize the Home Rule authority of the Town to: 
1.2.1 	protect salt marshes, freshwater wetlands, streams, and coastal banks to a greater degree than under the Wetlands Protection Act, M.G.L. Ch.131 §40, et. seq. (“Act”); 
1.2.2 	protect vernal pools as an additional resource area recognized by the Town as significant, but not included in the Act; 
1.2.3 	protect all resource areas for their additional values beyond those recognized in the Act; and 
1.2.4 	impose, through local regulations and permits, additional standards and procedures stricter than those of the Act and its implementing regulations, 310 
C.M.R. 10.00, et.seq. (“Regulations”).  
SECTION 2. Definitions 
2. 1 Except as otherwise provided in this By-Law or in the regulations promulgated hereunder, the definitions of terms and the procedures in this By-Law shall be as set forth in the Act and Regulations.  The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and implementation of this By-Law. 
2.1 	“Agriculture” shall include the activities defined and described in 310 C.M.R. 10.04. 
2.2 “Alter” shall mean, without limitation, the following activities when undertaken in, to, upon, within or affecting resource areas protected by this By-Law: 
2.2.1 	Grading, removal, excavation, filling or dredging of soil, sand, gravel, or aggregate materials of any kind; 
2.2.2 	Changing of preexisting drainage characteristics, flushing characteristics, salinity distribution, sedimentation patterns, flow patterns, or flood retention characteristics; 
2.2.3 	Drainage, to or from, or other disturbance of, water level or water table; 
2.2.4 	Dumping, depositing or discharging of, or filling with, any solid or liquid; 
2.2.5 	Placing of fill, or removal of material, which would change elevation; 
2.2.6 	Construction, erection, demolition, expansion or repair of buildings or structures of any kind; 
2.2.7 	Fabrication, pouring or installation of building or structural foundations; 
2.2.8 	Driving or removal of piles; 
2.2.9 	Placing of obstructions or objects in water; 
2.2.10 Destruction of plant life including cutting or trimming of trees and shrubs; 
2.2.11 Changing temperature, biochemical oxygen demand, or other physical, biological, or chemical characteristics of any waters; 
2.2.12 	Any activities, changes or work which may cause or tend to contribute to pollution of any body of water or groundwater; and 
2.2.13 Any incremental activities, changes or work which have, or may have, a cumulative adverse impact on the Resource Areas protected by this By-Law. 
2.3 “Bank” shall include the land area which normally abuts and confines a water body, the lower boundary being the mean annual low flow level, and the upper boundary being the first observable break in the slope or the mean annual flood level, whichever is higher. 

2.4 	“By-Law” shall mean the General Wetlands By-Law of the Town. 
2.5 “Person” shall mean any individual, group of individuals, association, partnership, corporation, company, business organization, trust, estate, the Commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the extent subject to town bylaws, administrative agency, public or quasi-public corporation or body, the Town, and any other legal entity, its legal representatives, agents, or assigns. 
2.6 “Pond” shall mean the definition as provided by 310 CMR 10.04, except that the size threshold shall be 5,000 square feet. 
2.7 “Practicable Alternative” shall mean that which is reasonably available and capable of being done after taking into consideration the proposed property use, overall project purpose (e.g., residential, institutional, commercial, or industrial), logistics, existing technology, costs of the alternatives, and overall project costs. 
2.8 “Stream” means a body of running water, including brooks and creeks, whether naturally occurring, artificially created or artificially modified, which moves in a definite channel in the ground due to a hydraulic gradient, and which flows within, into, or out of, a Resource Area.  A portion of a stream may flow through a culvert or beneath a bridge. Such a body of running water which does not flow throughout the year (i.e. which is intermittent) is a stream except for that portion upgradient of all bogs, swamps, wet meadows and marshes. 
2.9 “Vernal Pool” shall mean, in addition to scientific definitions found in the Regulations, any confined basin or depression not occurring in existing lawns, gardens, landscaped areas or driveways which: 
2.9.1 	in most years holds water for a minimum of two continuous months during the spring and/or summer; 
2.9.2 	contains at least 200 cubic feet of water at some time during most years; 
2.9.3 	is free of adult predatory fish populations; and 
2.9.4 	provides essential breeding and rearing habitat functions for amphibian, reptile or other vernal pool community species, regardless of whether the site has been certified by the Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife. 
2.9.5 	The boundary of the Resource Area for vernal pools shall be the 100 feet perpendicular to the mean annual high-water line defining the depression. 
SECTION 3. Regulations 
3.1 After public notice and public hearing, the ConCom may promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this By-Law, effective when voted and filed with the Town Clerk. 
3.2 The ConCom may establish in its rules and regulations design specifications, performance standards, and other measures and safeguards, including setbacks, no-disturb areas, no-build areas, maintenance of strips of continuous undisturbed vegetative cover, landscaping and other features, and other work limits for protection of Resource Area Buffer Zones [as hereinafter defined]. 
3.3 
Failure by the ConCom to promulgate rules or regulations, or a legal declaration by a court of law of the invalidity of such rules or regulations, shall not act to suspend or invalidate the effect of this By-Law. 

SECTION 4. Jurisdiction and Presumption 

4.1 
Except as permitted by the ConCom pursuant to this By-Law or as otherwise allowed by this By-Law, no person shall commence to alter the following areas (“Resource Areas”): 


4.1.1 	any freshwater or coastal wetland; salt marsh; wet meadow; bog; swamp; vernal pool; spring; bank; reservoir; lake; pond; river or stream; beach; dune; estuary; coastal bank; lands under any water body; land subject to flooding or inundation by groundwater or surface water; land subject to tidal action; coastal storm flowage or flooding; and 
4.1.2 	lands within 200 feet of any river or perennial stream, brook or creek (“Riverfront Area”). 
4.2 Except as permitted by the ConCom pursuant to this By-Law or as otherwise allowed by this By-Law, no person shall commence to alter lands within 100 feet of any: freshwater or coastal wetland; salt marsh; wet meadow; bog; swamp; vernal pool; spring; bank; reservoir; lake; pond; stream; beach; dune; estuary; coastal bank; lands under any water body; or land subject to tidal action (“Resource Area Buffer Zone(s)”) 
4.3 A Resource Area, where isolated and of a size of 5,000 square feet or greater, shall be protected whether or not it borders surface waters. 
4.4 Unless the applicant demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that a significant adverse effect will not occur, it shall be presumed that significant adverse effects will result from any alteration within: 
4.4.1 	a Resource Area, other than land subject to flooding or inundation by groundwater, or surface water or coastal storm flowage or flooding; 

4.4.2 	30 feet of the edge of any salt marsh, freshwater wetland or vernal pool; or 
4.4.3 	30 feet of the top of any coastal or inland bank. [Amended 2014] 
4.5 
The jurisdiction of this By-Law shall not extend to uses and structures of agriculture, including work performed for normal maintenance or improvement of land in agricultural or aquacultural uses. 

SECTION 5. Exemptions and Exceptions 

5.1 
A Notice of Intent (“NOI”) or permit is not required to be issued prior to commencing an emergency project necessary for the protection of the health and safety of the public, provided that: [Amended 2014] 


5.1.1 	the work is to be performed by, or has been ordered to be performed by, an agency of the Commonwealth, a political subdivision thereof, or the Town; 
5.1.2 	advance notice, oral or written, has been given to the ConCom prior to commencement of work or within 24 hours after commencement; 

5.1.3 	the ConCom or its agent certifies the work as an emergency project; 
5.1.4 	the work is performed only for the time and place certified by the ConCom for the limited purposes necessary to abate the emergency; and 
5.1.5 	within twenty one (21) calendar days of commencement of an emergency project, a NOI shall be filed with the ConCom for review as provided by this By-Law. 
5.1.6 	Upon failure to meet these and other requirements of the ConCom, the ConCom may, after notice and a public hearing, revoke or modify an emergency project approval and order restoration and mitigation measures. 
5.2 A NOI or permit is not required  for maintaining, repairing, or replacing, but not significantly changing or enlarging, an existing and lawfully located structure or facility used in the service of the public to provide electric, gas, water, telephone, or other telecommunication services, provided that: 
5.2.1 	written notice has been given to the ConCom prior to commencement of work; and 
5.2.2 	the work conforms to any performance standards and design specifications in regulations adopted by the ConCom. 
5.3 A NOI or permit shall not be required for work performed for normal maintenance or improvement of land in agricultural and aquacultural use as defined by this By-Law or the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder. 
5.4 
Other than as stated in this Section 5, all work that is exempted from regulation under the Act or the Regulations is subject to this By-Law. A NOI and a permit may be required by this By-Law whether or not an Order of Conditions (“OOC”) is also required under the Act. 

SECTION 6. Applications and Fees 

6.1 
Except as provided in Section 5 hereof, a written NOI application shall be filed with the ConCom to prior to performing any activity affecting a Resource Area. The NOI shall include such information and plans as are deemed necessary by the ConCom to describe proposed activities and their effects on the Resource Area or Resource Area Buffer Zone. No activities shall commence without receiving and complying with a permit issued pursuant to this By-Law. 


6.2 The ConCom may, in its discretion, accept as the application and plans under this By-Law, the application and plans filed under the Act or Regulations, but the Commission is not obliged to do so. 
6.3 Any person desiring to know whether or not a proposed activity or an area is subject to this By-Law may request, in writing, a determination from the ConCom through a Request for Determination of Applicability (“RDA”) or Abbreviated Notice of Resource Area Delineation (“ANRAD”) as authorized under the Regulations, and shall include information and plans as are deemed necessary by the ConCom. 
6.4 At the time of a NOI, the applicant shall pay a filing fee specified in the rules and regulations of the ConCom. The fee is in addition to that required by the Act and Regulations.  The Fee is not refundable. 
6.5 Pursuant to M.G.L. Ch. 44 §53G, and any rules and regulations promulgated by the ConCom hereunder, the ConCom may impose reasonable fees upon applicants for the purpose of securing outside consultants including engineers, wetlands scientists, wildlife biologists or other experts in order to aid in the review of proposed projects (“Consultant Fee(s)”). Any consultant hired under this provision shall be selected by, and report exclusively to, the ConCom. 
6.6 The Consultant Fee shall be deposited with the Town Treasurer, who shall create an account specifically for this purpose. Additional Consultant Fees may be requested where the requisite review is more expensive than originally anticipated, or where new information requires additional consultant services. 
6.7 Only costs relating to consultant work done in connection with a project for which a consultant fee has been collected shall be paid from this account, and expenditures may be made at the sole discretion of the ConCom.  
6.8 The ConCom shall provide applicants with written notice of the selection of a consultant, identifying the consultant, the amount of the fee to be charged to the applicant, and a request for payment of that fee. Notice shall be deemed to have been given on the date it is mailed or delivered and the applicant may withdraw the application or request within five (5) business days of the date notice is given without incurring any costs or expenses. 
6.9 The entire Consultant Fee must be received before the initiation of consulting services. Failure by the applicant to pay the requested Consultant Fee within five (5) business days of the request for payment shall be cause for the ConCom to declare the NOI administratively incomplete and deny the permit without prejudice, except in the case of an appeal. The ConCom shall inform the applicant and Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) of such a decision in writing. 
6.10 
The applicant may appeal the selection of an outside consultant to the Town Board of Selectmen, who may disqualify the consultant only on the grounds that the consultant has a conflict of interest or is not properly qualified. The minimum qualifications shall consist of either an educational degree or three or more years of practice in the field at issue, or a related field. The applicant shall make such an appeal in writing, and must be received within five (5) business days of the date that request for Consultant Fees was made by the ConCom. Such appeal shall extend the applicable time limits for action upon the NOI. 

SECTION 7. Notice and Hearings 

7.1 
Any person filing a NOI, ANOI (Abbreviated Notice of Intent), ANRAD or an Amendment to an OOC with the Conservation Commission shall, at the same time, give written notice thereof, by certified mail (return receipt requested), certificate of mailing, certification of delivery, or by hand delivery to: [Amended 2014] 


7.1.1 	all abutters at their mailing addresses as shown on the most recent applicable tax list of the assessors; 
7.1.2 	owners of land directly opposite the applicant’s property on any public or private street or way; and 
7.1.3 	abutters to the abutters within 300 feet of the property line of the applicant, including any in another municipality or across a body of water. 
7.2 	The notice required in Section 7.1 shall: 
7.2.1 	state a brief description of the project or other proposal; 
7.2.2 	the date of any ConCom hearing or meeting date, if known; 
7.2.3 	include a copy of the NOI or request, with plans, or shall state that a copy of the NOI or request, with plans, may be examined at the ConCom offices during regularly scheduled business hours. 
7.3 An affidavit of the person providing such notice, with a copy of the notice mailed or delivered, shall be filed with the ConCom. When the person requesting a determination is not the owner, the request, the notice of the hearing and the determination itself shall be sent by the applicant to the owner. 
7.4 The ConCom shall conduct a public hearing on any NOI, RDA, or ANRAD, with written notice given at the expense of the applicant, at least five (5) business days prior to the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town. 
7.5 The ConCom shall commence the public hearing within twenty one (21) calendar days from receipt of a completed NOI, RDA, or ANRAD, unless an extension is authorized in writing by the applicant. The ConCom shall have authority to continue the hearing to a specific date announced at the hearing, for reasons stated at the hearing, including, but not limited to: 
7.5.1 	the need for additional information from the applicant, or others, as deemed necessary by the ConCom in its discretion; 
7.5.2 	failure of the applicant to timely supply information deemed necessary by the ConCom; 
7.5.3 	based on comments and recommendations of the boards and officials listed in Section 8 hereof; or 
7.5.4 	at the request of the applicant. 
7.6 The ConCom, in its discretion, may combine its hearing under this By-Law with the hearing conducted under the Act and Regulations. 
7.7 
The ConCom shall issue a permit, other order or determination in writing, within twenty one (21) calendar days of the close of the public hearing thereon, unless an extension is authorized in writing by the applicant.  

SECTION 8. Coordination with Other Boards 

8.1 
Any person filing a NOI, RDA, or ANRAD with the ConCom, or any amendment thereto, shall provide a copy thereof, together with any accompanying plans, within five (5) calendar days after filing with the ConCom, by certified mail (return receipt requested), 


certificate of mailing, certification of delivery, or hand delivery, to the Town Planning Board, Board of Health and Building Inspector and such other Town Boards and officials as the ConCom or its Administrator may request. 
8.2 If the NOI, RDA or ANRAD pertains to property within three hundred (300) feet of an adjoining city or town, a copy shall be provided in the same manner to the Conservation Commission of the adjoining municipality or town.  
8.3 
An affidavit of the person providing notice, with a copy of the notice mailed or delivered, shall be filed with the ConCom. The ConCom shall not take final action until the boards and officials of Section 8.1 have had fourteen (14) calendar days from receipt of notice to file written comments and recommendations with the ConCom, which the ConCom shall consider, but which shall not be binding on the ConCom. The applicant shall have the right to receive any comments and recommendations, and to respond to them at a hearing of the ConCom, prior to final action. 

SECTION 9. Permits and Conditions 

9.1 
If the ConCom, after a public hearing, determines that the activities which are the subject(s) of a NOI, or the land and water uses which will result therefrom, are likely to have an adverse effect, immediate or cumulative, upon a Resource Area, the ConCom shall, within twenty one (21) calendar days of the close of the hearing, issue or deny a permit for the activities requested. 


9.2 When making its decision as to the issuance or denial of a permit, the ConCom shall consider the: 
9.2.1 	extent to which the applicant has avoided, minimized and mitigated any such immediate or cumulative effect; and 
9.2.2 	cumulative adverse effects of loss, degradation, isolation, replacement or replication of Resource Areas in the Town and the watershed, resulting from past activities, permitted and exempt, the proposed activities, and foreseeable future activities. 
9.3 Where the ConCom determines that the activities which are the subject of a NOI may have an adverse effect, immediate or cumulative, within fifty (50) feet of a Resource Area, the ConCom shall not permit such activity unless the applicant demonstrates, by a preponderance of credible evidence, that there is no practicable alternative to the proposed activity which would have a materially less adverse effect on the Resource Area. 
9.4 If the ConCom issues a permit, it may impose conditions which it deems necessary or appropriate to protect the Resource Area(s), and all activities authorized by a permit issued by the ConCom shall be conducted in accordance with the conditions of such permit.  
9.5 Where no conditions are adequate to protect said Resource Area(s), the ConCom is empowered to deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements of this By-Law. The ConCom may also deny a permit for failure to: 
9.5.1 	submit necessary information and plans requested by the ConCom; 
9.5.2 	comply with the procedures, design specifications, performance standards, and other requirements in the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder; or 
9.5.3 	avoid, minimize or mitigate unacceptable significant or cumulative effects upon the Resource Areas. 
9.6 Due consideration shall be given to any demonstrated hardship on the applicant by reason of denial, as presented at the public hearing. The ConCom may waive specifically identified and requested procedures, design specifications, performance standards, or other requirements set forth in this By-Law or the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, provided that: 
9.6.1 	the ConCom finds in writing after said public hearing that there are no reasonable conditions or alternatives that would allow the proposed activity to proceed in compliance with said regulations; 
9.6.2 	avoidance, minimization and mitigation have been employed to the maximum extent feasible; or 
9.6.3 	the waiver is necessary to accommodate the public interest, or to avoid a decision that so restricts the use of the property as to constitute an unconstitutional taking without compensation. 
9.7 In reviewing activities within a Resource Area Buffer Zone, the ConCom shall presume a Resource Area Buffer Zone is important to the protection of the Resource Area(s) because activities undertaken in the Resource Area Buffer Zone have a high likelihood of adverse impact upon the Resource Area(s), either immediately, as a consequence of the activities, or over time, as a consequence of daily operation or existence of the activities. Adverse impacts from such activities and use can include, without limitation, erosion, accretion, siltation, loss of groundwater recharge, degradation of water quality, excess nitrogen and phosphorous loading and loss of wildlife habitat. 
9.8 In reviewing activities within the Riverfront Area, the ConCom shall presume the Riverfront Area is important to all the Resource Areas unless demonstrated otherwise, and no permit issued hereunder shall permit any activities unless the applicant, in addition to meeting the otherwise applicable requirements of this By-Law, has proved by a preponderance of credible evidence that: 
9.8.1 there is no practicable alternative to the proposed project with less adverse effects; and 
9.8.2 such activities, including proposed mitigation measures, will have no significant adverse impact on the areas or values protected by this By-Law. 
9.9 The ConCom may authorize or require replication of wetlands as a form of mitigation, but only with specific plans, professional design, proper safeguards, adequate security, and professional monitoring and reporting to assure success, because of the high likelihood of failure of replication. 
9.10 The ConCom may require a wildlife habitat study of a project area, to be paid for by the applicant, whenever it deems appropriate, regardless the type of Resource Area or the amount or type of alteration proposed. The decision shall be based upon the ConCom’s estimation of the importance of the habitat area considering (but not limited to) such factors as proximity to other areas suitable for wildlife, importance of wildlife corridors in the area, or actual or possible presence of rare plant or animal species in the area. The work shall be performed by an individual who at least meets the qualifications set out in the wildlife habitat section of the Regulations. 
9.11 The ConCom shall presume that vernal pools, including the adjacent area, perform essential habitat functions. This presumption may be overcome by the applicant only by a demonstration to the ConCom, by a preponderance of credible evidence, that the basin or depression does not provide essential habitat functions. Any formal evaluation should be performed by an individual who at least meets the qualifications under Section 10.60(1)(b) of the Regulations. [Amended 2014] 
9.12 A permit, Determination of Applicability (“DOA”), or Order of Resource Area Delineation (“ORAD”) shall expire three (3) years from the date of issuance. The ConCom may, however, in its discretion: 
9.12.1 issue a permit expiring five (5) years from the date of issuance for recurring or continuous maintenance work, provided that annual notification of time and location of work is given to the ConCom; 
9.12.2 allow the renewal of a permit once, for an additional one (1) year period, provided that a request for a renewal is received in writing by the ConCom not less than thirty (30) calendar days prior to expiration; 
9.12.3 identify permit requirements which shall be enforceable for a stated number of years, indefinitely, or until permanent protection is in place, and shall apply to all present and future owners of the land. 
9.13 The ConCom may, for good cause, revoke any permit, DOA, or ORAD or any other order, determination or other decision issued under this By-Law after notice to the holder, the public, abutters and town boards, pursuant to Sections 7 and 8 hereof, and after a public hearing. 
9.14 Amendments to permits, DOAs, or ORADs shall be handled in the manner set out in the Regulations and policies thereunder. 
9.15 The ConCom in an appropriate case may combine the decision issued under this By-Law with the permit, DOA, ORAD, or COC issued under the Act and Regulations. 
9.16 No work proposed in any NOI shall be undertaken until the permit, or ORAD issued by the ConCom with respect to such work, has been recorded in the Southern Essex District Registry of Deeds or, if the land affected is registered land, in the registry section of the land court for the district wherein the land lies, and until the holder of the permit certifies in writing to the ConCom that the document has been recorded. If the applicant fails to perform such recording, the ConCom may record the documents and require the Applicant to pay or reimburse the recording fee therefore, either at the time of recording or as a condition precedent to the issuance of a COC. 
SECTION 10.  Security 
10.1 As part of a permit issued under this By-Law, and in addition to any security required by any other municipal or state board, agency or official, the ConCom may require that the performance and observance of the conditions imposed thereunder (including conditions requiring mitigation work) be secured in whole, or in part, by one or both of, the: 
10.1.1 	posting of a proper bond, deposit of money or negotiable securities under a written third-party escrow arrangement, or other undertaking of financial responsibility sufficient in the opinion of the ConCom, to be released in whole or in part upon issuance of a COC for work performed pursuant to the permit; and/or 
10.1.2 	imposition and acceptance of a conservation restriction, easement, or other covenant enforceable in a court of law, executed and duly recorded by the owner of record, running with the land to the benefit of the Town, whereby the permit conditions shall be performed and observed before any parcel may be conveyed, other than by mortgage deed. 
10.2 	The use of a conservation restriction, easement or other covenant described in Subsection 
10.1.2
 above shall only be used with the consent of the applicant. 

SECTION 11. Enforcement 

11.1 
No person shall alter a Resource Area, or cause, suffer, or allow such activity, or leave in place unauthorized fill, or otherwise fail to restore illegally altered land to its original condition, or fail to comply with a permit or an enforcement order issued pursuant to this By-Law. 


11.2 The ConCom, its agents, officers, and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this By-Law and may make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys, or sampling as the ConCom deems necessary, subject to the constitutions and laws of the United States of America and the Commonwealth . 
11.3 The ConCom shall have authority to enforce this By-Law, its rules and regulations, and permits issued thereunder by letters, phone calls, electronic communication and other informal methods, violation notices, non-criminal citations under M.G.L. Ch. 40 §21D, and civil and criminal court actions. Any person who violates provisions of this By-Law may be ordered to restore the property to its original condition and take other action deemed necessary to remedy such violations, or may be fined, or both. 
11.4 Upon request of the ConCom, the Board of Selectmen and Town counsel may take legal action for enforcement under civil law. Upon request of the ConCom, the Chief of Police may take legal action for enforcement under criminal law. 
11.5 Town boards and officers, including any police officer or other officer having police powers, shall have authority to assist the ConCom in enforcement. 
11.6 Any person who violates any provision of this By-law or any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, permits, or administrative orders issued thereunder, shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300).  Each day or portion thereof during which a violation continues, or unauthorized activity or other alteration remains in place, shall constitute a separate offense, and each provision of the bylaw, regulations, permits, or administrative orders violated shall constitute a separate offense. 
11.7 
As an alternative to criminal prosecution in a specific case, the ConCom may request the issuance of citations with specific penalties pursuant to the non-criminal disposition procedure set forth in M.G.L. Ch. 40 §21D, which has been adopted by the Town in Article I, Section 4 of the General By-Laws. 

SECTION 12. Burden of Proof 

12.1 
Except where a higher burden of proof is specified in this By-Law or any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, the applicant shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of credible evidence that the work proposed in the NOI will not have adverse effects, immediate or cumulative, upon the Resource Area. 


12.2 Failure by the applicant to meet and satisfy the applicable burden of proof shall be sufficient cause for the ConCom to deny a NOI, permit or to impose conditions sufficient to prevent any adverse effects on the Resource Area. 
SECTION 13.  Appeals 
A decision of the ConCom shall be reviewable in a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with M.G.L. Ch. 249 §4. 
SECTION 14. Relation to the Wetlands Protection Act 
This By-Law is adopted under the Home Rule Amendment of the Constitution of the Commonwealth and the Home Rule statutes, independent of the Act and Regulations. It is the intention of this By-Law that the purposes, jurisdiction, authority, exemptions, regulations, specifications, standards, and other requirements shall be interpreted and administered as stricter than those under the Act and Regulations. 
SECTION 15. Severability 
The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate any other section or provision thereof, nor shall it invalidate any permit, approval or determination which previously has previously been issued or take any other action relating thereto. 
[Adopted 1987; Amended 1999, Amended (replaced in its entirety) 2010] [Amended 2014] 
ARTICLE XVIII 
UNDERGROUND FUEL STORAGE 

SECTION 1 Authority 
This By-Law is adopted by the Town of Manchester under its home rule powers, its police powers to protect the public health and welfare, and its authorization under Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40, Section 21. 
SECTION 2 	Purpose The purpose of this By-Law is to control the installation and maintenance of underground gasoline or fuel storage tanks over 1000 gallons, and to protect groundwater and surface water from contamination due to leakage.  The provisions of this By-Law are applicable only to underground tanks. 
SECTION 3 	Definitions 
3.1 	Underground tank shall mean any fuel storage containment system for gasoline, fuel or lubricating oil with a capacity in excess of 1000 gallons, the top of which is located below the ground. 
3.2 	Fire Chief shall mean the chief of the fire department for the municipality in which a tank is located. 
3.3 	Noncorrosive soil is soil that, when tested by a qualified professional, is shown to have a resistivity greater than 10,000 ohm-cm, and that does not exhibit corrosive characteristics in a soil chemistry analysis. 
3.4 	100-year floodplain shall mean those areas as shown in the Flood Insurance Rate Maps for Town of Manchester under the Federal Emergency Management Agency's National Flood Insurance Program. 
SECTION 4 	Registration of Existing Tanks 
4.1 	Tank Registration.  Every operator of an underground tank must file with the Town Clerk the size, type, age, contents, and location of their underground tanks within 90 days of the enactment of this By-Law. 
4.2 	Notification of Fire Department.  The Town/City Clerk must forthwith, give the Fire Chief a copy of the information filed for each tank that is registered according to Section 4.1.  The Fire Chief or his designee must check this information against fire department records.  He may require evidence of the date of purchase and installation if there is any question concerning the age of the tank. 
4.3 	Tank Testing.  Operators that are known to have underground fuel storage tanks that did not report their tank(s) as required by Section 4.1 of this By-Law/Ordinance must have such tanks tested in accordance with Section 6.6 of this By-Law/Ordinance. 
SECTION 5 Standards Applicable to the Installation of New Tanks 
5.1 	A. Unless proven otherwise by soil tests performed by qualified professionals, the soils in Massachusetts shall be assumed to be corrosive. Metallic tanks (except stainless steel) without cathodic protection or an underground secondary-containment system will be prohibited.  Also prohibited is schedule 40 steel pipe, galvanized or black iron, or approved nonmetallic (except fiberglass-reinforced plastic pipe).  If a qualified professional demonstrates that the soils in which the tank is to be placed are non-corrosive as described in Section 3.3 of the definitions, a steel tank with interior coating and other approved piping may be installed. 
B. In corrosive soils, underground tanks must be constructed of: non-corrodible materials, such as fiberglass-reinforced plastic (FRP) or its equivalent; steel with external bonded non-corrodible material (i.e., FRP); a steel system cathodically protected by an impressed current cathodic system, sacrificial anodes, or equivalent protection; or, double-walled tank.  These requirements are in accordance with the Massachusetts Board of Fire Prevention regulations codified in 527 CMR 906 (18). 
C. In corrosive soils, piping shall be constructed of non-corrodible materials such as FRP or its equivalent, a steel system with cathodic protection, or some other type of equivalent protection, in accordance with 527 CMR 9.06 (18). 
D. Cathodic protection systems shall be maintained and checked in accordance with 527 CMR 9.06 (20) (g). 
E. Commercial tanks must be equipped with striker plates below openings used for product measurement or filling. 
5.2. 	Tank Installation 
A. The Fire Chief or his designee must inspect and approve underground tanks prior to their burial, in accordance with 527 CMR 9.06 (10). 
B. Tanks must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation techniques. Damage to protective coatings or to the FRP tank or surface must be repaired prior to covering the tank. 
C. New underground tanks shall be tested for tightness, hydrostatically or with air pressure at not less than 3 pounds per square inch and not more than 5 pounds per square inch, after installation, but before being covered or placed in use in accordance with 527 CMR 9.06 (20) (b). 
D. Piping should be tested in accordance with 527 CMR 9.06 (20) (a) before being covered, enclosed, or placed in use. 
E. Backfill material, used to cover all new tank installations and repairs, must be of the type and quality specified by the tank manufacturer's installation procedures, and by the pertinent regulations governing storage tank installation. 
F. Underground tanks that are to be located in areas subject to flooding or below the maximum water table elevation must be anchored according to manufacturer's instructions. 
5.3 Tank Location. 
A. Underground tanks may not be installed within the 100-year floodplain. 
B. Underground tanks that are to be installed within the watershed of a drinking-water reservoir, or within the cone of depression of a public well (or lacking a defined cone of depression, within 1000 feet of a public water supply well), must submit, for review by the Fire Chief, the Board of Health or its agent, and the local Water Commissioners or their agent, a plan outlining the procedures or devices, such as product sensors and/or area monitoring devices, to be used to prevent water supply contamination.  The plan must be endorsed by representatives of the three departments noted above prior to tank installation. 
SECTION 6 Leak Detection for Existing and New Tanks 
6.1 Inventory Verification 
A. All underground tanks, except fuel-oil tanks and tanks connected with burning equipment, must be monitored for the prevention and detection of leakage of flammable and combustible liquids in accordance with the provisions of 527 CMR 5.05 (3). 
B. The daily-inventory records must be shown to the Fire Chief, or his designee, prior to issuance of a permit or license renewal. 
C. The owner and operator must participate in a program of regularly scheduled inventory verification, at lease once every two years, in accordance with 527 CMR 5.05 (3) (g).  The operator of tanks 10 years of age or older shall submit to the Fire Chief annually a report certifying that the inventory verification has been performed, stating the calculated gain/loss over the verification periods. 
D. The Fire Chief shall require the operator of an underground tank storage system to test the system for tightness, at the operator's expense, when accurate daily inventory records have not been maintained as specified in 
6.1. 
E. If daily inventory records indicate a loss of product in excess of 0.5 percent of the volume of product used or sold, or an abnormal increase in the amount of water contained in the tank, steps must be taken immediately in accordance with 527 CMR 5.05 (3) (e) to detect and stop the leak.  The discrepancy must be reported to the Fire Chief. 
6.2 	Tank Testing. 
A. Unless the tank operator demonstrates to the Fire Chief and the Board of Health that his tank(s) are constructed of a material that will not corrode, has product sensors, or has been repaired or tested within the last year, underground tanks shall be required, at the expense of the owner, to undergo one of the following tests at five-year intervals from the date of installation, up to the twentieth year, and annually thereafter: A Kent-Moore (Heath Petrotite) test; or a Sun-Mark leak-locator test; or the equivalent as determined by the Fire Chief.  The Fire Chief shall be given at least 48 hours notice of time, date, and place of testing.  Test results must be submitted to the local Fire Chief. 
B. The waiver from 6.2 (a) may not be granted for a tank that is located within any of the areas specified in Section 5.3 (b). 
C. If flammable fluids or their vapors have been detected in neighboring structures, sewers, or wells on or off the property locations, the Fire Chief may require that any nearby tank, including underground residential tanks less than 1000 gallons, be tested at the expense of each tank's owner. 
SECTION 7 Procedure in Case of Spill or Leak 
7.1 	Leak Reporting Any person who is aware of a spill or abnormal loss of flammable fluids must report such spill or loss immediately to the Fire Chief.  The Fire Chief must be responsible for other notification, including the Board of Health. 


7.2 	Equipment Replacement/Removal 
A. After a leak is confirmed, underground tanks (or piping) must be emptied immediately, and removed or repaired forthwith, under the direction of the Fire Chief. 
B. A leaking tank that is twenty years old or older that does not comply with the design standards in Section 5.1 (b) must be removed and may not be repaired.  A permit for its removal must be obtained in accordance with 
M.G.L.
 Chapter 48, Section 38A. 

C. 
A leaking tank that is less than twenty years old must be repaired or removed.  If the tank operator can show to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief that (in the case of steel tanks) the leak was from internal corrosion, and that the tank can be repaired so as not to pose a continuing threat to the soils and waters of the Commonwealth, considering at a minimum the corrosivity of the soil: tank age and external condition; techniques to be used for the repair; and the location of the tank, then the tank may be repaired.  Operators of leaking FRP tanks must demonstrate to the Fire Chief that the tank can be repaired according to manufacturer's instructions.  Operators who do not meet these requirements must remove the tank. 

D. 
If it is necessary to replace an underground steel tank that has developed a corrosion-induced leak, all other steel tanks at the facility of the same age or older, whether they are leaking or not, shall be repaired or replace with tanks that meet the requirements of Section 5.1 of this By-Law. 


SECTION 8 Administration. 
8.1 	The provisions of this By-Law shall be administered by the Fire Chief. 
8.2 	Variances from the specific requirements of this By-Law/Ordinance may be authorized by the chief licensing authority after notice and a public hearing. 
8.3 	Licenses issued in accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 148 Section 13 for underground tanks must be renewed at five-year intervals from the date of installation, up to the twentieth year, and annually thereafter.  Tank owners must submit to the Fire Chief and the licensing authority a statement certifying satisfactory leak-detection results over the period of the permit (in accordance with Section 6.2 of this By-Law), and inventory verification, at least 30 days before the issuance of a permit renewal for the time periods specified herein.  Test results must accompany the permit-renewal application. 
8.4 	Fees necessary for the issuance and renewal of permits or licenses shall be set by the Board of Selectmen. 
8.5 	The Fire Chief or his designee may, at all reasonable times, and upon reasonable notice to the occupant of the premises, enter any premises, public or private, for the purpose of investigating, sampling, or inspecting any record, condition, equipment, practice, or property relating to activities subject to this By-Law/Ordinance, and may at any time and upon reasonable notice to the occupant of the premises enter such premises for the purpose of protecting the public health or safety, or to prevent damage to the environment. [Adopted 1984] 
ARTICLE XIX 
COUNCIL ON AGING 

SECTION 1 	There is hereby established a Council on Aging consisting of from seven to eleven citizens of this town, appointed by the Board of Selectmen for terms not to exceed four years for any member.  Said terms shall be staggered so that not more than three appointments shall be made in any calendar year. Members can be re-appointed for concurrent terms. 
SECTION 2 	The duties of said Council on Aging shall be to: 
(1) 
identify the total needs of the community's elderly population; 

(2)
 educate the community and enlist the support and participation of all citizens concerning these needs; 

(3) 
design, promote, or implement services to fill these needs, or coordinate present existing services in the community; 

(4) 
promote and support any other programs which are designed to assist elderly programs in the community. 


SECTION 3 	Said Council on Aging shall cooperate with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Office of Elder Affairs and shall be cognizant of all state and federal legislation concerning funding, information exchange, and program planning which exists for better community programming for the elderly. 
SECTION 4 	Said Council on Aging shall give an annual report to the Board of Selectmen with a copy of that report directed to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Office of Elder Affairs. 
SECTION 5 	The By-Laws of said Council shall be drawn by them and presented to the Board of Selectmen for their approval. [Adopted 1984] 
ARTICLE XX 
COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE BYLAW 

A. The Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea shall have a Community Preservation Committee to perform the duties as required in the Community Preservation Act, Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 44B.  The Committee shall evaluate the community preservation needs of the Town and develop a community preservation program and financial plan for the Town.  The program shall identify short-term and long-term goals, set criteria for evaluating proposed acquisitions and initiatives, prioritize projects and estimate their costs.  The financial plan shall include a multi-year revenue and expenditure forecast and identify the fund or other municipal financing source for each proposed project.  The program and financial plan shall be reviewed and updated annually. 
B. The Committee shall make recommendations annually to the Town Meeting for the acquisition, creation, and preservation of open space, for the acquisition, creation, and preservation of land for recreational use, for the acquisition and preservation of historic resources, for the creation, preservation, and support of community housing, and for the rehabilitation or restoration of such open space, land for recreational use, historic resources, and community housing that is acquired or created as provided in the Community Preservation Act.  With respect to community housing, the Community Preservation Committee shall recommend, wherever possible, the reuse of existing buildings or construction of new buildings on previously developed sites.  Before making its recommendations to the Town Meeting, the Committee shall consult with the Board of Selectmen, Conservation Commission, Planning Board, Housing Authority, Finance Committee, other municipal boards as needed, representatives for historic resources, representatives for parks and recreation, and citizens. 
C.  Commission as designated by the Commission, one member of the Planning Board as designated by the Board, one member of the Housing Authority as designated by the Authority, one representative for municipal finances as designated by the Finance Committee, one member of the Historic District Commission acting under its authority as the Historical Commission as designated by the Commission, one representative for parks and recreation as designated by the Board of Selectmen, and three at-large representatives as designated by the Board of Selectmen. The terms of the Committee members shall be three years. 
D.  The Committee shall not meet or conduct business without the presence of a quorum.  A majority of the members of the committee shall constitute a quorum.  The committee shall abide by the Open Meeting Law of Massachusetts. 
E. The Committee shall hold one or more public informational hearings annually regarding community preservation.  The hearing notice shall be posted publicly and published for each of two weeks preceding the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. 
F. Minutes of meetings shall be taken.  Copies shall be provided to the Town Clerk. 
G. This by-law shall not become effective unless the Town accepts the Community Preservation Act under Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 44B.  [Added 2005] 
ARTICLE XXI AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND 
Section 1 Affordable Housing Trust 
There shall be a Manchester-by-the-Sea Affordable Housing Trust, the purpose of 
which shall be the acquisition, creation, preservation, rehabilitation and support of 
affordable housing in the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea for the benefit of low 
and moderate income households. The Trust shall be governed by Trustees in 
accordance with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 44, Section 55C and the 
authority granted by Town Meeting, as revised from time to time. [Amended 
October 2017] 
Section 2 Name of the Trust 
This trust shall be called the “Manchester-by-the-Sea Affordable Housing Trust”, 
herein referred to as the Trust. 
Section 3 Purposes 
The purpose of this Trust shall be the acquisition, creation, preservation, 
rehabilitation and support of affordable housing in the Town of Manchester-by­
the Sea for the benefit of low and moderate income households and in furtherance 
of this purpose, to acquire by gift, purchase, or otherwise real estate and personal 
property, both tangible and intangible, of every sort and description; to use such 
property, both real and personal, in such manner as the Trustees shall deem most 
appropriate to carry out such purpose, provided however, that all property 
comprising this Trust and the net earnings thereof shall be used only in the Town 
exclusively for the benefit of all of the inhabitants of the Town of Manchester-by-
the-Sea for the creation and preservation of affordable housing for which this 
Trust was formed and no part of the activities of the Trust shall consist of 
propaganda or otherwise attempting to influence legislation or participation in or 
intervention in (including the publication or distribution of statements) any 
political campaign on behalf of any candidate for public office and no part of the 
net earnings of this Trust shall inure or be payable to or for the benefit of any 
private individual or corporation. [Amended October 2017] 
Section 4 Board of Trustees 
There shall be a Board of Trustees (the “Board”) consisting of seven (7) Trustees 
who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen (5 members) and the Town 
Moderator (2 members). The members of the Board shall be comprised of as 
follows:  
one (1) member of the Board of Selectmen, or its designee; 
one (1) member of the Community Preservation Committee or its designee; 
one (1) member of the Manchester Housing Authority or its designee; 
one (1) member of the Planning Board or its designee; 
one (1) member of the Finance Committee or its designee; and 
two (2) citizens at large selected by the Town Moderator 

Section 5 Tenure of Trustees 
The Trustees hereunder shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen or Town 
Moderator.  Only persons who are residents of the Town shall be eligible to hold 
the office of Trustee.  Trustees shall serve for a term not to exceed two years and 
may be re-appointed at the discretion of the Board of Selectmen or Town 
Moderator, as applicable.  Any Trustee who ceases to be a resident of the Town 
shall cease to be a Trustee hereunder provided that a written notification of the 
change in residence has been filed with the Town Clerk. Any Trustee may resign 
by written instrument signed and acknowledged by such Trustee and duly filed 
with the Town Clerk and recorded with the Registry of Deeds and filed with the 
Land Registration Office.  If a Trustee shall die, resign, or for any other reason 
cease to be a Trustee hereunder before his/her term of office expires, a successor 
shall be appointed by a joint meeting of the appointing authority and the 
remaining Trustees to fill such vacancy provided that in each case the said 
appointment and acceptance in writing by the Trustee so appointed is filed with 
the Town Clerk and recorded with the Registry of Deeds and filed with the Land 
Registration Office.  Upon the appointment or election of any succeeding Trustee 
and the filing of such appointment or a certificate of such election the title to the 
Trust estate shall thereupon and without the necessity of any conveyance be 
vested in such succeeding Trustee jointly with the remaining Trustees.  Reference 
to the Trustee shall mean the Trustee or Trustees for the time being hereunder. Of 
the original Trustees, four shall hold office until July 1, 2017 and three shall hold 
office until July 1, 2018. 
Section 6 Meetings of the Trust 
Meetings of the Trust shall be held not less than quarterly and at all other times 
deemed advisable at such time and at such place as the Trustees shall determine. 
A written notice stating the place, day, hour and agenda of each Meeting of the 
Trust shall be posted at Town Hall at least two (2 business days before the date of 
such meeting. A quorum at any meeting shall be a majority of the Trustees 
qualified.  Meetings may be scheduled as needed in conformance with the 
requirements of the Massachusetts open meeting laws. 
Section 7 Powers of Trustees 
The Trustees, for the carrying out of the above purposes and except has herein 
otherwise specifically provided, shall have the same powers with respect to all 
real and personal estate at any time held by them as if they were the absolute 
owners thereof, and without limiting the foregoing generality: 
a) 	to solicit and accept grants, gifts, devises and bequests or otherwise acquire real or personal property; 
b) 	to invest any of the trust property in such manner as they may deem advisable without being limited as to the kind or amount of any investment; 
c) 	to sell and exchange any real or personal property or any interest therein for such consideration and upon such terms and conditions as they deem advisable; 
d) 	to join with others in the acquisition of real property or any interest therein; 
e) 	to borrow money and mortgage or pledge any part of the trust estate assets and issue notes or other indebtedness; 
f) 	to join with others in borrowings, mortgages and pledges and to guarantee and become surety on obligations of others, in transactions in which the Trust has an interest; 
g) 	to execute, as lessor or lessee, leases; 
h) 	to restore, construct, repair and maintain buildings and other improvements and establish such reserves as they deem necessary therefore; 
i) 	to pay, compromise or adjust all obligations incurred and rights acquired in the administration of the Trust; 
j) 	to obtain advice of counsel and to rely thereon; 
k) 	to employ such other persons, agents, brokers, managers, accountants, or advisors as they may deem advisable; 
l) 	and to execute, acknowledge and deliver all such contracts, deeds, mortgages, leases, discharges, and partial releases of mortgages, or other instruments as they may deem advisable in the course of the administration of the Trust. 
The Trustees shall refrain from exercising any powers in such manner as to violate the provisions of said Chapter 44, Section 55C. 
Section 8 Limitations on the Powers of Trustees These powers shall be subject to the following limitations: 
a) 	any purchase, sale, lease, exchange, transfer, or conveyance of any interest in real property must be approved by five of the seven voting members. 
b) 	the Trustees may incur debt, borrow money, grant mortgages, and pledge Trust assets only in an amount not to exceed 80% of the Trust's total assets. 
c) 	no debt incurred by the Trustees shall constitute a pledge of the full faith and credit of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea and all documents related to any debt shall contain a statement that the holder of any such debt shall have no recourse against the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea with an acknowledgement of said statement by the holder. 
Section 9 Acts of Trustees 
A majority of Trustees may exercise any or all of the powers of the Trustees 
hereunder and may execute on behalf of the Trustees any and all instruments with 
the same effect as though executed by all the Trustees. The Trustees may, by 
instrument executed by all the Trustees, delegate to any attorney, agent or 
employee such other powers and duties as they deem advisable, including power 
to execute, acknowledged or deliver instruments as fully as the Trustees might 
themselves and to sign and endorse checks for the account of the Trustees of the 
Trust.  The Trustees shall not delegate the authority to amend or terminate the 
Trust and no such delegation shall be effective.  No Trustee shall be required to 
give bond.  No license of court shall be required to confirm the validity of any 
transaction entered into by the Trustees with respect to the Trust Estate.  No one 
dealing with the Trustees need inquire concerning the validity of anything the 
Trustees purport to do or see to the application of anything paid to or upon the 
order of the Trustees.  No Trustee shall be liable for the acts, negligence or 
defaults of any other Trustee or any employee, agent, or representative of the 
Trustees selected with reasonable care, nor for errors in judgment, nor mistakes of 
law or fact made in good faith nor in reliance in good faith on advice of counsel 
not for other acts or omissions in good faith. 
Section 10 Liability 
Neither the Trustees nor any agent or officer of the Trust shall have the authority 
to bind the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea.  The Trust is a public employer and 
the Trustees are public employees for the purposes of G. L. Chapter 258.  The 
Trust shall be deemed a municipal agency and the Trustees special municipal 
employees for the purposes of Chapter 268A.  
Section 11 Amendments 
This Declaration of Trust may be amended from time to time except as to those 
provisions specifically required under G. L. Chapter 44 Section 55C and 
Manchester-by-the-Sea By-laws, by an instrument in writing signed by all of the 
Trustees and approved at a meeting called for that purpose, provided that in each 
case, a certificate of amendment has been recorded with the Registry of Deeds 
and filed with the Land Registration Office. 
Section 12 	Accounts The Town Treasurer shall be responsible for: 
a) 	the preparation, maintenance and fair presentation of the books and records of the Trust in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America; which includes the design, implementation and maintenance of internal control relevant to the preparation and fair presentation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.  And 
b) 	to have these Trust accounts and statements audited annually by an independent auditor in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in Governmental Auditing Standards issued by the Comptroller General of the United States of America together with the auditor’s Opinions and Management Letter. 
Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit the Trustees’ authorities, powers and duties as otherwise set forth in this Bylaw and any applicable state or federal law.  The Trust may utilize the services of Town staff, consultants, employees, and/or officials, upon such terms and conditions as mutually agreeable between the Town and Trust, to effectuate the purposes of the Trust. [Added October 2017] 
Section 13 Duration of the Trust This Trust shall be of indefinite duration.  However, it may be terminated by a vote of Town Meeting in accordance with Chapter 4, Section 4 provided that an instrument of termination, together with a certified copy of the Town Meeting vote, are duly recorded with the Registry of Deeds and the Land Registration Office. Upon termination of the Trust, subject to the payment of or making provision for the payment of all obligations and liabilities of the Trust and the Trustees, the net assets of the Trust shall be transferred to the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea and held by the Board of Selectmen for affordable housing purposes. In making any such distribution, the Trustees may sell all or any portion of the Trust property and distribute the net proceeds thereof or they may distribute any of the assets in kind.  The powers of the Trustees shall continue until the affairs of the Trust are concluded. 
Section 14 Authority shown by Record to be Conclusive; Certificate as to Facts Every contract, deed, mortgage, lease and other instrument executed by a majority of the Trustees as appears from instruments or certificates recorded with said Registry of Deeds and Land Registration Office to be Trustees hereunder shall be conclusive evidence in favor of any person relying thereon or claiming 
thereunder, that at the time of the delivery thereof this Trust was in full force and effect and that the execution and delivery of such instrument was duly authorized by the Trustees except that delegations of authority pursuant to Section 9 hereof and instruments of amendment pursuant to Section 10 and an instrument of termination pursuant to Section 12 hereof shall be conclusive only if it appears that the delegations, amendments or termination have been executed by all of the Trustees.  Any person dealing with the Trust property or the Trustees may always rely on a certificate signed by any person appearing from instruments or certificates so recorded to be a Trustee hereunder as to the identity of the then current Trustees or as to the existence or non-existence of any fact or facts which constitute conditions precedent to acts by the Trustees or in any other manner germane to the affairs of the Trust. 
Section 15 Titles The titles to the various Sections herein are for convenience only and are not to be considered part of said Sections nor shall they affect the meaning or the language of any such Section. [Added 2016] 
AN ACT REQUIRING THAT CERTAIN MEASURES IN THE TOWN OF MANCHESTER­BY-THE-SEA BE APPROVED AT A TOWN ELECTION 
SECTION 1 	Notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary, in the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea, no incurrence of indebtedness or other action that the Town's general by-law, as from time to time in effect, provides should be authorized pursuant to this Act, and no other action that a town meeting determines should be so authorized, shall be valid unless (i) with respect to such indebtedness or other action specified in the general by-law, the town meeting determines by majority vote that the incurrence of the indebtedness or the other action  shall be submitted to the voters as a ballot question at a town election, and (ii) the ballot question as to such incurrence or as to the other action that is specified in the general by-law or that a town meeting has determined should be authorized pursuant to this Act is approved by a quantum of vote sufficient to authorize it at a town meeting.  The election at which voters act on the question by ballot may be the annual election or a special election which the selectmen shall promptly call, held in either case not less than thirty and not more than sixty days after the dissolution of the meeting. 
The question submitted to voters as a ballot question shall appear on the ballot in the following form:  "Do you approve of the measure summarized below?"  A fair, concise summary of the measure, as determined by the town counsel, shall follow. The polls at such election shall be open as required by section sixty-four of the General Laws for the election of town officers, and all other provisions of the General Laws pertaining to town elections shall apply.  No quorum shall be required in voting on any ballot questions under this act. 
SECTION 2 	This act shall take effect upon its passage. [Enacted 1991] 
APPENDIX 

1995: 	Added Article III, Section 2(h). Approved by the April 3, 1995 Annual Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General on May 23, 1995 
1996: 	Amended Article II, Section 3 Approved by the November 13, 1995 Special Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General on December 1, 1995 
Added Article VIII, Section 4 Approved by the November 13, 1995 Special Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General on December 1, 1995 
1997: 	Amended Article X Section 20(a) and (b) Approved by the April 7, 1997 Annual Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General July 11, 1997 
Added Article X, Section 34 Approved by the April 7, 1997 Annual Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General on July 11, 1997 
Added Article X, Section 36 Approved by the April 7, 1997 Annual Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General July 11, 1997 
Amended Article II, Section 14(a) Approved by the April 7, 1997 Annual Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General on July 11, 1997 
Added Article X, Section 35 (1) and (2) Approved by the April 7, 1997 Annual Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General on September 7, 1998 
Amended Article X, Section 35 Approved by the November 17, 1997 Special Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General on January 28, 1998 
1998: 	Added Article II, Section 19 Approved by the April 6, 1998 Annual Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General on June 8, 1998 
Added Article X, Section 28(c)9 Approved by the April 6, 1998 Annual Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General on June 8, 1998 
1998: 	Amended Article X, Section 28(g)3 Approved by the April 6, 1998 Annual Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General on June 8, 1998 
Amended Article X, Section 28(h) Approved by the April 6, 1998 Annual Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General on June 8, 1998 
Amended Article X, Section 28(c)3 Approved by the April 6, 1998 Annual Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General on June 8, 1998 
Added Article X, Section 33(4) Approved by the April 7, 1998 Annual Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General on June 8, 1998 
Added Article X, Section 37 Approved by the April 6, 1998 Annual Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General on June 8, 1998 
1999: 	Adopted Article X, Section 38 Approved by the April 5, 1999 Annual Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General on April 14, 1999 
Amended Article XVII, Section 2.1 Approved by the April 5, 1999 Annual Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General on April 14, 1999 
2000 	Amended Article X, by deleting Section 15A Approved by the April 3, 2000 Annual Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General on June 16, 2000 
Amended Article X, Section 33 Approved by the April 3, 2000 Annual Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General on June 16, 2000 
2001 	Amended Article IV, by adding Section 10 Approved by the April 2, 2001 Annual Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General July 19, 2001 Amended Article XII, Earth Removal Approved by the April 2, 2001 Annual Town Meeting 
Approved by the Attorney General July 19, 2001 
2002 	Amended Article 1, Section 4(b) Enforcement Approved by the April 1, 2002 Annual Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General July 8, 2002 
Amended Article XIII, Personnel Bylaw 
Approved by the April 1, 2002 Town Meeting 
Approval of Attorney General not required for Personnel By-laws 

2003 	Amended  Article II, Section 2, Date of Annual Election Approved by the April 7, 2003 Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General June 10, 2003 
Amended Article 1, Section 4, Item 4-Accessible Parking By-law 
Approved by the April 7, 2003 Town Meeting 
Approved by the Attorney General June 10, 2003 

2004 	Amended Article II, Section 5, Town Meeting Quorum Requirement Approved by the April 7, 2004 Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General April 26, 2004 
2005 	Amended Article X, Section 1 and Article 1, Section 4, Printed Matter Vending Machines Approved by the April 4, 2005 Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General May 19, 2005 
Adopted Article XX, Community Preservation Committee By-law 
Approved by the April 4, 2005 Town Meeting 
Approved by the Attorney General June 10, 2005 

2006 	Amended Article XV, Section 14(a) Counting Votes at Town Meeting Amended Article XII, Section 5(d) Restoration After Excavation 
2007 	Amended Article XII, Section 2, Exemptions 
2009 Amended Article X, Section 33, House Numbering Fine Amended Article XX, Section (c), Community Preservation Committee membership Approved by the Attorney General April 23, 2009 
2010 	Amended Article XIV, Section A1, Resident Parking, Permission to Park Passenger Vehicles on Certain Streets Approved by Town Meeting, April 5, 2010 Approved by Attorney General July 6, 2010 Amended Article XVII, General Wetlands By-Law, Replaces Previous Article XVII in its Entirety Approved by the April 5, 2010 Town Meeting Approved by the Attorney General May 24, 2010 
2011 	Amended Article III,  Section 7, Harbormaster Amended Article IX, Section 3, Records and Reports Amended Article X, Section 28 (C) (3) Police and Other Regulations Approved by Town Meeting, April 4, 2011 Approved by Attorney General July 26, 2011 
2012 	Amended Article II by adding Section 20, Town Meeting Amended Article X by adding Section 39, Snow Emergency Parking Ban Approved by Town Meeting on April 2, 2012 Approved by Attorney General June 6, 2012 
2013 	Amended Article IX, Section 3, Records and Reports Amended Article X by adding Section 40, Denial or Revocation of Permit for Non-Payment of Taxes or Fees Approved by Town Meeting on April 1, 2013 Approved by Attorney General on May 2, 2013 
Amended Article I, Section 4B1, General Wetlands By-law, Fine allowed, Enforcement Agent, Fine Schedule Amended Article II, Section 18, Town Meetings Amended Article X by adding Section 41, Stretch Energy Code Amended Article X, Section 28, B1, Animal Control Board membership Amended Article X, Section 28, C3, Control of Animals Approved by Town Meeting on April 2, 2013 Approved by Attorney General on May 2, 2013 
Amended Article X by adding Section 42, Plastic Bag Reduction 
Approved by Town Meeting on April 2, 2013 
Approved by Attorney General on July 24, 2013 

2014 	Amended Article XVII, Section 4.4.3, Section 5.1, and Section 7.1 General Wetlands By-Law Amended Article X, Section 39A and Section 39C Snow Emergency Parking Ban Approved by Town Meeting on April 7, 2014 Approved by the Attorney General on May 16, 2014 
2015 	Amended Article X, Section 28, Replaces Previous Section 28 in its Entirety Amended Article X, Section 29, Replaces Previous Section 29 in its Entirety 
Approved by Town Meeting on April 6, 2015 
Approved by the Attorney General on August 31, 2015 

2016 	Adopted Article XXI, Affordable Housing Trust Fund Amended Article X by Adding Section 20C Short Term Paying Guest in Homes Approved by Town Meeting April 4, 2016 Approved by the Attorney General on July 8, 2016 
2017 	Adopted Article IV, Section 11: Revolving Funds Amended Article II by deleting Section 12 and renumbering all the following sections to be consistent with this deletion and sequential. Amended Article II, Section 15: Regarding motion for reconsideration and renumbered as section 14 Adopted Article VIII, Section 5: Sewer Betterment Assessments Approved by Town Meeting April 3, 2017 Approved by the Attorney General on May 22, 2017 
2018 	Amended Article IV, Section 4 by deleting the specific dollar amount and replacing with the statutory reference for threshold for disposal of surplus municipal property. Amended Article X by adding a new Section 43 “Construction Site Activity.” Amend Section 30A of Article X to include Beach St east of Tappan St as no parking zones. Amend Sections 1, 3 and 12 of Article XXI, Affordable Housing Trust, to include “acquisition, rehabilitation and support” under list of purposes and caveat of nothing shall limit the authority, powers and duties of the Trust. Approved by Town Meeting October 16, 2017 Approved by the Attorney General on February 9, 2018 Amended Article VI, “Finance Committee” to reduce membership from 9 to 7. Amended Article X, “Police and other Regulations,” Section 39, “Snow Emergency Parking Ban,” subsection C, to enforce violations under MGL Ch. 90 S. 20A rather than MGL Ch. 40 S. 21D. Approved by Town Meeting October 15, 2018 Approved by the Attorney General on January 28, 2019 
2019 	Amended Article II, Section 13, to include Electronic Voting as a Town Meeting voting option. Amended Article II, Section 3 to add a subsection F to require Boards/Committees to file their minutes with the Town Clerk’s office. Amended Article X, Section 28 by adding subsection D to include a $10 late fee per month, up to 3 months, for dog registration fees. Amended Article X to add a new section 44 to ban the sale of certain plastic food ware and polystyrene in Town. Approved by Town Meeting April 1, 2019. Approved by the Attorney General on April 26, 2019. 
Table of Source Sections: 
Article II Section 13: 04/01/2019 (Art. 13) 
Article II Section 3: 04/01/2019 (Art. 14) 
Article IV Section 4: 10/16/2017 (Art. 11) 
Article VI Section 1: 10/15/2018 (Art. 1) 
Article X – “Police and Other Regulations” Section 28: 04/01/2019 (Art. 15) Section 30A: 10/16/2017 (Art. 7) Section 39 (C): 10/15/2018 (Art. 2) Section 43: 10/16/2017 (Art. 9) Section 44: 04/01/2019 (Art. 17) 
Article XXI – “Affordable Housing Trust” Section 1: 10/16/2017 (Art. 6) Section 3: 10/16/2017 (Art. 6) Section 12: 10/16/2017 (Art. 6) 
Revision Schedule 
Version October 2018: 	January 30, 2019 (per FTM 10/15/2018. Scribner’s error corrections: -Renumber an internal reference in Section 13 in Article II; -Eliminate appropriation language at the end of Section 39 of 
Article X as it was not part of the language of the bylaw that was voted upon and approved by the AG. 
ZONING BY-LAW 
OF THE 
TOWN OF MANCHESTER-BY-THE-SEA 
[Revised through October 2017] 

Table of Contents 
INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................................... 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.......................................................................................................1 INFORMATION RELATING TO LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING LAND 
USE......................................................................................................................................2 
SECTION 1.0  AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE ........................................................................ 3 
SECTION 2.0  DEFINITIONS................................................................................................... 4 
SECTION 3.0  ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS ............................................................... 7 
SECTION 4.0  USE REGULATIONS ....................................................................................... 8 
SECTION 5.0 DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS................................................................. 36 
SECTION 6.0  SPECIAL PROVISIONS................................................................................. 41 
SECTION 7.0  ADMINISTRATION.......................................................................................110 
APPENDIX..................................................................................................................................116 
INDEX .........................................................................................................................................126 
MAPS……………………………………………………………………………………...........133 


INTRODUCTION 
The Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea voted to amend the Zoning By-Law at the Annual Town Meeting held on May 1, 2 and 3, 1978, adopting a complete Zoning By-Law revision and new codification and organization.  The Massachusetts Attorney General approved, with deletions in subsection 7.1.2 and section 7.2, this amended and recodified Zoning By-Law on August 18, 1978.  The Zoning By-Law has subsequently been revised often by vote of Town Meeting. 
Any editorial, typographical and transcription errors do not invalidate the Zoning By-Law.  If errors are found, please report them to the Board of Selectmen's office. 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws as amended by Chapter 808 of the Acts of 1975, "The Zoning Act", sets forth certain requirements relating to zoning matters.  For the convenience of those using the Zoning By-Law of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea, a few of these requirements are set forth below.  However, nothing herein is intended to alter or vary the requirements of Chapter 40A, "The Zoning Act", provisions of which shall control in all instances. 
1. 	
A zoning change may be initiated by or submitted to the Board of Selectmen by a Selectman, the Zoning Board of Appeals, individuals owning land to be affected, ten registered voters, the Planning Board or a regional planning agency. 

2. 	
All zoning changes require approval of the Town Meeting by a two-thirds vote. 

3. 	
No proposed zoning by-law or change unfavorably voted upon shall be considered by the Town Meeting within two years unless there is a favorable Planning Board recommendation. 

4. 	
No appeal, application or petition which has been unfavorably acted upon by the Zoning Board of Appeals can be reconsidered within two years without consent of the Planning Board. 

5. 	
Rights acquired under a variance shall lapse if they are not exercised within one year. 

6. 	
Decision on an appeal or variance must be made within 100 days of the date of filing.  Failure to make a decision within 100 days shall be deemed to be a grant of the appeal or variance. 

7. 	
Decision on a special permit must be made within 90 days of the public hearing thereon.  Failure to make a decision within 90 days shall be deemed to be a grant of the special permit. 

8. 	
A special permit shall lapse within two years (or such shorter period as is deemed appropriate by the Zoning Board of Appeals or the special permit granting authority) if substantial use thereof has not commenced within such period except for good cause or if construction has not begun except for good cause. 

9. 	
The Zoning Board of Appeals consists of five members.  By reason of Chapter 40A, all decisions must receive four votes. 

10. 	
The Board of Selectmen consists of five members.  By reason of Chapter 40A, all decisions as special permit granting authority require a vote of at least four members. 


Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea Zoning By-Law -Page 1 –Revised: October 2017 
INFORMATION RELATING TO 
LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING LAND USE 

Land use in the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea is subject to regulation under various Town By-Laws and statutes of the Commonwealth.  Included among these are the Zoning By-Law of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea adopted pursuant to Chapter 40A of the General Laws as amended by Chapter 808 of the Acts of 1975, "The Zoning Act" of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and the following: 
BY-LAWS OF THE TOWN OF MANCHESTER-BY-THE-SEA as amended and set forth as Board of Selectmen's Rules and Regulations.  Included are the Earth Removal By-Law (Article XII), the Historic District By-Law (Article XVI), the General Wetlands By-Law (Article XVII), and By-Laws regulating swimming pools, signs and advertising devices, snow guards, road openings, and billboards (Article X). 
TOWN OF MANCHESTER-BY-THE-SEA SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS set forth the Planning Board's procedures and standards to be followed in the subdivision of land and the construction of ways pursuant to "The Subdivision Control Law," Chapter 41 of the General Laws. 
STATE BUILDING CODE sets forth the regulations, administered by the Building Inspector, relative to the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, demolition, removal, inspection, issuance and revocation of permits or licenses, installation of equipment, classification and definition of buildings and structures and use or occupancy thereof. 
STATE ENVIRONMENTAL CODE -Title 5 as amended sets forth the minimum standards for the protection of public health and the environment when circumstances require the use of individual systems for the disposal of sanitary sewage in areas where municipal sewage systems are not available. 
"MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DISPOSAL OF SANITARY SEWAGE IN UNSEWERED AREAS" sets forth the Board of Health's local rules and regulations pertaining to the construction or installation of on-lot sewage disposal systems in areas not connected to the municipal sewers. 
HISTORIC DISTRICTS sets forth the boundary description of the Historic District and the regulations administered by the Historic Districts Commission pertaining to the preservation and protection of buildings, places and districts of historic significance in such zones through the development and maintenance of appropriate settings.  Maps of the District are available in Town Hall. 
STATE WETLANDS PROTECTION ACT is administered by the Manchester Conservation Commission and provides for public review of proposed projects which involve construction or other alterations of land in or near wetlands or land deemed subject to periodic flooding. 
ZONING BY-LAW OF THE TOWN OF MANCHESTER-BY-THE-SEA 
SECTION 1.0  AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE 
1.1 Authority 
The Zoning By-Law of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea is adopted pursuant to and under the authority of Chapter 40A of the General Laws as amended by Chapter 808 of the Acts of 1975, The Zoning Act. 
1.2 Purpose 
The purpose of this By-Law is the promotion and protection of the public health, safety, 
convenience, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Manchester-by-the-
Sea and of the public generally by: 
-encouraging the most appropriate use of land and water within the Town; 

-preventing overcrowding of land; -preventing undue concentration of population on the one hand, and preventing excessive scattering of population on the other; -encouraging various lot sizes and housing types for persons of various age and 
income levels; -minimizing traffic hazards and congestion; -providing for adequate light, air, and sanitation; -reducing hazards from fire, flood, panic, and other dangers; -assisting in the economical provision, utilization and expansion for all services 
provided to the public, including streets, drainage, water supply, sewage disposal, schools, parks and open spaces; -preventing blight and pollution of the environment; -maintaining and enhancing the natural and historical amenities of Manchester-by-the-Sea; and -conserving the value of land and buildings. 
SECTION 2.0  DEFINITIONS 
As used in this By-Law, the following terms shall have the following meaning: 
2.1 	Accessory A building, structure or use which is subordinate to, and the use of which is customarily incidental to, and is located on the same lot with the principal building, structure or use to which it is accessory. 
2.2 	The Zoning Act Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws, as amended by Chapter 808 of the Acts of 1975, The Zoning Act, and any amendments thereafter. 
2.3 	Building A structure having a roof (including an awning or similar covering) adapted to permanent or continuous occupancy for assembly, business, education, industrial, institutional, residential or storage purposes.  The term "building" shall be construed where applicable as if followed by the words "or portion thereof". 
2.4 	Dwelling A detached building designed or arranged to accommodate one or more dwelling units and separated by side yards from any other structure except accessory buildings.  Except as expressly provided in section 4.1.9.1 (employee), not more than one dwelling shall be built or maintained on a lot. 
2.5 	Dwelling Unit A building or portion thereof occupied or suitable for occupancy as a residence and arranged for the use of one or more individuals living as a single housekeeping unit, but not including a trailer, mobile home or recreational vehicle which is designed to be mounted on wheels, whether or not on a permanent foundation. 
2.6 	Lot The whole area of a single parcel of land in one ownership, with definite boundaries, used, or available for use, as the site of one or more buildings.  A lot for the purpose of this Zoning By-Law may or may not coincide with a lot of record title. 
2.7 	Special Permit A specific authorized use within this Zoning By-Law that may be granted upon application to the designated special permit granting authority. 
2.8 	Street Any accepted town way, a way established by or maintained under county, state or federal authority, a way established by and constructed according to a subdivision plan approved in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law, and a way determined by the Planning Board to have sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land, and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon.  A public or private way shall not be deemed to be a street relative to any lot that does not have rights of access to and passage over said way.[Amended 1987] 
2.9 	Structure A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location to give support, shelter or utility, including but not limited to, buildings (whether principal or accessory), platforms and decks, swimming pools, tennis or similar courts, satellite dishes of three (3) feet diameter or greater, sheds, shelters, and display signs.  The term "structure" shall be construed where applicable as if followed by the words "or portion thereof".  The term "structure" shall not include walls or fences. [Amended 1987, 1994] 
2.10 	Lot Width 
Lot Width shall mean the length between the side lot lines of a straight line as measured 
parallel to the lot’s street frontage (See Line “A”). If such lot width so measured at any 
point beginning at and moving from the street frontage toward the rear lot line ceases to be more than the length specified in the column headed “Minimum Lot Width” in Section 5.4, the area bounded by the lot front line (inclusive of the street frontage), side lot lines and the line representing the initial occurrence of the length specified in such Minimum 
Lot Width column shall not be less than eighty(80) percent of the lot’s required area (as specified in the column headed “Minimum Lot Area” in Section 5.4)  [Amended 1997, 2007] 

2.11 Lot Frontage 
The frontage of a lot is the unbroken distance measured along the street line perimeter of 
the lot (also referred to as “street frontage”) and constitutes all or a portion of the front lot 
line which runs between one side line of the lot to the other side line. 
For purposes of determining whether a lot has the applicable frontage specified in the 

column headed “Minimum Frontage” in Section 5.4, the frontage of a lot shall be the 
lesser of (1) its unbroken street frontage, or (2) the unbroken distance measured along a line which marks the required front setback from the front lot line as specified in the 
column headed “Minimum Front Setback” in Section 5.4.  In the case of a lot abutting on 
more than one street, such lot shall be required to have such applicable minimum frontage on only one street.” [Amended 2007] 
SECTION 3.0 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 
3.1 	Districts 
For the purpose of this By-Law, the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea is hereby divided 
into the following zoning districts [See Maps]: 
Single Residence District A 
Single Residence District B 
Single Residence District C 
Residence District D 
Single Residence District E [Added 2000] 
General District 
Limited Commercial District [Amended 1987] 

3.2 	Zoning Map 
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts are shown on the following identified zoning maps as they may be hereinafter amended, and are collectively referred to as "The Zoning Map": 
"Map of the Town of Manchester, Massachusetts, Showing Zoning Districts," originally drawn by Charles A. Fritz on October 2, 1954, with reference to earlier map of December 7, 1944, accepted by the Town on February 13, 1945 and later amended to March 12, 1973 (scale: 1 inch equals 800 feet); and "Town of Manchester Natural Resources Map," consisting of a set of 8 maps prepared by Autometrics Division of Raytheon Corporation, dated April 1974 and adopted as part of the Zoning By-Law in May 1976 (scale:  inch equals 600 feet), a composite map (scale: 1 inch equals 1,000 feet), and an index map (scale: 1 inch equals 2,000 feet). [Amended 1987] [See Maps] 
3.3 	Zoning Map Interpretation 
For the purposes of interpretation of the Zoning Map, the following shall apply: 
3.3.1 	Boundaries which appear to follow streets, railroads, wood roads or brooks shall coincide with the center line thereof. 
3.3.2 	Boundaries which appear to follow a property or lot line, the exact location of which is not indicated by means of dimensions shown in figures, shall coincide with the property or lot line. 
3.3.3 	Boundaries which appear to run parallel to the sidelines of streets shall be regarded as parallel to such lines.  Dimensions shown in figures placed upon said map between such boundary lines and sidelines of public or private ways are the distances in feet of such boundary lines from such lines. 
3.3.4 	[Deleted 1987] 
SECTION 4.0  USE REGULATIONS 
4.1 	Single Residence Districts In a single Residence District no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered which is intended or designed to be used for any purpose except one or more of the following: 
4.1.1 	A dwelling having not more than one dwelling unit. 
4.1.2 	Non-nuisance agricultural, horticultural and floricultural uses, except those requiring a special permit pursuant to Section 4.1.10(1). [Amended 2007] 
4.1.3 	Church and related use. 
4.1.4 	Educational use, not conducted for profit. 
4.1.5 	The taking of boarders or the leasing of rooms for not more than four (4) persons by a family residing on the premises with common cooking and living facilities, providing there is no sign or display to advertise such use. (But it shall not be permissible to construct or operate overnight camps.) 
4.1.6 	Municipal parks, playgrounds and other municipal recreational uses, municipal wells, water storage and processing and sewage lift stations, and related buildings and parking facilities. 
4.1.7 	The office of a doctor, dentist or other member of a recognized profession  provided there is no display or advertising except for a small professional sign not over one square foot in area. 
4.1.8 	Customary home occupations including home-cooking, dressmaking, millinery, hairdressing, and other similar occupations, by a person resident on the premises, provided there is no visible display of goods from the street and no exterior advertising, except an announcement sign of not more than two square feet in area, and provided such occupation shall not be carried on in an accessory building. 
4.1.9 	Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses, or to the uses permitted in accordance with the following section 4.1.10, and not detrimental to a residential neighborhood, including specifically the following: 
4.1.9.1 	As part of an existing garage, stable or other  existing structure approved by special permit of the Board of Appeals, family living quarters for and to be occupied only by an employee of the owner occupant of the dwelling while such garage, stable or other existing structure, approved by the Board of Appeals, is an accessory use. Said employee must be employed on the premises. [Amended 1983] 
4.1.9.2 	The garaging or maintaining on any lot of not more than 1 commercial vehicle. 
4.1.10 	Any of the following uses, if authorized by special permit issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by the Planning Board, as specified below, and in accordance with the provisions of Section 7.5 (Special Permits) and subject to appropriate conditions, limitations and safeguards stated in writing by the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Planning Board, whichever is authorized to act on the matter (the SPGA), and made a part of the special permit:    [Amended 2007] 
(a) 	
Private Club, not conducted for profit; Planning Board is the SPGA 

(b) 	
Cemetery, not conducted for profit; Planning Board is the SPGA 

(c) 	
The garaging or maintaining of more than 4 automobiles when accessory to a dwelling; Zoning Board of Appeals is the SPGA 

(d) 	
Charitable or philanthropic use, hospital, sanitarium, nursing, rest or convalescent home, not conducted for profit, or other similar use; Planning Board is the SPGA 

(e) 	
Public utility or public communications building not including a service station or outside storage of supplies; Planning Board is the SPGA 

(f) 	
A permanent swimming pool or a tennis or similar court when accessory to a dwelling; Zoning Board of Appeals is the SPGA 

(g) 	
The offices within a single building for not more than three medical doctors, subject to the following conditions: (i) the Board of Appeals determines that there is a need in the Town for such offices within a single building, that there is no reasonably available and suitable office space for such doctors within a single building, or land for such a building, in a district other than a Residence District, and that there is adequate and safe off-street parking for doctors and their staffs and patients; (ii) there is no display or advertising except for a small professional sign for each doctor not over one square foot in area; (iii) no more than one building with offices for more than one doctor shall be permitted in the Residence Districts; and (iv) site plan approval is required as provided for in Section 

6.5 (Site Plan Approval). Zoning Board is the SPGA. 

(h) 	
Wind energy conversion systems (windmills). Planning Board is the SPGA [Added 1982] [Amended 2000, 2007] (See 5.3) 

(i) 	
The raising or keeping of livestock, including poultry, horses, or cows.  The Planning board is the SPGA [added 2005] 

(j) 	
Matters (including the construction or alteration of any structure or the use thereof) all or any part of which is within tideland lying below Mean High Water (per U.S. Geodetic Survey) for which an application for a state 


license under Section 18 of Gen. Laws Chapter 91 is required thereunder to be submitted for comments to the Planning Board.  The Planning Board is the SPGA. [added 2006] 
4.2 	Residence District D 
4.2.1 	The uses and accessory uses permitted in Residence District D shall be the same as those specified and defined in Section 4.1 for Single Residence Districts. In addition a dwelling having not more than two dwellings units is permitted, except as is provided in Sections 4.2.2 and 4.2.3. 
4.2.2 	Purpose:  To allow for a diversity in dwelling unit construction, and to continue an historic pattern of settlement within the downtown portion of town, this By-Law allows for the construction and/or conversion of structures into two dwelling units, provided the new or converted structures are appropriate in terms of bulk, shape and location on the lot and relationship to abutting properties. 
4.2.3 	Applicability: [See Maps] Within that portion of Residence District D included within a line running one hundred (100') feet from, and parallel to, the easterly and westerly sidelines of Pine Street, the northerly and southerly sidelines of Pleasant Street, the westerly sideline of School Street, the northerly sideline of Pleasant Street Extension, the easterly sideline of Arbella Street, and the northerly sidelines of Lincoln Street, specifically defined as the area depicted in Article 21 of the 1985 Annual Town Meeting, the conversion of a single-family residence in existence on the lot as of May 6, 1991 to a two-dwelling unit structure and the construction of a two-dwelling unit are permitted, if authorized by a special permit issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 7.5 (Special Permits) and M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 9, provided the conditions listed below are met.  As a condition of a grant of a special permit, the Zoning Board of Appeals may impose reasonable conditions on the construction or conversion of a two-dwelling structure, if in the Board's opinion, said conditions will ensure that the development is suitable and in compliance with the purpose of this By-Law.  The conversion of a structure existing on the lot as of May 6, 1991, that does not involve any increase in the size, height or volume of the structure, including the construction of exterior stairways, porches, patios or decks, shall not require a special permit. 
(a) 	
The units within the structure shall connect with the municipal sanitary sewer; 

(b) 	
The new or expanded structure is appropriate in terms of bulk, shape, location on the lot and relationship to abutting properties and existing structures within the immediate and general neighborhood; 

(c) 	
Off-street parking regulations of Section 6.2 of this By-Law are met; 

(d) 	
The converted two-unit structure may not be substantially different in character from the existing building, except in a case where changes in building facade or design would better reflect the overall character of the surrounding neighborhood; 

(e) 	
The resulting structure will be in harmony with the surrounding neighborhood. 


4.2.4 	Filing Requirements: Applicants for a special permit under this section shall file with the Zoning Board of Appeals thirteen (13) copies of written and graphic materials sufficient to describe the building appearance and position on the lot after construction, as well as location(s) for vehicular parking.  At a minimum, these materials shall include exterior architectural drawings, stamped by a registered architect, depicting the appearance and location on the lot relative to front, side and rear yard setbacks, and the proximity to existing structures of the new or converted structure.  The drawings shall also include before and after alterations in topography, if any, greater than two (2) vertical feet.  The Zoning Board of Appeals may request additional information if it determines that such information is necessary to evaluate the impact of the proposed development on the surrounding neighborhood. 
4.2.5 	Decisions: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall take action on a special permit application under this section in accordance with the procedures of M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 9 and Section 7.5 of the Zoning By-Law, with the exception that a public hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the filing of a complete application with the Town Clerk, and the Zoning Board of Appeals at a regularly scheduled Zoning Board of Appeals meeting.  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall take final action on the special permit application within thirty (30) days following the close of the above-noted public hearing.  In the event that a decision is not filed with the Town Clerk within seventy-five (75) days of the filing date, the application shall be deemed to be approved.  [1991] [2001] 
4.3 	General District In a General District no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered except for the following uses: 
4.3.1 	Uses and accessory uses permitted in Residence Districts. 
4.3.2 	Municipal and utility uses. 
4.3.3 	Retail, professional, office, service, restaurant and similar uses. 
4.3.4 	Yacht storage, construction and service and related uses. 
4.3.5 	Fish and shellfish landing, storage and handling (but not a fish processing or 
similar plant). 

4.3.6 	Public parking or garaging of automobiles not incidental to another permitted use if authorized by a special permit issued by the Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of Section 7.5 (Special Permits). 
4.3.7 	Greenhouse and nursery uses for horticultural or floricultural purposes. 
4.3.8 	Printing and publishing and similar uses. 
4.3.9 	Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incident to a use permitted by this Section 4.3, including off-street parking provided in accordance with Section 
6.2 (Off-Street Parking and Driveway/Curb Cut Regulations). 
4.3.10 	An existing dwelling which is altered or reconstructed so as to contain not more than 3 dwelling units. Such alteration or reconstruction shall not include an increase in floor area or volume. Except for shed dormers, individual dormers are not considered to be an increase in volume. 
4.3.11 	A new or enlarged existing dwelling containing not more than 4 dwelling units if authorized by a special permit issued by the Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of Section 7.5 (Special Permits); in addition, the following stated provisions shall also apply.  After the required public hearing, the Planning Board shall find and determine that such dwelling and use, including the site, plans and designs of the dwelling and any accessory buildings, constitute a desirable development in and will not be detrimental to the neighborhood, and subject further to the following conditions: 
4.3.11.1 	Each unit shall have independent cooking facilities. 
4.3.11.2 	No living quarters shall be located so that the floor elevation is more than 36 inches below the finished exterior grade. [Amended 2007] 
4.3.11.3 	The dwelling and to the extent appropriate any accessory building shall connect with a municipal sanitary sewer; 
4.3.11.4 	The density shall not exceed the rate of 15 dwelling units per acre of lot except for a dwelling constructed or enlarged on a lot of less than 12,000 square feet existing on January 25, 1974; 
4.3.11.5 	Such other conditions and restrictions as the Planning Board may prescribe in the interest of the Town in carrying out the purposes of this By-Law. 
4.4 	Limited Commercial District Within the Limited Commercial District no building, structure, or land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected or altered, except for the following uses.  Site plan review approval is required from the Planning Board, as provided for in Section 6.5 Site Plan Approval (See also 5.7 Limited Commercial District): 
4.4.1 	Business and professional offices and office buildings; 
4.4.2 	Recreational club or facilities operated for profit; 
4.4.3 	Municipal use; 
4.4.4 	Any accessory use in an accessory building when completely screened from the abutting streets or lots; 
4.4.5 	Large-scale Ground-mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations. 
4.4.6 	By Special Permit from the Planning Board, and limited to the land area west of Pine Street, a/k/a Pipe Line Road, laboratories and establishments devoted to scientific research and development; light manufacturing, assembly and processing of materials related thereto and incidental accessory uses.  Such a use will be permitted only if the following conditions, in addition to the requirements specified in Sections 6.9 and 7.5 of the Zoning By-Law are met: 
(a)  
The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Planning Board, based in part on the advice of the Conservation Commission, the Board of Health, and the Department of Public Works, that such use and facilities will not adversely affect the environment or public health.  These requirements are in addition to those described in Section 5.10 of the Zoning Bylaw. 

(b)
  Expenses incurred by the Planning Board in connection with the Special Permit, including the reasonable fees and expenses of any consultants retained by the Planning Board, shall be borne by the applicant for the Special Permit. 

(c)  
It shall be a condition of any Special Permit granted under this section that the applicant shall file with the Planning Board on an annual basis evidence that all federal, state and town licenses, permits and standards have been obtained or met for handling, use, storage and disposal of any regulated substances as defined in Section 4.9.4.3 of the Zoning Bylaw. 

(d) 
In considering the Special Permit application, the Planning Board shall apply relevant design and operating guidelines noted in Section 4.9.6.5 of the Zoning Bylaw, including subsection (f) regarding alterations and expansion. [1997] 


4.4.7 By special permit from the Planning Board, Medical Marijuana Treatment Centers, as defined by Section 6.19 of the Zoning By-Law. 
4.6 	Special Housing Provisions 
4.6.1 	Purpose: This By-Law permits the construction of accessory dwelling units in Single Residence Districts A, B, C, and E in order to meet the following objectives: 
(a) 	
To facilitate the availability of suitable private housing for moderate and lower income, elderly and younger citizens of the Town while preserving the existing character of single family districts. 

(b) 	
To make it financially possible for existing homeowners to stay in their homes. 

(c) 	
To provide security. 

(d) 	
To provide regulations that are enforceable and bring illegal conversions under control. 

(e) 	
To insure that all accessory dwelling units that are created will comply with the building codes and health, safety and fire regulations. 

(f) 	
To allow the best use of older homes by encouraging the preservation of these homes. 


4.6.2 Accessory Dwelling Units in Single Residence Districts A, B, C, and E: 
4.6.2.1 	An owner or owners of a single family dwelling in Single Residence Districts A, B, C, and E may apply to the Board of Appeals for a Special Permit for the construction of one accessory dwelling unit in such single family dwelling. 
4.6.2.2 	After notice and public hearing the Board of Appeals may grant such a permit provided that: 
(a) 	
Except in Single Residence District E, the lot size shall be two (2) times the minimum lot size as determined by the zoning regulations. 

(b) 	
The single family dwelling shall have existed on the lot as of March l, 1984.[Amended 1987] 

(c) 	
Off-street parking for at least four (4) vehicles shall be provided in a manner consistent with the character of a single family dwelling. 

(d) 	
Either the accessory dwelling unit or the main dwelling shall be occupied by the owner of the property except for temporary absences of up to one year. 

(e) 	
The construction and occupancy of the accessory dwelling unit will not be detrimental to the neighborhood or injurious to persons or property. 

(f) 	
The accessory dwelling unit is accessory to the principal residence.  The floor area of the accessory dwelling unit will not exceed 35% of the floor area of the principal dwelling and the accessory dwelling unit combined. 

(g) 	
No exterior changes shall be made which alter the single family character of the dwelling.  Any additions made shall not increase the floor area or volume by more than 10% and shall meet all applicable setback requirements. 

(h) 	
Adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of sewage, waste and drainage caused by the occupancy of such dwelling unit. 

(i) 	
There is no other accessory dwelling unit in the dwelling. 


4.6.2.3 	The Applicant for the special permit shall submit plans showing at a minimum the following items: 
(a) 	
Lot size and location of parking. 

(b) 	
Floor plan showing size and location of accessory dwelling unit with all means of egress, natural and mechanical ventilation, and location of all items required by the building code. 

(c) 	
Elevations of building if exterior changes occur. 

(d) 	
Additional information requested by the Board of Appeals. 


4.6.2.4 	The accessory dwelling unit shall not be occupied until a Building Permit and a Certificate of Occupancy are issued by the Building Inspector. [Added 1984; Amended 1987] 
4.7 	Flood Control District The Flood Control District will consist of those areas designated as A1, A2 and B1 in Figure 8 of a report prepared for the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea by the consulting firm of Camp, Dresser and McKee entitled "Storm Drainage Improvements for the Bennett's Brook Drainage Area" dated October, 1971. [See Maps; original on file with the Department of Public Works.] 
4.7.1 	The Flood Control District shall overlay other districts in this By-Law.  Any land lying within the Flood Control District shall be subject to the development and use regulations of the underlying district in which such land is situated but only to the extent not inconsistent with the regulations for the Flood Control District. 
4.7.2 	The purpose of the Flood Control District is to protect the public health and safety and property against the damages of flooding conditions caused by new development in areas with inadequate capacity of existing drainage systems, brook channels, and street culverts to accept storm runoff from the areas drained. 
4.7.3 	Any use otherwise permitted in the underlying district is permitted as a matter of right within the Flood Control District except those uses expressly regulated in this Section.  The following uses are hereby regulated: 
4.7.3.1 	Dumping, filling, or placing of soil or other substance as landfill or surfacing the land with any type of impervious materials; excavation, dredging, or removing of natural resource deposits. 
4.7.3.2 	Erection or construction of new buildings and enlargement or moving of existing structures. 
4.7.4 	The portion of any lot within the Flood Control District may be used to meet the area and yard requirements for the district or districts in which the remainder of the lot is situated. 
4.7.5 	Any use designated by Section 4.7.3 of the By-Law shall be permitted by the Board of Appeals through the issuance of a special permit, if the Board finds that the proposed use will not result in the creation or aggravation of flooding conditions which this section seeks to prevent.  In exercising its jurisdiction hereunder, the Board of Appeals may impose such conditions and restrictions on such use as it determines necessary or desirable in order to satisfy the requirements of this section.  Prior to any hearing on an application for a special permit pursuant to this section, the Board shall request the opinions of the Board of Health, the Planning Board, and the Conservation Commission with respect to the use for which this special permit is sought.  [Added May, 1984] 
4.8 	Flood Plain 
4.8.1 Flood Plain District: 
The purposes of the Flood Plain District are to: 

(a) 	
Ensure public safety through reducing the threats to life and personal injury; 

(b) 	
Eliminate new hazards to emergency response officials; 

(c) 	
Prevent the occurrence of public emergencies resulting from loss of water quality, contamination, and pollution due to flooding; 

(d) 	
Avoid the loss of utility services which, if damaged by flooding, would disrupt or shut down the utility network and impact regions of the community beyond the site of flooding; 

(e) 	
Eliminate costs associated with the response and cleanup of flooding conditions; 

(f) 	
Reduce damage to public and private property resulting from flooding waters. 


4.8.2 	Flood Plain District Boundaries and Base Flood Elevation and Floodway Data 
4.8.2.1 	The Flood Plain District is herein established as an overlay district. Any use otherwise permitted in the underlying district is permitted as a matter of right in the Flood Plain District, provided the use meets the following additional requirements and those of the Massachusetts State Building Code dealing with construction in flood plains and coastal high hazard areas as applicable. The Flood Plain District includes all special flood hazard areas within the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, or VE on the Essex County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the Essex County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea are panel numbers 25009C0429F dated July 3, 2012; and panel numbers 25009C0431G, 25009C0432G, 25009C0433G, 25009C0434G, 25009C0441G, 25009C0442G, 25009C0451G, 25009C0453G, 25009C0454G, and 25009C0475G, dated July 16, 2014. The exact boundaries of the District shall be defined by the 100-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Essex County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated July 16, 2013, as those documents were updated by FEMA Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) dated March 12, 2017, for panels 25009C0453G and 25009C0454G, effective as of July 25, 2017. The FIRM, FIS booklet, and LOMR are  incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the Town Clerk, Planning Board, and Director of Public Works. [Amended 2012, 2014, 2017] 
4.8.2.2 	Base Flood Elevation and Floodway Data 
(a) 
Base Flood Elevation Data is required for subdivision proposals or other developments greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, which ever is the lesser, within unnumbered A zones. 

(b) 
In Zones A and AE, along watercourses that have not had a regulatory floodway designated, the best available Federal, State, local, or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. [Added 2012} 


4.8.3 	Notification of Watercourse Alteration In a riverine situation, the following must be notified of any alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
(a) 	
Adjacent communities 

(b) 	
NFIP State Coordinator 
Massachusetts Office of Water Resources 
251 Causeway Street 
Suite 600-700 
Boston, MA 02114-2104 


(c) 	
[deleted 2002] 

(d) 	
NFIP Program Specialist 
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region I 
99 High Street, 6th Floor 
Boston, MA  02110 [Revised 2012] 



4.8.4 	Use Regulations 
4.8.4.1 	Within any Zone where the base flood elevation is not provided on the FIRM, the applicant shall obtain any existing base flood elevation data and it shall be reviewed by the Building Inspector for its reasonable utilization toward meeting the elevation or flood proofing requirements, as appropriate, of the State Building Code. 
4.8.4.2 	Located within the Flood Plain District are areas designated as coastal high hazard areas (Zone VE).  Since these areas are extremely hazardous due to high velocity waters from tidal surges and hurricane wash, all new construction shall be located landward of the reach of Spring High Tide.  Spring High Tide shall be located as that elevation shown on the Army Corps of Engineers High Tide Chart (Tidal Flood Profiles New England Coastline, See ACOE, New England Division, Prepared by Hydraulics and Water Quality Section, Waltham, MA). All references to elevations should be to NGVD (National Geodetic Vertical Datum).  Wave run-up as defined by the elevation of the one year flood surge (Stillwater) as noted under section 404, shall be incorporated in to those elevations within V zones. [Revised 2012] 
4.8.4.3 	All development in the Flood Plain District, including structural and non-structural activities, whether permitted by right or by special permit, shall be in compliance with Chapter 131, Section 40 of the Massachusetts General Laws, and with the following: 
(a)
 Sections of the Massachusetts State Building Code (780 CMR) which address floodplain and coastal high hazard areas; [Revised 2012] 

(b) 
Wetlands Protection Regulation, Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) (currently 310 CMR 10.00); 

(c) 
Inland Wetlands Restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 13.00); [Revised 2012] 

(d) 
Coastal Wetlands Restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 12.00); [Revised 2012] 

(e) 
Minimum requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage, DEP (currently 310 CMR 15, Title 5); Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the above-referenced State regulations shall be granted only in accordance with the required variance procedures of these State regulations. 


4.8.4.4 Other Use Regulations 
(a) 
Within Zone AO on the FIRM, adequate drainage paths are 
required around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around 
and away from proposed structures. [Revised 2014] 


(b) 
Man-made alteration of sand dunes within Zone VE, which 
would increase potential flood damage, is prohibited. [Revised 
2012] 


(c) 
All development and/or uses within the Flood Plain District 
shall comply with all applicable local laws and regulations. 
[Revised 1998] 
[Amended 2012, 2014] 



4.9. 	Ground and Surface Water Resource Overlay Protection Districts 
4.9.1 	Findings: 
The Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea finds that: 

(a) 	
The groundwater underlying the Town is a major source of its existing and future water supply, including drinking water. 

(b) 	
The aquifer system supplying Manchester-by-the-Sea with its groundwater supply is integrally connected with numerous surface waters, lakes, and streams. 

(c) 	
The surface water supplies of Gravelly and Round Ponds supplement the Town's groundwater resource, and are similarly considered an indispensable natural resource. 

(d) 	
Accidental spills and discharges of toxic and hazardous materials have threatened the quality of such water supplies posing public health and safety hazards. 

(e) 	
Unless preventive measures are adopted to control the discharge and storage of toxic and hazardous materials within the Town, further spills and discharges of such materials will predictably occur and with greater frequency and degree of hazard by reason of increasing land development, population and vehicular traffic within Manchester-by-the-Sea. 


4.9.2 	Purpose: The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare through the preservation of the Town's water resources to ensure a future supply of safe and healthful drinking water for the residents and employees of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea and the general public. The designation of the Ground and Surface Water Resource Overlay Protection Districts and careful regulation of development activities within these districts can reduce the potential for ground and surface water contamination. 
4.9.3 	Ground and Surface Water Resource Overlay Protection District Maps: The maps delineating the Ground and Surface Water Resource Overlay Protection District, dated April, 1990, prepared by Horsley Witten Hegemann, Inc., Scale: 1 inch = 3,000 feet,” and the maps entitled “Water Resource Protection District, Town of Manchester, Scale: 1 inch = 800 feet,” dated 1987, prepared byWhitman and Howard, are incorporated herein and made a part of this By-Law and collectively shall be referred to as the “Ground and Surface Water Resource Overlay Protection District Maps.” These Maps shall be on file and maintained by the Town Clerk's office. Any amendments, additions or deletions to said Maps shall be made only as provided for in M.G.L. c. 40A, §5. [See Maps] 
4.9.4 	Regulations: Ground and Surface Water Resource Overlay Protection Districts, as shown on the maps described in §4.9.3, shall be considered to be superimposed over any other district established in this By-Law. Land in a Ground and Surface Water Resource Overlay Protection District may be used for any purpose otherwise permitted in the underlying district, subject to the additional restrictions presented herein. This By-Law shall not apply to land or activities located outside of the corporate boundaries of Manchester-by-the-Sea. 
4.9.4.1 Determination of Location within Ground and Surface Water Resource Overlay Protection Districts: In determining the location of properties and facilities within the Ground and Surface Water Resource Overlay Protection District, the following rules shall apply: 
(a) 	
Properties located wholly within one zone reflected on the Ground and Surface Water Resource Overlay Protection District Maps shall be governed by the restrictions applicable to that zone. 

(b) 	
Properties located such that the site lies within more than one zone as reflected on the Ground and Surface Water Resource Overlay Protection District Maps shall be governed by the restrictions applicable to the zone in which the greater part of the property is located. 

(c) 	
Where a facility, building or accessory thereto including but not limited to sewage disposal systems is overlapped by different zones, the stricter zone shall apply. 

(d) 	
Special permits, in accordance with the provisions of this By-Law, Section 7.5 of the Manchester-by-the-Sea Zoning By-Law and 


M.G.L. c. 40A, §9, may be granted by the Planning Board to exempt a location from the requirements of this By-Law, provided that the applicant demonstrates that the Ground and Surface Water Resource Overlay Protection District Maps incorrectly identify the location as being within the Ground and Surface Water Resource Overlay Protection District. The burden of proof shall rest upon the applicant for a special permit to demonstrate that the location is not within a delineated district. The applicant shall be required to present detailed hydrogeologic and hydrologic information to the Planning Board indicating that the location is, in fact, not within a Ground and Surface Water Resource Overlay Protection District. The applicant shall provide funds to the Planning Board to pay for the technical review by the Planning Board's choice of consultant(s) of said hydrogeologic and hydrologic information and the Planning Board shall base its decision, in part, on the report by said consultant(s). 
4.9.4.2 Relationship to Other Laws: This By-Law is supplementary to other laws and By-Laws within Manchester-by-the-Sea. Where this By-Law or any portion thereof imposes a greater restriction than is imposed by other regulations, the provisions of this By-Law shall control.  Where this By-Law references statutes or regulations promulgated by the Commonwealth or its agencies, the statute or regulation shall be that in effect as of January 1, 2002. 
4.9.4.3 Definitions: "Applicant" means any person filing an application. 
“Department” means the Massachusetts Department of Environmental 
Protection (DEP). 
"Person" means any agency or political subdivision of the federal government or the Commonwealth, any state, public or private corporation or authority, individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, partnership, association, or other entity, and any officer, employee, or agent of such person, and any group of persons. 
"Zone I" means the 400-foot protective radius required by the Department around a public water supply well or wellfield. 
"Zone II" means that area of an aquifer which contributes water to a well under the most severe pumping and recharge conditions that can be realistically anticipated (180 days of pumping at safe yield, with no recharge from precipitation), as defined in 310 CMR 22.00. It is bounded by the groundwater divides, which result from pumping the well, and by the contact of the aquifer with less permeable materials such as till or bedrock. In some cases, streams or lakes may act as recharge boundaries. In all cases, Zone II shall extend upgradient to its point of intersection with prevailing hydrogeologic boundaries (a ground water flow divide, a contact with till or bedrock, or a recharge boundary). 
“Zone III" means that land area beyond the area of Zone II from which 
surface water and ground water drain into Zone II, as defined in 310 CMR 22.00.The surface drainage area as determined by topography is commonly coincident with the ground water drainage area and will be used to delineate Zone III. In some locations, where surface and ground water drainage are not coincident, Zone III shall consist of both the surface drainage and the ground water drainage areas. 
“Zone A” means 
(a)
 the land area between the surface water source and the upper boundary of the bank; (b)the land area within a 400 foot lateral distance from the upper boundary of the bank of a Class A surface water source, as defined in 314 CMR 4.05(3)(a); and 

(c)
 the land area within a 200-foot lateral distance from the upper boundary of the bank of a tributary or associated surface water body. 


“Zone B” means the land area within one half mile of the upper boundary 
of the bank of a Class A surface water source, as defined in 314 CMR 4.05(3)(a), or edge of watershed, whichever is less. However Zone B shall always include the land area within a 400-foot lateral distance from the upper boundary of the bank of the Class A surface water source. 
“Zone C” means the land area not designated as Zone A or B that is either within the watershed of a Class A surface water source as defined by 314 CMR 4.05(3)(a), or contributes water runoff to Gravelly and Round Ponds. 
"Regulated Substances" means those substances found in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated herein. 
"Spill" means the unpermitted release or escape of a Regulated Substance, irrespective of the quantity thresholds directly or indirectly to soils, surface waters, or ground waters. 
4.9.5 Restrictions within Ground and Surface Water Resource Overlay Protection Districts 
4.9.5.1. Prohibited uses in Zone I, Zone II, and Zone III, and Zone A, Zone B, and 
Zone C: 
(a)  
All underground storage tanks. 

(b)	
      Automobile graveyards and junkyards, as defined in M.G.L. c.140B, §1. 

(c) 	
Stockpiling and disposal of snow or ice removed from highways and streets located outside Zone II/Zone A that contains sodium chloride, chemically treated abrasives or other chemicals used for snow and ice removal. 

(d) 	
Storage of sodium chloride, chemically treated abrasives or other chemicals used for the removal of ice and snow on roads, unless such storage is within a structure designed to prevent the generation and escape of contaminated runoff or leachate. 

(e) 	
Storage of commercial fertilizers, as defined in M.G.L. c. 128, §64, unless such storage is within a structure designed to prevent the generation and escape of contaminated runoff or leachate. 

(f) 	
Storage of animal manures, unless such storage is covered or contained in accordance with the specifications of the Natural Resource Conservation Service. 

(g) 	
Residential approval not required (ANR) land divisions and/or subdivisions pursuant to M.G.L. c.41, §§81L, 81P, 81S, and 81U, at a density greater than one dwelling unit per 30,000 square feet unless connected to the municipal sewage treatment facility. 

(h) 	
Landfills and open dumps, as defined in 310 CMR 19.006. 

(i) 	
Landfills receiving only wastewater residuals and/or septage approved by the Department pursuant to M.G.L. c.21, §26 –53; 

M.G.L. c.111, §17; M.G.L. c.83, §6-7, and any regulations promulgated thereunder. 

(j) 	
Petroleum, fuel oil and heating oil bulk stations and terminals, including, but not limited to, those listed as of January 1, 2002 under Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes 5171 and 5983. SIC Codes are established by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget and may be determined by referring to 


the publication, “Standard Industrial Classification Manual”,  and 
any subsequent amendments thereto. 
(k) 	
Treatment or disposal works subject to 314 CMR 5.00 for wastewater other than sanitary sewage. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, treatment or disposal works related to activities under the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes set forth in 310 CMR 15.004(6) (Title 5), except the following: 

(1) 
the replacement or repair of an existing system(s) that will not result in a design capacity greater than the design capacity of the existing system(s); and 

(2) 
treatment works approved by the Department designed for the treatment of contaminated ground or surface waters and operated in compliance with 314 CMR 5.05(3) or 5.05 (13); and 

(3) 
publicly owned treatment works, or POTWs. 



(l) 	
Facilities that generate, treat, store or dispose of hazardous waste that are subject to M.G.L. c. 21C and 310 CMR 30.000, except for the following: 

(1) 
very small quantity generators, as defined by 310 CMR 30.00; 

(2) 
household hazardous waste collection centers or events operated pursuant to 310 CMR 30.390; 

(3) 
waste oil retention facilities required by M.G.L. c. 21, §52A; and  

(4) 
treatment works approved by the Department designed in accordance with 314 CMR 5.00 for the treatment of contaminated ground or surface waters. 



(m) 	
Storage of sludge and septage, as defined in 310 CMR 32.05, unless such storage is in compliance with 310 CMR 32.30 and 310 CMR 32.31. 

(n) 	
Storage of liquid hazardous materials, as defined in M.G.L. c. 21E, and/or liquid petroleum products unless such storage is: 

(1) 
above ground level; and 

(2) 
on an impervious surface; and 

(3) 
either: 


(i) in container(s) or above-ground tank(s) within a building, or ii) outdoors in covered container(s) or above-ground tank(s) in an area that has a containment system designed and operated to hold either 10% of the total possible storage capacity of all containers, or 110% of the largest container's storage capacity, whichever is greater; however, these storage requirements shall not apply to the replacement of existing tanks or systems for the keeping, dispensing or storing of gasoline provided the replacement is performed in a manner consistent with state and local requirements. 

(o) 	
The removal of soil, loam, sand, gravel or any other mineral substances within four (4) feet of the historical high groundwater table elevation (as determined from monitoring wells and historical water table fluctuation data compiled by the United States 

Geological Survey), unless the substances removed are redeposited within 45 days of removal on site to achieve a final grading greater than four (4) feet above the historical high water mark, and except for excavations for the construction of building foundations or the installation of utility works. 

(p) 	
Land uses that result in the rendering impervious of more than 15% or 2,500 square feet of any lot, whichever is greater, unless a system for artificial recharge of precipitation is provided, which is satisfactory to the Planning Board, that will not result in the degradation of groundwater quality. 

(q) 	
Commercial outdoor washing of vehicles. 

(r) 	
Commercial car washes 

(s) 	
Motor vehicle repair operations. 

(t) 	
Solid waste combustion facilities or handling facilities as defined at 310 CMR 16.00. 

(u) 	
Any floor drainage systems in existing facilities, in industrial or commercial process areas or hazardous material and/or hazardous waste storage areas, which discharge to the ground without a Department permit or authorization. Any existing facility with such a drainage system shall be required to either seal the floor drain (in accordance with the state plumbing code, 248 CMR 2.00), connect the drain to a municipal sewer system (with all appropriate permits and pre-treatment), or connect the drain to a holding tank meeting the requirements of all appropriate DEP regulations and policies. 


4.9.5.2. Special Permit uses in Zones II and III, and A, B, and C 
(a) 	
The use, handling, production, and storage of Regulated Substances. 

(b) 	
Within Zone II and Zone III only, residential approval not required (ANR) land divisions, subdivisions, pursuant to M.G.L. c. 41, §§81L, 81P, 81S, and 81U with on-site disposal of effluent, at a density greater than one dwelling unit per 30,000 square feet provided that the nitrate-nitrogen concentrations described in Section 4.9.6.3(d), below, are not exceeded. 

(c) 	
Any uses with on-site disposal of sewage effluent exceeding 2,000 gallons per day for the entire project provided that the nitrate-nitrogen concentrations described in Section 4.9.6.3(d) are not exceeded. 

(d) 	
Land uses that result in the rendering impervious of more than 15% of any lot, unless a system for artificial recharge of precipitation is provided, which is satisfactory to the Planning Board, that will not result in the degradation of groundwater quality. 


4.9.5.3. Additional Prohibited Uses: Zone A, Zone B, and Zone C: 
(a) 	
Residential approval not required (ANR) divisions, subdivisions pursuant to M.G.L. c. 41, §§81L, 81P, 81S, and 81U, or residential development on lots less than 80,000 square feet of land area containing at least 200 feet of lot width and 150 feet of lot frontage. 

(b) 	
No person shall wade or bathe in any source of drinking water supply, and no person shall, unless permitted by written permit by the Manchester-by-the-Sea Department of Public Works or like body having jurisdiction over such source of supply, fish in; enter or go in any boat, seaplane, or other contrivance; enter upon the ice for any purpose, including the cutting or taking of ice; or cause any animal to go in or upon such source of water supply or tributary thereto. 

(c) 	
No stabling, hitching, standing, feeding or grazing of livestock or other domestic animals shall be located, constructed, or maintained within 100 feet of the bank of a surface water source or tributary thereto.  Owners and operators of agricultural operations should 


consult the Massachusetts Department of Food and Agriculture’s “On Farm Strategies to Protect Water Quality – An Assessment & Planning Tool for Best Management Practices” (December 1996, 
and any subsequent amendments thereto) for information about technical and financial assistance programs related to erosion and sediment control and nutrient, pest, pesticide, manure, waste, grazing, and irrigation management. 
(d) 	No burials shall be made in any cemetery or other place within 100 feet of the high water mark of a source of public water supply or tributary thereto except by permission in writing by the Manchester-by-the-Sea Department of Public Works or like body having jurisdiction over such source of supply.  Lands not under the control of cemetery authorities and used for cemetery purposes shall not be taken or used for cemetery purposes if natural drainage from said lands flows into said source of water or tributary thereto, until a plan and sufficient description of the lands is presented to the Department and until such taking or use is expressly approved in writing by the Department. 
4.9.6 Special Permits: This section provides the requirements and procedures for the issuance of Special Permits by the Planning Board as required by this By-Law. 
4.9.6.1 Special Permits: The Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) under Section 4.9 of this By-Law shall be the Planning Board. Special permits shall be granted only in conformance with this By-Law, Section 
7.5 of the Manchester-by-the-Sea Zoning By-Law, and M.G.L. c. 40A, §9. 
4.9.6.2 Review by Other Town Agencies: Upon receipt of the special permit application, the SPGA shall transmit one copy to the Director of Public Works, the Town Administrator, the Building Inspector, the Board of Health, the Conservation Commission, and any other relevant Town board/agency or department for their written recommendations. Failure to respond in writing within 30 days shall indicate approval or no desire to comment by said agency. The applicant shall furnish the necessary number of copies of the application. 
4.9.6.3 Special Permit Criteria and Decision: Special Permits may be approved by the SPGA provided that the SPGA determines, in consultation with other Town agencies as specified in Section 4.9.6.2, that the intent of this By-Law as well as its specific criteria are met. In making such determination, the SPGA shall give consideration to the simplicity, reliability and feasibility of the control measures proposed and the degree of threat to water quality which would result if the control measures failed. It shall then issue a written decision which describes its findings with respect to the following: 
(a) 	
meets the intent of this By-Law as well as its specific criteria; 

(b) 	
will not, during construction or thereafter, have an adverse impact on Zone I, Zone II, Zone III, or Zone A, Zone B, or Zone C; 

(c) 	
will not cause the average quality of groundwater recharged on the property to violate Class 1 drinking water standards promulgated by the Department; and 

(d) 	
will not cause the average concentration of nitrate-nitrogen in groundwater recharged on the property to exceed five (5) milligrams per liter. 


4.9.6.4 Submittals: In applying for a special permit required by this By-Law, the information listed below shall be submitted to the SPGA, as the SPGA deems applicable: 
(a) 	
A list of all Regulated Substances which are to be stored, handled, used or produced in the activity being proposed. 

(b) 	
A detailed description of the activities that involve the storage, handling, use, or production of the Regulated Substances indicating the unit quantities in which the substances are contained or manipulated. 

(c) 	
Evidence of approval by the DEP of any industrial waste treatment or disposal system or any wastewater treatment systems over 10,000 gallons per day capacity. 

(d) 	
A site plan illustrating the location of all operations involving Regulated Substances. 

(e) 	
A hydrogeologic assessment of the site which shall address, at a minimum, soil characteristics and ground water levels and 


direction of ground water flow relative to operating and future planned public water supplies. 
4.9.6.5 Design and Operating Guidelines: As a condition(s) of granting a special permit, the SPGA may require adherence to any, or all of the following design and operation guidelines, where in its opinion, such adherence would further the purpose and intent of this By-Law. 
(a) 	
Containment of Regulated Substances: Leak-proof trays under containers, floor curbing, or other contaminant systems to provide secondary liquid containment shall be installed. The containment shall be of adequate size to handle all spills, leaks, overflows, and precipitation until appropriate action can be taken. The specific design and selection of materials shall be sufficient to preclude any Regulated Substance loss to the external environment. Containment systems shall be sheltered so that the intrusion of precipitation is effectively prevented. The owner/operator may choose to provide adequate and appropriate liquid collection methods rather than sheltering only after approval of the design by the SPGA.  These requirements shall apply to all areas of use, production, and handling, to all storage areas, to loading and off­loading areas, and to aboveground and underground storage areas. 

(b) 	
Emergency Plan: An emergency plan shall be prepared and filed with the Special Permit application indicating the procedures which will be followed in the event of spillage of a Regulated Substance so as to control and collect all such spilled material in such a manner as to prevent it from reaching any storm or sanitary drains or the ground water. 

(c) 	
Inspection: A responsible person designated by the permittee who stores, handles, uses or produces the Regulated Substances shall check on every day of operation, for breakage or leakage of any container holding the Regulated Substances. Electronic sensing devices may be employed as part of the inspection process, if approved by the SPGA, and provided the sensing system is checked daily for malfunctions. The manner of daily inspection shall not necessarily require physical inspection of each container provided the location of the containers can be inspected to a degree that reasonably assures the SPGA that breakage or leakage can be detected by the inspection. Monitoring records shall be kept daily and made available to the SPGA on a quarterly basis. 

(d) 	
Reporting of Spills: Any spill of a Regulated Substance in excess of the non-aggregate quantity thresholds shall be reported by telephone to the Manchester-by-the-Sea Fire Department and the Department of Public Works within one (1) hour of discovery of the spill. Clean-up shall commence immediately upon discovery of the spill. A full written report including the steps taken to contain 

and clean up the spill shall be submitted to the Fire Department, Director of Public Works, and the Town Administrator within fifteen (15) days of discovery of the spill. 

(e) 	
Monitoring of Regulated Substances in Groundwater Monitoring Wells: If required by the SPGA, groundwater monitoring well(s) shall be provided at the expense of the permittee in a manner, number and location approved by the SPGA. Except for existing wells found by the SPGA to be adequate for this provision, the required well or wells shall be installed by a water well contractor. Samples shall be analyzed and analytical reports prepared by a Commonwealth of Massachusetts certified laboratory of the quantity present in each monitoring well of the Regulated Substances. 

(f) 	
Alterations and Expansion: The SPGA shall be notified in writing prior to the expansion, alteration or modification of an activity holding a Special Permit under this By-Law. Such expansion, alteration, or modification may result from increased square footage of production or storage capacity, or increased quantities of Regulated Substances, or changes in types of Regulated Substances beyond those square footages, quantities, and types upon which the permit was issued. Excluded from notification prior to alteration or modification are changes in types of Regulated Substances used in a laboratory or laboratories designated as such in the currently valid permit which do not exceed the non-aggregate limits and which are within the Generic Substances listed in said permit based upon the Generic List attached hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibit A. The introduction of any new Regulated Substance shall not prevent the revocation of any existing Special Permit if, in the opinion of the SPGA, such introduction substantially or materially modifies, alters or affects the conditions upon which existing Special Permit was granted or the ability to remain qualified as a General Exemption, if applicable, or to continue to satisfy any conditions that have been imposed as part of a Special Permit, if applicable. 


4.9.7 	General Exemptions: 
4.9.7.1 Exemptions for Continuous Transit: The transportation of any regulated substance through Zones I, II, III, or A, B or C shall be exempt from the provisions of this By-Law provided the transporting motor vehicle is in continuous transit. 
4.9.7.2 Exemptions for Vehicular and Lawn Maintenance Fuel and Lubricant Use: The use in a vehicle or lawn maintenance equipment of any regulated substance solely as fuel in that vehicle or equipment fuel tank or as lubricant in that vehicle or equipment shall be exempt from the provisions of this By-Law. 
4.9.7.3 Exemptions for Application of Pesticides, Herbicides, Fertilizers, Fungicides and Rodenticides: The application of those Regulated Substances used as pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, fungicides, and rodenticides in recreation, agriculture, pest control and aquatic weed control activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this By-Law provided that: 
(a) 	
In all zones, the application is in strict conformity with the use requirement as set forth by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and as indicated on the containers in which the substances are sold. 

(b) 	
In all zones, the application of any of the pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, fungicides, and rodenticides shall be noted in the records of the certified operator. Records shall be kept of the date and amount of these substances applied at each location and said records shall be available for inspection at reasonable times by the Building Inspector and Director of Public Works. 

(c) 	
In all zones, the application of pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, fungicides, and rodenticides for non-residential or non-agricultural purposes shall require a special permit. 


4.9.7.4 Exemption for Retail/Wholesale Sales Activities: Except in Zone I, retail/wholesale sales establishments that store or handle Regulated Substances for resale in their original unopened containers shall be exempt from the provisions of this By-Law, provided however, that retail/wholesale sales establishments that store or handle quantities of Regulated Substances exceeding thirty (30) gallons liquid or twenty-five 
(25) pounds solid shall be prohibited without receipt of a special permit from the SPGA. 
4.9.7.5 Exemptions for Office and Commercial Uses: Except in Zone I, office and commercial use of Regulated Substances below the aggregate sum not exceeding thirty (30) gallons where said substance is a liquid or twenty-five (25) pounds where said substance is a solid shall be exempt from the provisions of this By-Law, provided, however, that office and commercial uses that store or handle quantities of Regulated Substances exceeding thirty (30) gallons liquid or twenty-five (25) pounds solid shall be prohibited without receipt of a special permit from the SPGA. 
4.9.7.6 Exemption for Construction Activities: The activities of constructing, repairing or maintaining any facility or improvement on lands within Zones I, II, III, or A, B, or C, shall be exempt from the provisions of this By-Law provided that all contractors, subcontractors, laborers, and their employees, when using, handling, storing or producing Regulated Substances in Zones I, II, III, or Zones A, B, or C, use those applicable Best Management Practices set forth in Exhibit B, attached hereto and incorporated herein. 
4.9.7.7 Exemption for Household Use: In addition to the exemptions provided for in Section 4.9.7.3 of this By-Law, the household use of Regulated Substances below the aggregate sum not exceeding thirty (30) gallons where said substance is a liquid or twenty-five (25) pounds where said substance is a solid shall be exempt from the provisions of this By-Law, provided, however, that household uses that store or handle quantities of Regulated Substances exceeding thirty (30) gallons liquid or twenty-five (25) pounds solid shall be prohibited without receipt of a special permit from the SPGA. 
4.9.7.8 Exemption for Municipal Use: In addition to the exemptions provided for in Section 4.9.7.3 of this By-Law, the municipal use of Regulated Substances in quantities exceeding thirty (30) gallons where said substance is a liquid or twenty-five (25) pounds where said substance is a solid shall be prohibited without receipt of a special permit from the SPGA. 
4.9.7.9 Exemption for Underground Storage of Oils(s):  	The underground storage of oil(s) used for heating fuel shall be exempt from the provisions of Section 4.9 of this By-Law provided, however, that the container used for said storage shall be located within an enclosed structure sufficient to preclude leakage of oil to the external environment and to afford routine access for visual inspection (e.g., cement-floored basement), and sheltered to prevent the intrusion of precipitation. 
4.9.8 	Severability: The provisions of this By-Law are severable from each other and the invalidity of any provisions or section shall not invalidate any other provision or section thereof. 
EXHIBIT A: GENERIC SUBSTANCES LIST 
Acid and basic cleaning solutions, Antifreeze and Coolants, Arsenic and arsenic compounds, 
Bleaches and peroxides, Brake and transmission fluids, Brine solution, Casting & Foundry 
chemicals, Caulking agents and sealants, Cleaning solvents, Corrosion and rust prevention 
solutions, Cutting fluids, Degreasing solvents, Disinfectants, Electroplating solutions, 
Explosives, Fertilizers, Fire extinguishing chemicals, Food processing wastes, Formaldehyde, 

Fuels and additives, Gasolines, Glues, adhesives and resins, Greases, Hydraulic fluid, Indicators, Industrial and commercial janitorial supplies, Industrial sludges and stillbottoms, Inks, printing and photocopying chemicals, Laboratory chemicals, Liquid storage batteries, Medical, pharmaceutical, dental, veterinary and hospital solutions, Mercury and mercury compounds, Metals finishing solutions, Oils, Paints, primers, thinners, dyes, stains, wood preservatives, varnishing, and cleaning compounds, Painting solvents, PCB's, Pesticides and herbicides, Plastic resins, plasticizers and catalysts, Photo development chemicals, Poisons, Polishes, Pool chemicals in concentrated form, Processed dust, and particulates, Radioactive sources, Reagents and standards, Refrigerants, Roofing chemicals and sealers, Sanitizers, disinfectants, bactericides and algaecides, Soaps, detergents and surfactants, Solders and fluxes, Stripping compounds, Tanning industry chemicals, Transformer and capacitor oils/fluids, Water and wastewater treatment chemicals. 
EXHIBIT B: "BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES" FOR THE CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY 
1. 	
The general contractor, or if none, the property owner, shall be responsible for assuring that each contractor or subcontractor evaluates each site before construction is initiated to determine if any site conditions may pose particular problems for the handling of any Regulated Substances. For instance, handling Regulated Substances in the proximity of water bodies or wetlands may be improper. 

2. 	
If any Regulated Substances are stored on the construction site during the construction process, they shall be stored in a location and manner that will minimize any possible risk of release to the environment. Any storage container of 55 gallons, or 440 pounds, or more, containing Regulated Substances shall have constructed below it an impervious containment system constructed of materials of sufficient thickness, density and composition that will prevent the discharge to the land, ground waters, or surface waters, of any pollutant which may emanate from said storage container or containers. Each containment system shall be able to contain 150% of the contents of all storage containers above the containment system. 

3. 	
Each contractor shall familiarize him/herself with the manufacturer's safety data sheet supplied with each material containing a Regulated Substance and shall be familiar with procedures required to contain and clean up any releases of the Regulated Substance. Any tools or equipment necessary to accomplish same shall be available in case of a release. 

4. 	
Upon completion of construction, all unused and waste Regulated Substances and containment systems shall be removed from the construction site by the responsible contractor, and shall be disposed of in a proper manner as prescribed by law. 


. [Added 1990] [Revised 2002] 
Section 4.10 Personal Wireless Telecommunication Service Facilities 
4.10.1 Definitions 
(1) 
The term "Personal Wireless Telecommunication Service" means commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access services; 

(2) 
The term "Personal Wireless Telecommunication Service Facilities" means facilities for the provision of personal wireless telecommunication services. 


4.10.2 Purpose and Intent The increasing use of business and personal devices relying on Personal Wireless Telecommunication Service Facilities, often referred to as Wireless Telecommunications Service Facilities, has generated a significant number of applications for the placement, construction and modification of such facilities throughout the Commonwealth and the Cape Ann region.  Therefore, and in reliance on the Town's authority under M.G.L. c.40A, and under the Massachusetts State Constitution and in keeping with its responsibilities to protect public health, public welfare and public safety, the Town hereby adopts this Bylaw. 
4.10.3 Special Permit All Personal Wireless Telecommunication Service Facilities shall require a Special Permit from the Planning Board. 
This Bylaw creates an allowed use by Special Permit of the Planning Board for Personal Wireless Telecommunication Service Facilities.  The Planning Board shall determine the minimum lot dimensions and set backs appropriate to the use proposed. 
No special permit shall be granted by the Planning Board, unless, in its judgment, following input from other municipal boards, departments, agencies and their staff, the Board determines that reasonable measures shall be or already have been taken to comply with the requirements of Section 7.5 and to: 
(1) 
mitigate against potential negative impacts on visual quality upon neighboring properties by incorporating reasonable design, siting and screening methods; and 

(2) 
protect against potential damage to neighboring properties from tower/structure failure or collapse and falling ice. 

(3)obtain a financial surety to cover the costs of (a) the remediation of damage to the landscape which occurs during the clearing of the site, and (b) the removal of the facilities and the remediation of the landscape, should the facility cease to operate, as provided in section 4.10.5 below; and 

(4) 
provide for testing and monitoring of radio frequency emissions, as follows: 

(a)
 Pre-testing.  After a special permit is granted and before the applicant's Personal Wireless Telecommunication Service Facility begins transmission, the applicant shall pay for an independent consultant, hired by the Town, to test and monitor the ambient or background levels of radio frequency emissions around the proposed facilities site, using established protocols. 

(b)
 Post-testing.  After transmission begins, the owner(s) of any Personal Wireless Telecommunication Service Facilities located on any site shall pay for an independent consultant, hired by the Town, to test and monitor the radio frequency emissions from the site, using established protocols.  Such testing and monitoring shall take place annually. 

(c)  
Excessive emissions.  Should the testing and monitoring of a facility site reveal that the site exceeds any applicable federal, state or local regulations, the owner(s) of all Facilities at that site shall be so notified.  Any Personal Wireless Telecommunication Service Facility which does not comply with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations shall be removed upon failure to bring the facility into compliance within thirty (30) days from receipt of written notice. 




4.10.4 Limited Commercial District 
Within the Limited Commercial District, Personal Wireless Telecommunication Service 
Facilities under 200 feet in height and less than 10 feet in diameter above 35 feet above 
the ground shall be exempt from Section 5.5 of the Manchester-by-the-Sea Zoning 
Bylaws. 

4.10.5 Cessation of Use 
At the Planning Board's discretion within six (6) months of the cessation of use of any 
facility for use as a Personal Wireless Telecommunication Service Facility, the facility, 
all support buildings and/or structures, all foundations and pads and any other items 
installed under this Special Permit shall be removed by the owner/operator and the site 
shall be restored to a condition equal to or surpassing that which existed prior to 
construction. 

4.10.6 Validity 
The invalidity of one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or provisions of 
this Bylaw shall not invalidate or impair the Bylaw as a whole or any part thereof. 
[Adopted 1997; amended 1998] 

4.11 Helicopter landing, storage or parking facilities 
In accordance with the Town’s authority to regulate land and waterway uses and 
structures, the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea hereby determines that it is in the public interest to regulate the on-the-ground placement and storage of helicopters. 
Applicants shall be required to obtain a special permit from the Planning Board to use any lot or seaway for helicopter landing, storage or parking within the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea.  However, nothing herein shall prevent a temporary helicopter landing area for emergency purposes, such as air ambulance, search and rescue, fire fighting and similar public safety operations. [Adopted 2003] 
SECTION 5.0  DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS 
5.1 	Adequate Frontage In issuing building permits for construction on lot(s) with frontage considered by the Building Inspector to provide impractical vehicular access, or otherwise satisfying only technical and not practical frontage compliance, the Building Inspector shall be empowered to ensure that said lot(s) have access to that portion of the lot(s) to be constructed upon by means of easement or so-called "common driveways" which are, in his opinion and in the opinion of the Planning Board, of adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land, and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and buildings erected or to be erected thereon and which meet the design standards contained in Section 6.2.8 of these By-laws.  No more than two lots shall be served by a common driveway without a special permit from the Planning Board. [Amended 1987, 2001, 2007] 
5.2 	Area 
For purposes of this Section 5.0 the area of a lot shall not include: 
(a) 
The area within the limitation of the street. 

(b) 
Tideland lying below Mean High Water (per U.S. Geodetic Survey), except that such tideland shall be included for determining minimum setbacks (see Sections 5.4 and 5.6). [Added 2006] 


5.3 	Setback In the case of a lot abutting on more than one street, the minimum front setback shall be applicable to each street. The minimum setback requirements shall not apply to the projections of steps, eaves, chimneys and cornices, window sills or belt courses. The minimum setback for a wind energy conservation system from property lines or easements must be at least one (1) times the height of the energy conservation system. [Added 1982] (See 6.2.5) 
5.4 	Minimum Area and Dimensional Requirements Except as provided in Section 5.6 (Accessory Structure) and 5.7 (Limited Commercial District), no building shall be erected on or moved to a lot having less than the minimum applicable frontage and area shown on the table below, and no building shall be located on a lot closer to the front, rear and side lines of the lot than the minimum setback distances shown on the table below. No lot shall be changed as to size or shape so as to result in the violation of the requirements set forth in the table below. 
DISTRICT MINIMUM MINIMUM MINIMUM MINIMUM MINIMUM MINIMUM LOT AREA FRONTAGE LOT FRONT SIDE REAR 
(SQ. FT.) WIDTH SETBACK SETBACK SETBACK Single  Res. District A 22,500 150 ft. 125 ft. 30 ft. 20 ft. 40 ft 
Single Res. 
District B 15,000 75 ft 60 ft. 20 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft. 

Single Res. 
District C 45,000 150 ft. 125 ft. 30 ft. 20 ft. 40 ft. 

Res. District D 6,000 60 ft. 50 ft 10ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 

Single Res. 
District E 90,000 150 ft. 125 ft. 30 ft. 20 ft. 40 ft. 

General 
District 6,000 60 ft. 50 ft. 5 ft 10 ft. 10 ft. 

In the case of a lot abutting on more than one street, the minimum front setback shall be 
applicable to each street.  (See Section 5.3) 

LOT COVERAGE REQUIREMENTS DISTRICT BY STRUCTURES MAXIMUM % LOT COVERAGE BY STRUCTURES AND 
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES 
Single Residence 
District A 15% 30% 

Single Residence 
District B 20% 35% 

Single Residence 
District C 15% 25% 

Residence District D 40% 50% 

Single Residence 
District E 15% 25% 

General District 40% 70%* *Except as noted within Section 4.3 of the Zoning By-Law.                         
5.5 	Height Regulations No structure shall be erected or altered so that it exceeds 2-1/2 stories or so that the vertical distance measured from the highest point of the roof to the mean pre-construction grade exceeds thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is the lesser.  Chimneys, spires or towers not used for human occupancy may extend ten (10) feet above these height limits.  Mean pre-construction grade is defined as a reference plane representing the average elevation of pre-construction ground adjoining the building at all exterior walls.  A half story is defined as a story with a sloping roof, the area of which story at a height of four (4) feet above the floor does not exceed two-thirds of the floor area of the story immediately below it.” (Amended 2001) 
5.6 	Accessory Structure Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section 5.0, no accessory structure shall be erected or altered so that it exceeds one and one-half (1 1/2) story as defined in Section 5.5 above or twenty-five (25) feet, whichever is lesser. Accessory structures shall be set back from any street on which the lot has frontage at least the applicable minimum front setback for such lot plus ten (10) feet. [Amended 1982, 1986, 1987, 1989, 2007] *Accessory structures shall be set back from the street(s) on which the lot has frontage at least the applicable minimum from setback for such lot plus ten (10) feet. 
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES  
DISTRICT  MINIMUM DISTANCE FROM  FRONT  
SIDE AND REAR LOT LINES  
Single Residence  
District A  10 ft.  *  
Single Residence  
District B  5 ft.  *  
Single Residence  
District C  15 ft.  *  
Residence District D  5 ft.  *  
Single Residence  
District E  15 ft.  *  
General District  5 ft.  *  

5.7 	Limited Commercial District Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section 5.0, the following requirements shall be met in the Limited Commercial District (See also Section 4.4 Limited Commercial District): 
5.7.1 	Each business, defined as a single use under one ownership, shall be located on a lot of not less than five (5) acres and a minimum width at all points of not less than five hundred (500) feet. 
5.7.2 	The structures on the lot shall cover not more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of the lot, and at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of the lot shall be of natural or landscaped area. Not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the area shall be used for parking. 
5.7.3 	All structures shall be set back from any street at least one hundred and fifty (150) feet, and from any other lot line at least one hundred (100) feet. 
5.8 	Special Exception Any increase in area, frontage, width, yard, or depth requirements of this By-Law shall not apply to a lot for a dwelling having not more than two (2) dwelling units which, at the time of recording or endorsement, whichever occurs sooner, was not held in common ownership with any adjoining land, conformed to existing requirements and had less than the proposed requirements but at least five thousand (5,000) square feet of area and fifty 
(50) feet of frontage. 
5.10 	Performance Requirements within Limited Commercial District Recognizing that the portion of Manchester-by-the-Sea zoned Limited Commercial may contribute significant recharge to the town's municipal drinking water supply, and recognizing further that inappropriate development, or development with inappropriate safeguards may threaten said water supply, no special permit or site plan approval for any use within the Limited Commercial District shall be granted without adherence to the following guidelines: 
5.10.1 Design and Operations Guidelines:  	The following design and operation guidelines shall be observed within the Limited Commercial District. 
5.10.1.1 	Safeguards:  Provisions shall be made to protect against toxic or hazardous materials discharge or loss resulting from corrosion, accidental damage, spillage or vandalism through measures such as: prohibition of underground fuel storage tanks; spill control 
5.10.1.2 
5.10.1.3 
5.10.2 Definition: 
5.10.2.1 
provisions in the vicinity of chemical or fuel delivery points; secured storage areas for toxic or hazardous materials; and indoor storage provisions for corrodible or dissolvable materials.  For operations which allow the evaporation of toxic or hazardous materials into the interiors of any structures, a closed vapor recovery system shall be provided for such structure to prevent discharge of contaminated condensate into the ground water. 
Disposal: For any toxic or hazardous wastes to be produced in quantities greater than those associated with normal household use, the applicant must demonstrate the availability and feasibility of disposal methods which are in conformance with Chapter 21C, MGL. 
Drainage:  All runoff from impervious surfaces shall be recharged on the site, diverted towards areas covered with vegetation for surface infiltration to the extent possible.  Dry wells shall be used only where other methods are not feasible, and shall be preceded by oil, grease, and sediment traps to facilitate removal of all contaminants. 
Toxic or Hazardous Materials: Any substance or mixture of such physical, chemical or infectious characteristics as to pose a significant, actual or potential hazard to water supplies, or other hazard to human health, if such substance or mixture were discharged to land or waters of this town.  Toxic or hazardous materials include, without limitation, organic chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals, radio-active or infectious wastes, acids and alkalies, and include products such as pesticides, herbicides, solvents and thinners.  Wastes generated by the following activities, without limitation, are presumed to be toxic or hazardous unless and except to the extent that anyone engaging in such an activity can demonstrate the contrary to the satisfaction of the Board of Health and the Board of Selectmen: 
*
 Airplane, boat and motor vehicle service and repair 

*
 Chemical and bacteriological laboratory operation 

*
 Cabinet making 

*
 Dry cleaning 

*
 Electronic circuit assembly 

*
 Metal plating, finishing and polishing 

*
 Motor and machinery service and assembly 

*
 Painting, wood preserving and furniture stripping 

* 
Pesticide and herbicide application 

*
 Photographic processing 

*
 Printing [Added 1987] 


SECTION 6.0  SPECIAL PROVISIONS 
6.1 	Nonconforming Uses 
6.1.1 	Existing Use: Any structure or use lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this By-Law or any amendment hereto and any use or structure lawfully begun in respect of which a building or special permit has been issued before the first publication of notice of public hearing on this By-Law or any amendment hereto may be continued or completed although such structure or use does not conform to the provisions hereof, provided that, in the case of the issuance of a building or special permit, construction or operation hereunder shall conform to the provisions of this By-Law or any amendment hereto unless the construction or use has commenced within a period of six months after the issuance of the permit and that in cases involving construction such construction is continued through to completion as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable. 
6.1.2 	Changes, Extensions and Alterations: A nonconforming structure or use may be changed, extended or altered, provided that in each case the Board of Appeals grants a special permit therefor after finding that such change, extension or alteration is not substantially more detrimental or injurious to the neighborhood than the existing nonconforming structure or use. The above requirement does not apply to such an extension, alteration, re-construction or structural change to a single family or two family residential structure that does not increase the nonconforming nature of that structure. [Added 1984] 
6.1.3 	Restoration: Restoration of a nonconforming structure which has been damaged by fire, flood or other casualty or by vandalism may be made without conformance to the provisions of this By-Law or amendment hereto, provided that such restoration shall have commenced within six months of the date the damage was sustained and that such restoration continue through to completion as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable, and provided that the structure as restored shall not exceed 100% of the floor area of the structure immediately prior to the damage unless the Board of Appeals grants a special permit therefor in accordance with Section 7.5 (Special Permits) after finding that such restoration is not substantially more detrimental or injurious to the neighborhood than the structure immediately prior to such damage. 
6.1.4 	Abandonment: Any structure or lot, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district and the nonconforming use may not be thereafter resumed. A nonconforming use or structure not used for a period of 2 years shall be deemed abandoned and shall not again be revived or such structure used except in conformity with all applicable provisions of this By-Law or any amendment hereto. 
6.2 	Off-Street Parking and Driveway/Curb Cut Regulations 
The following shall apply to all premises in all districts: 
6.2.1 	Performance Requirement: Off-street parking must be provided to service the net increase in parking demand created by new construction, additions or change of use. 
6.2.2 	Number of Spaces: The standards below must be met without counting any existing parking necessary for existing activities to meet these requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be designed with minimum dimensions of 9 feet by 20 feet. 
Use -Unit of Measure Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces 
Residential: One dwelling unit 2 Two dwelling units 3 Three dwelling units 5 Four dwelling units 6 
Retail or service (other than automotive service station): 150 sq. ft. of gross sales or service floor area 1 Automotive service station: 100 sq. ft. of area in service bays 1 Professional or other office: 300 sq. ft of gross floor area 1 Club or other recreational activities: Each three persons reasonably expected to be  using the facility during a period of full utilization 1 Restaurant or bar: Four seats of rated capacity 1 
Printing, yacht yard or similar facility: Each  3 employees on duty during normal work period 1 Each company car or truck 1 
All other uses: Parking spaces adequate to accommodate all normal demand as determined by the Building Inspector, with the advice of the Planning Board. [Amended 2006] 
6.2.3 	Location: Required parking shall be either on the same premises as the activity it serves, or located within 300 feet of the building entrance on a separate parcel, not separated by a street having right-of-way width of 60 feet or more, and in a zoning district allowing the activity it serves. 
6.2.4 	Backing: Parking areas shall be designed and located so that their use does not involve vehicles backing onto a public way or way utilized for public access. 
6.2.5 	Setbacks: No part of any private parking area shall be located within a required front yard as noted in Section 5.4, Minimum Front Setback, except that no part of any private parking area shall be located within fifty (50') feet of any street within the Limited Commercial District and, within the Limited Commercial District only, no part of any private parking area shall be located within two hundred (200') feet of the state layout of Route 128, nor shall any private parking area be located within (5') feet of any property line except that where a lot has frontage on more than one street, thus establishing more than one front yard, the Planning Board may, as part of the Site Plan Review process, designate one front yard as the primary front yard and then reduce the front yard setback requirements for parking on non-primary front yards. Any such reduction shall be limited to only those situations where the applicant needs the reduction to meet the parking requirements for the proposed use and never less than five (5') feet from any property line. 
6.2.6 	Parking Lot Plantings: Parking lots containing (5) or more parking spaces shall have at least one (1) tree per five (5) parking spaces, such trees to be located either within the lot or within (5') feet of it.  Such trees shall be at least two (2") inches trunk diameter, with not less than forty (40) square feet of unpaved soil or other permeable surface area per tree.  At least five (5%) percent of the interior of any parking lot having twenty 
(20) or more spaces shall be maintained with landscaping, including trees, in plots of at least four (4') feet in width.  Trees in soil plots shall be so located as to provide visual relief and sun and wind interruption within the parking area and to assure safe patterns of internal circulation. [Added 1988] 
6.2.7 	Driveways/Curb Cuts: No person shall construct a driveway or entrance from the traveled portion or from the curb of any street or way open to public use in the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea for the purpose of passing to or from abutting property nor cut any curbing for any purpose without applying for and receiving a permit from the Planning Board, under such conditions and restrictions as the Board shall determine to be necessary to protect public safety, to prevent erosion and sedimentation, to assure proper drainage and for related purposes. The applicant shall:  (a), at least seven days prior to filing the application, mail a notice (in the form specified by the Planning Board) to all property owners within one hundred feet of the locus for which a driveway/curb cut is sought as such property is identified in the most recent information available at the Assessor’s Office, (b) 
certify in such application that such notice has been mailed, (c) attach to such 
application a list of the names and addresses of those notified, and file the 
application (with the filing fee, as established by the Planning Board) with the 
Planning Board by submission to the Town Clerk. [Amended 2007] 
This subsection shall not apply to the construction of any street in a subdivision, 
which is approved by the Planning Board pursuant to the Subdivision Control Law. 
Failure by the Planning Board to act within thirty (30) days after receipt of an 
application shall be deemed to be approval. 

6.2.8 	Common Driveways Frontage along the length of any way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in Manchester-by-the Sea shall in no way be used as frontage as specified in the Zoning By-Law unless the way meets the following minimum standards.  Furthermore, no common driveway shall be accepted as a public road; nor shall the Town under any circumstances be held liable for construction, reconstruction, maintenance, or snow removal on any common driveway, unless by contract duly entered into by the Town and all landowners served by the common driveway. Common driveways shall be built in accordance with the following standards: 
1. 	
Minimum driveway width: 16’(18’ if over 100’ in length) residential use; 24’ all other uses. [Amended 2007] 

2. 	
Maximum driveway grade of 10%. 

3. 	
Maximum driveway length of 500’. 

4. 	
The common driveway, at its intersection with the street, must provide a leveling off area with a slope no greater than 1% for the first 20’ and a slope no greater than 5% for the next 30’. 


These standards may be waived when, in the opinion of the Planning Board, such action is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of the Zoning By-Law and these design standards.” [Amended 2001] 
6.3 	Junk Cars No person in charge or control of any real estate within the Town, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked motor vehicles to remain on such property longer than 60 days without a valid windshield sticker, so-called, issued and displayed in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 90, Section 7A of the General Laws as amended, and the rules and regulations of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, unless a permit therefor has been obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Board shall not issue a permit unless it finds that such vehicle on said premises will not constitute a hazard to the safety or welfare of the inhabitants of the Town nor will otherwise nullify or substantially derogate from the intent or purpose of this By-Law. No such permit shall be required for a vehicle in an enclosed building nor for a vehicle on the property of a lawful business or farming enterprise necessary to such operation, or for motor vehicles at the place of business of a holder of a class license under Sections 58 and 59 of Chapter 140 of the General Laws. 
6.4 	Signs Advertising and other signs shall be permitted only as expressly provided in Sections 4.1.7, 4.1.8 and this  Section 6.4.  Signs shall also be subject to the applicable provisions of the General By-Laws of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea. 
6.4.1 	No flashing or animated signs shall be permitted in any district. No illuminated sign of any kind shall be permitted in a Residence District. 
6.4.2 	A real estate sign not over 6 square feet in area advertising for sale or rent the property on which it is placed is permitted in any district. 
6.4.3 	In the General District and Limited Commercial District, the following signs are permitted: 
6.4.3.1 	One firm name sign for each firm or enterprise located in a building, no larger than 5 feet by 20 feet, attached to or flush to the building; 
6.4.3.2 	One nonilluminated announcement sign no larger than 3 feet by 3 feet, at the entrance or gates of a building. 
6.4.3.3 	One nonilluminated sign for each firm or enterprise located in a building, no larger than 2 feet by 6 feet, located at least 50 feet from any street. 
6.4.4 	In the General District, in addition to the signs permitted by Section 6.4.3 one or more signs for advertising a business conducted on the premises is permitted, not projecting above the building on the premises and no larger than one square foot for each linear foot of frontage up to a maximum of 100 square feet. 
6.5 	Site Plan Approval 
6.5.1 	Purpose: The purpose of Site Plan Review is to ensure that the design and layout of certain developments permitted as a matter of right or by special permit will constitute suitable development and will not result in a detriment to the neighborhood or the environment.  In considering a site plan the Planning Board shall assure: 
(a) 	
Protection of adjacent areas against detrimental or offensive uses on the site by provisions of adequate surface water drainage, buffers against lighting, sight, sound, dust, vibration, and allowance of sun, light, and air; 

(b) 	
Convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement within the site and in relation to adjacent areas; 

(c) 	
Adequacy of facilities of handling and disposal of refuse and other production by-products; 

(d) 	
Protection of environmental features on the site and in adjacent areas; 

(e) 	
Promotion of appropriate arrangement of structures within the site and in relation to existing structures within the district and neighborhood; 

(f) 	
Coordination with and improvement of systems of vehicular and pedestrian access, drainage, water supply, sewage disposal, lighting, landscaping, wetlands, water courses, buildings and other features that support the neighborhood; 

(g) 	
Compliance with all applicable sections of the Zoning By-Laws. 


6.5.2 	Applicability: Any new development, expansion, or change in use other than a single-family or two-family residence which would under the parking schedule "Off-Street Parking and  Driveway/Curb Cut Regulations" of Section 6.2, require at least five 
(5) but less than ten (10) parking spaces, regardless of the number of parking spaces existing on the premises and irrespective of whatever the number of parking spaces created shall be reduced by action of the Board of Appeals or otherwise, shall be subject to Site Plan Review by the Planning Board (See Section 6.9 -Site Plan Review Special Permit). 
6.5.3 	Procedure: Applications for building permits for construction subject to Site Plan Review shall be accompanied by a Site Plan Review application form and seven (7) prints of the plans of the proposal.  The Building Inspector shall forward one copy to the Planning Board for their review and shall not approve any application subject to this section without receipt of written plan approval from the Planning Board, unless thirty (30) days elapse from the date of transmittal of plans to the Planning Board without receipt of such review from the Planning Board. 
6.5.4 	Application Requirements: Plans subject to Site Plan Review shall be prepared by a Registered Architect, Landscape Architect, or Professional Engineer.  The site plan shall be prepared at a scale no greater than 1"=40', and shall show all existing and proposed buildings, existing and proposed contour elevations, structures, parking spaces, driveway openings, driveways, service areas, facilities for sewage, refuse and other waste disposal and for surface water drainage,  wetlands, surface water, areas subject to the 100-flood, and landscape features such as fences, walls, trees and planting areas, walks and lighting, both existing and proposed.  The site plan shall also show the relation of locus map at a scale not greater than 1"=2,000'.  The site plan shall also show all contiguous land owned by the applicant or by the owner of the property.  The applicant shall submit material as may be required regarding measures proposed to prevent pollution of surface or ground water, soil erosion, increased runoff, changes in groundwater level, and flooding.  The applicant shall submit such material as may be required regarding design features intended to integrate the proposed new development into the existing landscape, to enhance aesthetic assets, and to screen objectional features from neighbors.  The applicant shall submit such material as may be required regarding the projected traffic-flow patterns into and upon the site for both vehicles and pedestrians and an estimation of the projected number of motor vehicle trips to and from the site for an average day and for peak hours. 
6.5.5 	Costs Incurred: Expenses incurred by the Planning Board in connection with site plan review, including the reasonable fees and expenses of any consultants retained by the Planning Board, shall be borne by the applicants for site plan approval. 
6.5.6 	Decision. Plans shall be approved provided that the Planning Board determines that, subject to any conditions that may be imposed, the requirements of Section 6.2 will be satisfied, and that no other conflicts between the proposal and the Zoning By-Laws have been observed. [Amended 1987] 
6.6 	Reflecting Antennas A Special Permit is required from the Zoning Board of Appeals to approve the erection of a reflecting antenna, with a total surface area of 100 square feet or more, for the reception of commercial radio or television. [Added 1984] 
6.7 	Special Provision for Open Space Planning 
6.7.1 	Purpose: For the purpose of encouraging the preservation of open space and promoting the more efficient use of land in harmony with its natural features and the economical and efficient street, utility, and public facility layout, installation, construction and maintenance, efficient allocation, distribution, and maintenance of common open space and overall compatibility with the character of surrounding areas in Single Residence District A,C or E. The Planning Board may, subject to this Section 6.7, and after notice and hearing in accordance with the law, grant a Special Permit authorizing exceptions from a lot area and lot frontage requirements specified in Section 5.4. in Single Residence A, C, or E Districts. 
6.7.2 	Condition to Special Permit: No Special Permit shall be granted under the foregoing Section 6.7.1 unless the following conditions are met 
6.7.2.1 	The minimum size of a parcel to be considered for development shall be ten (10) acres in the Single Residence District A and twenty (20) acres in the Single Residence District C and Single Residence District E. 
6.7.2.2 	Prior to or included with an application for a Special Permit the applicant shall submit to the Planning Board such plans, studies and data sufficient to enable the Planning Board to make a determination as to the number of lots which could be created on said parcel without a Special Permit. 
6.7.2.3 	The number of building lots on any plan for which a Special Permit is granted under this Section 6.7 shall not exceed the number of lots which could be created on said parcel without such permit. 
6.7.2.4 	There shall be excluded from the calculation of the number of lots in Section 6.7.4 all areas of the parcel which the Planning Board finds are not buildable because of the conditions such as steep slope, presence of wetlands, poor drainage or water supply problems or a combination of the foregoing.  The Planning Board may rely upon findings and recommendations of the Board of Health and the Conservation Commission. 
6.7.2.5 	Every lot laid out under this Section shall conform to the following: In Single Residence District A, 16,500 sq. ft. minimum area, 75 ft. minimum frontage. In Single Residence District C and Single Residence District E, 22,500 sq. ft. minimum area, 75 ft. minimum frontage. 
6.7.2.6 	Every lot shall be connected to municipal sewer and water, unless the Planning Board, after consultation with the Board of Health, determines that other suitable provisions for sewer and water have been made. 
6.7.2.7 	Limitation of Subdivision: No lot shown on a plan, for which a permit is granted under this section, may be further subdivided and a notation to this effect shall be shown on the plan. 
6.7.2.8 	Each building lot shall contain a house site which is in the harmony with the general intent of the Zoning By-Law. 
6.7.2.9 	No plan shall be approved unless the Planning Board, following its public hearing and consultation with the Fire Chief, Department of Public Works and Selectmen, determines that access to public or private ways affected by the development will be adequate in light of the anticipated traffic. 
6.7.2.10 	All studies, plans, design criteria with regard to all engineering aspects of a plan submitted under the Section shall conform to the Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea. 
6.7.2.11 	All procedural matters with regard to notice and hearing shall conform to Section 7.5 of the Zoning By-Laws of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea. 
6.7.3 Open Land: 
6.7.3.1 	All land shown on a plan for which a Special Permit is granted that is not included in building lots shall be open land.  Provisions shall be made by agreement, duly executed in form, suitable for recording that such open land shall be: 
(a) 	
Owned and maintained either by a trust or association, or in common by the owners of the lots. 

(b) 	
Subject to restrictions which shall be contained in a covenant duly recorded with and referred to on the approved plan, unlimited by time that such open land shall be used only for conservation in its natural state, walking, or other passive recreational activities in harmony with the intent of this By-Law. 

(c) 	
Adequately distributed throughout the parcel and accessible to all residential lots without crossing through private property. 

(d) 	
Designed to preserve natural features such as topography, vegetation, views, vistas, access to water courses and water bodies, and incorporate them into the total development scheme. 


6.7.3.2 	The manner of ownership of such land shall be determined by the applicant after consultation with the Planning Board. 
6.7.3.3 	At least 30% of the gross area of a parcel for consideration under this By-Law must be dedicated to open land as referred to in Subsection 6.7.4.l and be of such type and in such a configuration as to meet the intent of the By-Law. 
6.7.4 	Determination of Buildable Lots: 
6.7.4.1 	The number of lots which can be developed shall be determined using the following formula:  total acreage of tract, minus areas considered to be unbuildable, multiplied by .7, divided by the zoning district lot area requirements in which the parcel is located, as provided in Section 5.4 of the Zoning By-Law. 
6.7.5 	Land in Two or More Districts: 
6.7.5.1 	If the land shown on the plan includes land located in two or more districts, it shall be considered lying within the districts having the largest area and frontage requirements. 
6.7.6 	Further Restrictions: 
6.7.6.1 	The Planning Board may impose further restrictions upon a parcel, or parts thereof, as a condition to granting the Special Permit. 
6.7.7 	Recording of Restrictive Agreement: 
6.7.7.1 	No building or structure shall be erected pursuant to any Special Permit to this Section 6.7 until and unless the restrictive agreement provided for in Section 6.7.3.1 shall have been duly recorded in the Registry of Deeds. 
6.7.8 	Relation to Subdivision Control Act: A Special Permit issued hereunder by the Planning Board shall not be a substitute for compliance with the Planning Board's Rules and Regulations or the Subdivision Control Act. The Planning Board, by granting a Special Permit, is not obligated to approve any definitive plan nor reduce any time periods for the Board's consideration under the Subdivision Control Act. [Added 1984] 
6.8 	Planned Residential Development (PRD) District C and E Only 
6.8.1 	Purpose: Planned residential developments allowed by special permit from the Planning Board, an alternative pattern of land development to the pattern permitted in Residential District C and Residential District E .  It is intended to encourage the conservation of open space, promote less land excavation -especially in rocky, hilly terrain, preserve existing wetlands, recharge areas, rivers, streams, marshes, historic sites, unique geological and botanical areas or features, trails, paths and open space links, while at the same time providing for a greater mixture of housing types in the Town than are permitted in residential districts and cluster developments.  In a PRD, dwelling units should be constructed in clusters which are harmonious with the neighborhood development and will not detract from the ecological and visual qualities of the environment. The overall site design and amenities should enhance the quality of living for the residents of the development, the immediate neighborhood, and the Town generally.  Attention, however, shall be given by the Planning Board as to whether the proposed site design, development layout, number, type and design of housing constitute a suitable development of the neighborhood within which it is to be located. 
6.8.2 	Standards: No special permit shall be granted under the foregoing Section 6.8.1 unless the following conditions are met: 
6.8.2.1 	Minimum tract size: Planned residential developments shall be permitted upon a single tract, in one ownership with definite boundaries ascertainable from a recorded deed or recorded plan, which has an area of not less than 50 acres.  Existing public or private ways need not constitute boundaries of the tract, but the area within any such ways shall not be counted in determining the tract size. 
6.8.2.2 	Environmental Impact Study (EIS): Not less than 120 days prior to submission of the Definitive Site Plan, the permit applicant shall file with the Planning Board a NOTICE which shall consist of a Preliminary EIS and Preliminary Site Plans giving the Board notice of the applicant's intent to request a Special Permit under this Section.  The Preliminary EIS shall identify the site and describe in general terms the plan for development including, in particular but not in limitation, the number and type of dwelling units and population density.  The Preliminary Plan shall show potential utilization of the development site as a single family development and a second Preliminary Plan shall show the proposed clustering of units. Not more than 45 days after filing the NOTICE, the Planning Board shall receive and consider written comments from the Conservation Commission and the Board of Health regarding the NOTICE and shall issue a Determination of Scope of the final EIS.  These written comments shall include at a minimum, 
(a) 	
an evaluation of the proposed methods for waste disposal, surface and sub-surface drainage, with particular reference to the protection which such methods afford to any river, stream, lake, pond, marsh, or other wetlands which may be affected by the proposed PRD; 

(b) 	
an evaluation of the impact on public lands and recreational areas; 

(c) 	
an evaluation of the impact on public sewers. The Determination of Scope shall identify potential impacts on the human and natural environment to be addressed in the Final EIS; shall designate, subject to agreement with the 


developer, the author of the Final EIS, and shall include the author's binding estimate for the cost preparing the Final EIS.  In particular, but not in limitation, the Final EIS should consider the impact of the proposed development on wetlands, water recharge areas, streams and ponds, public lands and recreation areas, the impact on historic and architecturally significant properties, the impact on traffic and public safety, and the impact on public services. 
The Final EIS shall be submitted by the applicant to the Planning Board within 45 days following the issuance of the Determination of Scope, and the full cost of preparing the Preliminary and Final EIS shall be borne by the applicant. 
The Planning Board shall be empowered to require, during both the Preliminary and Definitive stages, supplements and amendments to the EIS at the cost of the applicant if, after review, the Planning Board determines the relevant issues have not been adequately considered. 
6.8.2.3 Permissible Density: The number of dwelling units for which a special permit can be granted in this Section shall not be more than the maximum number of dwelling units which could be constructed on the tract without such permit.  Developer must demonstrate the maximum number of single family dwelling units that could be developed on the site by submitting a Preliminary Site Plan in accordance with the requirements of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea Subdivision Rules and Regulations. There shall be excluded from the calculations of the number of such units all areas of the tract which the Planning Board determines are not buildable because of conditions such as steep slope, presence of wetlands, poor drainage, or inadequacy of water supply. 
6.8.2.4 	Permitted Uses: There shall be permitted in a PRD: 
(a) 	Single family detached and attached, and multifamily structures of all types, provided however, that the average number of bedrooms per dwelling unit does not exceed two. 
6.8.2.5 	Lot Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements: There shall be no minimum lot area, frontage or yard requirements within a PRD.  However, no dwelling shall be erected within 500 feet of an existing public way, within 50 feet of a lot line, or within 30 feet of any way within the development. 
6.8.2.6 	Water and Sewerage: Every dwelling unit shall be connected to municipal sewer and water unless the Planning Board, after consultation with the Board of Health, determines that other suitable provisions for sewer and water have been made. 
6.8.2.7 	Density Increases Subsequent to Final Approval: Following final approval of the PRD no additional dwelling units shall be permitted within the tract whether by subdivision or additions to existing multifamily structures.  The Planning Board shall require as a condition of approval that a restrictive covenant, enforceable by the Town, is executed by the developer and duly recorded. 
6.8.2.8 	Height: All structures in the Planned Residential Development (PRD) shall comply with the Height Regulations of Section 5.5 of this By-Law. 
6.8.2.9 	Area of Residential Development: The area developed for a residential use, including buildings, parking and other areas paved for vehicular use shall not exceed 30 percent of the total area of the PRD tract. 
6.8.2.10 	Traffic: No PRD shall be approved unless the Planning Board following a public hearing and consultation with the Police Chief, Fire Chief, Board of Public Works and Selectmen, determines that the public and/or private ways providing access to the tract are adequate: 
(a) 	
in light of the preexisting traffic on such way, and 

(b) 	
the additional traffic which will be generated by the PRD.  At its discretion, the Planning Board may require that ways to be constructed within the PRD shall comply with the design requirements of the rules and regulations adopted by the Planning Board pursuant to the Subdivision Control Law. 


6.8.2.11 	Buffer Zone: The Planning Board shall require that there shall be provided in a PRD an area of open land between the parcel of land proposed for construction of dwelling units and any adjacent property.  This buffer shall be planted or preserved in a natural state and augmented where necessary to provide visual separation from abutting property.  The distance from a lot line of existing zones shall be no less than 500' from any cluster and 50' from any single family home.  The buffer area shall not be used for roads, parking, structures, except as where necessary to gain access to the site.  The Planning Board, at its discretion, can require additional buffers near specific areas of the PRD, to preserve privacy, promote safety, and maintain the overall aesthetic value of the development.  The Planning Board shall require as a condition of approval that the buffer areas are protected against development by a suitable covenant, enforceable by the Town, which shall be recorded. 
6.8.2.12 Common Open Space: 
(a) 	
All land within the PRD  tract which is not covered by buildings, driveways, parking areas or service areas, or which is not set aside as private yards, patios or gardens for the residents, or is not part of a single family residence within the development, shall be common open space.  The area of common open space shall equal at least 70 percent of the total area of the PRD tract. (Such land shall have a shape, dimension, character and location suitable to assure its use for park, recreation, conservation or agricultural purposes by all residents of the PRD, 70 percent of the common open space shall be devoted exclusively to conservation use and shall be encumbered with a restriction to that effect as herewith described.)  Such conservation open space, regardless of the form of ownership, shall be treated as part of the PRD for purposes of computing permissible density as provided for in Section 6.8.2.3 of this By-Law. 

(b) 	
Provision shall be made so that the common open space is owned in common by and readily accessible to the owners of all units in the PRD, or by a corporation, nonprofit organization or trust whose members are all the owners or occupants of units, or by the Town, or otherwise as the Planning Board may approve. In all cases, a perpetual restriction of the type described in G.L.c. 184 s31 (including future amendments thereto and corresponding provisions of the future law) running to or enforceable by the Town shall be recorded in respect to such land.  Such restrictions shall provide that the conservation open space shall be  retained in perpetuity for conservation purposes. 

(c) 


Such restrictions shall be in such form and substance as the Planning Board shall prescribe and may contain such additional restrictions on development and use of the conservation open space as the Planning Board may deem appropriate. In order to ensure that the corporation, nonprofit organization or trust shall properly maintain the common open space an instrument shall be recorded at the Registry of Deeds which shall at a minimum provide: 
(1) 
A legal description of the common open space. 

(2) 
A statement of the purposes for which the common space is intended to be used and the restrictions on its use and alienation. 

(3) 
The type and name of the corporation, nonprofit organization or trust which will own, manage and maintain the common open space. 

(4) 
The ownership or beneficial interest in the corporation, nonprofit organization or trust of each owner of a dwelling in the PRD and a provision that such ownership or beneficial interest shall be appurtenant to the dwelling to which it relates and may to be conveyed or encumbered separately therefrom. 

(5) 
Provision of the number, term of office, and manner of election to office, removal from office of directors and/or the corporation or nonprofit organization or trustees of the trust. 

(6) 
Procedures for the conduct of the affairs and business of the corporation, nonprofit organization or trust including provision for the calling and holding of meetings of members and directors and/or officers of the corporation or nonprofit organization or beneficiaries and trustees of the trust and provisions for quorum and voting requirements for action to be taken. Each owner of a dwelling shall have voting rights proportional to his ownership or beneficial interest in the corporation, nonprofit organization or trust. 

(7) 
Provision for the management, maintenance, operation, improvement and repair of the common space and facilities thereon, including provision for obtaining and maintaining adequate insurance and levying and collection from dwelling owners, common charges to pay for expenses associated with the common open space, including real estate taxes. It shall be provided that common charges are to be allocated among the dwelling unit owners in proportion to their ownership or beneficial interest in the 

corporation, nonprofit organization or trust, and that each dwelling owner's share of the common share shall be a lien against his real estate in the PRD, which shall  have priority over all other liens with the exception of municipal liens and first mortgages of record. 

(8) 
The Planning Board shall require the developer of the PRD to submit the Master Deed of the PRD to the Board for review. 


6.8.3 	Procedure for Approval: Any person who desires a special permit to construct a PRD shall submit an application in writing in such form as the Planning Board and Conservation Commission separately may require which shall include the following: 
6.8.3.1 	A development statement which shall consist of a petition, a list of the parties in interest with respect to the PRD tract, a list of the development team and a written statement setting forth the development concept including in tabular form the number of units, type, size (number of bedrooms, floor plan), ground coverage and summaries showing the areas of residential development and common open space as percentages of the total area of the PRD tract and a development schedule for all site improvements. 
6.8.3.2 	Copies of the proposed instruments to be recorded with the plans including the common open space perpetual restriction, the deed and membership corporation, nonprofit organization or trust. 
6.8.3.3 	Development plans bearing the seal of a Massachusetts registered architect, registered civil engineer or similar professional as appropriate and consisting of: 
(a) 	
Site plans and specifications showing all site improvements and meeting, to the extent applicable, the requirements set forth for a definitive plan in the Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board. 

(b) 	
Site perspectives, sections, elevations, as required under the subdivision control rules and regulations. 

(c) 	
Detailed plans for disposal of sanitary sewerage and surface drainage. 

(d) 	
Detailed plans for landscaping. 

(e) 	
An Environmental Impact Study. 

(f) 	
Such additional information as the Board may determine necessary. 


6.8.3.4 	The Conservation Commission and the Board of Health shall submit, in writing, prior to the hearing, their recommendations to the Planning Board.  The reports shall include at minimum, 
(a) 	
an evaluation of the proposed methods of waste disposal, surface and sub-surface drainage, with particular reference to the protection which such methods afford to any river, stream, lake, pond, marsh, or other wetlands which may be affected by the proposed PRD; 

(b) 	
an evaluation of the impact on public lands and recreational areas; 

(c) 	
an evaluation on the impact on public sewers. 


6.8.4 	Relation to the Subdivision Control Act: A Special Permit issued hereunder by the Planning Board shall not be a substitute of compliance with the Planning Board's Rules and Regulations or the Subdivision Control Act.  The Planning Board, by granting a special permit, is not obligated to approve any definitive plan or reduce the time periods for the Board's consideration under the Subdivision Control Act. 
6.9 Site Plan Review Special Permit 
6.9.1 	Purpose: Each use for which a site plan submission is required is a potentially significant addition to a developing or developed area of the town, and to a residential, commercial or industrial neighborhood.  The purpose of site plan review special permit is to ensure the design and layout of certain developments permitted as a matter of right or by special permit will constitute suitable development and will not result in a detriment to the neighborhood or the environment.  It is intended that the site plan for each use be prepared with due consideration for: 
(a)  	
Protection of adjacent areas against detrimental or offensive uses on the site by provisions of adequate surface water drainage, buffers against lighting, sight, sound, dust, vibration, and the allowance of sun, light, and air; 

(b) 	
Convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement within the site and in relation to adjacent areas; 

(c) 	
Adequacy of facilities of handling and disposal of refuse and other production by-products; 

(d) 	
Protection of environmental features on the site and in adjacent area; 

(e) 	
Promotion of appropriate arrangement of structures within the site and in relation to existing structures within the district and neighborhood; 

(f)  	
Coordination with and improvement of systems of vehicular and pedestrian access, drainage, water supply, sewage disposal, lighting, landscaping, wetlands, water courses, buildings and other features that support the neighborhood. 

(g) 	
Compliance with all applicable sections of the Zoning By-Laws. 


6.9.2 	Applicability: Any new development, expansion, or change of use other than a single-family or two-family residence which would, under the parking schedule "Off-Street Parking Regulations" of Section 6.2, require ten (10) or more parking spaces, regardless of the number of parking spaces existing on the premises, shall be permitted only upon the issuance of a special permit from the Planning Board for Site Plan Review.  A special permit shall be granted only if the permit-granting authority finds that it is consistent with the purposes outlined in Section 6.9.1 of this By-Law. 
6.9.3 	Procedure: The Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) under section 6.9 of this By-law shall be the Planning Board. Special Permits under this section 6.9 shall be granted only in conformance with this Section 6.9 and Section 7.5 of the Manchester Zoning By-law and the requirements of MGL Chapter 40A, Section 
9. Applications shall be accompanied by at least seven (7) prints of the plans of the proposal. [amended 2005] 
6.9.4 [Section 6.9.4 is intentionally omitted] [2005] 
6.9.5 	Application Requirements: Plans subject to Site Plan Review shall be prepared by a Registered Architect, Landscape Architect, or Professional Engineer.  The site plan shall be prepared at a scale no greater than 1"=40', and shall show all existing and proposed buildings, existing and proposed contour elevations, structures, parking spaces, driveway openings, driveways, service areas, facilities for sewage, refuse and other waste disposal and for surface water drainage, wetlands, surface water, areas subject to the 100-flood, and landscape features such as fences, walls trees and planting areas, walks and lighting, both existing and proposed.  The site plan shall also show the relation of locus map at a scale not greater than 1'=2.000'.  The site plan shall also show all contiguous land owned by the applicant or by the owner of the property.  The applicant shall submit such material as may be required regarding measures proposed to prevent pollution of surface or ground water, soil erosion, increased runoff, changes in groundwater level, and flooding.  The applicant shall submit such material as may be required regarding design features intended to integrate the proposed new development into the existing landscape, to enhance aesthetic assets, and to screen objectional features from neighbors.  The applicant shall submit such material as may be required regarding the projected traffic-flow patterns into and upon the site for both vehicles and pedestrians and an estimation of the projected number of motor vehicle trips to and from the site for an average day and for peak hours. 
6.9.6 	Expenses Incurred: Expenses incurred by the Planning Board in connection with site plan review, including the reasonable fees and expenses of any consultants retained by the Planning Board, shall be borne by the applicants for site plan approval. 
6.9.7 Performance Guarantee: As a condition of the granting of special permits for any uses requiring a special permit under this section, the Planning Board shall require that construction and site alteration permitted and specified by said special permit be secured by one, or in part by one and in part by the other, of the following methods, which method may be selected and from time to time varied by the applicant upon receiving written approval from the Planning Board: 
6.9.7.1 	By a proper bond or deposit of money or negotiable securities sufficient in the opinion of the Planning Board to secure performance of the construction of buildings, parking areas and appurtenances thereto required for completion of the project as noted in the special permit and shown on any accompanying plans.  The Planning Board shall require that said construction shall be completed within a specific period of time; or 
6.9.7.2 	By a covenant executed and duly recorded by the owner of record, running with the land, whereby said construction will be completed before such buildings or appurtenances thereto may be eligible for an occupancy permit as required by Section 7.3 of the Manchester-by-the-Sea Zoning By-Laws. 
6.9.8 	Release of Guarantee: Performance bonds, deposits or covenants may be released in whole or from time to time, in part, when the work has been satisfactorily completed in the opinion of the Planning Board.  The Planning Board shall then release the interest of the town in such bond and return the bond or the deposit to the person who furnished the same or release the covenant by appropriate instrument duly acknowledged which shall be recorded at the Essex County Registry of Deeds.  Request for all releases shall be by certified, return receipt letter to the Planning Board and the Town Clerk and shall outline that portion of the work to be released and shall be accompanied by an engineer's or surveyor's certification that the work has been done in accordance with the requirements of the granted special permit. If the Planning Board determines that said construction or site alteration has not been completed, it shall specify in a notice sent by registered mail to the applicant and to the Town Clerk, the details wherein said construction or site alteration fails to comply with the special permit and upon failure to do so within forty-five (45) days after the receipt by said Town Clerk of said request by the applicant, all obligations under the bond shall cease and terminate by operation of law, any deposit shall be returned, and such other covenant shall become void.  In the event that said forty-five day period expires without such specification, or without the release and return of the bond or return of the deposit or release of the covenant as aforesaid, the said Town Clerk shall issue a certificate to such effect, duly acknowledged, which may be recorded. 
6.9.9 	Other Regulations: This Section 6.9 is supplementary to the other existing Zoning By-Laws affecting the access, circulation, design and landscaping of parking areas.  Where the application of Section 6.9 imposes a greater restriction than is imposed by other Zoning By-Laws, the application of Section 6.9 shall control. 
6.9.10 	Decision: Plans shall be approved provided that the Planning Board determines that subject to any conditions that may be imposed the requirements of Section 6.2 will be satisfied, and that no other conflicts between the proposal and the Zoning By-Laws have been observed. [Added 1987] 
6.10 	Water Resource Protection District [Added 1989] [2002-Replaced by new §4.9] 
6.11 	Development Scheduling; Sewer Connection Limitation 
6.11.1 Purpose: The purpose of Section 6.11, Development Scheduling, is to ensure that a harmonious pattern and rate of development occurs in Manchester-by-the-Sea which protects the welfare of current and future Manchester-by-the-Sea residents.  The consequences of the historical pattern and rate of development in Manchester-by-the-Sea have been described in various documents and discussed by Town boards, departments and committees.  Of particular concern is the Town's increasing inability to provide public water and sewer service to those residents seeking access to these facilities.  The Water and Sewer Department has provided evidence that the municipal sewer system can accommodate no more than 200 additional dwelling units and the public water supply is at or near capacity.  The rate of residential and commercial development in Manchester-by-the-Sea is determined by and should not exceed the ability of the town to provide adequate public services to safeguard the health, welfare and safety of current and future residents. 
6.11.2 Applicability: Section 6.11 applies to the issuance of building permits for all new residential and non-residential construction, including those considered as single and common lots for single and two-family residential use as outlined in MGL, Chapter 40A, Section 6. 
6.11.3 Activation: This development scheduling By-Law, once activated by Town Meeting, is designed to establish lead time for the provision of adequate services to current and future Manchester-by-the-Sea residents expected under the current Zoning By-Law, the expected build-out population, and the capital improvement program currently being prepared by the Town.  This By-Law establishes a development rate adequate to ensure that the town, with prudent reliance on local and other financial sources and in compliance with the revenue generating guidelines of Proposition 2 1/2, can and will provide infrastructure and operate in a manner which provides current and future Manchester-by-the-Sea residents with an adequate and responsible level of town services, as defined by relevant, commonly-accepted professional standards. 
6.11.4 Rate of Development: The Building Inspector shall issue building permits for construction of new residential and non-residential structures only if permit issuance will not result in authorizing connection, within the period commencing from the effective date of this By-Law, of a total of more than 200 dwelling units to the municipal sewage treatment facility.  This By-Law shall remain in effect until repealed by a future Town Meeting. 
6.11.5 Issuance of Building Permits: 
6.11.5.1 	The Building Inspector shall issue building permits for construction of residential and non-residential structures only if permit issuance complies with the requirements of Section 6.11.4.  However, no building permit(s) shall be issued to any applicant authorizing more than five (5) connections to the municipal sewage treatment facility (regardless of number of dwelling units served by said connection) within any twelve (12) month period by that applicant.  For the purpose of this section, applicant is defined as individuals, partnership, corporation, trust or other legal entity in which the applicant of record holds a legal or beneficial ownership greater than one (1%) percent. 
6.11.6 Relation to Real Estate Assessment: Any land owner who has been denied a building permit because of these provisions may appeal to the Board of Assessors in conformity with MGL, Chapter 59, Section 59 for determination as to the extent to which the restrictions on development use of such land shall affect the assessed valuation placed on such land for purposes of real estate taxation, and for abatement as determined to be appropriate. [Added 1989] 
6.12 Division of Land and Development of Multiple Dwellings [Added 2005] 
6.12.1 Purpose The purpose of this Bylaw is to ensure that land divisions, subdivisions, and developments of multiple dwellings on single lots are afforded the depth and breadth of review allowed by G.L. c. 40A, sec. 9 to adequately protect public health, safety and welfare of the current and future residents of the Town. 
6.12.2 Applicability The following shall require a special permit from the Planning Board under the provisions of section 6.13: 
1.
 The division and or subdivision of land held in single ownership as of the effective date of this Bylaw or any time thereafter into six (6) or more lots; or 

2.
 The division and/or subdivision of a tract of land greater than ten (10) acres held in single ownership as of the effective date of this Bylaw or anytime thereafter into  five (5) or more lots; or 

3.
 The construction of six (6) or more dwelling units on land that does not require land division and/or subdivision, whether on one or more contiguous parcels held in single ownership as of the effective date of this Bylaw or anytime thereafter. In cases where the proposed division of land is for six (6) or more lots and said division is proposed as a division of land not requiring Planning Board approval (G.L. c.41, sec. 81-P) the 


Planning Board’s special permit powers shall be limited to enforcing the 
provisions of Section 6.14 of the Zoning Bylaw. The provisions of Section 
6.12 shall not apply to the construction of six (6) or more dwelling units on individual lots, if said six (6) or more lots were in existence as of  the effective date of this Bylaw. 
6.13 Residential Conservation Cluster [Added 2005] 
6.13.1 Purpose and Intent 
1.
 Allow for greater flexibility and creativity in the design of residential developments. 

2.
 Encourage the permanent preservation of open space, agricultural and forestry land, other natural resources including water bodies and wetlands, and historical and archeological resources. 

3.
 Maintain the Town’s traditional character and land use pattern in which small 


villages contrast with open land. 
4.
 Protect scenic vistas from the Town’s roadways and other places. 

5.
 Encourage screening of new residential development from the Town’s roads, open spaces and scenic areas. 

6.
 Facilitate the construction and maintenance of streets, utilities and public services in a more economical and efficient manner. 

7.
 Protect existing and potential municipal water supplies. 

8.
 Encourage a less sprawling and more efficient form of development that consumes less open land and conforms to existing topography and natural features better than a conventional subdivision. 

9.
 Minimize the total amount of disturbance on the site. 

10.
 Preserve open space areas for active and passive recreational use, including the provision of neighborhood parks and trails. 

11.
 Encourage the provision of diverse housing opportunities and the integration of a variety of housing types. 

12.
 Further the goals and policies of the Manchester-by-the-Sea Comprehensive Plan, as revised. 


6.13.2 Definitions 
In this Bylaw, the following words have the meanings indicated: 

Residential Conservation Cluster (RCC) Development:  A residential development in which the buildings are clustered together with reduced lot sizes and frontage. The land not included in the building lots is permanently preserved as open space. RCC Development is generally the preferred form of residential development and/or redevelopment in the Town for residential developments of five (5) or more acres and/or six (6) or more lots. 
6.13.3 	Applicability A proposed subdivision of land into six (6) or more lots shall be filed in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.13.4, below. The Planning Board shall determine whether the proposed location is suitable for an RCC Development under the terms and provisions of this section. If the Planning Board determines that the proposed location is suitable for an RCC Development, any further subdivision of the land into six or more lots shall be accomplished only through the provisions of this Bylaw. If the Planning Board determines, after discussion and analysis provoked by Section 6.13.4, that the location is best suited for subdivision under a conventional subdivision design, the Planning Board shall so inform the applicant and the applicant may then proceed to design a subdivision plan under the provisions of the Subdivision Control Law and the Manchester-by-the-Sea Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land (Subdivision Rules and Regulations) and the provisions of this section shall not apply. In cases where the Planning Board determines that the site is not suitable for an RCC Development, and where the proposed subdivision of land is for six (6) or more lots, the Planning Board’s special permit powers shall be limited to enforcing the provisions of Section 6.14 of the Zoning Bylaw. In either case, however, a special permit from the Planning Board shall be required. 
Notwithstanding the provisions above, the Planning Board may grant a special permit for an RCC Development for any parcel or contiguous parcels of at least five (5) acres in any district permitting single-family dwellings subject to the regulations and conditions herein. Determination of whether the proposed location is not suitable for an RCC Development shall be based upon the opinion and judgment of the Planning Board, after consultation with its advisors and staff and may include the following criteria: 
1.
 The degree to which the topography of the locus will not be preserved by a RCC Development; 

2.
 The degree to which stormwater runoff and erosion will not be minimized by a RCC Development; 

3.
 The degree to which the RCC Development will result in inappropriate site planning, 


subdivision design and/or damage to the site’s natural features; 
4.
 The degree to which the RCC Development will not preserve or protect abutting properties and associated views and vistas; 

5.
 The degree to which public safety will be threatened by a RCC Development; 

6.
 The degree to which other site-specific attributes or site-specific concerns are not appropriately addressed by a RCC Development. 


6.13.4 Procedural Requirements 
1.
 Pre-Application Meeting: A pre-application meeting between the Planning Board and the applicant is strongly encouraged. 

2.
 Preliminary (Conventional) Plan/RCC Sketch Plan: Applicants proposing the subdivision of land into six (6) or more lots shall submit a Sketch Plan for an RCC Development along with a Preliminary (Conventional) Subdivision Plan for review by the Planning Board. One of the purposes of this review is to determine the number of lots possible in the RCC Development. For this reason, it is strongly recommended that a copy of the existing conditions plan required in Section 6.13.4.3 below be submitted at this stage. The Planning Board shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the preliminary plan/RCC Sketch Plan within forty-five (45) days of receipt of a completed application. Upon 


receipt of the Planning Board’s written decision regarding said plan, the applicant 
may submit a Definitive Subdivision/ RCC Development plan in accordance with the Planning Board’s written decision. If the above-noted forty-five (45) day time period has lapsed without a written decision being issued by the Planning Board, the applicant may submit a definitive subdivision/ RCC Development plan in accordance with Section 6.14.3 of this Bylaw. 
3.
 Definitive Subdivision/ RCC Development Plan: The Definitive Subdivision/ RCC Development Plan shall show: location and boundaries of the site, proposed land and building uses, lot lines, location of open space, proposed grading, location and width of streets and ways, parking, landscaping, existing vegetation to be retained, water supply or approximate location of wells, drainage, proposed easements and methods of sewage disposal. A team including a Registered Civil Engineer, Registered Land Surveyor, and a Registered Landscape Architect shall prepare the plan. An accompanying Existing Conditions Plan shall depict existing topography, wetlands, waterbodies and the 100-year floodplain, all existing rights of way, easements, existing structures, the location of significant features such as woodlands, tree lines, open fields or meadows, scenic views, watershed divides and drainage ways, fences and stone walls, roads, driveways, and cart paths. Submission of photographs depicting existing conditions, views and vistas from various locations on the property and from public and private ways shall accompany the plan submission. The Site Analysis shall also show locations of soil test pits and percolation tests, with supporting documentation on test results. Applicants shall also include a statement indicating the proposed use and ownership of the open space as permitted by this Bylaw. Applicants should refer to the Subdivision Rules and Regulations for provisions regarding preparation and submittal of plans. 

4.
 Density/Number of Dwelling Units: The total number of dwelling units in a Residential Conservation Cluster shall be determined by the following formula: 


(a) [Total area of land subject to the application] – [Area of wetlands and waterbodies] = Applicable Land Area [ [ Applicable Land Area] x [.75] ] Divided by Minimum Lot Area Established for the Zoning District = Total number of dwelling units.  The number of dwelling units permitted in a Residential Conservation Cluster shall not exceed that which would be permitted under a conventional subdivision that complies with the Zoning Bylaw and the Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board and any other applicable laws and regulations. 
5.
 Review and Decision: Upon receipt of the application and the required plans, the Planning Board shall transmit one copy each to the Board of Health, Historical Commission and Conservation Commission. Within 45 days of their receipt of the application/plans, these agencies shall submit any recommendations to the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall act on applications according to the procedure specified in G. L. c. 40A, sec. 9. Notice shall be provided of hearings in accordance with Chapter 40A, sec. 11 and Chapter 41, sec. 81T. Public hearings for the subdivision application and the special permit application shall be conducted concurrently. 

6.
 Criteria for Special Permit Decision: 


(a) 
Findings: The Planning Board may approve the development upon finding that it complies with the purposes and standards of the RCC Development Bylaw and is superior in design to a conventional subdivision with regard to protection of natural features and scenic resources of the site. The Planning Board shall consider the following criteria in making its decision: 

1.
 Upland open space as required by this Bylaw has been provided and generally conforms to the Design Requirements in Section 6.13.8 of this Bylaw. 

2.
 Approximate building sites have been identified and are not located closer than 100 feet to wetlands and waterbodies. 

3.
 Proposed streets have been aligned to provide vehicular access to each dwelling unit in a reasonable and economical manner. Lots and streets have been located to avoid or minimize adverse impacts on open space areas and to provide lots with views of and access to the open space. 

4.
 All lots meet the applicable dimensional requirements of Section 6.13.5 of the RCC Development Bylaw and all other relevant provisions of the Zoning Bylaw. 

5.
 The provisions of Section 6.14 of the Zoning Bylaw will be met. The Planning Board’s findings, including the basis of such findings, shall be stated in the written decision of approval, conditional approval or denial of the application for special permit. 



(b) 
Conditions: The Planning Board shall impose conditions in its decision as necessary to ensure compliance with the purposes of this Bylaw. Approval of an RCC Development shall be conditioned upon Definitive Subdivision approval and shall be conditioned to provide that no further division of land that increases the number of lots or results in an alteration to the area to be set aside as open space may occur without a modification of the special permit. Any alteration of lot lines or layout of ways shall require approval of the Planning Board and shall be in compliance with the requirements of the RCC Development Bylaw and the Subdivision Rules and Regulations. 

(c)
 Time Limit: A special permit is granted for a period of two years from the date of its approval and shall lapse if substantial use or construction has not commenced by such date, except for good cause shown. In its sole discretion, the Planning Board may grant extensions to allow construction of subdivisions within the vested rights limits set forth in G.L. c. 40A, sec. 6 except where such extension would derogate from the intent and purpose of this Bylaw. 

(d) 
Relationship to Subdivision Control Law: Nothing contained herein shall exempt a proposed subdivision from compliance with other applicable provisions of these Bylaws or the Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board, nor shall it affect the right of the Board of Health and of the Planning Board to 


approve, condition or disapprove a subdivision plan in accordance with the provision of such Rules and Regulations and of the Subdivision Control Law. 
6.13.5 Standards and Dimensional Requirements Where the requirements of this section differ from or conflict with the requirements found elsewhere in this Bylaw, the requirements of this section shall prevail. 
1.
 Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size shall be one-half the square footage otherwise required by the Zoning District in which the project is located. 

2.
 Minimum Frontage: The minimum frontage may be reduced from frontage otherwise required in the Zoning District, provided however that no lot shall have less than 50 feet of frontage and provided further that such frontage reduction shall apply only to lots fronting on proposed internal roadways. 

3.
 Setbacks: Provided that no objection to the contrary is raised by the Fire Department, the Planning Board may reduce by up to one-half the setbacks otherwise required by the Zoning Bylaw if the Board finds that such reduction will result in better design, improved protection of natural and scenic resources, and will otherwise comply with this Bylaw. Notwithstanding this provision or the requirements of the Zoning Bylaw, every dwelling fronting on the proposed roadways shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the roadway right-of–way, and a minimum of 50 feet from the outer perimeter of the land subject to the application. This 50-foot setback shall be maintained in a naturally vegetated state to screen and buffer the development and may be included within the open space. This setback may be eliminated where the proposed development abuts existing permanent open space. Wherever feasible, construction of the dwelling at the front setback line is encouraged. 

4.
 Required Open Space: All land area not utilized for lots, roads, and drainage shall be set aside as open space. A minimum of 60% of the upland area of the parcel (“applicable land area”) shall be provided as open space. As an exception, where  the open space is proposed to be deeded to the Town or a qualified land trust pursuant to 6.13.7 of this Bylaw, and in fact, such a transfer occurs, a minimum of 50% of the upland area of the parcel shall be provided as open space. Applicants are encouraged to include wetlands and waterbodies within the open space; however, they do not count toward the open space requirement. Roadway rights-of way shall not count toward the area to be provided as open space. 


6.13.6 Permissible Uses Of Open Space 
1.
 Purposes: Open space shall be used solely for recreation, conservation, or agriculture purposes by residents and/or the public. Where appropriate, multiple use of open space is encouraged. At least half of the required open space may be 

required by the Planning Board to be left in a natural state. The proposed use of the open space shall be specified in the application. If several uses are proposed, the plans shall specify what uses will occur in what areas. The Planning Board shall have the authority to approve or disapprove particular uses proposed for the open space. 

2. 
Leaching Facilities: Subject to the approval of the Board of Health, as otherwise required by law, the Planning Board may permit a portion of the open space to be used for components of sewage disposal systems serving the subdivision, where the Planning Board finds that such use will not be detrimental to the character, quality, or use of the open space, wetlands or waterbodies, and enhances the site plan. The Planning Board shall require adequate legal safeguards and covenants that such facilities shall be adequately maintained by the lot owners within the development. No portion of the open space containing components of a sewage disposal system(s) shall count toward the open space requirements of Section 6.13.5.4, nor shall any portion of said open space areas be accepted by the Town or conveyed to a nonprofit organization other than a corporation or trust described in Section 6.13.7(c). 


6.13.7 Ownership Of Open Space 
1. Ownership Options: At the developer’s option and subject to approval by the 
Planning Board, all areas to be protected as open space shall be: 
(a)
 Conveyed to the Town to be placed under the care, custody and control of the Conservation Commission, and be accepted by it for a park or open space use. Land conveyed to the Town shall be open for public use; 

(b) 
Conveyed to a non-profit organization, the principal purpose of which is the conservation or preservation of open space, with a conservation restriction as specified below. Such organization shall be acceptable to the Town as a bona fide conservation organization; or 

(c)
 Conveyed to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned by the owners of lots or residential units within the development (i.e. 


“homeowners’ association”) and placed under conservation restriction. If 
such a corporation or trust is utilized, as indicated herein, ownership thereof shall pass with conveyance of the lots or residential units. The developer is responsible for the maintenance of the open space and other 
facilities to be held in common until such time as the homeowners’ 
association is capable of assuming such responsibility. Thereafter, the members of the association shall share the cost of maintaining the open space. The Planning Board shall require the applicant to provide 
documentation that the homeowners’ association is an automatic 
(mandatory) association that has been established prior to the conveyance of any lots within the subdivision. 
2.
 Permanent Restriction: In any case when open space is not conveyed to the Town, a permanent conservation or agricultural preservation restriction, in accordance with G. L. c. 184 sec. 31, approved by the Planning Board and Board of Selectman, and enforceable by the Town, conforming to the standards of the Massachusetts Executive Office of Environmental Affairs, Division of Conservation Services, shall be recorded to ensure that such land shall be kept in an open or natural state and not be built for residential use or developed for accessory uses such as parking or roadways except as permitted by this Bylaw and approved by the Planning Board. Restrictions shall provide for periodic inspection of the open space by the Town. Such restriction shall be submitted to the Planning Board prior to approval of the project and recorded at the Registry of Deeds/Land Court simultaneously with recording of the definitive subdivision plan. A management plan may be required by the Planning Board that describes how existing woods, fields, meadows or other natural areas shall be maintained in accordance with good conservation practices. 

3.
 Encumbrances: All areas to be set aside as open space shall be conveyed free of any mortgage interest, security interest, liens or other encumbrances. 

4.
 Maintenance of Open Space: In any case where open space is not conveyed to the Town, the Town shall be granted an easement over such land sufficient to ensure its perpetual maintenance as conservation or recreation land. Such easement shall provide that in the event the trust or other owner fails to maintain the open space in reasonable condition, the Town may, after notice to the lot owners and public hearing, enter upon such land to maintain it in order to prevent or abate a nuisance. The cost of such maintenance by the Town shall be assessed against the properties within the development and/or to the owner of the open space. The Town may file a lien against the lot or lots to ensure payment of such maintenance expenses. 


6.13.8 Design Process Each development plan shall follow the design process outlined below. When the development plan is submitted, applicants shall be prepared to demonstrate to the Planning Board that this design process was considered in determining the layout of proposed streets, house lots, and contiguous open space. 
1.
 Understanding the Site. The first step is to inventory existing site features, taking care to identify sensitive and noteworthy natural, scenic and cultural resources on the site, and to determine the connection of these important features to each other. 

2.
 Evaluating Site Context. The second step is to evaluate the site in its larger context by identifying physical (e.g., stream corridors, wetlands), transportation 

(e.g., road and bicycle networks), and cultural (e.g., recreational opportunities) connections to surrounding land uses and activities. 

3.
 Designating the Contiguous Open Space. The third step is to identify the contiguous open space to be preserved on the site. Such open space should include the most sensitive and noteworthy resources of the site, and, where appropriate, areas that serve to extend neighborhood open space networks. 

4. 
Location of Development Areas. The fourth step is to locate building sites, streets, parking areas, paths and other built features of the development. The design should include a delineation of private yards, public streets and other areas, and shared amenities, to reflect an integrated community, with emphasis on consistency with Manchester-by-the-Sea’s historical development patterns. 

5. 
Lot Lines. The final step is to draw the lot lines. 


6.13.9 Design Requirements The location of open space provided through this Bylaw shall be consistent with the policies contained in the Manchester-by-the-Sea Comprehensive Plan and the Open Space and Recreation Plan, as amended. The following design requirements shall apply to open space and lots provided through this Bylaw: 
1.
 Open space shall be planned as large, contiguous areas whenever possible. Long thin strips or narrow areas of open space (less than 100 feet wide) shall occur only when necessary for access, as vegetated buffers along wetlands or the perimeter of the site, or as connections between open space areas. 

2.
 Open space shall be arranged to protect valuable natural and cultural environments such as stream valleys, wetland buffers, unfragmented forestland and significant trees, wildlife habitat, open fields, scenic views, trails, and archeological sites and to avoid development in hazardous areas such as floodplains and steep slopes. The development plan shall take advantage of the natural topography of the parcel and cuts and fills shall be minimized. 

3.
 Open space may be in more than one parcel provided that the size, shape and locations of such parcels are suitable for the designated uses. Where feasible, these parcels shall be linked by trails. 

4.
 Where the proposed development abuts or includes a body of water or a wetland, these areas and the 100-foot buffer to such areas shall be incorporated into the open space. Where appropriate, reasonable access shall be provided to shorelines. 

5.
 The maximum number of house lots compatible with good design shall abut the open space and all house lots shall have reasonable physical and visual access to the open space through internal roads, sidewalks or paths. An exception may be made for resource areas vulnerable to trampling or other disturbance. 

6.
 Open space shall be provided with adequate access, by a strip of land at least 20 feet wide, suitable for a footpath, from one or more streets in the development. 

7.
 Development along existing scenic roads and creation of new driveway openings on existing regional roadways shall be minimized. 

8.
 Where a proposed development abuts land held for conservation purposes, the development shall be configured to minimize adverse impacts to abutting conservation land. Trail connections should be provided where appropriate. 

9.
 Residential structures shall be oriented toward the street serving the premises. 


6.13.10 Types of Buildings An RCC Development may consist of a combination of single-family and two-family and residential structures. The architecture of all buildings shall be residential in character, particularly providing gabled roofs, predominantly wood siding, an articulated footprint and varied facades. 
6.13.11 Affordable Component As a condition of the grant of any special permit for a RCC Development containing six 
(6) or more lots or dwelling units, the Planning Board shall ensure compliance with the provisions of Section 6.14 (“Inclusionary Housing”) of the Zoning Bylaw. 
6.13.12 Special Permit Requirements In reviewing an application under this Bylaw, the Planning Board shall rely, to the extent warranted, on the provisions of Section 7.5 of the Zoning Bylaw. 
6.14 Inclusionary Housing [Added 2005] 
6.14.1 Purpose and Intent The purpose of this Bylaw is to outline and implement a coherent set of policies and objectives for the development of affordable housing in compliance with the Manchester­by-the-Sea’s Comprehensive Plan, G.L. c. 40B sec. 20-23 and ongoing programs within the Town to promote a reasonable percentage of housing that is affordable to moderate income buyers. It is intended that the affordable housing units that result from this Bylaw be considered as Local Initiative Program (LIP) dwelling units in compliance with the requirements for the same as specified by the Department of Community Affairs, Division of Housing and Community Development and that said units count toward the Town’s requirements under G. L. c. 40B sec. 20-23. 
6.14.2 Definitions 
1. Affordable Housing Unit. A dwelling unit that qualifies as a local initiative unit 
under the Commonwealth’s Local Initiative Program and meets the requirements 
of a subsidized housing unit for purposes of listing in the subsidized housing inventory under G. L. c. 40B Sec. 20-23. 
2. Qualified affordable housing unit purchaser. An individual or family with household incomes that do not exceed 80% of the median income, with adjustments for household size, as reported by the most recent information from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and/or the Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD). 
6.14.3 Applicability 
1. Division of Land. This Bylaw shall apply to the division of land into six (6) or more lots, and shall require a special permit from the Planning Board under Section 6.13 of the Zoning Bylaw. A special permit shall be required for land 
divisions under G. L. c. 40A sec. 9 as well as for “conventional” or “grid” 
divisions allowed by G. L. c. 41 sec. 81-L and sec. 81-U, including those divisions of land that do not require subdivision approval. 
6.14.4 Mandatory Provision of Affordable Units The Planning Board shall, as a condition of approval of any development referred to in Section 6.13, require that the applicant for special permit approval complies with the obligation to provide affordable housing pursuant to this Bylaw and more fully described in Section 6.14.5. 
6.14.5 Provision of Affordable Units The Planning Board shall deny any application for a special permit for development under Sections 6.13 and this section if the applicant for special permit approval does not agree that: 
1) At least ten (10) percent of the lots in a division of land or units in a multiple unit development subject to this Bylaw shall be established as affordable housing units in any one or combination of methods provided for below. Fractions of a lot or dwelling unit shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number, such that a development proposing six (6) dwelling units shall require one affordable unit, a development proposing eleven (11) dwelling units shall require two affordable units and so on. 
(a)
 Constructed or rehabilitated on the locus subject to the special permit; 

(b) 
Constructed or rehabilitated on a locus different than the one subject to the special permit (see Section 6.14.8); 

(c)
 An applicant may offer, and the Planning Board with the approval of the Board of Selectmen, may accept donations of land in fee simple, on or off-site, that the Planning Board determines are suitable for the construction of affordable housing units. The value of donated land shall be equal to or greater than the value of the construction or set-aside of the affordable units. The Planning Board may require, prior to accepting land as satisfaction of the requirements of this Bylaw, that the applicant submit 

appraisals of the land in question, as well as other data relevant to the determination of equivalent value; 

(d) 
For non-rental affordable housing units, a cash payment to the Affordable Housing Trust Fund may be made subject to Section 6.14.11 of this Bylaw. The applicant may offer, and the Planning Board may accept, any combination of the Section 6.14.5.1(a)-(d) requirements provided that in no event shall the total number of units or land area provided be less than the equivalent number or value of affordable units required by this Bylaw. 


6.14.6 Provisions Applicable to Affordable Housing Units On-and Off-Site 
1.
 Siting of affordable units – All affordable units constructed or rehabilitated under this Bylaw shall be situated within the development so as not to be in less desirable locations than market-rate units in the development and shall, on average, be no less accessible to public amenities, such as open space, as the market-rate units. 

2.
 Minimum design and construction standards for affordable units – Affordable housing units within market rate developments shall be integrated with the rest of the development and shall be compatible in design, appearance, construction and quality of materials with other units. 

3.
 Timing of construction or provision of affordable units or lots – Where feasible, affordable housing units shall be provided coincident to the development of market rate units, but in no event shall the development of affordable units be delayed beyond the schedule noted below: 


MARKET-RATE UNIT % AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNIT% 
Up to 30%  None required  
30% plus 1 unit  At least 10%  
Up to 50%  At least 30%  
Up to 75%  At least 50%  
75% plus 1 unit  At least 70%  
Up to 90%  100%  

Fractions of units shall not be counted. 
6.14.7 Marketing Plan for Affordable Units Applicants under this Bylaw shall submit a marketing plan or other method approved by the Planning Board, to the Planning Board for approval, which describes how the affordable units will be marketed to potential homebuyers. This plan shall include a description of the lottery or other process to be used for selecting buyers. The marketing plan must describe how the applicant will accommodate local preference requirements, if any, established by the Board of Selectmen, in a manner that complies with the nondiscrimination in tenant or buyer selection guidelines of the Local Initiative Program. 
6.14.8 Provision of Affordable Housing Units Off-Site As an alternative to the requirements of Section 6.14.5.1(a), an applicant subject to the Bylaw may develop, construct or otherwise provide affordable units equivalent to those required by Section 6.14.5 off-site. All requirements of this Bylaw that apply to on-site provision of affordable units, shall apply to provision of off-site affordable units. In addition, the location of the off-site units to be provided shall be approved by the Planning Board as an integral element of the special permit review and approval process. 
6.14.9 Maximum Incomes and Selling Prices: Initial Sale 
1.
 The developer of the housing units or his/her agent shall verify prior to transferring title or executing a lease that each prospective purchaser or renter of an affordable housing unit created under this Bylaw is a household of low or moderate income, as defined by the Commonwealth’s Local Initiative Program (LIP). Toward this end: 

a) The developer shall engage a qualified certifying agent acceptable to the Planning Board to receive purchase or rental applications, obtain and review documentation concerning sources and amounts of household income, and certify to the Town that all purchasers or renters approved for an affordable unit meet LIP income eligibility requirements. b) The developer is responsible for making arrangements acceptable to the Planning Board to provide annual certifications to the Town as may be required to place and maintain the affordable units on the Commonwealth’s Chapter 40B Subsidized Housing Inventory. 

2.
 The maximum allowable purchase price or maximum allowable rent for affordable units created under this Bylaw shall comply with the regulations and guidelines of the Local Initiative Program (LIP). 


6.14.10 Preservation of Affordability; Restrictions on Resale Each affordable unit created in accordance with this Bylaw shall have the following limitations governing its resale. The purpose of these limitations is to preserve the long­term affordability of the unit and to ensure its continued availability to qualified purchasers in the future. The resale controls shall be established through a deed rider or an affordable housing restriction as defined by G.L. c.184, Section 31, recorded at the Essex County Registry of Deeds or the Land Court, and shall be in force for as long a period as is lawful. The affordable housing use restriction shall meet the requirements of the Local Initiative Program. 
1. Resale price – Sales beyond the initial sale to a qualified affordable income 
purchaser shall include the initial discount rate between the sale price and the unit’s appraised value at the time of resale. This percentage shall be recorded as part of the  restriction on the property. For example, if a unit appraised for $300,000 is sold for $225,000 because of this Bylaw, it has sold for 75% of its appraised value. If, several years later, the appraised value of the unit at the time of proposed resale is $325,000, the unit may be sold for no more than $243,750, or 75% of the appraised value of $325,000. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the resale price of an affordable unit shall in no event exceed that amount which will require a household earning 80% of the most recent area median income number, as published by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and adjusted for the household size that corresponds with the number of bedrooms in 
the affordable unit, to spend a maximum of 30% of the household’s annual 
income on housing costs. Housing costs shall include principal, interest, property tax, insurance payments and association or condominium fees. 
2.
 Right of first refusal to purchase – The purchaser of an affordable housing unit developed as a result of this Bylaw shall agree to execute a deed rider prepared by the Town, granting, among other things, the Town’s right of first refusal for a period not less than the maximum period allowable under guidelines set by the Department of Housing and Community Development for Local Initiative Units as defined by the Local Initiative Program, to purchase the property or assignment thereof, in the event that, despite diligent efforts to sell the property, a subsequent qualified purchaser cannot be located. 

3.
 The Planning Board shall require, as a condition for special permit approval under this Bylaw that the deeds to the affordable housing units contain a restriction against renting or leasing said unit during the period for which the housing unit contains a restriction on affordability. 

4.
 The Planning Board shall require, as a condition for special permit approval under this Bylaw, that the applicant comply with the mandatory set asides and accompanying restrictions on affordability, including the execution of the deed rider noted in Section 6.14.10. The Building Commissioner shall not issue an occupancy permit for any affordable unit until the deed restriction is recorded at the Essex County Registry of Deeds or the Land Court. 


6.14.11 Fees in Lieu of Affordable Housing Units As an alternative to Section 6.14.5 (a) through (c), an applicant may contribute a cash payment to the Affordable Housing Trust Fund, to be used for the development of affordable housing by the Town or its designees, in lieu of constructing and offering affordable units within the locus of the proposed development or off-site. 
1. Calculation of fees-in-lieu of units. The applicant for development subject to this Bylaw may pay a fee in lieu of the construction of affordable units. For each affordable unit not constructed or provided through one or a combination of the methods specified in 6.14.5 (a) through (c), the fee shall be an amount equal to the difference between the median sale price for new single-family homes built in 
Manchester-by-the-Sea during the preceding three fiscal years, as determined and 
reported by the Board of Assessors, and the purchase price of a home that is 
affordable to a qualified purchaser. 
a) For developments of multi-family condominiums, the Planning Board may substitute the median sale price for new condominiums built in Manchester-by-the-Sea during the preceding three fiscal years for the median sale price of new single-family homes. b) The methodology used to determine an affordable purchase price shall comply with Local Initiative Program guidelines in effect at the time of application for a special permit. c) The assumptions used to determine an affordable purchase price, including but not limited to minimum down payment, mortgage interest rate, term, closing and other costs shall be consistent with first-time homebuyer mortgage products available from commercial lending institutions located in or serving Manchester-by-the-Sea at the time of application for a special permit, all in accordance with the Inclusionary Housing Submission Requirements and Procedures Manual adopted by the Planning Board and filed with the Town Clerk. d) Upon adoption of this bylaw by town meeting, the Planning Board shall prepare and adopt an Inclusionary Housing Submission Requirements and Procedures Manual after holding a public hearing on the same. 
2. Schedule of fees in lieu of payments. Fees in lieu of payments shall be paid according to the schedule set forth in Section 6.14.6 (3), above. 
6.15 Stormwater Management Special Permit [Added 2007] 
6.15.1 Purpose and intent 
A. Regulation of discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) is necessary for the protection of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea’s water bodies and groundwater, and to safeguard the public health, safety, welfare and the environment. Increased and contaminated stormwater runoff associated with developed land uses and the accompanying increase in impervious surface are major causes of impairment of water quality and flow and contamination of drinking water supplies, erosion of stream channels, alteration or destruction of aquatic and wildlife habitat, and flooding. 
B.  This By-Law establishes stormwater management standards for the final conditions that result from development and redevelopment projects, as well as construction activities, to minimize adverse impacts offsite and downstream which would be borne by abutters to development projects and the general public. 
C.  The goals and objectives of this By-law are: 
1.
 To require practices to control the flow of stormwater from new and redeveloped sites into the Town storm drainage system in order to prevent flooding and erosion; 

2.
 To protect groundwater and surface water from degradation; 

3.
 To promote groundwater recharge; 

4.
 To prevent pollutants from entering the Town’s municipal separate storm sewer 


system (MS4) and to minimize discharge of pollutants from the MS4; 
5.
 To ensure adequate long-term operation and maintenance of structural stormwater best management practices so that they work as designed; 

6.
 To comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating to stormwater discharges; and 

7.
 To establish the Town’s legal authority to ensure compliance with the 


provisions of this By-law through inspection, monitoring, and enforcement. 
6.15.2 Definitions 
Alteration of drainage characteristics: Any activity on an area of land that changes the water quality, force, direction, timing or location of runoff flowing from the area. Such changes include: change from distributed runoff to confined, discrete discharge; change in the volume of runoff from the area; change in the peak rate of runoff from the area; and change in the recharge to groundwater on the area. 
Best management practice (BMP): An activity, procedure, restraint, or structural improvement that helps to reduce the quantity or improve the quality of stormwater runoff. 
Clearing: Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover. 
Development: The modification of land to accommodate a new use or expansion of use, usually involving construction. 
Disturbance of land: Any action that causes a change in the position, location, or arrangement of soil, sand, rock, gravel or similar earth materials. 
Grading: Changing the level or shape of the ground surface. 
Grubbing: The act of clearing land surface by digging up roots and stumps. 
Impervious surface: Any material or structure on or above the ground that prevents water infiltrating the underlying soil. Impervious surface includes (without limitation) roads, paved parking lots, sidewalks, and rooftops. 
Massachusetts Stormwater Management Policy: The Policy issued by the Department of Environmental Protection, and as amended, that coordinates the requirements prescribed by state regulations promulgated under the authority of the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act G.L. c. 131 § 40 and Massachusetts Clean Waters Act G.L. c. 21 §. 23-56. The Policy addresses stormwater impacts through implementation of performance standards to reduce or prevent pollutants from reaching water bodies and control the quantity of runoff from a site. 
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) or Municipal storm drain system: The system of conveyances designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility, retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered drainage channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure that together comprise the storm drainage system owned or operated by the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea. 
Operation and Maintenance Plan: A plan setting up the functional, financial and organizational mechanisms for the ongoing operation and maintenance of a stormwater management system to insure that it continues to function as designed. 
Outfall: The point at which stormwater flows out from a point source that is a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance into waters of the Commonwealth. 
Outstanding resource waters (ORWs): Waters designated by Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection as ORWs. These waters have exceptional sociologic, recreational, ecological and/or aesthetic values and are subject to more stringent requirements under both the Massachusetts Water Quality Standards (314 CMR 4.00) and the Massachusetts Stormwater Management Standards. ORWs include vernal pools certified by the Natural Heritage Program of the Massachusetts Department of Fisheries and Wildlife and Environmental Law Enforcement, all Class A designated public water supplies with their bordering vegetated wetlands, and other waters specifically designated. 
Owner: A person with a legal or equitable interest in property. 
Person: An individual, partnership, association, firm, company, trust, corporation, agency, authority, department or political subdivision of the Commonwealth or the federal government, to the extent permitted by law, and any officer, employee, or agent of such person. 
Point source: Any discernible, confined, and discrete stormwater conveyance, including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, or container from which pollutants are or may be discharged. 
Redevelopment: Development, rehabilitation, expansion, demolition or phased projects that disturb the ground surface or increase the impervious area on previously developed sites. 
Runoff: Rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface. 
Stormwater management plan: A plan required as part of the application for a Stormwater Management Permit. See Section 6.15.7. 
Stormwater: Storm water runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface water runoff and drainage. 
TSS: Total suspended solids. 
6.15.3 Authority 
This By-Law is adopted under authority granted by the Home Rule Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution, the Home Rule statutes and pursuant to the regulations of the federal Clean Water Act found at 40 CFR 122.34. 
6.15.4 Applicability 
A. No person may undertake a construction activity, including clearing, grading and excavation that results in a land disturbance that will disturb equal to or greater than one acre of land or will disturb less than one acre of land but is part of a larger common plan of development that will ultimately disturb equal to or greater than one acre of land 
draining to the Town’s municipal separate storm sewer system without a special permit 
from the Planning Board. 
B.  Activities or land uses that otherwise require a special permit from the Planning Board shall not be required to obtain an independent special permit under to this Section 
6.15 provided that the applicable terms, conditions and requirements of this Section 6.15 are imposed within the special permit issued by the Planning Board. 
C. Exemptions: 
1.
 Normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural use as defined by the Wetlands Protection Act regulation 310 CMR 10.04; 

2.
 Maintenance of existing landscaping, gardens or lawn areas associated with a single family dwelling; 

3.
 The construction of fencing that will not substantially alter existing terrain or drainage patterns; 

4.
 Construction and installation of utilities other than drainage (gas, water, electric, telephone, etc.) which will not alter terrain or drainage patterns; 

5.
 As authorized in the Phase II Small MS4 General Permit for Massachusetts, storm water discharges resulting from the activities identified in Section 6.15.4 that are wholly subject to jurisdiction under the Wetlands Protection Act and demonstrate compliance with the Massachusetts Storm Water Management Policy as reflected in an Order of Conditions issued by the Conservation Commission are exempt from compliance with this Section 6.15. 

6. 
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations. 



6.15.5 Administration 
A. The Planning Board shall administer, implement and enforce this By-Law pursuant to 
G.L. c.40A s.9 and Section 7.5 of the Zoning By-Law. 
6.15.6 Permits and procedure 
A. Filing Application. The site owner or his agent shall file a completed application package for a Stormwater Management Special Permit (SMSP) as follows:  one copy (with the filing fee) with the Town Clerk and ten (10) additional copies with the Planning Board (by delivery with the above copy to the Town Clerk). Permit issuance is required prior to any site altering activity. While the applicant can be a representative, the permittee must be the owner of the site.  Each copy of the SMSP Application package shall include: 
1.
 a completed Application Form with original signatures of all owners; 

2.
 a list of abutters, certified by the Assessors Office; 

3.
 the Stormwater Management Plan and project description as specified in Section 6.15.7 of this By-law; 

4.
 the Operation and Maintenance Plan as required by Section 6.15.8 of this By-Law; 


B. Entry. Filing an application for a special permit grants the Planning Board, or its agent, permission to enter the site to verify the information in the application and to inspect for compliance with the resulting special permit. 
C. Other Boards. The applicant for a Stormwater Management Special Permit shall deliver a copy of the application package, within three (3) business days of filing the application with the Planning Board, to each of the Board of Health, Conservation Commission and Department of Public Works, and shall file a certificate of such delivery with the Planning Board. 
D. Fee Structure. The Planning Board is authorized to establish an application form and 
filing fees, and to retain, at the applicant’s expense, Registered Professional Engineers or 
other professional consultants to review and advise the Board on any or all aspects of these plans. 
E. Public Hearing. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing in accordance with 
G.L. 
c.40A ss. 9 and 11. 

F.
 Actions.  The Planning Board’s action, rendered in writing, shall consist of either: 

1.
 Approval of the Stormwater Management Special Permit Application based upon determination that the proposed plan meets the Standards in Section 6.15.7 and Section 7.5 of this By-law and will adequately protect the water resources of the Town and is in compliance with the requirements set forth in this Section 6.15; 

2.
 Approval of the Stormwater Management Special Permit Application subject to any conditions, modifications or restrictions required by the Planning Board which will ensure that the project meets the Standards in Section 6.15.7 and Section 7.5 of this By-law and adequately protects water resources, set forth in this Section 6.15; 

3.
 Disapproval of the Stormwater Management Special Permit Application based upon a determination that the proposed plan, as submitted, does not meet the Standards in Section 6.15.7, Section 7.5 of this By-Law or adequately protect water resources, as required herein. 



G.
 Project Completion. At completion of the project the permittee shall submit as-built record drawings of all structural stormwater controls and best management treatment practices required for the site. The as-built drawing shall show deviations from the approved plans, if any, and be certified by a Registered Professional Engineer. 


6.15.7 Stormwater Management Plan A. The Stormwater Management Plan shall contain sufficient information for the Planning Board to evaluate the environmental impact, effectiveness, and acceptability of the measures proposed by the applicant for reducing adverse impacts from stormwater. The Plan shall be designed to meet the Massachusetts Stormwater Management Standards as set forth in Part B of this section and DEP Stormwater Management Handbook Volumes I and II. The Stormwater Management Plan shall fully describe the project in drawings, and narrative. 
B. The Plan shall include: 
1.
 A locus map, 

2.
 The existing zoning, and land use at the site, 

3.
 The proposed land use, 

4.
 The location(s) of existing and proposed easements, 

5.
 The location of existing and proposed utilities, 

6.
 The site's existing and proposed topography with contours at 2 foot intervals, 

7.
 The existing site hydrology, 

8.
 A description and delineation of existing stormwater conveyances, impoundments, and wetlands on or adjacent to the site or into which stormwater flows, 

9.
 A delineation of 100-year flood plains, if applicable, 

10.
 Estimated seasonal high groundwater elevation (November to April) in areas to be used for stormwater retention, detention, or infiltration, 

11.
 The existing and proposed vegetation and ground surfaces with runoff coefficient for each, 

12.
 A drainage area map showing pre-construction and post-construction watershed boundaries, drainage area and stormwater flow paths, 

13.
 A description and drawings of all components of the proposed drainage system including: 

a.
 locations, cross sections, and profiles of all brooks, streams, drainage swales and their method of stabilization, 

b.
 all measures for the detention, retention or infiltration of water, 

c.
 all measures for the protection of water quality, 

d.
 the structural details for all components of the proposed drainage systems and stormwater management facilities, 

e.
 notes on drawings specifying materials to be used, construction specifications and 

f.
 expected hydrology with supporting calculations. 



14.
 Proposed improvements including location of buildings or other structures, impervious surfaces, and drainage facilities, if applicable, 

15.
 Timing, schedules, and sequence of development including clearing, stripping, rough grading, construction, final grading, and vegetative stabilization, 

16.
 A maintenance schedule for the period of construction, and 

17.
 Any other information requested by the Planning Board. 


C. Standards 
Projects shall meet the Standards of the Massachusetts Stormwater Management Policy, which are as follows: 
1.
 No new stormwater conveyances (e.g. outfalls) may discharge untreated stormwater directly to or cause erosion in wetlands or water of the Commonwealth. 

2.
 Stormwater management systems must be designed so that post-development peak discharge rates do not exceed pre-development peak discharge rates. 

3. 
Loss of annual recharge to groundwater should be minimized through the use of infiltration measures to the maximum extent practicable. The annual recharge from the post-development site should approximate the annual recharge rate from the pre-development or existing site conditions, based on soil types. 

4.
 For new development, stormwater management systems must be designed to remove 80% of the average annual load (post development conditions) of Total Suspended Solids (TSS). It is presumed that this standard is met when: 

a.
 suitable nonstructural practices for source control and pollution prevention are implemented; 

b.
 stormwater management best management practices (BMPs) are sized to capture the prescribed runoff volume; and 

c.
 stormwater management BMPs are maintained as designed. 



5.
 Stormwater discharges from areas with higher potential pollutant loads require the use of specific stormwater management BMPs (see Stormwater Management Volume I: Stormwater Policy Handbook). The use of infiltration practices without pretreatment is prohibited. 

6.
 Stormwater discharges to critical areas must utilize certain stormwater management BMPs approved for critical areas (see Stormwater Management Volume I: Stormwater Policy Handbook). Critical areas are Outstanding Resource Waters (ORWs), swimming beaches, cold water fisheries and recharge areas for public water supplies. 

7.
 Redevelopment of previously developed sites must meet the Stormwater Management Standards to the maximum extent practicable. However, if it is not practicable to meet all the Standards, new (retrofitted or expanded) stormwater management systems must be designed to improve existing conditions. 

8.
 Erosion and sediment controls must be implemented to prevent impacts during disturbance and construction activities. 

9. 
All stormwater management systems must have an Operation and Maintenance Plan to ensure that systems function as designed. 

10.
 Appropriate stormwater management controls shall be in place and operative throughout the construction phase of the project. 


When one or more of the Standards cannot be met, an applicant may demonstrate that an equivalent level of environmental protection will be provided. 
D. Reporting Requirements 
The applicant shall prepare and submit semi-annual reports to the Planning Board for the first two (2) years after issuance of the Certificate of Completion, and annual reports thereafter demonstrating compliance with the terms and conditions of the special permit received from the Planning Board. 
6.15.8 Operation and Maintenance Plans 
A. An Operation and Maintenance Plan (O&M Plan) is required at the time of application for all projects. The O&M Plan shall be designed to ensure that compliance with the Permit, this By-Law and the Massachusetts Surface Water Quality Standards, 314 CMR 4.00 are met in all seasons and throughout the life of the system. The Planning Board shall make the final decision of what maintenance option is appropriate in a given situation. The Planning Board will consider natural features, proximity of site to water bodies and wetlands, extent of impervious surfaces, size of the site, the types of stormwater management structures, and potential need for ongoing maintenance activities when making this decision. The O&M Plan shall remain on file with the Planning Board and shall be an ongoing requirement. The O&M Plan shall include: 
1.
 The name(s) of the owner(s) for all components of the system. 

2.
 Maintenance agreements that specify: 

a.
 The names and addresses of the person(s) responsible for operation and maintenance; 

b.
 The person(s) responsible for financing maintenance and emergency repairs; 

c.
 A Maintenance Schedule for all drainage structures, including swales and ponds; 

d.
 A list of easements with the purpose and location of each; and 

e.
 The signature(s) of the owner(s). 



3.
 Stormwater Management Easement(s): 


a. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property 
owner(s) as necessary for: (i). access for facility inspections and maintenance, 
(ii) preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and detention areas and facilities, including flood routes for the 100­year storm event, and 
(iii) direct maintenance access by heavy equipment to structures requiring regular cleanout. 
b.
 The purpose of each easement shall be specified in the maintenance agreement signed by the property owner(s). 

c.
 Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the Planning Board. 

d.
 Easements shall be recorded with the Essex County South Registry of Deeds prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completion by the Planning Board. 


4. Changes to Operation and Maintenance Plans 
a.
 The owner(s) of the stormwater management system must notify the Planning Board of changes in ownership or assignment of financial responsibility. 

b.
 The maintenance schedule in the Maintenance Agreement may be amended to achieve the purposes of this by-law by mutual agreement of the Planning Board and the Responsible Parties. Amendments must be in writing and signed by all Responsible Parties. Responsible Parties shall 


include owner(s), persons with financial responsibility, and persons with operational responsibility. 
6.15.9 Surety 
The Planning Board may require the permittee to post before the start of land disturbance or construction activity, a surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, cash, or other acceptable security. The bond shall be in an amount deemed sufficient by the Planning Board to ensure that the work will be completed in accordance with the permit. If the project is phased, the Planning Board may release part of the bond as each phase is completed in compliance with the permit but the bond may not be fully released until the Board has received the final inspection report as required below and issued a Certificate of Completion.  Where the applicant is simultaneously seeking approval from the Planning Board pursuant to the Subdivision Control Law, the performance bond provisions of G.L. c.41 s.81-U shall supersede the requirements of Section 6.15.9 provided that in the opinion of the Planning Board the performance bond so executed includes sufficient protections to the Town for work to be completed pursuant to this Section 6.15. 
6.15.10 Inspections 
The Planning Board shall cause the project site to be inspected by its representative at the following stages: 
1. 
Initial Site Inspection: prior to approval of any plan. 

2.
 Erosion Control Inspection: to ensure erosion control practices are in accord with the filed plan. 

3.
 Bury Inspection: prior to backfilling of any underground drainage or stormwater conveyance structures. 

4.
 Final Inspection: After the stormwater management system has been constructed and before the surety has been released, the applicant must submit a record plan detailing the actual stormwater management system as installed. The Planning Board shall cause the system to be inspected by its representative to confirm its "as-built" features. This inspection shall also evaluate the effectiveness of the system in an actual storm. If the inspection finds the system to be adequate, the Planning Board shall issue a Certificate of Completion. 


If the system is found to be inadequate by virtue of physical evidence or operational failure, even though it was built as called for in the Stormwater Management Plan, it shall be corrected by the permittee before the performance guarantee is released. If the permittee fails to act the Town may use the surety bond to complete the work. 
6.15.11 Certificate of completion 
The Planning Board will issue a letter certifying completion upon receipt and approval of the final inspection reports and/or upon otherwise determining that all work of the special permit has been satisfactorily completed in conformance with the special permit and this Section 6.15. 
6.15.12 Severability 
If any provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this By-law shall be held invalid for any reason, all other provisions shall continue in full force and effect. 
6.16 Topographical Changes and Land Clearing Special Permit [Residential Districts]  [Added 2007] 
6.16.1 Purpose: 
It is intended to encourage the conservation of open space, and the general topographical layout of the land, promote less land clearing, grading and excavation especially in rocky, hilly terrain, preserve existing wetlands, recharge areas, rivers, streams, marshes, historic  sites, unique geological and botanical areas or features, trails, paths and open-space links, specimen trees, wildlife habitat and contiguous forested areas, and preserve natural vegetative buffer zones abutting neighboring parcels. The object is to enhance the quality of life for the residents of the lot, the immediate neighborhood, and the Town generally, and to discourage unnecessary or excessive removal of rock. It is intended that the site plan will be prepared with due consideration for the foregoing and for protection of adjacent areas against detrimental or offensive uses on the site by provisions for adequate surface water drainage, buffers against lighting, sight, sound, dust, vibration, and the allowance of sun, light and air. 
6.16.2 Applicability: 
6.16.2(a)  Definitions (for purposes of this Section 6.16): 
Each lot within the Single Residence Districts A, B, C, and E, and Residence District D, 
consists of two parts.  One part [the “Setback Area”] is that portion of the lot from its 
exterior boundaries to the lines delimiting its minimum front, side and rear building 

setbacks as prescribed by Section 5.4.  The other part [the “Interior Area”] is the rest of 
the lot. That portion of the Setback Area of a lot between the lines delimiting its minimum side building setbacks from its front exterior boundaries to the line delimiting 
its minimum front building setback, all as so prescribed, is the “Central Front Setback Area”; and the remaining portion of the Setback Area is the “Side/Rear Setback Area”. 
“Green Activities” means planting, trimming, harvesting, additions, subtractions or other 
changes of, in or to the trees, shrubs, grass, plants, vegetation or other non-nuisance agricultural, horticultural, floricultural or silvicultural products. Without limitation of the 
generality of the foregoing, “Green Activities” include the annual addition of up to 
twelve (12) inches of soil or other material to any area. 
“Ledge” means a boulder or rock formation, whether or not cracked or broken into contiguous pieces, (1) which has a volume of three (3) or more cubic yards, or (2) the removal of all or any part of which, in the opinion of the Building Inspector or as proposed by the lot owner, normally would involve either blasting or hoe-ramming. Such Ledge is an exposed ledge if its uncovered surface area is fifty (50) or more square feet. 
“Authorized Structures/Drives Activities” means construction, maintenance or other 
changes (A) within the layout of any street, or sidelines of any easement for any common driveway on which the lot has frontage, or (B) under the Subdivision Rules and Regulations or this Zoning By-Law within the footprint of buildings and other structures, and sidelines of driveways and turnarounds, authorized (with specific reference to any ledge removal permitted) by either the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Appeals or 
(C) within the footprint of a residential building, provided that any excavation does not exceed a depth of fifteen (15)feet from the pre-construction grade and is authorized by a building permit issued by the Building Inspector. 
“Septic Activities” means construction, maintenance or other changes in a septic system 
authorized (with specific reference to any ledge removal permitted) after a public hearing by the Board of Health. 
“Utilities Activities” means construction, maintenance or other changes in water, gas, 
sewer, electric, telephone, cable and other utilities installed underground within one or 
more trenches each not exceeding 4 feet in width (the number and location of such 
trenches to be as determined by the Planning Board under the Subdivision Rules and 
Regulations, otherwise by the Building Inspector) extending (a) from the front exterior 
boundary of the lot through the Center Front Setback Area to structures within the 
Interior Area, and/or (b) between structures within the lot. 

6.16.2(b)  General: 

As described in this Section 6.16.2, and except for certain de minimus or excluded 
activities, a special permit is required from the Planning Board for certain ledge removal 
and/or other topographical changes or disturbances within the Setback Area or (different 
criteria) the Interior Area of a lot in the residential zoning districts [Single Residence 
Districts A, B, C, and E, and Residence District D]. 

6.16.2(c)  Exclusions: 
No such special permit under this Section 6.12 is required for any or all of the following 

(collectively, the “Excluded Activities”): 
(i)
   Authorized Structures/Drives Activities; and/or 

(ii) 
Septic Activities; and/or 


(iii) Utilities Activities; and/or (iv)  Green Activities. 
6.16.2(d)  Setback Area Special Permits: 
Topographical changes (other than Excluded Activities) within the Setback Area for any 
lot in Single Residence Districts A, B, C, and E, and in Residence District D, may not be 
made without a special permit from the Planning Board if such changes: 

(1) 
Involve within the Setback Area removal of either any portion of any pre­construction exposed ledges or more than 5 feet vertically or horizontally of other ledges; and/or 

(2) 
Result in a change in elevation (from the pre-construction elevation) of more than 5 feet at any point (otherwise than within the footprint of any structure) within the Setback Area; and/or 

(3) 
Result in the excavation, deposit or removal of more than 20 cubic yards of earth, clay, sand, gravel and rock within the Setback Area, whether or not any such material so excavated, deposited or removed is relocated elsewhere either within the Setback Area or the lot; and/or 

(4) 
Disturb more than 10% of the Setback Area. 


6.16.2(e)  Interior Area Special Permits: Topographical changes (other than Excluded Activities) within the Interior Area for any lot in Single Residence Districts A, B, C, and E, and in Residence District D, may not be made without a special permit from the Planning Board (in addition to any Earth Removal Permit which may be required under Article XII of the Town’s General By-Law) if such changes: 
(1) 
Involve within the Interior Area removal of any portion of any pre­construction exposed ledges; and/or 

(2) 
Result in a change in elevation (from the pre-construction elevation) of more than 10 feet at any point (otherwise than within the footprint of any structure) within the Interior Area; and/or 

(3) 
Result in the excavation, deposit or removal of more than 100 cubic yards of earth, clay, sand, gravel and rock within the Interior Area, whether or not any such material so excavated, deposited or removed is relocated elsewhere either within the Interior Area or the lot; and/or 

(4) 
Disturb more than 30% of the Interior Area. 


6.16.3 Procedure: Special Permits under this Section 6.16 shall be granted only if the Planning Board finds that it is consistent with the purpose and intent outlined in Section 6.16.1 of this By-Law and in conformance with this Section 6.16 generally and Section 7.5 of the Manchester-by-the-Sea Zoning By-Law and the requirements of MGL Chapter 40A, Section 9.  Each application shall be in the form and number of copies prescribed by the Planning Board, and shall be filed [each with a site plan as proposed for the lot] with the Planning Board by submission to the Town Clerk, together with such filing fee as the Planning Board shall determine.  Applicants are encouraged to discuss their proposals informally with the Planning Board prior to filing. 
6.16.4 Application Requirements: Plans subject to Special Permit approval under this Section 6.16 shall be prepared by a Registered Architect, Landscape Architect, or Professional Engineer.   The lot identification shall include its Assessors Map and Lot numbers.  The site plan for the lot shall be prepared at a scale no greater than 1"=40', and shall show (except as otherwise prescribed or waived by the Planning Board) all existing and proposed contour elevations (at two (2) foot contour line intervals), structures, parking spaces, driveway openings, service areas, facilities for sewage, refuse and other waste disposal and for surface water drainage, wetlands, vernal pools, streams, ponds and other surface water, areas subject to the 100-year flood, and landscape features such as exposed ledges, fences, walls, trees (having a diameter, 4 1/2 feet from the ground, exceeding 6 inches), planting areas, walks and lighting, both existing and proposed.  The site plan also shall show the relation of locus map at a scale not greater than 1”=2,000'.   The site plan also shall show all contiguous land owned by the applicant or by the owner of the property, and shall identify all abutters, by name and Assessors Map and Lot numbers.  The applicant shall submit such material as may be required by the Planning Board regarding measures proposed to prevent pollution of surface or ground water, soil erosion, increased runoff, changes in groundwater level, and flooding, and regarding design features intended to integrate the proposal into the existing landscape, to preserve the same, to enhance aesthetic, and to screen objectionable features from neighbors. 
6.16.5 	Expenses Incurred: Expenses incurred by the Planning Board in connection with an application under this Section 6.16, including the reasonable fees and expenses of any consultants retained by the Planning Board, shall be paid by the applicant for such Special Permit. 
6.17 WIND ENERGY CONVERSION FACILITIES [ADOPTED 2011] 
6.17.1 	PURPOSE It is the express purpose of this Section to permit distributed generation, wind energy conversion facilities in the Limited Commercial District (LCD), while addressing any adverse visual, safety and environmental impacts of the facilities.  The intent of this Section is to enable the review of wind energy conversion facilities and wind monitoring or meteorological towers by the Planning Board in keeping with the Town’s existing By-Law.  Pursuant to G.L. c.40A, s.9, the Planning Board is hereby designated as the special permit granting authority for wind energy conversion facilities. 
6.17.2 DEFINITIONS Distributed Generation: Energy generation that is located at or near the end-user. 
Height: The height of a wind turbine measured from grade elevation at the base of the tower to the elevation at the tip of the blade at its highest point. Nacelle: The frame and housing at the top of the tower that encloses the gearbox and generator and protects them from the weather. Rotor: The blades and hub of the wind turbine that rotate during turbine operation. Wind Energy Conversion Facility (WECF): All equipment, machinery and structures utilized in connection with the conversion of wind to electricity.  This includes, but is not limited to, all transmission, storage, collection and supply equipment, substations, transformers, site access, service roads and machinery associated with the use. Wind Monitoring or Meteorological Test Tower (Met Tower): A temporarily installed tower used for supporting anemometer, wind vane and other equipment to assess the wind resource at a predetermined height above the ground. Wind Turbine: A device that converts kinetic energy of the wind into rotational energy to turn an electrical generator shaft.  A wind turbine typically consists of a rotor, nacelle and supporting tower. 
6.17.3 DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
6.17.3.1 Use Regulations: WECF, Wind Monitoring and Meteorological Towers. WECFs under these Sections 6.17 and 4.4 shall be allowed only in the LCD, and then only upon issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board in accordance with the requirements of the Zoning By-law, including those requirements set forth in Sections 5.7, 5.10, and 7.5, irrespective of whether the use is a principal or accessory use.  Met Towers shall be permitted in the LCD, subject to the issuance of a special permit in conformance with the Zoning By-law and a building permit for a temporary structure. 
6.17.3.2 Site Control At the time of application for a special permit, the applicant shall submit documentation of the legal right to install and use the proposed WECF on the subject lot.  Documentation must list all lot owners and any encumbrances on the land that may affect the proposed use, and must demonstrate and act upon the applicant's sufficient legal authority to prevent the building of any structure unrelated to the WECF within the WECF’s  required set-backs. 
6.17.3.3 Dimensional Requirements WECF and Met Towers shall be subject to the following dimensional requirements: 
6.17.3.3.1 Height A WECF shall be no higher than four hundred fifty (450) feet above the elevation at its base. 
6.17.3.3.2 Setback Each free-standing WECF and Met Tower shall be set back from property lines, any structures permitting human occupancy, and roadways, excepting the access roadway, by at least one and one-half times the height of the WECF, and from any residential property lines, including those in abutting towns, by at least thirteen hundred (1300) feet. 
6.17.4 SPECIAL PERMIT REGULATIONS The Planning Board shall grant a special permit only if it finds that the proposal complies with the provisions of this Section 6.17 and with Section 7.5 of the Zoning By-Law. 
6.17.4.1 General WECFs and Met Towers shall be consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable electrical, construction, noise, safety, environmental and communications requirements and the requirements of the relevant utility to which the WECF will be connected. 
6.17.4.2 Design Standards 
6.17.4.2.1Visual Impact The applicant shall demonstrate through project siting and proposed mitigation that the WECF or Met Tower minimizes impact on the visual character of surrounding neighborhoods and the community.  This may include, but not be limited to, information regarding site selection, turbine design, buffering, lighting and cable layout.  The Planning Board shall select between three (3) and six (6) sight lines, including from the nearest building with a view of the WECF, for pre-and post-construction view representations.  Sites for the view representations shall be selected from populated areas or public ways within a two (2) mile radius of the WECF. View representations shall have the following characteristics: a) View representations shall be in color and shall include actual pre­construction photographs and accurate post-construction simulations of the height and breadth of the WECF (e.g. superimpositions of the WECF onto photographs of existing views). b) View representations shall include existing and proposed buildings and tree coverage. c) View representations shall include a description of the technical procedures followed in producing the visualization, including without limitation, distances, angles, lenses, etc. d) Within thirty (30) days of the date of application for the special permit, the applicant shall provide a balloon or crane test at the proposed site, or alternate test approved by the Planning Board, to demonstrate the height of the proposed WECF.  The date, time and alternate date if needed due to weather, shall be announced in a newspaper having local circulation for the two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the test.  Said announcement shall also be sent to all parties receiving notification of the Special Permit application at the applicant's expense. 
6.17.4.2.2 Color 
WECFs shall be white. 

6.17.4.2.3 Equipment Shelters All equipment necessary for monitoring and operation of the WECF should preferably be contained within the turbine tower.  If this is infeasible, ancillary equipment may be located outside the tower, provided it is contained either within an underground vault, or enclosed within a separate structure or secured fence. 
6.17.4.2.4 Lighting and Signage a) Wind turbines shall be lighted only as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other federal, state or county agency or 
authority.  The applicant shall provide a copy of said authority’s 
determination to establish the required markings and/or lights for the structure. b) Lighting of equipment structures and any other facilities on site (except lighting required by said authority) shall be shielded from abutting properties. c) Signs on the WECF shall be limited to those needed to identify the property and the owner, WECF manufacturer and model number, to warn of any dangers, and educational signs. d) All signs shall comply with the requirements of the Zoning By-Law. 
6.17.4.3 Environmental Standards 
6.17.4.3.1 Land Clearing/Open Space/Animal Species WECFs and Met Towers shall be designed to minimize land clearing and fragmentation of open space areas and shall avoid impact on permanently protected open space when feasible.  WECFs should be sited to make use of previously disturbed and/or developed areas wherever possible.  WECFs and Met Towers shall also be located in a manner that does not have significant negative impacts on animal species in the vicinity (particularly avian species, bats, etc.). 
6.17.4.3.2 Storm Water Storm water run-off and erosion control shall be managed in a manner consistent with all applicable state and local regulations and the terms and conditions as imposed by the Planning Board. 
6.17.4.3.3 Noise The WECF and associated equipment shall conform to Massachusetts noise regulations (310 CMR 7.10) and IEC61400-14 as revised from time to time.  An analysis, prepared by a qualified engineer, shall be presented to demonstrate compliance with these noise standards and be consistent with Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection guidance for noise measurement. Notwithstanding the provisions of 310 CMR 7.10, the Planning Board may impose any reasonable limitation on noise generated by the WECF. 
6.17.4.3.4 Shadowing/Flicker WECFs shall be sited in a manner that does not result in significant shadowing or flicker impacts, in the sole opinion of the Planning Board. 
6.17.5 INTERFERENCE WITH EXISTING SERVICES WECFs may not interfere with radar, airport communications and guidance systems, point-to-point radio communication links, and other radio communications systems. 
6.17.6 MODIFICATIONS Any modifications to a WECF made after issuance of the Special Permit shall require approval by the Planning Board pursuant to the Zoning By-Law and G.L. c.40A, s.9. 
6.17.7 MONITORING AND MAINTENANCE 
6.17.7.1 The applicant shall maintain the WECF in good condition and shall schedule inspections by a competent professional at least once every twelve (12) months or more often, pursuant to industry standards and practice.  The results of the inspection and any resulting repair work shall be submitted to the Planning Board and the Building Inspector within thirty (30) days of the receipt of results of such evaluation by the applicant or WECF owner.  Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, required scheduled and unscheduled inspection, maintenance of all turbine components, including the structural integrity of the foundation, repair, painting, and maintenance of all equipment and support structures and security barriers, access, and landscaping. 
6.17.7.2 The applicant shall provide to the Planning Board and the Building Inspector addresses, telephone numbers and any other necessary contact information for the special permit holder, each property owner, and each WECF owner. Notice shall be provided to the Planning Board and the Building Inspector of any change in this information. 
6.17.8 DISCONTINUATION OF USE 
6.17.8.1 At such time that a WECF or Met Tower is scheduled to be discontinued, the applicant will notify the Planning Board and the Building Inspector  by certified 
U.S. mail of the proposed date of discontinuation of operations and the plans for removal of the WECF, unless caused by force majeure. The WECF shall be considered discontinued if the WECF is not in operation for one hundred eighty 
(180) consecutive days, or has reached the end of its useful life.  In the case of a two (2)-turbine WECF, the Planning Board shall stipulate in its special permit decision how this requirement shall apply in the event that only a portion of the entire WECF is out of operation for the 180-day period. 
Upon request, the permit holder shall provide evidence to the Building Inspector demonstrating continued use of the WECF or Met Tower.  Failure to provide such evidence within thirty (30) days of a written request from the Building Inspector, addressed to the contact address provided and maintained by the permit holder as required herein, shall be conclusive evidence that such WECF or Met Tower has been discontinued.  Upon a finding of discontinuance, the Building Inspector shall issue a Notice of Discontinuance to the permit holder and to the owner of the site by certified mail, delivery receipt requested. 
6.17.8.2 Upon receipt of a Notice of Discontinuance from the Building Inspector, the owner shall physically remove the WECF or Met Tower within ninety (90) days. This period may be extended at the request of the operator and at the discretion of the Planning Board.  “Physically Remove” shall include, but not be limited to: a) Removal of the wind turbine and tower, all machinery, equipment, equipment shelters, security barriers and all appurtenant structures from the subject property; b) Proper disposal of all solid or hazardous materials and wastes from the site in accordance with local and state solid waste disposal regulations; and c) Restoration of the location of the WECF or Met Tower to its natural condition, except that any landscaping or grading may remain in the after-condition. All visible foundations to be removed to two (2) feet below grade in the vicinity of the structure. 
6.17.8.3 As a condition of the issuance of a special permit the Planning Board shall require the applicant to provide a form of surety (i.e., a bond, escrow account or other form of security satisfactory to the Planning Board) to the Town prior to commencing construction of the WECF, to cover costs of the removal in the event the permit holder does not remove the WECF as required.  The amount of such surety shall be equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the cost of removal in compliance with Section 6.17.8.2.  The applicant shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal, prepared by a qualified engineer.  The permit holder shall adjust the total amount of security every five 
(5) years as necessary to ensure that it reflects current estimated removal costs plus twenty-five (25) percent contingency. 
6.17.9 TERM OF SPECIAL PERMIT A special permit issued for any WECF shall be valid for twenty (20) years. Upon application the Planning Board may extend the term of the special permit upon a finding of satisfactory operation of the WECF.  Upon the expiration of the special permit the WECF shall be removed by the applicant as per Section 6.17.8.2. 
6.17.10 APPLICATION PROCEDURES 
6.17.10.1 Pre-Application Conference Prior to the submission of an application for a special permit under this By-Law, the applicant is strongly encouraged to meet with the Planning Board at a public meeting to discuss the proposed WECF in general terms and to clarify the filing requirements.  The Planning Board shall meet with an applicant under this regulation within twenty-one (21) days or at the next scheduled meeting, following a written request submitted to the Planning Board. 
6.17.10.2 Pre-Application Filing Requirements The purpose of this conference is to inform the Planning Board as to the nature of the proposed WECF. As such, no formal findings are required for the pre­application conference.  However, the applicant is encouraged to prepare sufficient preliminary architectural and/or engineering drawings to inform the Planning Board of the location of the proposed WECF, as well as its scale and overall design. 
6.17.10.3 Professional Fees Pursuant to Section 7.9, the Planning Board may retain technical experts, consultants and legal counsel to verify information presented by the applicant and provide the Planning Board with guidance on reviewing and approving or denying the application.  The cost for such a technical expert or consultant will be at the expense of the applicant. 
6.17.10.4 Application Filing Requirements The filing requirements of Section 6.9.5 of the Zoning By-Law shall apply to applications for a special permit for a WECF.  In addition, the Planning Board may require the submission of any or all of the materials included in Sections 
6.17.10.4.1 through 6.17.10.4.3.4, below. 
6.17.10.4.1 General Filing Requirements a) Name, address, telephone number and original signature (photo­reproductions of signatures or digital signatures will not be accepted) of applicant 
and any co-applicants.  Co-applicants shall include the landowner of the subject 
property and the operator of the WECF. 
b) If the applicant or co-applicant will be represented by an agent, the name, 
address and telephone shall be provided as well as original signature authorizing 
the agent to represent the applicant and/or co-applicant.  Photo-reproductions of 
signatures or digital signatures will not be accepted. 
c)  Documentation of the legal right to install and use the proposed WECF and 
proof of control over the site and required setback area. 

6.17.10.4.2 Location Filing Requirements a) Assessor’s map and lot number of subject property; b) Zoning district designation for the subject parcel; c) Locus Map to scale showing the lot lines of the subject property and all properties within thirteen hundred (1300) feet of the property lines, as well as the location of all buildings, including accessory structures, on all properties shown. 
6.17.10.4.3 Siting and Design Filing Requirements 
6.17.10.4.3.1 Vicinity and Site Plan a) Property lines for the subject property and all properties adjacent to the subject property within thirteen hundred (1300) feet; b) Indication of use of all existing buildings and accessory structures on subject property and all adjacent properties within thirteen hundred (1300) feet.  Distances, at grade, from the proposed WECF to each building on the site plan shall be shown; c) Proposed location of WECF, including all turbines, fencing, associated ground equipment, transmission infrastructure and access roads.   Including: i) Location of all roads, driveways and parking areas, public and private, on the subject property and on all adjacent properties within thirteen hundred (1300) feet including driveways proposed to serve the WECF; ii) All proposed changes to the existing property, including grading, vegetation removal or replacement and temporary or permanent roads and driveways; iii) Representations, dimensioned and to scale, of the proposed WECF, including power cable locations, parking areas and any other construction or development attendant to the WECF. d) Tree cover and average height of trees on the subject property and adjacent properties within three hundred (300) feet; e) Contours at each two (2) feet Above Mean Sea Level (AMSL) for 
the subject property and adjacent properties within three hundred (300) feet; f) Representation of location of viewpoint for the sight-line diagram referenced below. 
6.17.10.4.3.2 Elevations Siting elevations or views at grade from the north, south, east and west at a sufficient radius to include all permanent structures around the proposed WECF shall be provided to the Planning Board. Elevations shall be at either one-quarter (1/4) inch equals one (1) foot or one-tenth (1/10) inch equals one (1) foot scale and show the following: a) The WECF and if applicable the security barrier and associated equipment, with total elevation dimensions of all parts of the WECF; b) Security barrier.  If the security barrier will block views of the WECF, the barrier drawing shall be cut away to show the view behind the barrier. c) Any and all structures on the subject property; d) Existing trees and shrubs at current height and proposed trees and shrubs at proposed height at time of installation, with approximate elevations dimensioned; and 
e) Grade changes or cuts and fills, to be shown as original grade and new grade line, with two (2) foot contours AMSL. 
6.17.10.4.3.3 Materials a) Specifications for the proposed WECF or Met Tower shall be provided for all equipment and attendant facilities. b) Materials of the proposed WECF shall be specified by type, treatment, and color to include the wind turbine tower and all other proposed equipment and facilities. 
6.17.10.4.3.4 Landscape Plan A landscape plan including existing trees and shrubs and those proposed 
to be added or removed, identified by size of specimen at installation and species. 
6.17.10.5 Emergency Services The applicant shall provide a description of any WECF fire protection system and a copy of the project summary, an electrical schematic, and plot or site plan to the local emergency services designated by the Planning Board. The applicant shall cooperate with local emergency services in developing an emergency response plan. All means of disconnecting the WECF shall be clearly indicated on the materials provided, and marked on each wind turbine. The applicant or WECF owner shall maintain a phone number and identify a responsible person for the public and Building Inspector to contact throughout the life of the WECF. 
6.17.11 SPECIAL PERMIT FILING The Special Permit shall not be effective until filed with the Registry of Deeds. 
6.18 Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations [Adopted 2013] 
6.18.1 Purpose 
The purpose of this by-law is to authorize and regulate large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations by providing standards for the placement, design, construction, operation, monitoring, modification and removal of such installations such that these standards address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources and provide adequate financial assurance for the eventual decommissioning of such installations. 
6.18.1.1 Applicability 
This By-Law applies to large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations, as defined herein, proposed to be constructed after the effective date of this By-Law. This By-Law also pertains to physical modifications that materially alter the type, configuration, or size of these installations or related equipment. Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations, as defined herein, shall be allowed by right in the Limited Commercial Zoning District as that district is defined by the Zoning By-Law. 
Smaller scale ground or building-mounted solar photovoltaic installations which are accessory to a lawful principal use on the same lot are not otherwise subject to the requirements of this by-law, but must comply with the other provisions of the Zoning By-Law, as applicable.  
6.18.2 Definitions 
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation (LGSPI): A solar photovoltaic system that is structurally mounted on the ground and is not roof-mounted, and has a minimum nameplate capacity of 250 kW DC.   
Rated Nameplate Capacity: The maximum rated output of electric power production of the Photovoltaic system in Direct Current (DC). 
Site Plan Approval Authority (SPAA): The site plan review authority as designated by the Zoning By-law. 
Zoning By-Law: The Manchester Zoning By-Law. 
6.18.3 General Requirements for all As-of-Right Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations (LGSPI) 
6.18.3.1 Compliance with Laws, Ordinances and Regulations The construction and operation of LGSPI shall be consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable safety, environmental, Wetlands Protection Act, construction, electrical, and communications requirements. All buildings and fixtures forming part of a solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed in accordance with the State and/or Local Building Code. 
No LGSPI shall be constructed, installed or modified without a building permit. 
6.18.3.3 Site Plan Approval Required LGSPI shall be constructed, installed, used and modified in conformity with a site plan approved by the SPAA in accordance with Section 6.5 of the Zoning By-Law and the further requirements set forth herein. The requirements set forth herein shall be applied coincident with and in addition to those requirements set forth in Section 6.5. The requirements of this section shall take precedence in the event of a direct conflict. 
6.18.3.3.1General All plans and maps shall be prepared, stamped and signed by a Professional Engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.  
6.18.3.3.2 Required Documents Pursuant to the site plan review process, the project proponent shall provide the following documents: 
(a) 	
A site plan showing: 

i. 	
Property lines and physical features, including structures and roads, for the project site; 


ii. 	Proposed changes to the landscape of the site, grading, vegetation clearing and planting, exterior lighting, screening vegetation or structures; 
iii. 	Blueprints or drawings of the solar photovoltaic installation signed by a Professional Engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts showing the proposed layout of the system and any potential 
shading from nearby structures; 
iv. 	
One or three line electrical diagram detailing the solar photovoltaic installation, associated components, and electrical interconnection methods, with all current National Electrical Code compliant disconnects and over current devices; 

v. 	
Documentation of the major system components to be used, including the photovoltaic panels, mounting system, and inverter; 


vi. 	Name, address, and contact information for proposed system installer; 
vii. Name, address, phone number and signature of the project proponent, as well as all co-proponents or property owners, if any; 
viii.The name, contact information and signature of any agents representing the 
project proponent; 

ix. 	How land clearing and construction shall be performed in accordance with 
Sections 5.10 and 6.15 of the Zoning By-Law governing storm water 
discharge, land disturbance, provision for handling toxic or hazardous 
materials, and post-construction storm water runoff; 

(b) 
Documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the project site 
(see also Section 6.18.3.4); 


(c) 
An operation and maintenance plan (see also Section 6.18.3.4.1); 

(d) 
Zoning district designation for the parcel(s) of land comprising the project 

site (submission of a copy of a zoning map with the parcel(s) identified is 
suitable for this purpose); 


(e) 
Proof of liability insurance written by companies licensed to provide such 
insurance in Massachusetts and with coverage limits at commercially 
acceptable levels; 


(f) 
Description of financial surety that satisfies Section 6.18.3.10.2.The project 
proponent shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with 
removal, prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount shall include a 
mechanism for calculating increased removal costs due to inflation. 


(g) 
Public outreach plan, including a project development timeline, which 
indicates how the project proponent will meet the required site plan approval 
notification procedures and otherwise inform abutters and the community. 



The SPAA may require additional information, data or evidence as it deems necessary pursuant to the site plan approval process, or may waive documentary requirements as it deems appropriate. 
6.18.3.3.3 Professional Review 
TheSPAA may engage, at the applicant’s expense, professional and technical consultants, 
including legal counsel, to assist the SPAAwith its review of the application, in accordance with the requirements of Section 53G of Chapter 44 of the Massachusetts General Laws.  The SPAA may direct the applicant to deposit funds with the SPAA for such review at the time the application is accepted, and to add additional funds as needed upon notice. Failure to comply with this section shall be good grounds for denying the application.  Upon approval of the application, any excess amount in the account attributable to that project, including any interest accrued, shall be repaid to the applicant. 
6.18.3.4 Site Control The project proponent shall submit documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the project site sufficient to allow for construction and operation of the LGSPI. 
6.18.3.4.1 Operation & Maintenance Plan The project proponent shall submit a plan for the operation and maintenance of the LGSPI, which shall include measures for maintaining safe access to the installation, storm water controls, and general procedures for operational maintenance of the installation. 
6.18.3.5 Utility Notification No LGSPI shall be constructed until evidence has been given to the SPAA that the utility company that operates the electrical grid where the installation is to be located has been informed of the LGSPI owner’s or operator’s intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator.  Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement. 
6.18.3.6 Dimension and Density Requirements The LGSPI shall meet the dimensional requirements of the Zoning By-Law, except as set forth below. 
6.18.3.6.1 Setback An LGSPI shall be set back from property lines consistent with the applicable regulations for the Limited Commercial District, with the exception of necessary connection equipment to utility transmission facilities.  
6.18.3.6.2 Accessory Structures All accessory structures to an LGSPI shall be subject to the dimensional requirements of the Zoning By-Law. All such accessory structures, including but not limited to, equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers, substations shall be architecturally compatible with each other and shall be landscaped and screened from view by vegetation, located underground, or behind berms, and/or clustered to minimize visual impacts. 
6.18.3.7 Design Standards 
6.18.3.7.1 Lighting Lighting of an LGSPI shall be consistent with local, state and federal law. Lighting of other parts of the installation, such as accessory structures, shall be limited to that required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties. Lighting of an LGSPI shall be directed downward and shall incorporate full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution. 
6.18.3.7.2 Signage Signs on LGSPI shall comply with the requirements of all applicable sign regulations, and shall be limited to: 
(a) 
Those necessary to identify the owner, provide a 24-hour emergency contact 
phone number, and warn of any danger.  


(b) 
Educational signs providing information about the LGSPI and the benefits of renewable energy. Signs shall be limited to two dimensions (i.e. flat) and shall not be electronic or lighted. 


6.18.3.7.3 Advertising LGSPI shall not be used for displaying any advertising except for identification of the manufacturer or operator of the LGSPI in conformance with section 6.18.3.8.1. 
6.18.3.7.4 Utility Connections Reasonable efforts, as determined by the SPAA, shall be made to place all utility connections from the LGSPI underground, depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape, and topography of the site and any requirements of the utility provider. Electrical transformers for utility interconnections may be above ground if required by the utility provider. 
6.18.3.7.5 Screening A buffer or greenstrip planted with live shrubs or trees, predominantly evergreen, shall if feasible be maintained between the perimeter of the LGSPI and any abutting property line or street unless the existing natural growth is adequate to provide an equivalent buffer. Such a buffer shall be designed so as not to create a hazard upon entrance or exit from the facility. The SPAA may vary or waive this requirement consistent with minimizing negative effects on abutting property. 
6.18.3.8 Safety and Environmental Standards 
6.18.3.8.1 Emergency Services 
The LGSPI owner or operator shall provide a copy of the project summary, electrical 
schematic and approved site plan to the Fire Chief. Upon request the owner and/or operator 
shall cooperate with local emergency services in developing an emergency response plan, 
which may include ensuring that emergency personnel have immediate, 24-hour access to 
the facility.  All means of shutting down the LGSPI shall be clearly marked. 

6.18.3.8.2 Land Clearing 
Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the construction, 
operation and maintenance of the LGSPI or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, 
regulations, and bylaws. 

6.18.3.8.3 Drainage and Groundwater Protection 
An LGSPI shall comply with the requirements set forth in Sections 5.10 and 6.15 of the 
Zoning By-Law, which requirements shall be imposed and conditioned as appropriate 
through the Site Plan Approval process. No LGSPI shall be required to obtain an 
independent special permit under either section.  

6.18.3.9 Monitoring and Maintenance 
6.18.3.9.1 Solar Photovoltaic Installation Conditions The LGSPI owner and/or operator shall maintain the facility in good and safe working condition, and shall schedule inspections by a competent professional at least once every twelve (12) months or more often, pursuant to industry standards and practice. The results of the inspection and any resulting repair work shall be submitted to the SPAA and the Building Inspector within thirty (30) days of receipt by the owner or operator. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable to the Fire Chief and emergency medical services. The owner and operator shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining the LGSPI and any access road(s), unless accepted as a public way. 
6.18.3.9.2 Modifications All material modifications to a LGSPI made after issuance of the required building permit shall require prior approval by the SPAA.   
6.18.3.9.3 Contact The owner and operator of an LGSPI shall each identify a responsible person for emergency purposes and public inquiry and shall at all times throughout the life of the installation maintain current contact information (name, address, telephone number, e-mail address) for such person(s) on file with the Building Inspector, the Fire Chief, and the SPAA. 
6.18.3.10 Discontinuance and Removal 
6.18.3.10.1 Removal Requirements Any LGSPI, or any substantial part thereof, not in operation for a period of one hundred and eighty (180) continuous days or more without written permission from the SPAA, or that has reached the end of its useful life, shall be considered discontinued and shall be removed. Upon written request from the Building Inspector addressed to the contact address provided and maintained by the owner and operator as required above, the owner or operator shall provide evidence to the Building Inspector demonstrating continued use of the LGSPI. Failure to provide such evidence within thirty (30) days of such written request shall be conclusive evidence that the installation has been discontinued. The owner or operator of the installation shall notify the SPAA and Building Inspector by certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for removal. 
The owner or operator shall physically remove the installation no more than ninety (90) 
days after the date of discontinued operations, which period may be extended with written 
permission of the Building Inspector for no more than sixty (60) days.  
Removal shall consist of: 

(a) 
Remove all of the LGSPI in its entirety, including all associated structures, 
equipment, security barriers and transmission lines from the site. 


(b) 
Dispose of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local, state, and 
federal waste disposal regulations. 


(c) 
Stabilize or re-vegetate the site as necessary to minimize erosion. The SPAA 
may allow the owner or operator to leave landscaping or designated 
below-grade foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption to 
vegetation. 


(d) 
Reinstate gravel or ground cover consistent with the surrounding landscape. 

(e) 
Remove all above-ground foundations and supports to a depth of one foot below existing grade. 


If the owner or operator of the LGSPI fails to remove the installation in accordance with the requirements of this section, the Town shall have the right, to the extent it is otherwise duly authorized by law, to enter the property and remove the installation at the expense of the owner of the installation and the owner(s) of the site on which the facility is located. 
6.18.3.10.2 Financial Surety The owner of an LGSPI approved in accordance with this By-Law shall provide to the Town, acting by and through the SPAA, security to cover the cost of removal in the event the Town must remove the LGSPI and remediate the landscape. Such surety shall be in an amount and form determined to be reasonable by the SPAA, which may be an escrow account, bond or otherwise, and shall be provided prior to construction. Surety will not be required for municipal or state-owned facilities. The project proponent shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal, prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount shall include a mechanism for calculating increased removal costs due to inflation. 
6.19 REGULATION OF MARIJUANA BUSINESSES 
6.19.1 Purpose The purposes of this By-Law are: to exercise lawful oversight and regulation of Medical Marijuana Treatment Centers (also known as Registered Marijuana Dispensaries) and Marijuana Establishments, together referred to herein as Marijuana Businesses, consistent with Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012, An Act To Ensure Safe Access to Marijuana, Chapter 55 of the Acts of 2017, all regulations which have or may be issued by the Department of Public Health and/or the Cannabis Control Commission, including, but not limited to 105 CMR 725.00 et seq. and 935 CMR 500.00, et seq., and the Town's regulatory powers; and to limit the siting and operation of Marijuana Businesses to locations appropriate to such use, and to regulate such use through conditions necessary to protect community safety while ensuring legitimate patient access. 
6.19.2 Applicability 
1. 	
The commercial cultivation, production, processing, assembly, packaging, retail or wholesale sale, trade, distribution or dispensing of marijuana is prohibited unless permitted as a Marijuana Business under this By-Law. 

2. 	
No Marijuana Business shall be established except in conformity with this By-Law and all applicable laws and regulations, including such regulations as may be promulgated by the Board of Health; and the requirements of 105 CMR 725.00 et seq. and 935 CMR 500.00, et seq. 

3. 	
Nothing in this By-Law shall be construed to supersede any state or federal laws or regulations governing the sale and distribution of narcotic drugs. 


6.19.3 Definitions 
Where not expressly defined in the Zoning By-law, terms used in this bylaw shall be interpreted as defined in G.L. c.94I and G.L. c.94G and regulations promulgated and/or incorporated thereunder, and otherwise by their plain language. 
Marijuana Business means a Medical Marijuana Treatment Center, Marijuana 
Establishment, or any combination or part thereof. 

Marijuana Establishment: A marijuana cultivator, independent testing laboratory, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer, or any other type of licensed marijuana-related business for the non-medical, including recreational use of marijuana, as set forth in G.L. 94G, and any regulations promulgated thereunder. 
Medical Marijuana Treatment Center as defined by 105 CMR 725.000, et al., as it may be amended or superseded, and pursuant to all other applicable state laws and regulations, means a not-for-profit entity registered under 105 CMR 725.100, otherwise known as a Registered Marijuana Dispensary (RMD), that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes (including development of related products such as edible MIPs, tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments), transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or administers Marijuana, products containing Marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials to registered qualifying patients or their personal caregivers, as those terms are defined under 105 CMR 725.004. Unless otherwise specified, RMD refers to the site(s) of dispensing, cultivation, and preparation of Marijuana. 
Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) pursuant to this By-Law shall be the Planning Board. 
6.19.4 Eligible Locations 
1. Marijuana Businesses may be allowed by Special Permit in the Limited Commercial Zoning District, subject to all requirements of this Zoning By-Law, the requirements of the Board of Health, and applicable state laws and regulations. 
6.19.5 General Requirements and Conditions The following requirements and conditions shall apply to all Marijuana Businesses: 
1. 	All Marijuana Businesses must obtain a special permit from the Planning Board pursuant to the requirements of Section 6.4 (Signs), 6.9 (Site Plan Review Special Permit), Section 7.5 (Special Permits) and the requirements of Section 6.19. The Planning Board may grant a single special permit incorporating the requirements of Sections 6.4, 6.9, 7.5 and 
6.19 for a Marijuana Business. 
2. 	
No Special Permit shall issue without demonstration by the applicant of compliance with all applicable state laws and regulations, and with all local regulations. 

3. 	
No Marijuana Business shall be located within 300 feet of a residential zoning district, or within 500 feet of any lot containing a school, child care facility, or playground. 

4. 	
No smoking, burning or consumption of any product containing Marijuana or Marijuana-infused products shall be permitted on the premises of a Marijuana Business except as may be expressly permitted by law. 

5. 	
No products shall be displayed in the facilities windows or be visible from any street or parking lot. 

6. 	
Signs for all Marijuana Businesses shall, at a minimum, comply with Section 6.4 of the Zoning By-Law, the provisions of 105 CMR 725.105(L) ("Marketing and Advertising Requirements"), the provisions of 935 CMR 500 et seq., and the terms and conditions of the specia1 permit issued pursuant to Section 6.19, et seq. 


6.19.6 Special Permit Requirements A Marijuana Business shall be allowed only by Special Permit in accordance with G.L. 
c. 40A, s. 9; with the requirements of Section 7.5 et seq. of the Zoning By-Law, with the terms and conditions of the special permit issued pursuant to Section 6.19, et seq. and with the additional requirements contained in this Section (6.19.6), below. 
1.Uses. A Special Permit for a Marijuana Business shall be limited to one or more of the uses for which RMD’s and Marijuana Establishments are authorized to engage in by law. 
2. Application. In addition to the application requirements set forth in the rules of the Special Permit Granting Authority, a Special Permit application for a Marijuana Business shall include the following: 
A. 	The name and address of each owner of the establishment and property owner; 
B. 	Copies of all required licenses and permits issued to the applicant by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and any of its agencies for the establishment; 
C. 	Evidence of theapplicant’s right to use the site for the establishment, such as a deed, or lease; 
D. 	Proposed security measures for the Marijuana Business demonstrating compliance with all requirements of 105 CMR 725.110, "Security Requirements for Registered Marijuana Dispensaries," including but not limited to secure storage areas, limited access areas, security and alarm systems compliant with 105 CMR 725.110(D), and the requirements of 935 CMR 500 et seq. A copy of the approved security measures shall be provided to the Police Department. 
The above information may be confidential and exempt from the provisions of 
G.L. c. 66, and as such shall not be part of the public record. 
E. 	As applicable, the Proposed Operations and Maintenance Manual for the Medical Marijuana Treatment Center demonstrating compliance with all requirements of 105 CMR 725.110, "Security Requirements for Registered Marijuana Dispensaries," including but not limited to procedures for limiting access to the facility to persons authorized under 105 CMR 725.110(A); and procedures for transport of Marijuana and/or MIPs as provided under 105 CMR 725.110(E). 
Pursuant to 105 CMR 725.200 (C), the above information may be confidential and exempt from the provisions of G.L. c. 66, and as such shall not be part of the public record. 
3. 	
Hours of Operation. The hours of operation of a Marijuana Business shall be established by the Special Permit Granting Authority. 

4. 	
Term of a Special Permit. Special Permits shall be valid for a period of two (2) years from the effective date of the special permit. 

5. 	
Transferability of a Special Permit. Special Permits may be transferred only with the approval by the Special Permit Granting Authority, in the form of an amendment to the Special Permit, conditioned upon satisfactory submission of all information required for an original Special Permit. 

6. 	
Renewals. A Special Permit may be renewed for successive two (2) year periods provided that a written request for renewal is made to the Special Permit Granting Authority not less than three (3) months prior to the expiration of the then-existing term. Any request for a renewal of a Special Permit shall be subject to publication notice requirements as required for an original application for a Special Permit. Such notice shall state that the renewal request will be granted unless, prior to the expiration of the existing Special Permit, a written objection, stating reasons for such objection, is received by the Special Permit Granting Authority. 


6.1. If any such objection is received, the Special Permit Granting Authority shall hold a public hearing on the renewal request and shall proceed in a manner consistent with the proceedings required for an original application. 
6.2. 	The Special Permit shall remain in effect until the conclusion of the public hearing and decision of the Special Permit Granting Authority either granting or denying the Special Permit renewal request. 
6.3. In granting any renewal, the Special Permit Granting Authority may alter or impose additional conditions, and/or may provide for revocation of the Special Permit if any identified violations of this By-Law or any other applicable regulation are not corrected within a specified time period. 
6.19.7 Severability 
If any provision of this Section or the application of any such provision to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this Section, to the extent it can be given effect, or the application of those provisions to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and to this end the provisions of this Section are severable. [Added 2015] [Amended 2018] 
6.20.1 TEMPORARY MORATORIUM ON RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS 
Section 6.20.1 Purpose 
On November 8, 2016, the voters of the Commonwealth approved a law regulating the cultivation, processing, distribution, possession and use of marijuana for recreational purposes (new G.L. c. 94G, Regulation of the Use and Distribution of Marijuana Not Medically Prescribed).  The law, which allows certain personal use and possession of marijuana, took effect on December 15, 2016 and (as amended on December 30, 2016 by Chapter 351 of the Acts of 2016 and thereafter, on July 28, 2017 by Chapter 55 of the Acts of 2017) requires a Cannabis Control Commission to issue regulations regarding the licensing of commercial activities by March 15, 2018 and to begin accepting applications for licenses no later than April 1, 2018.  Currently under the Zoning Bylaw, a non-medical 
Marijuana Establishment (hereinafter, a “Recreational Marijuana Establishment”), as 
defined in G.L. c. 94G, §1, is not specifically addressed in the Zoning Bylaw. Regulations to be promulgated by the Cannabis Control Commission may provide guidance on certain aspects of local regulation of Recreational Marijuana Establishments.  The regulation of recreational marijuana raises novel legal, planning, and public safety issues, and the Town needs time to study and consider the regulation of Recreational Marijuana Establishments and address such issues, as well as to address the potential impact of the State regulations on local zoning and to undertake a planning process to consider amending the Zoning Bylaw regarding regulation of Recreational Marijuana Establishments.  The Town intends to adopt a temporary moratorium on the use of land and structures in the Town for Recreational Marijuana Establishments so as to allow sufficient time to address the effects of such structures and uses in the Town and to enact bylaws in a consistent manner.  
Section 6.20.2 Definition 
“Recreational Marijuana Establishment” shall mean a “marijuana cultivator, independent 
testing laboratory, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or any other type 
of licensed marijuana-related business.” 
Section 6.20.3 Temporary Moratorium 
For the reasons set forth above and notwithstanding any other provision of the Zoning Bylaw to the contrary, the Town hereby adopts a temporary moratorium on the use of land or structures for a Recreational Marijuana Establishment and other uses related to recreational marijuana.  The moratorium shall be in effect through December 31, 2018 or until such time as the Town adopts Zoning Bylaw amendments that regulate Recreational Marijuana Establishments, whichever occurs earlier. During the moratorium period, the Town shall undertake a planning process to address the potential impacts of recreational marijuana in the Town, and to consider the Cannabis Control Commission regulations regarding Recreational Marijuana Establishments, and shall consider adopting new Zoning Bylaws in response to these new issues. [Added October 2017] 
SECTION 7.0  ADMINISTRATION 
7.1 	Permits/Enforcement The office of the Building Inspector is responsible for the enforcement of this By-Law and the issuance of building permits.  He shall withhold a permit for the construction, alteration or moving of any building or structure if the building or structure as constructed, altered or moved would be in violation of this Zoning By-Law and no permit shall be granted for a new use of a building, structure or land which use would be in violation of this By-Law.  Where a permit or variance may be granted with conditions, such conditions shall be imposed and made part of the record. 
7.2 	Enforcement Request If the Building Inspector is requested in writing to enforce these By-Laws against any person allegedly in violation of same, and the Building Inspector declines to act, he shall notify, in writing, the party requesting such enforcement of any action or refusal to act and the reasons therefor within fourteen (14) days of receipt of such request. 
7.2.1 	Penalties: Any person violating any provision of this By-Law, upon conviction, shall be fined $300 for each offense, and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. [Added 1987; Amended 1989] 
7.3 	Certificate of Occupancy No use or occupation of land for any purpose for which a certificate of occupancy is required shall be made, in whole or in part, until such a certificate has been issued by the Inspector of Buildings stating that the use of land and structure, if any, complies with this By-Law and other applicable codes in effect at the time of issuance. 
7.4 	Board of Appeals 
7.4.1 	Appointment; Organization: The Board of Appeals, also known as the Zoning Board of Appeals, shall consist of five regular members and two associate members appointed by the Board of Selectmen for three year terms.  The regular members shall be appointed such that the term of at least one member shall expire each year. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as appointments.  The Board of Appeals shall elect one of its members as chairman and one of its members as clerk, each to serve for a one year term.  The two associate members shall be appointed such that their terms do not expire the same year. [Amended October 2017] 
7.4.2 	Removal: A member may be removed only for cause by the Board of Selectmen and only after a written statement of the facts on which removal for cause is based has been presented to such member and a public hearing has been held at which the member has been afforded the opportunity to be heard. 
7.4.3 	Jurisdiction: The Board of Appeals of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea is hereby designated as the Zoning Board of Appeals and as the permit granting authority mandated by The Zoning Act.  In addition to the other powers and responsibility granted by other applicable provisions of the General Laws or by this By-Law, the Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals in accordance with Section 7.4.5 of this By-Law, petitions for variances in accordance with Section 10 of The Zoning Act and Section 7.4.6 of this By-Law, and applications for special permits with respect to matters as to which it is designated in this By-Law as the special permit granting authority. 
7.4.4 	Procedure: The Board of Appeals shall be governed by the procedural requirements of The Zoning Act and other applicable provisions of the General Laws.  The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules, not inconsistent with the provisions of this By-Law and The Zoning Act or other applicable provisions of the General Laws, for the conduct of its business and shall file a copy of such rules with the Town Clerk.  Decision on an appeal (Section 7.4.5) or variance (Section 7.4.6) must be made within 100 days of the date of filing.  Failure to make a decision within 100 days shall be deemed to be a grant of the appeal or variance. [amended 2005] 
7.4.5 	Appeals: An appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by any person aggrieved by reason of his inability to obtain a permit or enforcement action from any officer or board of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea under The Zoning Act or this By-Law, by any regional planning agency in whose area the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea is situated, or by any person including an officer or board of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea or of an abutting city or town aggrieved by an order or decision of any officer or board of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea in violation of any provisions of The Zoning Act or of this By-Law. 
7.4.6 	Variance: The Board of Appeals may grant upon appeal or upon petition with respect to particular land or structures a variance from specific requirements of this By-Law only where, after notice and a public hearing, as required by The Zoning Act, the Board of Appeals specifically finds that, owing to circumstances relating to the soil conditions, shape or topography of land or structures, and especially affecting such land or structures but not affecting generally the zoning district in which it is located, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this By-Law would involve substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, and that desirable relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or purpose of this By-Law.  The Board of Appeals may not grant a variance authorizing a use or activity not otherwise permitted in the district in which land or structure is located, except that this limitation shall not apply to land or structures located in the Limited Commercial District or General District.  The Board of Appeals may impose such conditions, safeguards and limitations, both of time and of use, as it deems appropriate upon the grant of any variance, but excluding any condition, safeguards or limitation based upon the continued ownership of the land or structures to which the variance pertains by the applicant, petitioner or any owner.  Any rights authorized by a variance which are not exercised within one year from the date of grant of such variance shall lapse and may be reestablished only after notice and a new hearing pursuant to this Section. 
7.4.6.1 Use Variances -Requirements: No variance authorizing a use or activity not otherwise permitted in the Limited Commercial District shall occur without a written finding by the Board of Appeals that, in addition to the requirements set forth in Section 7.4.6, the specific considerations (1-7) outlined in Section 7.5.2 of the Manchester-by-the-Sea Zoning By-Law have been addressed. [Added 1987] 
7.5 	Special Permits 
7.5.1 	Certain uses are designated in this By-Law as requiring a special permit. A special permit shall not reverse, vary or alter any applicable provision of this By-Law.  The Board of Selectmen, Planning Board and the Board of Appeals are hereby designated as the special permit granting authorities mandated by Zoning Act.  The board authorized in this By-Law to grant a special permit for a specified use is herein designated as the special permit granting authority for that use. [Amended 1987] 
7.5.2 	No special permit shall be granted unless the applicable special permit granting authority finds the proposed uses in harmony with the purpose and intent of this By-Law and will not be detrimental or injurious to the neighborhood in which it is to take place and that all requirements or conditions for the grant of the special permit have been satisfied.  No special permit shall be granted unless the special permit granting authority determines that the proposed use will not be detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood in light of each of the following factors: 
(a) 	
Adequacy of the site in terms of size for the proposed use; 

(b) 	
Suitability of the site for the proposed use; 

(c) 	
Impact on traffic flow and safety; 

(d) 	
Impact on neighborhood visual character, including views and vistas; 

(e) 	
Adequacy of method of sewage disposal, source of water and drainage; 

(f) 	
Adequacy of utilities and other public services; 

(g) 	
Impact on public or private water supplies, wildlife habitats and other natural resource issues deemed appropriate by the special permit granting authority. 


The special permit granting authority shall also make such further findings as may otherwise be required by this By-Law, and may attach such conditions or safeguards or limitations on the grant of the special permit as it finds to be appropriate and reasonable to protect the surrounding neighborhood, including but not limited to (aa) Setback requirements greater than the minimum required by this By-Law; (bb) Requirements as to installation of screening, fencing or other means of 
protecting adjacent property; 
(cc) Modification of the exterior features or appearance of any structure; (dd) Limitation as to size, number of occupants, or method and time of operation of any proposed use; (ee) Regulation of number, design and location of access drives and other 
traffic features; 
(ff) 	Requirement of off-street parking and other special features; 
(gg) 	Installation of mechanical or other devices to limit noise, light, odor or 
other objectional aspects of use; and (hh) Requirement for surety bonds or other security for the performance of any conditions attached to the special permit. [Amended 1987] 
7.5.3 	An applicant for a special permit shall file an application with the applicable special permit granting authority, together with such other plans, specifications and documents as may be required by rules adopted by the special permit granting authority pursuant to Section 7.5.6, and shall file a copy thereof with the Town Clerk and with any other officers, boards or commissions required by this By-Law.  Within 65 days of such filing with the Town Clerk or the special permit granting authority, whichever shall first occur, the special permit granting authority shall hold a public hearing. 
7.5.4 	Failure of the special permit granting authority to act within 90 days following the public hearing shall be deemed to be the grant of the special permit applied for and the applicant shall be entitled to whatever documents are necessary to evidence such permit. 
7.5.5 	Any special permit granted under this By-Law shall lapse within a period of time, to be specified by the permit granting authority, not to exceed two years from the date of issue, unless, in the case of special permit for a building or structure, construction has commenced, or in the case of any other use of or activity upon land such use or activity has commenced. 
7.5.6 	The special permit granting authority shall be governed by the procedural requirements of The Zoning Act and other applicable provisions of the General Laws. Each special permit granting authority shall adopt rules, not inconsistent with the provisions of this By-Law and The Zoning Act or other applicable provisions of the General Laws, for the conduct of its business and shall file a copy of such rules with the Town Clerk. 
7.6 	Other By-Laws, Rules or Regulations The provisions of this By-Law shall be construed as being additional to and not as annulling, limiting or lessening to any extent whatsoever the requirements of any other By-Law, rule or regulation, provided that, unless specifically exempted, where this By-Law is more stringent it shall control. 
7.7 	Validity The invalidity of one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or provisions of this By-Law shall not invalidate or impair the By-Law as a whole or any other part hereof. 
7.8 	Referral In addition to those applications for a special permit which require Site Plan Review Special Permit under Section 6.9, the Board of Appeals, Board of Selectmen and Planning Board shall refer a special permit application to the Board of Health, Conservation Commission, and the Department of Public Works for written comments and recommendations before taking final action on said Special Permit application. The Special Permit Granting Authority may refer a Special Permit application to any other town agency/board/department for comments and recommendations if it so desires before taking final action on said Special Permit application. A public hearing on said referral shall not be required.  Any such Board or Agency to which applications are referred for comment shall make its recommendations and send copies thereof to the Special Permit Granting Authority and the applicant within thirty-five (35) days of receipt of the referral request by said board or agency or there shall be deemed no opposition or desire to comment.  The Special Permit Granting Authority shall not act upon said special permit until either comments from referred board or agencies have been received, or said thirty-five (35) days have elapsed, whichever is sooner.  Applications referred to more than one board or agency may be reviewed jointly by said boards or agencies. [Added 1988] 
7.9 Planning Board Fees and Expenses  [added 2007] 
7.9.1 Scope: 
Section 7.9 applies to each application or request [“Application”] filed with or otherwise 
submitted to the Planning Board for determination, approval, consent, grant, permit, 

special permit or other decision by the Planning Board [“Permit”]. 
7.9.2 Filing Fees: 
The Planning Board shall determine the filing fee for Applications for which a fee is not 
otherwise provided or specified, which filing fee in its discretion the Board may waive or 
reduce in any particular matter when appropriate. 

7.9.3 Expenses: 
In connection with any such Application to the Planning Board, all expenses for 
advertising, recording and filing of documents, and for the reasonable fees (and expenses) 
for the employment of outside consultants as the Planning Board shall select, if and when 
it shall determine to do so, shall be borne by the applicant.  The applicant shall be 
advised of the selection of an outside consultant, and of the sum to be deposited with the 
Town in a special account for the reasonable fees for the employment of the same.  Such 
special account shall be established and dealt with consistant with MGL c.44 Section 
53G. 

The applicant may make an administrative appeal from the Planning Board’s selection of any such outside consultant, such appeal to be made to the Town’s Board of Selectmen and limited to claims that the consultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum required statutory qualifications (which, as specified in MGL c.44 Section 53G are either an educational degree in or related to the field at issue or 3 or more years of practice in the field at issue or a related field). To the extent permitted by law and consistent with MGL c.44 Section 53G, any required time limits for action on an Application by the Planning Board shall be extended by the duration of such administrative appeal, and if no decision is made by the Town’s Board of Selectmen within one month following the filing of such administrative appeal, the selection made by the Planning Board shall stand. 
APPENDIX 
History of the Manchester-by-the-Sea Zoning By-Law 

Original By-Law and Map February 13, 1945 (Town Meeting Action) March 5, 1945 (Attorney General Approval) 
Zoning Map February 11, 1946 (Town Meeting Action) May 1, 1946 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Articles 17 and 18; change area bounded by Gloucester, Summer Street, "Univ. Land" from 
General District to Single Residence. 

Zoning Map March 10-12, 1952 (Town Meeting Action) December 23, 1952 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Changed property bounded by Summer, Raymond and Brook, from Single Residence to General 
District. 

Zoning Map March 8, 1954 (Town Meeting Action) January 17, 1955 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Established as Single Residence area bounded by Route 128, Bennett Street, Pine Street and 
Pipeline Road. 

Zoning Map March 12, 1956 (Town Meeting Action) June 8, 1956 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Established as Single Residence area bounded by Sea Street, Summer, Lincoln, Arbella, 
Rosedale Cemetery, Pleasant Street, School, Saw Mill Brook, Pope, Cat Brook, Mill Street, 
Essex Line, Gloucester Line. 

Zoning Map March 12, 1956 (Town Meeting Action) June 8, 1956 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Article 23; added A and B to Single Family District and amplified the meaning of zoning. 
Changed area regulations of lots. 

Zoning By-Law & Map March 10, 1958 (Town Meeting Action) April 10, 1958 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Article 24; meaning of word dwelling changed to omit use as overnight camp or mobile home. 
Article 25; Limited Commercial District added bounded by 128, School Street, Essex Line. 

Zoning By-Law March 13, 1961 (Town Meeting Action) April 12, 1961 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Article 8; change in definitions of words street, erected, dwelling, floor area, rooms to persons, 
added enforcement section and changed procedure for amendments. 

Zoning By-Law & Map March 11, 1963 (Town Meeting Action) June 21, 1963 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Articles 16-21; added District C, amended classes of Single Residence District and area 
requirements of each part of Commercial District to Single Residence, extended nonconforming 
uses in Commercial District. 

Zoning By-Law March 8-9, 1965 (Town Meeting Action) October 29, 1965 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Articles 24 and 25; area regulations changes and regulations for apartment dwellings. 

Zoning By-Law March 14, 1966 (Town Meeting Action) May 4, 1966 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Articles 16 and 17; junk car regulations. 

Zoning By-Law March 14, 1966 (Town Meeting Action) May 16, 1966 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Articles 23-25; regulations of Single Residence Districts, 
municipal uses. 

Zoning By-Law & Map August 29, 1966 (Town Meeting Action) October 19, 1966 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: More than two-family housing prohibited in General District.  
Zoning By-Law March 13-14 1967 (Town Meeting Action) June 21, 1967 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Articles 16, 27, 28, 30, 31; junk cars, added Section 111, building permits -duration, flashing 
signs, home industry, advertising, accessory building.  Area in District D changed. 

Zoning By-Law May 27, 1968 (Town Meeting Action) September 10, 1968 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Articles 7 & 8; accessory buildings, General District minimum lot size. 

Zoning By-Law & Map March 12-13, 1973 (Town Meeting Action) June 6, 1973 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Article 45; off-street parking.  Article 46; General District, uses.  Article 47-58; "Purpose" 
added, District C extended to railroad property, islands, etc., pools and tennis courts zoned. 

Zoning By-Law March 11, 1974 (Town Meeting Action) May 24, 1974 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Articles 18 and 19; billboards and 3-4 dwelling unit density controlled. 

Zoning By-Law 
May 3, 1976 (Town Meeting Action) Brief Summary: Wetlands District added. 
Zoning By-Law 
May 1, 1978 (Town Meeting Action) 
August 18, 1978 (Attorney General Approval) Brief Summary: Articles 11 and 12; adopt mandatory provisions of Massachusetts Chapter 808, recodify and reorganize; minimum dimensions on old lots; increase Board of Appeals to five members and two associates; extended by two years grandfather provisions of lots having somewhat less than dimensions required; deleting "residing on premises for doctor, dentist or other professional;" added "existing" to  garage or stable and added "other existing structure" as a permit use for employee dwelling; increased accessory use of autos in residence district from 3 to 4; clarified alteration and reconstruction in General District; required site plan approval and special permit in Limited Commercial District; off-street parking not allowed on public property; prohibited use variances except in Limited Commercial District and General District; 3-4 dwelling units density controlled; and other changes. 
Zoning By-Law 
May 7, 1979 (Town Meeting Action) 
August 6, 1979 (Attorney General Approval) Brief Summary: Articles 18 and 19; restrictions for Manchester-by-the-Sea based medical offices.  Articles 21 and 22; clarification of Building Inspector's duties. 
Zoning By-Law 
May 5, 1980 (Town Meeting Action) 
September 18, 1980 (Attorney General Approval) Brief Summary: Article 43; permit use only for an employee of owner dwelling in an existing structure. 
Zoning By-Law 
May 3, 1982 (Town Meeting Action) 
August 10, 1982 (Attorney General Approval) Brief Summary: Article 14; height regulations/accessory structures.  Article 15; delete section 5.7.3.  Article 16; regulations for wind energy conversion systems. 
Zoning By-Law May 2, 1983 (Town Meeting Action) August 10, 1983 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Article 52; permit use only for an employee of owner dwelling in an existing structure. 

Zoning By-Law May 7, 1984 (Town Meeting Action) October 5, 1984 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: Article 31; provision allowing an alteration of a non-conforming structure that does not make the structure more non-conforming without a special permit.  Article 32; permits construction of accessory dwelling units in single residence districts.  Article 34; special provisions for Open Space Planning.  Article 35; regulates reflecting antennas by special permit. 
Zoning By-Law May 7 and 8, 1984 (Town Meeting Action) November 15, 1984 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Article 40; imposes a temporary moratorium on any further new development within the 
watershed areas southwest of Route 128.  Article 41; specification for Flood Control District. 

Zoning By-Law May 6, 1985 (Town Meeting Action) July 25, 1985 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Article 21, amend zoning map enlarging District D.  Article 23; consultant fees shall be borne by 
applicant.  Article 56; re-zone 7 School Street. 

Zoning By-Law February 3, 1986 (Special Town Meeting Action) March 6, 1986 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Article 10; regulations for Limited Commercial District. 

Zoning By-Law May 5, 12, and 19, 1986 (Town Meeting Action) September 30, 1986 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: Article 25; permits planned residential development in District C. Article 26; eliminate certain uses in Limited Commercial District.  Article 27; specifications for accessory structures.  Article 52; specify permitted uses for Limited Commercial District 
Zoning By-Law May 4, 1987 (Town Meeting Action) September 10, 1987 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: Article 32; revised definition of "Lot Width".  Article 33; revised definition of "Street".  Article 34; revised definition of "Structure".  Article 35; zoning map interpretation.  Article 38; special housing provisions.  Article 39; stipulations for common driveways.  Article 40; lot coverage requirements.  Article 41; provisions for accessory structures.  Article 43; performance requirements within Limited Commercial District.  Article 45; applicability of and procedure for Site Plan Approval.  Article 46; qualifications for Site Plan Special Permit.  Article 47; enforcement of Administration By-Law.  Article 48; use variance requirements.  Article 49; include Planning Board as a special permit granting authority.  Article 52; revisions in the wording of the General Wetlands By-Law. 
Zoning By-Law May 2, 1988 (Town Meeting Action) July 13, 1988 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Article 34; off-street parking regulations.  Article 35; referrals from other boards to special 
permit granting authorities. 

Zoning By-Law May 8, 1989 (Town Meeting Action) 
(Attorney General Approval) Brief Summary: Article 39; redefined accessory structure. Article 40; new Sewer Connection Limitation By-Law.  Article 41; new Water Resource Protection District By-Law.  Article 42; increase amount of fines. 
Zoning By-Law October 23, 1990 (Town Meeting Action) January 14, 1991 (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Article 7: Ground and Surface Water Resource Overlay Protection District By-Law. 
Zoning By-Law May 7, 1991 (Town Meeting Action) (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Article 32: Revised Residence District D language. 

Zoning By-Law April 4, 1994 (Town Meeting Action) (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Article 23: Amended definition of "Structure". 
Article 31: Miscellaneous amendments. 
Zoning By-Law April 7, 1997 (Town Meeting Action) (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Article 13: Substituted a new definition of "Lot Width". 
Article 15: Added regulation for Telecommunication Service Facilities. 
Zoning By-Law November 17, 1997 (Town Meeting Action) (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Article 1: Added a new "Limited Commercial District" use. 
Zoning By-Law April 6, 1998 (Town Meeting action) (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Article 17: Substituted a new Personal Wireless Telecommunication Service Facilities Use 
Regulation. 
Article 18: Substituted a new Flood Plain District Use Regulation. 
Zoning By-Law and Map April 3, 2000 (Town Meeting action) (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Article 21: Amended the issuance of Special Permits by assigning the Special Permit Granting 
Authorities. 
Article 22: Amended Off Street Parking Regulations to include Driveway and Curb Cut 
Regulations. 
Article 24: Created Single Residence Zoning District  E. 

Zoning By-law April 2, 2001 (Town Meeting action) (Attorney General Approval) 
Brief Summary: 
Article 16: Revised Section 5.1 Frontage as it pertained to common driveways and added a new 
section 6.28 
Article 17: Amended Section 5.5 to measure height from pre-construction grade. 
Article 18: Miscellaneous amendments and corrections. 

Zoning By-law April 1, 2002 (Town Meeting action) (Attorney General Approved) 
Brief Summary: 
Article 16: Delete Sections 4.9 and 6.10 and substitute with revised Section 4.9 Ground and 
Surface Water Overlay Protection Districts 
Article 17: Amends Section 4.8 “Flood Plain” 

Zoning By-Law April 7, 2003 (Town Meeting action) Attorney General Approved 
Brief Summary: 
Article 22: Added Section 4.11 Helicopter landing, storage and parking facilities June 2, 2003 (Town Meeting action) (Attorney General Approved) 
Article 1: Revised Section 4.11 Helicopter landing, storage and parking facilities 
Zoning By-Law April 4, 2005 (Attorney General Approved) 
Brief Summary: 
Article 17: Revised Section 7.4.4 by changing the words “75 days” to “100 days” 
Article 18: Amended Section 6.9 Site Plan Review Special Permit 
Article 19: Added new Section 6.12 Division of Land and Development of Multiple Dwellings and Section 6.13 Residential Conservation Cluster 
Article 20: Added new Section 6.14 Inclusionary Housing 
Article 21: Amended Section 4.1.10(i) requiring a Special Permit for raising and keeping livestock 
Zoning By-Law April 3, 2006 (Attorney General Approved) 
Brief Summary: Article 20: Added tidelands provisions to Section 5.2 and amended Section 4.1.10 by adding a new Section (j) concerning tidelands. Article 22: Amended Section 6.2.2, “Off street parking spaces” by adding “with the advice of the Planning Board.” 
Zoning By-Law April 4, 2007 (Attorney General Approved) 
Brief Summary: 
Article 6: Added new Section 6.15, Stormwater Management Special Permit 
Article 7: Amended Section 2.10 by deleting it and adding a new text portion. 
Article 8: Amended Section 5.6, Accessory Structure, by adding the words “or twenty-five 

(25) feet whichever is lesser” at the end of the first section. 
Article 10: Amended the Zoning Bylaw by adding the definition of lot frontage as Section 2.11, deleting the first two sentences in Section 5.1 “Frontage”, and renaming section 5.1 to “Adequate Frontage”. 
Article 21: Corrected Section 4.1.10 by deleting the words “in paragraphs (a) through (h) in the 
first sentence. Article 22:  Corrected Section 4.1.2 by adding the words “except those requiring a special permit pursuant to Section 4.1.10(i). 
Article 24:  Amended Section 6.2.7 “Driveways/Curb Cuts” by adding requirement to notify 
abutters. Article 25:  Amended Section 4.3.11 by deleting 4.3.11.2, striking out “nor above the second story” in Section 4.3.11.3 and renumbering sections 4.3.11.2 through 4.3.11.5. 
Article 32:  Amended Standard 1 for common driveway width in Section 6.2.8. Article 34: Added new Section 6.16, “Topographical Changes and Land Clearing Special Permit”. Article 36:  Added new Section 7.9  “Planning Board Fees and Expenses” 
Zoning By-Law April 4, 2011 (Attorney General Approved) Brief Summary 
Article 9:  Added new Section 6.17 “Wind Energy Conversion Facilities” 
Zoning By-Law 
April 2, 2012 
(Attorney General Approved) 
Article 24 amended Section 4.8 to reflect changes required for the National Flood Insurance Program 
Zoning By-Law 
April 1, 2013 
(Attorney General Approved) 
Article 21: Added new Section 6.18, Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations, and renumbered existing Section 4.4.5 as Section 4.4.6 and added new section 4.4.5 Large-scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations, and amended line 5 of Section 5.10 Performance Requirements within Limited Commercial District by adding “or site plan approval”, and added Section 6.15.4.C.6 Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations (LGSPI). 
Zoning By-Law 
April 7, 2014 
(Attorney General Approved) 
Article 12:  Replaced section 4.8.2 with a new Section 4.8.2 to reflect new flood maps as issued          by FEMA and revised Section 4.8.4.4 by deleting Zone AH. 
Zoning By-Law April 6, 2015 (Attorney General Approved) Article 14 Added new Section 4.4.7 and Section 6.19 Medical Marijuana Treatment Centers 
INDEX  
ABANDONMENT OF USE  6.1.4 
ACCESSORY Definition  2.1 LCD  4.4.4 Structures  5.6 Use 4.1.8, 4.1.9, 4.6 Dwelling units Single Res. Districts  4.6 Dwelling units Gen. District 4.3.9 
ADJOINING LOTS  5.8 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING  6.14.2.1 
AGRICULTURAL USES 4.1.2, Poultry, Livestock, 4/1/10, *Art. X, Sec. 5 
ANIMALS,  see LIVESTOCK 
ANTENNAS Reflecting 6.6 Wireless  4.10 
APPEALS BOARD  see ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 
AREA Lot  5.2, 5.4 Tideland  5.2 
AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE  1.0 
AUTOMOBILES, see VEHICLES 
BACKING  6.2.4 
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES  4.9.8, Exhibit B,  6.15.2 
BOARDERS 4 .1.5 
BOATYARDS 4.3.4, 6.2 

BUILDING 2.3 BUILDING DEPT. Building permit  7.1 
Cert. of occupancy 7.3 Enforcement  7.2 BUILDING INSPECTOR  7.1, 7.2 BUILDING PERMIT  4.6.2.4, 7.1 CAMPS 4.1.5, *Art. X, Sec. 25 CELL TOWERS [PWCFS] 4.10 CEMETERY  4.1.10, 4.9.5.3 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY  7.3 CHANGES, ALTERATIONS  6.1.2 CHANGE OF USE  6.5.2, 6.9.2 CHIMNEYS, SPIRES  5.3, 5.5 CHURCHES  4.1.3 CLUBS 
Parking 6.2 Non-Profit 4.1.10 For Profit 4.4.2 
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES Garaging in Residential Districts  4.1.9.2 
* See General By-law for specified article 
COMMON DRIVEWAYS 5.1, 6.2.8 CONVERSIONS  4.1.9, 4.2.3, 4.3.11 
COOKING FACILITIES  4.3.1.1 
CORNER LOTS  5.3, 6.2.5 
CURB CUTS, DRIVEWAYS 6.2.7 
DECKS 2.9, 4.2.3 
DEFINITIONS 
Accessory 2.1 Affordable Housing Unit  6.14.2.1 Building  2.3 Dwelling 2.4 Dwelling Unit  2.5 Half Story 5.5 Ledge removal  6.16.2.a Lot  2.6 Lot Width  2.10 Pre-construction grade  5.5 Special Permit  2.7 Spill  4.9.4 Street  2.8 Structure 2.9 Water Resource Zones  4.9.4.3 Zoning Act  2.2 
DENSITY Division of Land & Multiple Dwellings  
6.12 
District D  4.2Dwelling Definition 2.4 
General District 4.3.11 
Inclusionary Housing  6.114 
Multi-unit dwellings  4.3.11.5 
Open Space Development  6.7.2.3 
Planned Residential Development[PRD] 

6.8.2.3 
Residential Conservation Cluster[RCC] 

6.13.3.4 
Single Residence Districts  4.1.1 

DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS Accessory Structure 5.6 Area 5.2, 5.4 Frontage 5.1 
Height  5.5 Ltd. Com. District  5.7 Planned Residential Development  6.8.2.5 Setbacks  5.3 Special Exceptions  5.8 
DISTRICTS: ZONING  3.1 see 
APPENDIX, Maps 
General  4.3 Limited. Commercial [LCD] 4.4, 5.7 Single Residence 4.1 Residence D  4.2 
‘New” Residence D 4.2.1 see 
APPENDIX, Maps 
DISTRICTS: OVERLAY Flood Control  4.7 Flood Plain  4.8 Ground & Surface Water Resource Overlay Protection  4.9 see APPENDIX, Maps 
DIVISION OF LAND & MULTIPLE DWELLINGS  6.12 
DOCTOR'S OFFICE  4.1.7, 4.1.10 
DORMERS 4.3.10 
DRAINAGE Stormwater Management 6.15 Driveways, Curb Cuts 6.2.7 
* See General By-law for specified article 
DRIVEWAYS Backing Out  6.2.4 Common  5.1 Curb Cut Permit  6.2.7 
DWELLING Definition  2.5 
Below Grade 4.3.11.3  Restoration of 6.1.3  
Lot Coverage 4.3.11.2  
Multiple  4.2.3, 4.3.10, 4.3.11, 4.6.2  FLOOR DRAINS  4.9.5.1  
Unit  2.5  
Units, Res. D  4.2  FRONTAGE  2.11, 5.1  
Units, Gen. Dist.  4.3  
FUEL STORAGE, UNDERGROUND  
EARTH, LEDGE REMOVAL 4.9.5.1,  TANKS 4.9.5, *Art. XVIII  
6.16, *Art. XII  
Dumping, Flood Control District  4.7  GARAGES, GARAGING  4.1.9.1-2.   
4.1.10, 4.3.6  
ELEVATION CHANGES 6.16  
GENERAL DISTRICT  4.3  
EDUCATIONAL USES 4.1.4  Signs  6.4.3, 6.4.4  
EMPLOYEE  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS  Page 1  
Dwelling 2.4  Appeals, Board of  
Parking 6.2.2.  Appeal time  
Residing on lot  4.1.9.1  Decision, appeal variance  
Decision, special permit   
ENFORCEMENT  7.1  Special Permit lapse  
Variance, lapse  
EXCEPTIONS, SPECIAL 5.8  Zoning changes  
EXISTING USES 6.1.1  GENERIC SUBSTANCES  4.9.8, Exhibit A  
FEES AND EXPENSES 7.9  GREENHOUSE  4.3.7  
FENCES [State code: 6’ height limit]  
Special Permit  7.5.2  
Site Plan  6.5.4, 6.9.5  * See General By-law for specified article  
*Art. X Sec. 32  
ROUND AND SURFACE WATER  
FIRE  see RESTORATION  RESOURCE OVERLAY [WROPD] 4.9  
see APPENDIX, Maps  
FISH LANDING, STORAGE  4.3.5  
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS  4.9.5.1,  
FLOOD CONTROL DISTRICT  4.7  see  5.10.2  
APPENDIX, Maps  
HEIGHT REGULATIONS  5.5  
FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT  4.8  
HELICOPTERS 4.11  
FLOOR AREA     
Accessory Dwelling Units  4.6.2.2  HISTORIC DISTRICT  *Art. XVI  

HOME OCCUPATIONS 4.1.8 
HOSPITALS, HOMES, ETC.  4.1.10, 4.9.5 
HORTICULTURAL USES  4.1.2 
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE  5.4 Limited Commercial District  5.7.2 Water Resource Protection District  4.9.5.1 
INCLUSIONARY HOUSING 6.14 
JUNK CARS  see VEHICLES 
LABORATORIES  4.4.5 
LAND CLEARING  6.16 
LANDFILLS, DUMPS 4.7.3, 4.9.5 
LAND USE INFORMATION  Page 2 Building Code, State Environmental Code General By-laws  Sewage Disposal  Subdivision Rules & Regulations Wetlands Protection Act  Historic District  *Art. XVI 
LARGE-SCALE GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATIONS 6.1.8 
LEDGE,  EARTH REMOVAL 6.16.2.a 
LIMITED SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS (expired May 15, 1980) 
LTD. COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (LCD) 4.4, 5.7 Height, towers, cell towers  4.10.4, 5.5 Lot coverage, size, setback  5.7 Lot size 5.7 
Parking setbacks  6.2.5 Performance Req.  5.10 Setback  5.7 Signs  6.4.3 Toxic/Hazardous Materials  5.10.2  Uses & Special Permit Uses  4.4, 5,7 Use variances  7.4.6.1 Wireless antennae  4.10.4  
LIVESTOCK  4.1.10. I, 4.9.5.2. 
LOT Coverage 5.4, 5.7 Definition  2.6 Frontage Requirements  2.11, 5.4, 5.7.1 
LOT WIDTH  2.10, 5.4, 5.7.1 
MANUFACTURING [LCD] 4.4.5 
* See General By-law for specified article 
MAPS see APPENDIX 
Zoning Districts [§3.2] 
“New”District D[§4.2] 
Bennett’s BrookDrainageArea[§4.7] 
Water Resource Overlay Protection Districts ] 
Watershed for Gravelly Pond/Round Pond 
[§4.9] 
Zone of Contribution to Lincoln Street Well 

MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT 
CENTERS OR REGISTERED 
DISPENSARIES  6.19, 6.20.1 

MINIMUM AREA  5.4 

MINING, DUMPING  4.7.3, *Art. XII 

MULTIPLE DWELLING UNITS  4.2.3, 
4.3.10, 4.3.11, 4.6.2, 6.0 

MULTIPLE DWELLING 

DEVELOPMENTS 6.12 
MUNICIPAL Parks, etc.  4.1.6 Services  2.8 
MUNICIPAL USES General District  4.3.2 Limited Commercial District  4.4, 4.9.7 Single Residence District 4.1.6 
NON-CONFORMING USES Abandonment  6.1.4 Changes, Exterior Alterations  6.1.2, 7.4.6 Existing Use 6.1.1 Restoration  6.1.3 
NON-NUISANCE USES 4.1.2 
OCCUPATIONS, HOME  4.1.8 
OFFICES, BUS. & PROFESSIONAL General District  4.3.3 Limited Commercial Dist.  4.4.1 Single Residence Districts  4.1.7, 4.1.10 Medical Office Building 4.1.10 Parking 6.2 
OPEN SPACE PLANNING  6,7 Development  6.7 Planned Residential Development  
Residential Conservation Cluster 6.13 OTHER BY-LAWS  7.6 
OVERLAY DISTRICTS  See DISTRICTS, OVERLAY 
OVERNIGHT CAMPS 4.1.5 
PARKING See GARAGES, VEHICLES Accessory Dwelling Units  4.6.2.2 ADA requirements  * Article X Sec. 34 LCD  5.7.2 Off-street/Curb Cuts  6.2 Per dwelling unit 6.2 Lot Plantings 6.2.6 Projects with 5-9 spaces 6.5 Projects with >10 spaces 6.9 Public 4.3.6 Setbacks  6.2.5 Trucks  4.1.9.2. 6.2 
PARKS & RECREATION AREAS  4.1.6 
PERMITS  6.2.7  see also SPECIAL PERMITS 
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE 6.9.7 
PERMITS  7.1 
* See General By-law for specified article 
PERSONAL WIRELESS 
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES  4.10 PESTICIDES, HERBICIDES, etc. see GENERIC SUBSTANCES 
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS 6.8 PLATFORMS, DECKS  2.9 PORCHES, PATIOS, DECKS 4.2.3 
PRINTING AND PUBLISHING  4.3.8 PROFESSIONAL/BUS. OFFICE  4.1.10, 4.4, 4.9.7 
PURPOSE  1.2 REFERRALS 7.8 REFLECTING ANTENNAS 6.6 REGULATED SUBSTANCES 
List 4.9.6.5, Exhibit A Special Permit  4.4.5 
RESEARCH, LCD 4.4.5 
RES. CONSERVATION CLUSTER 6.13 
RESTAURANTS, ETC. 4.3.3 Parking 6.2.2 
RESTORATION Non-conforming structures  6.1.3 
RETAIL 4.3.3 
SATELLITE DISHES >3' diameter 2.9 SEPTIC ACTIVITIES  6.16 SETBACKS 5.3 Dimensional requirements  5.3, 5.4 
Limited Commercial District  5.7.3 Accessory Structure 5.6 Private Parking Areas  6.2.5 
SHEDS, SHELTERS 2.9 
SEWER  4.3.11 Connection limitation  6.11 Disposal systems  6.13.6 Sewage lift stations 4.1..6 
SIGNS 6.4 DISPLAY 2.9 Doctors  4.1.10.g Residential Districts  4.1.5, 4.1.7 Flashing 6.4.1 Other  4.1.8, 4.1.10,  * Art. X, Sec. 1, * 
Art. X, Sec. 23 
SINGLE RESIDENCE  4.1 Uses  4.1 
“New” District D Conversion 4.2.2. 
SITE PLAN APPROVAL 6.5 Review Procedure     6.5.3, 6.9 
SITE PLAN REVIEW REFERRAL 7.8 
SITE PLAN REVIEW SPECIAL PERMIT  
6.9 
SNOW DISPOSAL  4.9.5.1 
SPECIAL EXCEPTION 5.8 
SPECIAL HOUSING PROVISION  4.6 
* See General By-law for specified article 
SPECIAL PERMIT  7.5 
Other  4.1.9, 4.1.10, 4.2.3, 4.3.6, 4.3.11, 
4.4.5, 4.6.2, 4.7.5, 4.9.5.2, 

4.9.6, 4.10, 6.6, 6.7, 6.8, 6.9, 6.11, 6.12, 6.15, 6.16, 6.17 Requirements  7.5 Number of votes Page 1 
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT  6.15 Mass. Policy Standards  6.17.7 
STREET  2.8 
STRUCTURE  2.9 
SWIMMING POOL  2.9, 4.1.10 
* Art. X, Sec. 32, which states: “A fence of at least four 
(4) feet shall enclose all privately owned swimming 
pools.” 
TABLES Accessory Structures  5.6 Dimensional Requirements  5.4 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS, WIRELESS FACILITIES  4.10 
TENNIS COURTS  2.9, 4.1.10 
TIDELANDS  4.1.10, 5.2 
TOPOGRAPHICAL CHANGES  6.16 see also EARTH LEDGE REMOVAL 
TOXIC//HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 4.9, 5.10 See also Generic Substances 
UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS 4.9.5.1, 4.9.7, 5.10 *Art. XVIII , see also FUEL STORAGE 
USE REGULATIONS  4.0 
VALIDITY  7.7 
VARIANCE  7.4.6 
VEHICLES Backing 6.2.4 Commercial  4.1.9.2 Garaging 4 or more  4.1.10 Junk cars  6.3 Public Parking/garaging 4.3.6 Trucks  6.2 Commercial car washes  4.9.5.1 
WATER RESOURCE OVERLAY PROTECTION DISTRICT  4.9 Exemptions  4.9.7 Prohibited uses  4.9.5.1, 4.9.5.3 Special Permit uses  4.9.5.2 Special Permit procedures  4.9.6 
Maps see APPENDIX, Maps 
WETLANDS DISTRICT (deleted 1987) 
WIDTH, LOT  2.10 
WIND ENERGY Windmills, Single Res. Districts  4.1.10, 5.5 Wind Energy Conversion Facilities[WECFs] 
YACHT STORAGE  4.3.3 

ZONING ACT  2.2 
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS Appeals  7.4.5 Appointment, Removal 7.4.1-2 Jurisdiction  7.4.3 Procedure 7.4.4 Variances  7.4.6 General Requirements Pg. 1 
ZONING CHANGES  Page 1 
ZONING DISTRICTS  see DISTRICTS,  ZONING 
ZONING MAP 3.2, see APPENDIX, Maps 
* See General By-law for specified article 
MAPS 
[Maps for official use are on file at Town Hall] 
Zoning Districts [Section 3.2] 
“New”District D [Section 4.2] 
Bennett’s BrookDrainageArea[Section 4.7] 
Water Resource Overlay Protection Districts [Section 4.9] 
Watershed for Gravelly Pond/Round Pond [Section 4.9] 
Zone of Contribution to Lincoln Street Well [Section 4.9] 








OFFICE OF THE 
PLANNING BOARD 
TOWN HALL, 10 CENTRAL STREET, MANCHESTER-BY-THE-SEA, MA 01944-1399 
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION  
OF LAND IN MANCHESTER-BY-THE-SEA, MASSACHUSETTS 
Revised June 2016 

RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION 
OF LAND IN 
MANCHESTER-BY-THE-SEA, MASSACHUSETTS 

Table of Contents 

SECTION 1.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS 
SECTION 2.0 DEFINITIONS 
SECTION 3.0 APPLICATION OF SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW
3.1 Approved Definitive Plan Required Prior to Construction
 3.2 General
3.3 Waivers of Compliance 
3.4 Effect of Prior Recording of Plan 
3.5 One Dwelling Unit per Lot 
3.6 Severability 
3.7 Invalidation by State Law 
3.8 Applicant's Responsibility 
SECTION 4.0 PLAN BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE APPROVAL [ANR]: PROCEDURES FOR SUBMISSION AND BOARD ACTION
4.1 Submission Requirements 
4.2 Planning Board Action: Endorsement, Determination, Annotation
4.3 Failure of a Board to Act 
SECTION 5.0 PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISONS: PROCEDURES FOR SUBMISSION AND BOARD ACTION
5.1 Pre-Submission Meeting 
5.2 Residential and Non-residential Plans 
5.3 Submission Requirements and Procedure 
5.4 Contents
5.5 Design Review 
5.6 Planning Board Action 
5.7 Effect of Action 
SECTION 6.0 DEFINITIVE SUBDIVISONS: REQUIREMENTS & PROCEDURES FOR SUBMISSION AND BOARD ACTION
6.1 Pre-Submission Meeting 
6.2 Submission Requirements and Procedure 
6.3 Plan Requirements 
6.4 Water Distribution System
6.5 Surface Water Drainage 
6.6 Utilities 
6.7 Notification
 6.8 Parks, Playgrounds, Open Space 
6.9 	Plan, Profile, Cross Sections 
6.10 	Environmental & Community Impact Assessment & Mitigation Measures[ECIA]
6.11 	Erosion/Sediment Control Plan 
6.12 	Public Hearing and Abutter Notification 
6.13 	Review Procedures: DRT, Board of Health, ConCom, etc. 
6.14 	Planning Board Action 
6.15 	As-Built Plan Requirements
6.16 	Roadway Acceptance Plan 
6.17 	Modification or Amendment of Approved Plan 
6.18 	Rescission 
6.19 	Appeal 
SECTION 7.0 FEES, PERFORMANCE SECURITIES AND SPECIAL ACCOUNTS
7.1 	Filing Fees 
7.2 	Special Accounts for Consultant Costs 
7.3 	Performance Bond 
7.4 	As-Built and Roadway Acceptance Plan Security 
7.5 	Procedures 
7.6 	Form of Security 
7.7 	Review and Recall of Security 
SECTION 8.0 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
8.1 	General
8.2 	Design Guidelines 
8.3 	Streets
8.3.1 Classification of Streets 
8.3.2 Pavement Widths 
8.3.3 Cross-Section 
8.3.4 Location, Alignment, Intersections 
8.3.5 Sight Distance 
8.3.6 Grades 
8.3.7 Cul-de-Sacs 
8.4 	Storm Water-Drainage 
8.5 	Utility Requirements 
8.6 	Street Lights
8.7 	Street Names 
8.8 	Easements 
SECTION 9.0 FRONTAGE WAIVER REQUIREMENTS 
SECTION 10.0 STREET SIGNS 
SECTION 11.0 SHADE TREES 
SECTION 12.0 PRESERVATION OF NATURAL VEGETATION SECTION 13.0 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 
SECTION 14.0 CLEAN-UP 
SECTION 15.0 MAINTENANCE 
APPENDICES
A. Roadway Construction Standards
B. Drainage Materials and Installation Specifications 
C.  Inspection & Testing of Required Improvements 
D. Right-of-Way Profiles
E. Application Forms & Checklists under the Subdivision Control Law Form A Approval Not Required [ANR] & ChecklistForm B Preliminary Subdivision & Checklist Form C Definitive Subdivision & Checklist Form C(M) Modification of Definitive Subdivision & Checklist 
F. Application Forms under the Zoning By-Law & General By-lawsSection 4.9 Water Resource Protection District DeterminationSection 4.9 Water Resource Protection District Special PermitSection 7.5 Special Permits Section 6.5 Site Plan ReviewSection 6.2.8 Driveways/Curb Cuts General By-laws Article XII Earth Removal 
G. Assessment Study Standards 
MAPS 
[Maps for official use are at on file at Town Hall or available at 
http://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx 
Zoning Districts [ZBL Section 3.2]
‘New’ District D [ZBL Section 4.2] 
Bennett’s Brook Drainage Area/Flood Control District [ZBL Section 4.7] 
Water Resource Overlay Protection Districts [ZBL Section 4.9] 
Watershed for Gravelly Pond/Round Pond [ZBL Section 4.9] 
Zone of Contribution to Lincoln Street Well [ZBL Section 4.9) 

RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING 
THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND IN 
MANCHESTER BY-THE-SEA, MASSACHUSETTS 

SECTION 1  
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
1.1 Authority And Purpose 
These Rules and Regulations for the Subdivision of Land and the Construction of Ways therein are adopted by the Manchester-by-the-Sea Planning Board (The Board) pursuant to the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws (M.G.L.), Chapter 41, Section 81Q. For matters not covered by these Subdivision Rules and Regulations, reference is made to the provisions of 
M.G.L. Chapter 41, Sections 81-K to 81-GG, inclusive.  
Applicants submitting plans to subdivide land are directed to review the Zoning By-Law of Manchester-by-the-Sea (the By-Law), the Regulations of the Conservation Commission, and Board of Health (Title V, 310 CMR 15.000 and Manchester Addenda to Title V) including other applicable state and federal laws. 
These Subdivision Rules and Regulations have been enacted for the purpose of protecting the safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town by regulating the laying out and construction of ways in subdivisions providing proper access to the several lots therein, but which have not become public ways, and ensuring sanitary conditions, in subdivisions and in proper cases, parks and open areas. The powers of the Board under these Subdivision Rules and Regulations shall be exercised to:  
Provide adequate access to all lots in a subdivision by ways that are safe and convenient for travel; 
Lessen congestion in such ways and in adjacent public ways; 
Reduce danger to life and limb in the operation of motor vehicles; secure safety in case of fire, flood, panic and other emergencies;  
Ensure compliance with the applicable zoning ordinances or by-laws; 
Secure adequate provision for water distribution, underground utility service, sewerage, drainage, protection of natural water sources, erosion control, flood plains, and wetlands;  
Protect, promote and enhance the natural beauty, and rural and historical character of the Town; and 
Coordinate the ways in a subdivision with each other, with public ways in the Town and with ways in neighboring subdivisions. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 1 

In fulfilling the purpose of this law, the Planning Board shall have the power to review the impact of the proposed land division and road layout on the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea as well as abutting communities. Further, the Planning Board has the power to negotiate with applicants filing under this statute, utilizing the provisions of M.G.L. ch. 41, s. 81-R to ensure the protection of the Town's natural and built environment.  
EFFECTIVE DATE 
These Rules and Regulations are to be effective upon their passage and from that time shall supersede all prior rules and regulations governing the subdivision of land in the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 2 

SECTION 2 
DEFINITIONS 
ABUTTER – An owner of land as listed in the most recent real property tax list, certified by the Board of Assessors, whose real property is within three hundred (300) feet, or who is an abutter to an abutter within three hundred (300) feet of the boundaries of a proposed subdivision of land as shown on the definitive plan. 
APPLICANT – "Applicant" shall include an owner or his agent, representatives or his assigns.  
APPROVAL – Approval of a plan submitted in accordance with Section 4 of these Subdivision Rules and Regulations and Massachusetts General Law Chapter 41, Sections 81-S, 81-T, 81-U, 81-V and 81-W. 
ARTERIAL STREET – A proposed or existing street servicing more than one hundred twenty 
(120) dwelling units, or for non-residential subdivisions is to be used for major through traffic with a volume in excess of twelve hundred (1,200) vehicles in a representative twenty-four (24) hour period, as determined by the most recent edition of Trip Generation, Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), Washington, D.C. 
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) – A structural device or practice designed to mitigate the effects of storm water runoff easing flooding, reducing erosion and pollution. BMPs shall conform to the Guidelines described in the Performance Standards & Guidelines for Storm Water Management in Massachusetts published by the Department of Environmental Protection. 
BOARD – The Planning Board of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea. 
BUILDING – A structure designed to be used as a place of occupancy, storage or shelter.  
COLLECTOR STREET – A proposed or existing street servicing no more than one hundred twenty (120) dwelling units, or for non-residential subdivisions is to be used for through traffic with a volume of not more than twelve hundred (1,200) vehicles in a representative twenty-four 
(24) hour period as determined by the most recent edition of Trip Generation, Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), Washington, D.C. 
CUL-DE-SAC – A dead end street culminating in a circular turnaround.  
DEFINITIVE PLAN – A proposal plan for subdivision of land submitted pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 41, and Section 6 et seq. of these Rules and Regulations for approval of the Planning Board. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 3 

DEVELOPER – The person, persons, corporation, trust, firm or partnership or other legal entity who will be responsible for the development of land and/or structure(s). The developer will be responsible for submitting qualifications of his development team.  
DPW – The Department of Public Works of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea. 
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW TEAM (DRT) – A review body consisting of the Planning Director, Conservation Administrator, Building Inspector, DPW Director, Representatives of the Board of Health and Fire and Police Departments and others as necessary. 
DRAINAGE BASIN 
    DETENTION – A man-made basin, diked area, depression and/or related structure for the purpose of slowing the rate at which storm water is discharged from the site, and which may involve temporary backup of water during and immediately following a storm event. 
RETENTION – A man-made basin, diked area or depression and/or related structure for the purpose of retaining or impounding storm water on a site which has no free flowing outlet, e.g. a pipe or weir, to allow storm water from small storm events to be discharged to a natural water course or wetland. Leaching pits or similar ground discharge structures shall not constitute an outlet. 
DWELLING – An enclosure containing sleeping, kitchen and bathroom facilities designed for and used or held ready for use as a permanent residence by one family.  
DWELLING UNIT – A building or a portion of a building providing living quarters for a single family having a single set of kitchen facilities (a stove plus either or both a refrigerator and sink) not shared with any other unit; or quarters for up to six persons in a lodging house, dormitory, congregate housing or similar group dwelling. 
EASEMENT – A grant by a property owner to the use of land by the public, a corporation, or persons for specific purposes such as the construction of utilities, drainage ways and roadways.  
ENDORSEMENT – Certified by or endorsed by a Planning Board, as applied to a plan or other instrument required or authorized by the Subdivision Control Law to be recorded, shall mean bearing a certification or endorsement signed by a majority of the members of the Planning Board, or by its chairman or clerk or any other person authorized by the Board to certify or endorse its approval or other action and named in a written statement to the Register of Deeds and Recorder of the Land Court, signed by a majority of the Board.  
ENGINEER – A person who is registered and/or lawfully permitted to practice professional engineering in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
ENVIRONMENTAL & COMMUNITY IMPACT ASSESSMENT & MITIGATION MEASURES [ECIA] – A comprehensive technical analysis and report by the Applicant which is required to be submitted to the Board pursuant to Section 6.10 of these Rules and Regulations. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 4 
FLOOD CONTROL DISTRICT – The areas designated as A1, A2 and B1 in a map entitled Storm Drainage Improvements for the Bennett’s Brook Drainage Area. See 
http://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx 
FRONTAGE – The boundary of a lot coinciding with a street line providing rights of access across that boundary to a potential building site, measured continuously along one street line between side lot lines or in the case of a corner lot, the midpoint of any radius.  
GENERAL BY-LAWS – The General By-Laws of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea.  
INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL STREET – A proposed or existing street which, in the opinion of the Board, is to be used to provide local access to industrial-commercial enterprises.  
LAND SURVEYOR – A person who is registered and/or lawfully permitted to practice land surveying in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
LANE – A proposed street which, in the opinion of the Board, is to be used primarily for residential purposes and servicing no more than ten (10) dwelling units, including cul de sacs. 
LOT – A parcel of land used or set aside and available for use as the site of one or more buildings and buildings accessory thereto or for any other definite purpose, in one ownership and not divided by a street, not including any land within the limits of a public or private way upon which such lot abuts, even if the fee to such way is in the owner of the lot. 
MASSACHUSETTS GENERAL LAW [M.G.L.] – The Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Chapter 41 of the General Laws. 
MINOR STREET – A proposed or existing street which, in the opinion of the Board, is to be used primarily for residential purposes and servicing no more than forty (40) dwelling units. 
MUNICIPAL SERVICES – Fire and police services and public utilities furnished by the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea, such as water, sewerage and drainage. 
OWNER – The owner of record as shown by the records in the South Essex Registry of Deeds or Land Registration Office. 
PARCEL – A tract or plot of land of any size that may or may not be subdivided or improved.  
PRELIMINARY PLAN – A plan of a proposed subdivision submitted in accordance with Section 5 of these Subdivision Rules and Regulations. 
PROFILE – A vertical section of a street along its centerline, showing existing and proposed grades, storm drainage and sanitary sewer facilities. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 5 

RECORDED – Recorded in the South Essex Registry of Deeds, except that, as affecting registered land, it shall mean filed with the Recorder of the Land Court. 
REGISTERED MAIL – Registered or certified mail as provided by US Postal Service. 
REGISTRY OF DEEDS – The South Essex Registry of Deeds, hereafter referred to as “The Registry” including when appropriate, the Recorder of the Land Court. 
RIGHT-OF-WAY (R.O.W.) – The area of land designated for the construction and maintenance of a way or street. 
ROADWAY – The paved portion of the R.O.W. including berms, where permitted, and curbs. 
SECURITY, SURETY – Funds deposited to ensure performance of subdivision approval. 
SIDEWALK – A way within the R.O.W. generally parallel to the street designed for use by pedestrians. 
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS – The Massachusetts Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges, [MASSDOT] dated 1988, including all supplements and revisions. 
STRUCTURE – Any construction, erection, assemblage or other combination of materials upon or beneath the land, including but not limited to, either by pilings, footings or a foundation for attachment and/or installation within the land, including swimming pools and septic systems. 
SUBDIVISION – The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots for the purpose of sale or development, including re-subdivision, and when appropriate, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided; provided, however, that the division of a tract of land into two (2) or more lots shall not be deemed to constitute a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision Control Law if, at the time when it is made, every lot within the tract so divided has frontage on (a) a public way, or a way which the Town Clerk certifies is maintained and used as a public way, or (b) a way shown on a plan approved and endorsed in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law, or (c) a way in existence prior to February 18, 1954 when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea. The Planning Board shall require that the examples noted in (a), (b). or 
(c) above all have, in the opinion of the Board, sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land abutting thereon or served thereby, and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon. Such frontage shall be of at least such distance as is presently required by the Zoning By-Law of Manchester-by-the-Sea. Conveyances or other instruments adding to, taking away from, or changing the size and shape of, lots in such a manner as to leave any lot so affected without the frontage above set forth, or the division of a tract of land on which two or more buildings were standing when the 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 6 
Subdivision Control Law went into effect in the Town in which the land lies into separate lots on each of which one of such buildings remains standing, shall not constitute a subdivision. Such frontage shall be of at least such distance as is presently required by the Zoning By-Law of Manchester-by-the-Sea. Conveyances or other instruments adding to, taking away from, or changing the size and shape of, lots in such a manner as not to leave any lot so affected without the frontage above set forth, or the division of a tract of land on which two or more buildings were standing when the Subdivision Control Law went into effect in the Town in which the land lies into separate lots on each of which one of such buildings remains standing, shall not constitute a subdivision. 
UTILITIES – Gas, electric, water, drainage, cable television, telephone, septic, sewer, steam distribution and related and ancillary services. 
WATER RESOURCE OVERLAY PROTECTION DISTRICT – [WROPD] The ground areas designated as Zones 1,2 and 3, and surface areas designated as Zones A,B and C on maps entitled Water Resource Overlay Protection Districts at 
http://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx 
WAY – Any public way or private way shown on a plan approved under the provisions of the Subdivision Control Law or a way in existence when the provisions of said Subdivision Control Law became effective in the Town, having in the opinion of the Board suitable width, grades and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of land abutting thereon or served thereby and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon. 
WETLAND – Wetlands as defined in Massachusetts General Law 131, Section 40 (310 CMR 10.0) and Article XVII of the General Bylaw of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea. See 
http://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx 
ZONING BY-LAW – The Zoning By-Law of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 7 

SECTION 3 
APPLICATION OF THE SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW 

3.1 Approved Definitive Plan Required Prior to Construction  

No person shall make a subdivision of any tract, parcel, or lot of land into two (2) or more lots in such a manner as to constitute a "subdivision" within the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea, or proceed with the improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision, or the construction of ways, or the installation of municipal services therein, unless and until a plan has been endorsed "Planning Board Approval Not Required" or a Definitive Plan of such subdivision has been submitted to and granted final approval and endorsement by the Board as hereinafter provided, and has been recorded at the Registry of Deeds or registered at the Land Court. [M.G.L. c. 41, s. 81-O; 81-P] 
3.2 General 
The Board will not approve a subdivision unless the plan is in compliance with these Subdivision Rules & Regulations and with all applicable zoning, other local regulations, bylaws and laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All proposed subdivisions shall comply with the intent of these Subdivision Rules and Regulations as previously set forth in Section 1 and shall adhere to the principles of environmentally sensitive land use planning and accepted engineering practice. 
[M.G.L. c.41, s. 81-Q] 
3.3 Waivers of Compliance 
The Board reserves the right to waive strict compliance with these Subdivision Rules and Regulations when, in the judgment of the Board, topography, environmental impacts, public safety or other considerations necessitate such variation and such action is in the public interest and consistent with the intent and purpose of these Subdivision Rules and Regulations. All requests for waivers of compliance shall be in writing and shall specify the section of these Subdivision Rules and Regulations for which a waiver is requested. The Board shall make a finding that said variation from these Subdivision Rules and Regulations is in the public interest and shall vote to approve each specific request for variation from these Subdivision Rules and Regulations. In the event any of these Subdivision Rules and Regulations do not fully cover a special or unforeseen or unique circumstance arising from a proposed subdivision, the Board may make a reasonable determination, interpretation or extension of its Subdivision Rules and Regulations, using commonly accepted standards to resolve unusual circumstances. [M.G.L. c. 41, s. 81-R] 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 8 

3.4 Effect of Prior Recording of Plan 
The recording of a plan of a subdivision at the Registry of Deeds prior to the effective date of the Subdivision Control Law in the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea (February 18,1954) shall not exempt the land within such subdivision from the application and operation of these Subdivision Rules and Regulations except as specifically exempted by M.G.L. c.41, s.81-FF and the Manchester-by-the-Sea Zoning By-Law. 
3.5 One Dwelling Unit Per Lot 
Not more than one building designated or available for use as a dwelling purposes shall be erected or placed or converted to use as such, on any lot in a subdivision without the consent of the Board, and such consent may be made conditional upon the providing of adequate ways furnishing access to each site for such building in the same manner as otherwise required for lots within a subdivision. [M.G.L. c. 41, s. 81-Q] 
3.6 Severability 
In the event that any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or provision of these regulations shall be adjudged not valid, the adjudication shall apply only to the specific section affected, and the remainder of these Subdivision Rules and Regulations shall be deemed valid and enforceable. 
[M.G.L. c. 41, s. 81-GG] 
3.7 Invalidation by State Law 
Any part of these Subdivision Rules and Regulations subsequently invalidated by State law or amendment of an existing State law shall automatically be brought into conformity with the new or amended law, and shall be deemed effective immediately, without recourse of public hearing and the customary procedures for amendment and repeal of such Subdivision Rules and Regulations. [M.G.L. c.41, s. 81-Q] 
3.8 Applicant's Responsibility 
The action of the Board to approve a subdivision does not affect any rights of others pertaining to the land to be subdivided, nor does it grant any rights to the applicant to perform work on land owned by others. The Board assumes that any plans submitted for its approval or consideration to be correct, unless valid written evidence is presented to the contrary. The acquisition of necessary rights and presentation of complete and accurate information by engineers and surveyors to the Board are the responsibilities of the applicant; the failure to do so, including failure or inability to obtain all necessary state or local permits, licenses, releases or rights, may constitute a reason for the disapproval or the rescission of approval of a subdivision.  
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 9 

SECTION 4 

APPROVAL NOT REQUIRED [ANR] 
PROCEDURES FOR SUBMISSION AND BOARD ACTION 

4.1 Submission Requirements 

Any person who intends to record a plan of land at the Registry of Deeds [“the Registry”] or file a plan with the Land Court and believes that his plan does not require approval under the Subdivision Control Law (M.G.L. c. 41, s. 81-P) may submit the Mylar and ten (10) prints of the plan to the Planning Board by delivery to the Town Clerk accompanied by an application Form A (see APPENDIX E) and the appropriate fee (see SECTION 7). Checks shall be made payable to “Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea.” All ANR plans must contain the information listed in the ANR checklist shown in Appendix E and be accompanied by the necessary evidence to show that the plan does not require approval. 
The Town Clerk shall date-stamp the application form, thus establishing the date of submission. The applicant shall provide a copy of the date-stamped application form to the Planning Board. If requested, the Town Clerk shall provide a copy to the applicant. 
The Planning Director is available to answer questions on procedures, fees, Subdivision Rules and Regulations and applicability of other state and local regulations.  
4.2 Planning Board Action: Endorsement, Determination, Annotation  
4.2.1 Plans meeting the requirements set forth above and that in the opinion of a simple majority of the Board do not constitute a subdivision shall be endorsed without a public hearing. The Board shall act within twenty-one (21) days of receipt of application by the Town Clerk and shall notify the Town Clerk in writing of its action. The Board may add to such endorsement a statement of the reason approval is not required. Following approval, the Mylar copy shall be returned to the applicant for recording at the Registry of Deeds or to be registered at the Land Court and the Board shall also notify the Town Clerk in writing of its action. 
4.2.2 If the Board determines that the plan constitutes a subdivision, no endorsement will occur. The Board shall notify the Town Clerk within the limited twenty-one (21) days and the applicant shall be notified by certified mail.  
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 10 

4.2.3 In instances where an ANR also shows a lot or a parcel that does not fully comply with zoning, the Board may require that the Mylar be annotated to indicate the non­compliance. Examples include: 
a.
 ‘This endorsement shall not substitute for zoning compliance and the Planning Board's endorsement of this plan does not constitute or presume that the lots shown herein comply with the Zoning By-Law or any another relevant regulation or requirement.’ 

b.
 ‘Lot "2" lot does not comply with Section 5.7.1 of the Zoning By-law. It is not at least two acres in area and does not have sufficient frontage and does not have sufficient width.’ 

c.
 ‘Nothing in the granting of this ANR creates a buildable lot where one had not existed previously.’ 

d.
 ‘Planning Board endorsement of this plan shall not constitute approval of any of the parcels shown herein as buildable lots. ‘ 

e.
 ‘This endorsement is limited to Lot "1-2" as shown on this plan.’ 


4.3 Failure of a Board to Act 
If the Board fails to act upon a plan submitted under this section or fails to notify the Town Clerk and the Applicant of its action within twenty-one [21] days after its submission, it shall be deemed to have determined that approval under the Subdivision Control Law is not required, and it shall forthwith make such endorsement on said plan, and on its failure to do so, the Town Clerk shall issue a certificate to the same effect. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 11 

SECTION 5 

PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISIONS 
PROCEDURES FOR SUBMISSION AND BOARD ACTION 

5.1 Pre-Submission Meeting 

Applicants with plans for Preliminary Subdivisions should schedule a meeting with the Planning Director prior to submitting any plan. The applicant should have a conceptual or study plan for discussion and a listing of his development team’s qualifications.  
The Planning Director is available to answer any questions on procedures, Subdivision Rules and Regulations, the applicability of other state and local regulations, and to explain the special account requirements under M.G.L. c. 44, s. 53-G. 
5.2 Residential and Non-residential Plans 
a.
 A Preliminary Plan may be submitted for residentially zoned land to the Board for action prior to the submission of a Definitive Plan. The submission of a Preliminary Plan will enable the applicant, the Board, other municipal agencies, owners of property abutting the subdivision and any interested parties to discuss and clarify potential problems of the subdivision before a Definitive Plan is prepared.  

b.
 A Preliminary Plan shall be submitted for non-residentially zoned land.  



5.3 Submission Requirements and Procedure 
The applicant for a Preliminary Plan shall submit an application [Form B] and eighteen (18) sets of plans and supporting documents to the Board via the Town Clerk. (See APPENDIX E). Preliminary Plans shall comply with all requirements specified in Section 5.4 below, and must contain the information listed in the Preliminary Plan Checklist in Appendix E. The submission shall be accompanied by the filing fee and escrow amount (See SECTION 7). The appropriate fee and the amount of funds required to establish the special account for the project must be verified by the Planning Director prior to submission. Checks shall be made payable to “Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea.” Incomplete applications will be grounds for denial.  
The Town Clerk shall date-stamp the Form B thus establishing the date of submission of the Preliminary Plan. The applicant shall provide a copy of the date-stamped Form B to the Planning Board. The Planning Board will distribute the plans to the various Town Departments for comments. 
The applicant is responsible for submitting the plan to the Board of Health and is directed to follow Board of Health guidelines. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 12 

5.4 Contents 

The purpose of the Preliminary Plan is to show sufficient information about the subdivision to enable the Board to form a clear basis for the evaluation of potential problems of the subdivision prior to the preparation of the Definitive Plan. 
5.5 Design Review 
The Preliminary Plan will be reviewed by the DRT Team in order to determine whether it complies with the requirements of these Subdivision Rules and Regulations and is consistent with sound land use and community planning goals. Following review, the DRT will make suggestions for revisions it deems to be in the public interest. 
5.6 Planning Board Action 
Within forty-five (45) days after receipt of application by the Town Clerk, the Board shall without a public hearing approve, disapprove, or approve with conditions the Plan, noting thereon any changes that should be made, and shall file a notice of its actions with the Town Clerk and mail a copy of the notice to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested. The Board shall give its reasons for disapproving any plan. 
5.7. Effect of action 
a.
 Approval of a Preliminary Plan is not binding on the Planning Board.  

b.
 Neither approval nor disapproval of a Preliminary Plan with or without modifications shall constitute approval of the subdivision.  

c.
 The Preliminary Plan cannot be recorded at the Registry of Deeds. 

d.
 If the submission of a Preliminary Plan is followed by the submission of a Definitive Plan within seven (7) months and the Definitive Plan is subsequently approved, the zoning provisions in effect at the time of submission of the Preliminary Plan shall govern the land shown on the Definitive Plan for eight (8) years from the date of the Board's endorsement of the Definitive Subdivision Plan. 

e.
 The Board recommends that prior to submitting a Definitive Plan the applicant review the Preliminary Plan with the Conservation Commission pursuant to the applicability of M.G.L. c. 131 s. 40 and the Manchester-by-the-Sea General Bylaws, Article XVII, 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 13 

SECTION 6 

DEFINITIVE SUBDIVISIONS 
PROCEDURES FOR SUBMISSION AND BOARD ACTION 

6.1 Pre-Submission Meeting 
Applicants with plans for Definitive Subdivisions that have not received preliminary approval are requested to schedule a meeting with the Planning Director prior to submitting any plan. The applicant should have a conceptual or study plan for discussion and a listing of his development team’s qualifications. The Planning Director is available to answer any questions on procedures, Subdivision Rules and Regulations, the applicability of other state and local regulations, and to explain the special account requirements under M.G.L. c. 44, s. 53-G. 
6.2 Submission Requirements and Procedure 
The applicant for a Definitive plan shall submit an application form [Form C] and eighteen (18) sets of plans and supporting documents [as shown on the Definitive Plan Checklists in Appendix E] to the Planning Board via the Town Clerk. The Plans shall comply with all requirements specified in Sections 6.3 through 6.11. REQUIREMENTS. All Definitive Plans must contain the information listed in the Definitive Plan Checklist in Appendix E. 
The submission shall be accompanied by the filing fee and escrow amount (See SECTION 7). The appropriate fee and the amount of funds required to establish the special account for the project must be verified by the Planning Director prior to submission. Checks shall be made payable to “Town of Manchester-by-the–Sea.” At the time of submission of a Definitive Plan, all plans and information must be complete and accurate and in acceptable form as required by these Subdivision Rules and Regulations and the fee paid before the application package is accepted. Incomplete applications will be grounds for denial. 
The Town Clerk shall date-stamp the form thus establishing the date of submission of the Definitive Plan and the applicant shall provide a copy of the date-stamped application form to the Planning Board. 
The Planning Board will distribute plans to the various Town Departments for comment as specified in Section 6.12 and schedule a Development Review Team (DRT) meeting. A public hearing date shall be scheduled as soon as possible. 
The Applicant is responsible for submitting the plan to the Board of Health and is directed to follow Board of Health guidelines. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 14 

6.3 Plan Requirements 

6.3.1 General Requirements 
a.
 The Definitive Plan shall be prepared, signed and stamped on each sheet by a Registered Professional Engineer and Land Surveyor. Plans shall be submitted as blue or black line prints at a suitable scale. The original shall be drawn on Mylar. The plans shall be submitted on 24" x 36" sheets, with the longer dimension on the bottom. The property shall be oriented on the plan, when possible, so that the top is in a northerly direction. 

b.
 Each sheet shall be consecutively numbered. Plans shall have a title sheet and an index sheet showing the entire subdivision and identifying each street's location on the index of the entire subdivision. A locus plan at a scale of 1" = 1000' shall show the location of the subdivision in relation to the existing street system. 

c.
 The Planning Board signature block shall be located in the same general spot on each sheet of the submitted set of plans. 

d. 
A Definitive Subdivision Plan shall include, but not be limited to the following:  


6.3.2 Title Sheet Title block with name of owner of the property, number of lots, and total length of roadways.  
6.3.3 Existing Conditions 
a.
 Locations and outlines of all existing buildings, septic systems, site features such as stone walls, fences, wooded areas, rock outcroppings, waterways, natural drainage courses, wetlands, water bodies, flood plains, and seasonal wet areas within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision. 

b.
 Location of abutting structures, buildings, driveways, etc. within three hundred (300) feet of the parcel proposed for subdivision, noting the ownership of adjacent properties. 

c.
 Lengths and bearings of tract boundary lines and meridian used. 

d.
 Location and descriptions of all rights-of-ways or other easements existing and proof of secured easements inside and connecting to the land to be subdivided. 

e.
 Topographical contour elevations at two (2) foot intervals. This may be required to extend beyond the property boundaries for drainage design analysis and evaluation of clear sight distance. 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 15 

f. Zoning District boundaries including the Water Resource Overlay Protection District [see ZBL 4.9] or Flood Control District [see ZBL 4.7] if applicable. 
http://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx 
g.
 Delineation of the vegetated wetlands line with station numbers noting the Conservation Commission's acceptance of the line, if applicable. 

h.
 Trees twelve (12) inches in diameter [DBH] or greater located in the R.O.W. and other areas determined by the Planning Board. 


6.3.4 Proposed R.O.W., Lot Lines, & Lots 
a.
 Lengths and bearings of all subdivision lot lines, including lot frontage on the streets. 

b.
 Lengths and bearings of all straight center lines of streets. 

c.
 Lengths, radii, tangents, and central angles of all curves in lot lines and street center lines. 

d.
 The location, name, width and grade of each street and public or private way, bounding, approaching, or within sight distance of the subdivision, and the proposed ways within the subdivision. 

e.
 Existing and proposed granite or cement concrete monuments shall be shown at all points of curvature, points of tangents, and changes in direction of street lines, or where otherwise designated by the Board. Proposed monuments shall be installed to the specifications of the Massachusetts Land Court. 

f.
 The total area of each lot 

g.
 All proposed building lots shall meet or exceed the minimum area and frontage requirements specified in Section 5 of the Zoning By-Law. 


6.4 Water Distribution System 
The proposed water distribution system shall be shown on the Definitive Plan. The location and size of all existing and proposed water mains and their appurtenances shall be shown on plans and shall be subject to the approval of the DPW Director. The location of any operating water wells within the proposed subdivision or within the boundaries of a lot adjacent to the proposed subdivision shall be shown on the Definitive Plan. Re-location of all existing and the location of proposed fire hydrants will be subject to the approval of the Manchester-by-the-Sea Fire Chief and the DPW Director. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 16 

6.5 Surface Water Drainage 

Pursuant to the requirements of Section 8.4 below, the proposed size, type and location of all drainage pipes, structures, detention and retention basins, and other appurtenances shall be shown on the Definitive Plan. Specific areas of concern are the impacts of the discharge of stormwater runoff to existing water bodies, natural waterways, wetlands and resource areas, and abutting land areas. 
6.6 Utilities 
The location of all proposed utilities to serve the proposed dwellings or buildings shall be shown. All utilities shall be underground. The location of streetlights shall be shown at street intersections. All wires shall be placed in conduit. 
6.7 Notification 
The following note shall be placed on each sheet of the plan: "All contractors shall contact the Planning Office two (2) business days prior to initiation of any construction or resumption after a stoppage of five (5) consecutive business days." In addition the DPW Director shall be notified in writing at least two (2) business days in advance of beginning any work in a public way. Street opening permits are required. See the DPW Director for permit requirements to ensure that contractors are aware of the requirements and times for inspections. 
6.8 Parks, Playgrounds, Open Space  
Proposed park or open areas shall be suitably located for playground or recreation purposes within the subdivision in accordance with M.G.L. c. 41, s. 81-U. 
6.9 Plan, Profile, Cross Sections 
The Plan of each street shall show: 
a.
 The extent of the cut or fill limits outside of the road layout required for construction of the way. Side Slopes shall have a maximum of 2:1 slope unless waived by the Planning Board due to a topographical hardship. 

b.
 Existing center line shall be shown as a solid line. 

c.
 All existing and proposed intersections, walks, driveways, shown on both sides. 

d.
 The high water elevation and all test hole locations. 

e.
 Elevations of at least two (2) bench marks as shown on plan, using NGVD datum. 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 17 

Profiles – Each sheet shall show: 

a.
 Vertical profiles of proposed streets with only one (1) street shown per sheet. 

b.
 A horizontal scale of one inch equals forty (1"=40') feet and a vertical scale of one inch equals four (1"= 4') feet. 

c.
 Proposed centerline grades as solid line, showing grade elevations at every fifty (50) foot station, except in vertical curves which shall be at every twenty-five (25) foot station. Existing ground elevations of centerlines to be shown to the left of station. Depth of peat, ledge or undesirable roadway base material, as determined by test pits or borings, taken at the discretion of the Board or its engineer, shall be shown on the centerline.  

d.
 Rates of vertical curve gradients shown by figures and vertical curve design data. 


Cross Sections – Typical Sections shall show: 
a.
 Each street between top and/or bottom of slopes; type, lines and width of all curbing to be used; type of catch basin-frame and grate to be used (see APPENDIX B) and all utilities. 

b.
 Description of roadway construction including materials to be used. 


6.10 Environmental and Community Impact Assessment and Mitigation Measures  
Unless specifically waived by the Board during the Preliminary Plan Submission, an Environmental and Community Impact Assessment (ECIA) is required in order to identify any significant impacts of a proposed development, and the best available technology to minimize or prevent negative impacts from occurring. The Final ECIA shall be included at the time of submission of a definitive plan. 
All subdivisions must minimize impacts to areas with steep slopes, flood plains, wetland resource areas, unique land forms, and rare or endangered plant and wildlife species in accordance with the goals and objectives of the Master Plan 2000, and any duly approved successor Comprehensive Plan. 
The Board may retain an independent outside consultant, as outlined in SECTION 7, to review the ECIA and recommend appropriate mitigation measures. If a consultant is retained, a scope of work shall be provided by the Planning Director with input from other Town agencies and approved by the Board. 
The ECIA shall include an Analysis of Development Impact using nutrient loading standards as noted in the Hydrogeologic Study in Appendix G. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 18 

The following concerns must be considered in the ECIA: 

a) Impacts to groundwater resources 
b) Impacts to surface water bodies, rivers or Manchester Harbor 
c) Impacts of erosion from roadway, drainage or re-grading of land for house site 
construction d) Impact to existing water supplies e) Impacts to community services such as police, fire, public works, schools f) Impacts to traffic (See APPENDIX G for requirements) g) Whether the possible impacts are limited only to the subdivision or contribute to the 
cumulative incremental impact of environmental degradation of the surrounding area 
h) Measures to mitigate all identified impacts 
6.11 Erosion/Sediment Control Plan 
In order to reduce erosion occurring from the construction of roadways, utilities, drainage structures and regrading of house lots, and to prevent siltation/sedimentation of water bodies, water courses and wetlands resource areas, the Board shall require the submission of an Erosion/Sediment control plan. This plan shall explain in detail the specific mitigating measures that will be implemented by the developer, and any subsequent lot owners, both for short term and long term construction of the subdivision, including house lots. 
In order for an Erosion/Sedimentation control plan to be effective and reduce cost to the developer, the designer shall consider the following in the early stages of designing a subdivision: 
a) Fit development to the terrain 
b) Schedule grading and construction to minimize soil exposure to weather elements 
c) Retain existing vegetation whenever feasible 
d) Vegetate and mulch barren areas 
e) Direct runoff away from barren areas 
f) Minimize length and steepness of slopes 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 19 

g) Keep runoff velocities low 
h) Prepare drainage ways and outlets to handle concentrated or increased runoff 
i) Trap sediment on site 
j) Inspect and maintain control measures frequently and during storms to check 
effectiveness 
The plan must include the measures that will be implemented, both short and long term to prevent erosion. (See Appendix B, Section 4: EROSION CONTROL DURING CONSTRUCTION). 
The plan shall explain the mitigating measures that will be taken to prevent stockpiles of soil from eroding or creating problems associated with airborne particulates. Plastic covers and temporary vegetation may be used to prevent these problems from occurring. 
The plan shall also include items such as the location, extent and type of berms, dikes, dams, detention/retention/ settling basins, silt fence, hay bales or any other erosion control measures that will be used to prevent erosion and sedimentation of wetlands and natural water courses. 
In order to prevent dirt and mud from being tracked onto the roadway, which then washes into the drainage system, the construction of a crushed stone apron for vehicles entering home construction sites will be required as part of the erosion control plan (See Section D, Figure 1 for details). 
If dirt is tracked onto an existing Public Way the DPW Director will require that the area be swept at the end of each day in order to prevent sedimentation of the existing town drainage system. 
Erosion control plans shall be considered a part of any definitive plan approval. 
Compliance with the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II program is required for all sites in excess on an acre. Such sites shall have a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) available on site at all times.  
6.12 Public Hearing and Abutter Notification 
a. Before consideration of any Definitive Plan, the Planning Board will schedule a public hearing in accordance with M.G.L. c. 41, s. 81-T at which parties in interest, or their agent, shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing and of the subject matter, sufficient for identification shall be published in a newspaper with local circulation for advertisement once in each of two (2) successive weeks, the first publication to be not less than fourteen (14) days before the date of the hearing. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 20 

Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the Applicant and to all Abutters in accordance with M.G.L. c. 41, s. 81-T. 
b.
 The Planning Board shall submit the notice of the hearing to the Town Clerk with a copy sent for advertisement to a newspaper with local circulation. The cost of advertisement shall be the responsibility of the applicant.  

c. 
In the event a Public Hearing is continued for more than five (5) months, the applicant may, at the Board’s discretion, be responsible for the costs of re-notifying abutters and re-advertising the legal notice. 

d.
 Abutter notification shall be made by the Planning Board, using a list of abutters from the latest tax listing and postage, all provided by the applicant. 


6.13 Review Procedures 
6.13.1 DRT At least three (3) weeks before the Public Hearing, the applicant shall meet with the Planning Director for a pre-hearing meeting. Discussion will focus on comments on the plan from the Board's consulting engineer and the DRT. The Planning Director will make a report to the Board summarizing the DRT comments. 
6.13.2 Board of Health The Board of Health shall, within forty-five (45) days after the plan is filed, report to the Planning Board in writing, approval or disapproval of said plan, and in the event of disapproval, shall make specific findings as to which, if any, areas shown on such plan cannot be used for building sites without injury to the public health, and include such specific findings and the reasons therefor in such report, and where possible, shall make recommendations for the adjustments thereof. 
a.
 If the report of the Board of Health shall so require, the approval by the Planning Board shall be on condition that no building or structure shall be built or placed upon the areas designated, without consent by said Board of Health. 

b.
 Failure of the Board of Health to report shall be deemed approval by such Board. In the event approval by the Board of Health is by failure to make such a report, the Planning Board shall note on the plan that approval by the Board of Health is by failure to report. 

c.
 When the Definitive Plan shows that no Town sewer system is to service the proposed lots, approval by the Board of Health shall not be treated as, nor deemed to be approval of a permit for the construction and use on any lot of an individual sewage system, and approval of a Definitive Plan for a subdivision by the Board of Health shall not be treated as, nor deemed to be, an application for a permit to construct or use an individual sewage system on any lot contained therein.  


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 21 

6.13.3 Conservation Commission The Applicant shall document prior to Planning Board approval of the Definitive plan that either the Conservation Commission has determined that the Wetlands Protection Act is not applicable to the proposed development or that the Applicant has filed a Notice of Intent with the Commission.  
6.13.4 Other Town Officials Prior to approval of any Definitive Plan and Profile, the Planning Board will require a letter of review from the DPW Director, the Fire Chief and the Chief of Police. If any of the above officials fail to report, such failure shall be noted in the Minutes of the Public Hearing.  
6.14 Board action on a Definitive Subdivision Plan  
A. Decision The Board shall act within one hundred thirty-five (135) days (or ninety (90) days in the case of non-residential subdivisions and subdivisions for which a preliminary plan has been submitted), unless otherwise agreed upon by the Applicant and the Board. All issues raised by the Board, various Town Departments, abutters, the Board's consultants and the Planning Director shall be resolved to the satisfaction of the Board. Criteria for action by the Board shall be the following: 
1. 	
Completeness and technical adequacy of all submissions;  

2. 	
Determination that development at this location does not entail unwarranted hazard to safety, health and convenience of future residents of the development or of others because of possible natural disasters, traffic hazard, or other environmental degradation which will result in an increased threat to public health and safety; 

3. 	
Conformity with the requirements of these Rules and Regulations; 

4. 	
Determination based upon the Environmental and Community Impact Assessment [ECIA], where submitted, that the subdivision as designed will not cause substantial damage to the environment, which damage could be avoided or ameliorated through an alternative development plan; 

5. 	
Conformity with all applicable zoning requirements;  

6. 	
Consistency with the purposes of the Subdivision Control Law.  


B. Following action to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove a Definitive subdivision plan, the Board shall file a certificate of its action with the Town Clerk and shall send notice of its action by registered or certified mail to the Applicant at his address stated in the application. Such summary will be available to any person upon request. A copy of the certificate shall be transmitted by the Board to the Building Inspector. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016	 Page 22 

6.15 As-Built Plan Requirements 
Prior to placement of any bituminous concrete, a Utility As-Built Plan shall be supplied by the applicant [three (3) contact prints] to be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board. If after review any construction modifications should be required by the Planning Board, an additional revised Utility As-Built plan shall also be submitted. All applicants must allow adequate time for Planning Board review and approval prior to scheduling with contractors for paving. 
An accurate As-Built drawing of the development shall be submitted to the Board for approval within ninety (90) days of completion of all construction of the subdivision.  
6.16 Roadway Acceptance Plan 
For subdivision roadways intended to be public ways accepted by Annual Town Meeting, a separate road acceptance plan in addition to the As-Built plan, shall be prepared and submitted for approval. Definitive As-Built plan approval does not constitute acceptance by the Town. 
The applicant shall submit a street layout plan suitable for recording, prepared by a Massachusetts registered land surveyor. The plan shall be prepared in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Registry of Deeds, M.G.L. C. 82 s. 17- 23 showing the “Boundaries and Monuments of the Way”. If registered land, a land surveyor is also responsible for preparation of an appropriate plan in accordance with the “Commonwealth of Massachusetts Land Court Guidelines on Registered Land”. Upon approval, As-Built and street layout plans shall be submitted to the Planning Board in electronic digital format acceptable to the DPW Director. The applicant shall be responsible for all recording fees at both the Registry of Deeds and/or Land Court. 
The Planning Board shall retain a minimum of $25,000 surety or one buildable lot from the start of construction until the street is accepted by Town Meeting vote. Upon completion of the roadway, the applicant shall have submitted the As-Built plan and street layout plan for presentation to the Annual Town Meeting. The applicant shall also prepare a written document listing the metes and bounds description of the proposed layout, by reference to assessors map and parcel number of all land or easements acceptable by both the DPW Director and Town Counsel. Such document shall be an easement acquired for a public way purposes that will provide the public with all necessary rights of travel and associated use of the way(s) and relative easements, including installation of utilities but will not convey the fee interest in the land contained within the public way layout. After the date of the Town Meeting vote, the remainder of the $25,000 surety shall be returned or the lot released, to the person(s) who originally posted the surety. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 23 

6.17 Modifications or Amendments of Approved Plans 
When an applicant proposes changes to an approved definitive plan, the same requirements shall apply as for filing a Definitive Plan (See Section 6.3 Plan Requirements). Any modification is subject to the Subdivision Rules and Regulations in effect at the time of application. Only the area of modification need be shown if the proposed modification or amendment is a lot development change or utility change. Should the proposed modification or amendment be directly related to a larger component (i.e. drainage, street layout, etc.) then the entire site must be shown on a modification plan. 
6.18 Rescission 
The Board shall have the power to rescind its approval of a definitive plan and all the provisions relating to the submission and approval of a plan shall be applicable to the rescission of such approval. Failure of the developer to record the Definitive Plan within six months of its endorsement, or to comply with the construction schedule, if any, incorporated into the performance agreement, or to either initiate construction of improvements or sell lots in a subdivision or portion thereof within eight (8) years of the approval of the Definitive Plan, or to comply with all applicable sections of the Zoning By-Law and requirements of the Conservation Commission under the Wetlands Protection Act, or any unauthorized departure from any agreements made from these Regulations or plans submitted, whether or not at the direction of other public agencies or officials, shall constitute sufficient reason for the Planning Board to consider rescission of such approval, in accordance with the requirements and procedures of 
M.G.L. c.41 s. 81-W. 
6.19 Appeal 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Planning Board concerning a plan of a subdivision of land, or by the failure of the Board to take final action concerning such a plan within the required time, may appeal to the Superior Court or to the Land Court provided that such appeal is entered within twenty (20) days after such decision has been recorded with the Town Clerk and must also give notice to the Town Clerk so as to be received within the same period. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 24 

SECTION 7 

FEES, PERFORMANCE SECURITIES 
AND SPECIAL ACCOUNTS 

7.1 Filing Fees 

At the time of filing any plan with the Board, a Filing Fee in the form of cash or a check made payable to the “Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea” shall be submitted with the applicable package. The application packages will not be complete until all funds are deposited with the Manchester-by-the-Sea Town Treasurer. Filing fees are as follows:  
PLANNING BOARD FEE SCHEDULE 
Approval Not Required Plans [Form A] 	$250 per lot shown. (ANR) 
Preliminary Subdivision Plan [Form B] 	$2500 + $100 per lot (plus deposit of escrow account funds; see Section 7.2 below). 
Definitive Subdivision Plan [Form C] 	$2500 or $500 per lot, whichever is the  greater (plus deposit of escrow account funds; see Section 7.2 below). 
Definitive Plan Modification [Form C-M] 	$2500 or $500 per lot, whichever is the       greater (plus deposit of escrow account      funds; see Section 7.2 below). 
7.2 Special Accounts for Consultant Costs 
The Board may retain the services of a professional consultant to advise the Board on technical matters, review plans and inspect approved developments if the Board requires the assistance of a Planning, Traffic, Engineering, Legal, Soils or other professional to provide technical reviews and inspections of Subdivision Plans. The applicant will be responsible for paying all consultant costs incurred by the Town. At the time of filing either a preliminary or definitive plan, the applicant shall deposit with the Town Treasurer the following amount to be held in an individual interest bearing escrow account: 
3 Lots or Less: 4 or More Lots: $3,000 minimum deposit  $3,000 minimum deposit, plus $500 per lot in the proposed subdivision  
Checks shall be made payable to the “Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea.” Funds in the individual interest bearing account will be spent to pay consultant fees for the specific project for which they were collected. If at any time prior to approval of the Plan or final completion of the project 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016	 Page 25 

the amount in the account falls below $1,000 for subdivisions of 3 lots or less or $3,000 for subdivisions of 4 or more lots, the applicant shall deposit sufficient funds to bring the account back to the amount of the original deposit or an amount determined by the Board. Said funds must be deposited within ten (10) days of written notification of the Board. Failure to replenish the funds in the account within ten (10) days shall be reason for denial of the plan for failure to comply with these regulations. In the case of approved plans, failure to replenish the required amount of money within ten (10) days of notification shall be cause for the Board to schedule a hearing to rescind the lot releases of developments that are incomplete. 
Following completion of the development and payment of the final consultant bill for reviewing the As-Built drawings, the remaining money in the account, including interest, if any, shall be returned to the applicant. Upon request, a final report of the account shall be made available to the applicant. 
If the legal ownership of the development is transferred to another party, the new owner shall be responsible for meeting all applicable requirements of this section by re-establishing the account for consultant reimbursement. Any person or entity claiming to be the applicant's successor in interest shall provide the Board with sufficient documentation to establish legal ownership. The balance of the original escrow account shall be returned to the party who deposited it. 
The consultant retained by the Board shall provide the Board with a line item invoice which indicates the cost incurred for each project. The consultant shall also provide a report to the Board of their findings and recommendations. 
An applicant may appeal the selection of the Board's consultant to the Board of Selectmen (BOS), providing that such appeal is made within fourteen (14) days of notification of the Board's appointment of the consultant. The reasons for such an appeal shall be limited to claims that the consultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum required qualifications. The minimum qualifications shall consist of an educational degree and five (5) years of practice in the field at issue and, an appropriate license, registration and/or certification in the field at issue. The required time limit for action by the Board upon an application shall be extended by the duration of the administrative appeal. In the event that no decision is made by the Board of Selectmen within thirty (30) days following the filing of the appeal, the selection made by the Board shall stand. 
7.3 Performance Bond 
Following the approval of a Definitive Subdivision Plan, the developer has three options for completing the development: 
Option 1 The developer completes all infrastructure improvements associated with the development such as: roads, drainage, seeding disturbed areas, utilities and tree plantings. If all work is completed to the satisfaction of the Board, no performance security is required and the Board will authorize release of lots. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 26 
Option 2 The developer partially completes improvements associated with the development and posts a Performance Security to ensure completion of the remaining work. The amount of the Performance Security is based on the estimated cost of completion of the development plus contingencies and a factor of 20%. After the developer posts a security acceptable to the Board (see Section 7.6 Form of Security), the Board will authorize release of the lots. 
Option 3 The developer has an approved Definitive Plan, however, no construction has begun. The developer posts a security acceptable to the Board for the entire amount of the cost associated with completing the development. The amount of the security will be based upon the estimated cost of all improvements associated with the development plus contingencies and factor of 20%. After the developer posts a security acceptable to the Board (see Section 7.6 Form of Security), they will authorize release of the lots with a condition that no lot may be built upon until the base course of asphalt leading to the lot has been inspected and approved. 
7.4 As-Built and Roadway Acceptance Plan Security 
Prior to the endorsement of a Definitive Subdivision plan the applicant shall post a security to ensure completion of an As-Built drawing of the development as required in Section 6.15 and a Roadway Acceptance Plan as required in Section 6.16. The amount of the As-Built Bond will be based upon the number of permanent monuments (bounds) and the length of roadway. Bond amounts will be calculated as follows: $150 per bound and $10 per foot of roadway. 
7.5 Procedures 
7.5.1 Release of Lots/Covenant 
The developer shall request in writing an inspection for the purpose of determining an amount for the cost of completing the development. 
Following receipt of the itemized estimate for the cost of completing the development from the Board's consultant, the Board will vote to set the amount of the security. 
After the Board has received the security and accepts the bond as being adequate to ensure completion of the development, it will vote to release the lots and sign a lot release form. An original of the lot release form shall be recorded by the developer at the Registry of Deeds. Proof of recording shall be submitted to the Board within thirty (30) days of endorsement of the release.  
7.5.2 Partial Release of Security 
Following completion of improvements of development under construction, the developer may request, in writing, a partial release of the performance security. The Board will have an inspection made to determine the amount of money necessary to hold in the performance security in order to ensure completion of the development. Following 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 27 
the Board's review of the inspection report the Board may vote to lower the amount of money required in the performance security. The Board will then notify the appropriate authorities to authorize a reduction of the performance security. 
7.5.3 Total Release of Performance Security 
a) Performance Security 
Following completion of the development, the applicant shall request in writing a final inspection. If all work is completed to the satisfaction of the Board, the Board will vote to release all remaining funds held in the performance security. If work remains incomplete or unsatisfactory, the remaining work must be completed within thirty (30) days, at which time another inspection will be conducted. The Planning Director will notify the developer in writing within fourteen (14) days of all incomplete or unacceptable work. When all work is completed to the satisfaction of the Board, the Planning Board will vote to release the balance of the performance security. 
b) As-Built Drawing and Roadway Acceptance Plan Security 
Upon completion of the As-Built drawings and Roadway Acceptance Plan for public ways, the developer shall submit said drawings for review. Following an engineering review of the As-Built drawings, the Board's Engineer shall submit his/her findings to the Board. When the Board receives a favorable recommendation from its engineer to accept the As-Built and/or Roadway Acceptance Plan drawings, the Board will vote to release the security. 
7.5.4 Continued Responsibility of Roadway 
The developer is responsible for the continued maintenance of roadway and utilities of the new street up until the street is accepted by Town Meeting. This includes but is not limited to pavement wearing surface; snowplowing; drainage system; water; sewer; street trees; and sidewalks, if any. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 28 

7.6 Form of Security 

Two forms of security are available to the developer to select from to act as a "bond". The Board's requirements for these securities are described below. No depository institution acting as owner/developer may submit its own passbook account. 
7.6.1 Treasurer's (Bank) Check 
Deposit of a signed check, made out to the “Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea”, with the Town Treasurer. 
7.6.2 Surety Company 
Surety companies acceptable to the Planning Board and registered with Massachusetts Division of Insurance can be utilized for posting a performance bond. The petitioner is responsible for maintaining such performance bond in good standing until such time the Planning Board votes a release. 
7.7 Review and Recall of Security  
7.7.1 The performance security held to ensure completion of the development will be reviewed annually after approval and endorsement of the Definitive Plan or at more frequent intervals at the discretion of the Board. The Board shall call a meeting with the developer to review progress. If the Board finds that the development has not been carried out in good faith, the Board will vote to recall the bond as described below. 
7.7.2 If the Board determines that construction of the roadway, drainage structures or other improvements shown on the approved and endorsed definitive plan have not been completed, the Board will notify the developer in writing. Said notification will specify the incomplete or unsatisfactory work and how the construction or installation fails to comply with the endorsed Definitive Plan and Rules and Regulations. If after forty-five 
(45) days of the Town Clerk's receipt of said notice all work has not been satisfactorily completed, the Board may vote to recall the performance security. The money held in the performance security will be transferred into a special account of the Town's General Fund for the purpose of expenditure on completion of the development. All obligations under the security by the developer will be void. Any interest or remaining balance of the security not expended on completion of the development will be returned to the developer. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 29 

SECTION 8 
DESIGN STANDARDS 

8.1 General 
All definitive plans must comply with the design standards contained in this section and as shown in Appendices A and D. Any variation from these standards must be authorized by a formal vote of the Board and must specify the section of these Rules and Regulations for which a waiver is requested. Failure to comply with these standards without benefit of a waiver shall be grounds for denial of the Definitive Plan. 
NOTE: Material specifications and design standards not specifically addressed within these Rules and Regulations shall comply with the standards set forth in Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges, published by the Massachusetts Highway Department, hereafter referenced as “State Specifications”, and A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets published by the America Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) hereafter referred to as “AASHTO.” 
8.2 Design Guidelines 
The roadway, drainage design and building construction in all subdivisions shall be designed to accomplish the following goals: 
REDUCE, TO THE GREATEST EXTENT POSSIBLE:  
a) Volume of cut and fill;  
b) Area over which existing vegetation will be disturbed, especially if within 200 feet of a water body, wetlands resource area, or a slope of more than 15%;  
c) Number of mature trees removed. The petitioner should consult with the Tree Warden as to the removal of any trees that may be subject to the Shade Tree Act (M.G.L. c .87) and/or the Scenic Road Act (M.G.L. c. 40 s. 15-C); 
d) Extent of waterways altered or relocated; 
e) Visual impact of man-made elements not necessary for safety; 
f) Erosion or siltation; 
g) Alteration of natural valley flood storage areas; 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 30 

h) Disturbance of important wildlife habitats, outstanding ecological or botanical features, scenic 
views or historic resources; 
i) Detrimental impacts to water quality 

INCREASE, TO THE EXTENT REASONABLY POSSIBLE: 
a) Vehicular use of principal streets to avoid traffic on secondary and minor streets providing 
house frontages; 

b) Visual prominence of natural features of the landscape; 
c) Legal and physical protection of views from public ways; 
d) Design street layouts to facilitate southern orientation of houses; 
e) Use of curvilinear street patterns; 
f) Pedestrian and bicycle access and safety; 
g) Natural green belt & trees, etc. on lots. 

8.3 Streets 
All streets shall be designed to provide safe vehicular travel. Consideration shall be given to the number of dwellings served and to creating an aesthetically pleasing design of the street layout. 
8.3.1 Classification of Streets [see SECTION 2] 
Subdivision streets shall be divided into the following classifications for the purpose of 
establishing the applicable design and construction standards: 

Arterial Streets shall have a R.O.W. layout width of seventy-five (75) feet. 
Collector Streets shall have a R.O.W. layout width of sixty (60) feet. 
Minor Streets shall have a R.O.W. layout width of fifty (50) feet. Second means of access/egress required. 
Lanes including cul-de-sacs shall have a R.O.W. layout width of forty (40) feet. No second means of access required. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 31 

8.3.2 Pavement Widths 

  # of Lots Served   ROW  Min. Width of Traveled Way*  
Lane  4-10  40 ft  20 ft.  
Minor  11+  50 ft  22 ft.  
Collector  60 ft  24 ft.  
Arterial  75 ft  34 ft.  

*Curb width is in addition to the Traveled Way Width  
8.3.3 Cross-Section shall be as required on 8.3.2 above. The Board may require additional lanes, widths, or other dimension changes where the proposed use requires such for public safety. All cross sections shall conform to Figures 1 and 2 in Appendix D and shall meet the following design criteria: 
a) Except by approval of the Board, all wires for electricity, cable television, telephones or similar utility distribution systems shall be installed in conduit underground with all such distribution systems spaced not less than thirty six (36) inches (horizontally) from any water main, detector tape should be placed above the conduits. 
b) All poles for telephone, electric light or other cables shall be located at least five (5) feet from the face of the curb and shall not be placed in sidewalks. 
c) Sidewalks shall be constructed as indicated in Appendix A and Appendix D. 
8.3.4 Location, Alignment, Intersections 
a) Property lines at street intersections shall have a radius of not less than thirty (30) feet. In the case of intersections with significant traffic flow or other public safety issues, greater radii may be required. Minimum roadway curb line radii at all intersections shall be thirty (30) feet. 
b) The minimum roadway centerline radius shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet [& one hundred (100) feet for a Lane]. Greater radii may be required for principal and secondary streets, or where otherwise determined by the Board to pose a safety hazard.  
c) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. No street shall intersect any other street at less than sixty (60) degrees. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 32 

d) Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out either directly opposite each other or with a minimum offset of two hundred (200) feet between their center lines. 
e) Connection of Subdivision Ways to Public Ways: 
In the case of a Definitive Plan showing the connection of Ways within the subdivision over a private way to a Public Way, approval of the Definitive Plan shall be denied unless the applicant has sufficient rights in the Private Way to enable the applicant to construct improvements to the private way to bring it into conformance with the requirements of these Rules and Regulations, or as waived pursuant to M.G.L. c.41, s. 81R. The Definitive Plan shall show such Private Way, in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 6.3 Plan Requirements and this section. 
f) Reserve strips which prohibit access to streets or adjoining property shall not be allowed unless the Board determines that they are in the public interest. 
8.3.5 Clear Sight Distance 
a) All roadway design shall take into consideration safe sight distances not only at intersections but also along the traveled way, or as stated below. Clear sight distance shall take into account topography, density of dwelling units, and horizontal and vertical alignment.  
b) There must be an unobstructed sight distance along both approaches of both roads at an intersection and across their included corners for a distance sufficient to allow the operators of both vehicles approaching simultaneously to see each other in time to prevent a collision. Visibility from centerline of a street shall never be less than fifty (50) feet for Lanes, seventy-five (75) feet for Minor Streets and Collector Streets and one hundred (100) feet for Arterial Streets. Sight distance at street intersections shall not be less than three hundred (300) feet in each direction. Any object high enough to constitute a visual obstruction, including structures, trees, vegetation, fences, cut slopes and embankments shall be removed or lowered. The Board may require greater sight distances for intersections with heavily travelled main roads. 
8.3.6 Grades 
a) Grades of all streets shall be not less than one percent (1%), nor more than six percent (6%). Where the six percent (6%) requirement would result in adverse impacts to the aesthetic value of the site due to extensive cut and/or fill or tree removal, the Board may waive the six percent (6%) requirement provided such waiver is consistent with safety determinants, including the distance from an intersection, the number of dwellings served, the type of street, the length of the steeper graded portion of the street, the horizontal alignment and street curvature. At all intersections, the minimum grade on the 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 33 
approach street shall not exceed two percent (2%) within a distance of one hundred (100) feet of the point at which the edges of the travel lanes intersect. Street grade at cul-de-sac turnarounds shall not exceed three percent (3%). Intersecting streets shall have sag vertical curve on approach street to keep water from encroaching onto pavement of through street. 
b) There shall be a vertical curve for any change in street grade. Where proposed pavements meet existing pavements a vertical curve is not required if the difference in tangent grades is less than one-half of one percent (0.5%). Vertical crest curves shall have a minimum K value of thirty-five (35). Sag curves shall have a minimum K value of forty (40). K values of vertical curves shall be adjusted to provide the required stopping sight distance for the design speed as defined by AASHTO. 
8.3.7 Cul-de-sacs 
a) General - Dead end streets, including cul-de-sacs, shall not exceed 500 feet in length, as measured to the back of the cul-de-sac property line, unless a greater length is deemed desirable by the Board because of topography or other local conditions. For the purposes of this Section, any proposed street which intersects solely with a dead-end street shall be deemed to be an extension of the dead-end street. 
b) Design Standards - All cul-de-sacs shall be provided with the following: 
1. A circular turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least one hundred 
(100) feet, and a property line diameter of at least one hundred and twenty (120) feet unless otherwise specified by the Board. The Board may, at its option, allow an outside roadway diameter of up to two hundred (200) feet with the placement of a circular landscaped island with a minimum radius of twenty (20) feet a the center of the turn­around, if the dead-end street is not intended to connect with another street at some future point in time.  
2.
 The pavement width at all turnarounds shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet with a granite vertical curb and a six (6) inch reveal. 

3.
 The unpaved area of all cul-de-sac turnarounds must be landscaped with low maintenance trees and shrubbery. 

4.
 Road grade shall not exceed three (3%) within a cul-de-sac. 

5.
 Bituminous paving shall be used. 

6.
 Drainage shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 8.4 below. 

7.
 Modified turnarounds such as hammerheads may not be used. 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 34 

8.4 Storm Water - Drainage 
a) General - The proposed storm water drainage shall minimize contribution of pollutants to surface or groundwater on or off the site and shall not adversely impact adjacent property by creating ponding, significant changes in the water table or increases in water discharge as noted herein. The applicant must contact the Conservation Commission to determine if the M.G.L. c. 131, s. 40 and Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea General Bylaw Article VII, apply. The applicant is encouraged to be innovative in creating a system which will fulfill the objectives listed in Section 8.4 c). 
b) Design - Storm water drainage systems shall implement "Best Management Practices" and conform to the guidelines described in the Performance Standards and Guidelines for Storm Water Management in Massachusetts published by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection. 
Under certain circumstances, the Planning Board may also consider, after demonstration by a registered engineer, other designs and practices common to Low Impact Development (LID) to mitigate the effects of storm water runoff when reviewing storm water drainage systems. 
c) Objectives - All available drainage management systems shall be reviewed to determine the appropriate method or combination of methods for the site. Soil types, topography, wetland types and location, vegetative cover, water table, flood conditions and the presence of water bodies on or near the site shall all be considered in the design of the drainage system: 
Plans and calculations shall be developed in coordination with the Board, Planning Director, DPW Director, Board of Health, and the Conservation Commission. The following objectives shall guide the design: 
1.
 Protect surface and groundwater quality using creative, multi-stage systems;  

2.
 Minimize disruption to existing natural and topographic features on the site; 

3.
 Ensure no increase in the rate of discharge from pre-development to post- development conditions. 

4.
 Minimize future maintenance of the system; 

5.
 Ensure public safety; 

6.
 Protect existing abutting homes, properties and septic systems; 

7.
 Create aesthetically pleasing designs which enhance views of the natural environment; 

8.
 Prohibit direct discharges into any water body or resource area. 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 35 

8.4.1 Design Requirements - Design of the drainage system shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.
 Calculations - There shall be no increase in the peak rate of storm water runoff leaving the site for pre- and post- development. Design calculations to determine the size of all pipes, culverts and basins shall be submitted to the Board for review and shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Calculations shall be clearly organized, detailed and accompanied by a written narrative. Sizing of the piping system shall be based on the Rational Method. Drainage calculations shall include a map showing the tributary watershed areas, soil types and surficial cover characteristics (e.g., forest, grass, pavement). 

b.
 Drainage System - The drainage system shall be designed based on a twenty- five (25) year storm event. A complete storm drainage system shall be designed for each street and shall be laid out and be of sufficient size to permit unimpeded flow of all natural waterways, to eliminate undesirable accumulation of water on any portion of the subdivision or surrounding property and to intercept storm water runoff from adjacent lots. The storm drainage system shall include catch basins, manholes, pipe, gutters, swales, culverts, head-walls, and other related items as may be required to complete the system to the satisfaction of the Board. APPENDIX B contains the specifications for acceptable materials and installation practices for drainage systems. 


1. Catch basins shall be located along edges of pavement at all low points in the roadway and at intervals as follows: 
Maximum 300 ft. for grades up to 4% 
Maximum 250 ft. for grades from 4% to 6% 
Maximum 200 ft. for grades greater than 6% 
No basins shall be located within driveway curb cuts or at sidewalk handicap access ramps. 
2.
 Storm water drainage piping shall be minimum twelve (12) inch diameter and shall have a minimum depth of cover of two feet six inches (2'-6") as measured from the roadway subgrade. Slope of pipe shall not be less than 1/2 of one percent (0.5%). The drainage system shall be designed for a minimum self- scouring velocity of three (3) ft./sec. 

3.
 Drainage pipes shall have positive outfalls, head-walls with wing walls or pre- formed flared end sections, and rip-rapped stone aprons to provide energy dissipation. In every case, a minimum of thirty (30) feet of vegetated swale shall be provided above the high water line of any stream, swamp, bank or wetlands. All outfalls into resource areas or their buffer zones shall be subject to the approval of the Conservation Commission. 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 36 

4.
 Manholes shall be located at all changes in direction of drainage pipe, either horizontally or vertically, at all pipe connections and at maximum intervals of three hundred (300) ft. along pipe runs. 

5.
 Culverts shall be designed on the basis of a one hundred (100) year storm on the assumption that the entire drainage area is built up to the density allowed by the current zoning bylaws. Hydraulic Calculations necessary to determine the size of waterway opening shall be submitted to the Board for review. Culverts shall have a head-wall at each end. Culverts thirty-six (36) inches or greater in equivalent diameter shall include additional protection for roadway side slopes and grates. 


c. Swales - Wherever practical, except alongside roadways, stormwater shall be channeled via open swales to facilitate the removal of contaminants. 
1.
 Scuppers or swales from the roadway onto adjacent lots must be designed to direct flows away from any existing or proposed homes. Whenever possible, scuppers and swales should be grassed to promote aesthetics and the removal of contaminants. Where higher velocities require the use of a heavier lining, rip-rap, trap rock or other similar material shall be used to prevent erosion. 

2.
 Swales shall have minimum side slopes of 3:1 (horizontal to vertical) with maximum slope of swale not to exceed five percent (5%). 

3.
 Dense vegetative cover shall be established as quickly as possible. Organic matter shall be incorporated into the soil for pollutant removal. Grasses shall be planted to provide enhanced vertical resistance to stormwater runoff. 


d.
 Off-Site Systems - The use of existing or proposed off-site drainage systems will require the submission of legal easements or agreements with the applicable land owner as well as an access easement in the Town's favor. Drainage systems within off-site easement areas must comply with the requirements of these Subdivision Rules and Regulations. Calculations must be submitted demonstrating conformance with these Subdivision Rules and Regulations. All easements must be of a form acceptable to Town Counsel. See Section 8.8 Easements. 

e.
 Sites within Water Resource Overlay Protection Districts (WROPD) and Flood Control Districts - Special attention shall be given to sites within the WROPD as defined in Section 4.9 of the Manchester-by-the-Sea Bylaw and shown on a map with the same title, dated December 4, 2002; other communities' Zone II; and areas subject to protection under M.G.L. c. 131, s. 40 or Town of Manchester General By-Law, Chapter VII; and within the Flood Control District as defined in Section 4.7 of the Manchester-by-the-Sea Bylaw and as shown on a map entitled “Storm Drainage Improvements for the Bennett’s Brook Drainage Area” dated October, 1971. 


http://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 37 

For such sites, the Board will require that a nitrogen loading analysis be performed to determine the suitability of the drainage system. These requirements also apply to existing drainage facilities either on or off the site which will be affected by runoff from the proposed subdivision. The analysis shall be based on criteria established in the Manchester-by-the-Sea Zoning Bylaw Section 4.9.4.1(a-c). 
f. Drainage Basins - Detailed designs of all detention/retention basins and pre- treatment basins are required. At a minimum they shall include cross sections, soil types, depth to maximum level of groundwater, final slopes and elevations. A planting and stabilization schedule is required for side slopes. Drainage basins shall meet the following criteria: 
1.
 Bottom of basins shall be a minimum of two (2) feet above maximum groundwater level and shall be vegetated to promote filtration of contaminants. Permanent standing water is discouraged unless the basin is located adjacent to or hydrogeologically connected to a wetland or water body. 

2.
 A pre-treatment facility shall be provided to remove contaminants from the water prior to entering a detention/retention basin. Contaminants shall include sediment, grit, oil and general debris. Pre-treatment facilities may include lined siltation basins, oil/water separators, and oil/grit separators. No water shall be permitted to recharge or leach into the ground unless it has been pre-treated to remove oil and sediment. 

3.
 Basins shall be designed to contain a twenty-five (25) year design storm with one (1) foot of freeboard at the maximum water level. All basins shall be designed with an emergency overflow spillway with appropriate erosion control protection. 

4.
 Retention facilities shall be designed to dissipate within seventy-two (72) hours based on the percolation rate of the soil. Percolation tests for the site shall be required if a retention basin with recharge of stormwater into the ground is proposed. 

5.
 Basin length to width ratio shall be at least 3:1 to maximize distance from inlet to outlet. Basin surface area shall be maximized. 

6.
 Side slopes in basins shall not exceed 3:1 (horizontal to vertical) above a permanent pool and 2:1 within a permanent pool. 

7.
 In dry basins, a pervious low flow channel shall be used to prevent erosion of the bottom of basin. Low flow channels shall have a minimum grade of two (2%) percent to prevent ponding. Suitable protection shall be provided to prevent erosion of the channel. 

8.
 All pipes and risers shall be equipped with trash racks and/or guards as appropriate to prevent entry by children and animals. 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 38 

9.
 Basins and associated outlet aprons and swales shall be incorporated into separate land parcels exclusively for purposes of stormwater management rather than be shown as easements. These parcels shall include the required buffers and maintenance access. 

10.
 All facilities shall be designed to blend into the landscape to obviate the need for fencing and screening. Wherever possible, they shall follow the natural contours of the land so as not to create large disturbed areas, steep slopes or walls. Basins over four (4) feet in depth are not permitted. 

11.
 Means of access for mechanized maintenance equipment shall be provided to all basins. 

12.
 Plans for pre-treatment marshes shall specify the average and maximum levels of the adjacent water body and the final proposed water level of the marsh. If storage capacity is being created, the plans shall illustrate the methods being employed as well as the type and elevation of inlets and outlets. A specific planting scheme of wetland vegetation is required. 


(a). Pre-treatment marshes shall be constructed in upland areas. Wetlands shall not be removed or altered for marsh construction without approval of the Conservation Commission. 
(b). To promote water quality, the marsh shall be designed to retain the "first flush" of stormwater runoff to allow contaminants to settle out prior to entering the adjacent water body. Subsequently, it must be capable of storing or detaining a ten (10) year storm event. 
13.
 A fifty (50) ft. buffer zone of existing vegetation shall be retained between all basins or pre-treatment facilities and adjacent uses or structures. Buffers shall be adapted for access and shall be fully contained within the drainage lot. A thirty (30) ft. buffer zone of existing vegetation shall be retained between all point source discharges of stormwater and surface waters and wetlands. In tidal areas, the buffer zone shall be measured from the mean high tide level. 

14.
 Basins shall have positive outfalls with rip-rapped stone aprons to provide energy dissipation. In every case, a minimum of thirty (30) ft. of vegetated swale above the high water line of any stream, swamp, bank or wetlands shall be provided. 

15.
 The Board may require that a separate performance guarantee be posted to secure the completion and satisfactory functioning of any drainage basin or pre-treatment facility. This performance guarantee may be required for a specified time period to ensure the proper growth of plant species pursuant to M.G.L. c. 131, s. 40, 310 CMR (10.55). 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 39 

g) An Operation and Maintenance Plan shall be submitted to set up the functional, financial and organizational mechanisms for the ongoing operation and maintenance of the stormwater management system, based on Section 6.15.8 of the Zoning By-Law of Manchester-by-the-Sea. 
8.5 Utility Requirements 
a) Water pipes and related equipment such as hydrants and water main shut-off valves shall be designed in accordance with the latest standards of the American Water Works Association and shall be installed under the direction and supervision of the DPW Director to serve each lot of the subdivision. 
b) Public Water Supply Standards: Wherever feasible, water supply shall be provided from a public water supply system. The water supply system will be considered adequate only if it is capable of providing each proposed fire hydrant with a flow of 750 gpm at 20 psi residual pressure for single and two family residential developments. For multi-family and non­residential developments approval of the Fire Chief is required. Each proposed lot shall have water pressure of 35 psi, average peak day, at street grade without individual booster pumps for domestic water. Where any part of any lot is at elevation 120 feet (msl) or higher, the applicant shall submit calculations documenting supply adequacy. 
c) Private Supply Standards: Where connection to the public water supply is not feasible in the opinion of the Planning Board, the Planning Board may approve a subdivision upon the Board’s determination, following consultation with the Fire Chief, that a sprinkler system or other provisions will adequately provide for fire safety. In addition, upon the Board’s determination, following consultation with the Board of Health, wells on each lot shall be able to provide a sustained yield of five gpm of water meeting latest edition DEP "Drinking Water Regulations of Massachusetts" standards. Test wells may be required of the applicant. 
d) Sewage disposal: On-site sewage disposal facilities shall be constructed in conformance with the Rules and Regulations of the Board of Health as promulgated and amended from time to time. No house may be occupied until the sewage disposal facilities have been approved by the Board of Health, and a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building Inspector. 
The applicant shall submit sufficient information including test pits, perc tests, topographic and hydrologic data to indicate the feasibility of on-site disposal in the event public sewers are not available. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 40 

8.6 LED Street Lights 
Street lights may be required at intersections of streets, near sharp turns or other areas where the Board deems they are needed for public safety. All fixtures shall be LED and shall have a color temperature approved by the Board and the DPW Director. Lighting shall be directed downward to prevent light from shining into residences or the eyes of pedestrians or drivers. The developer is responsible for installing the pole, wiring and arranging installation of the light fixture. The developer is responsible for paying for the cost of electricity until such time as the road is accepted by Town Meeting, or in the case of private roads, approval of the As-Built drawing at which time the light bill will be paid by fee owners of the road. Street lights must be installed prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the first dwelling in the subdivision. Design and placement shall be approved by the DPW Director. 
8.7 Street Names 
Road names shall be determined by the Planning Board with the advice of the House Numbering Committee at the time of approval of the Definitive Plan. Street name signs that conform with street signs used by the Town shall be furnished and erected at all street intersections. Other road signs, 
i.e. "Private Street", shall be furnished and erected, as the Board determines necessary.  
8.8 Easements 
Utility or drainage easements shall be provided where necessary and shall, whenever possible, be centered on side or rear lot lines, and shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) ft. wide. For any utilities or drainage pipes buried greater than ten (10) feet below finished grade, the Planning Board will require Town ownership in lieu of an easement unless a public benefit can be demonstrated. All easements shall be shown on the definitive plan, As-Built drawing and Roadway Acceptance Plan. 
All easements shall be accompanied by Easement Documents for recording at the Registry of Deeds. Easements must be clearly defined and described on the definitive plan. The applicant is responsible for recording all easement documents following endorsement of the definitive plan by the Board. Proof of recording shall be submitted to the Board within thirty (30) days of endorsement of the plan. Easements shall be in a form acceptable to Town Counsel. 
There shall be no placement of any structure and/or subsurface system either above or below the land subject to an approved easement unless such easement is expressly dedicated to such use.  
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 41 

SECTION 9 
FRONTAGE WAIVER REQUESTS 
Applicants shall apply under the same procedures as a standard Definitive Subdivision plan, however, the plan showing the lots for which a waiver is requested shall consist of a plan similar to an ANR plan. All other plan requirements shall be the same as in a modification request. 
SECTION 10 
STREET SIGNS 
During construction, temporary signage shall be posted for street identification. The developer shall erect and set in concrete the permanent street sign pole. The street sign will be made by the Department of Public Works upon written request and payment of the applicable DPW fee. The developer is then responsible for installing the sign on the pole prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the first house in the development. All streets must have a sign made by the DPW that conforms to Town specifications. Any other proposal for street identification shall require approval from the DPW prior to installation 
SECTION 11 
SHADE TREES 
All subdivisions shall have deciduous shade trees in order to enhance the aesthetic quality of the streetscape. 
The location, size, number and species of trees shall be approved by the Planning Board, after consultation with the Tree Warden. Following the construction of the base course of the roadway, the developer shall request the Tree Warden to verify the staked locations for tree plantings. Groups of trees or shrubs may be required within the island of a cul-de-sac. 
Trees shall be nursery stock quality, minimum of two (2) inch caliper. All trees must be properly wrapped and guyed, where indicated. Trees shall be planted at appropriate seasons in order to ensure survival. The developer shall be responsible for maintaining the health of the trees for two 
(2) full growing seasons or until such time as the As-Built plans of the street are approved by the Board (private ways), or the acceptance of the street by Town Meeting (public ways) whichever is longer. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 42 

SECTION 12 
PRESERVATION OF NATURAL VEGETATION 
Every effort shall be made to preserve the existing trees or other rare or unique flora within the 
R.O.W. and on the lots being created. Cuts and fill for roadway construction shall be done in a manner that preserves natural vegetation whenever possible. Stock-piles of fill shall be located in areas that do not bury existing trees above the natural grade. Machine operators shall exercise due caution during construction and avoid unnecessary damage to root systems or scraping bark from trees to be preserved. 
The developer shall erect 8 ft x 8 ft. temporary wooden tree guards around specific trees designated to be saved to protect them from damage during construction. 
SECTION 13 
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 
The construction of all subdivision improvements shall only occur during seasonal and weather conditions that allow for high quality infrastructure construction, utilizing accepted industry standards. See APPENDIX A, APPENDIX B, and APPENDIX D. 
SECTION 14 
CLEAN UP 
Upon completion of all work on the ground, the developer shall remove from the streets and adjoining property, all temporary structures and all surplus material and rubbish which may have accumulated during construction, and shall leave the work in a neat and orderly condition. During construction, the developer shall keep the site free of rubbish which may be carried by wind or rain off the site to abutting properties or onto public ways. 
SECTION 15 
MAINTENANCE 
The developer shall maintain the roads for vehicular travel, including snow plowing, in a manner satisfactory to the Board, until approval of the As-built plan for private roads or acceptance by Town Meeting for proposed public ways. Further, the developer shall maintain the completed roads, drainage structures and shade trees in a subdivision in a condition which meets all the above requirements to the satisfaction of the Board up until approval of the As-Built plan or until acceptance of the roads by vote of Town Meeting. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 43 

APPENDIX A 
ROADWAY CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS 
The following specifications shall govern the construction of all streets within the right- of-way (R.O.W.) lines of a proposed subdivision under the Rules and Regulations governing the Subdivision of Land, adopted by the Manchester-by-the-Sea Planning Board. 
The term "Standard Specifications" as used in this section in reference to materials and methods of construction shall mean Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges of the Massachusetts Highway Department, dated 1988, and including all supplements and revisions.  
The term “AASHTO” shall refer to “A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets” published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
The contractor shall notify the DPW Director in writing at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of beginning any construction within a public way. 
1.0 ROADWAYS 
1.1 Clearing and Grubbing  
A. All areas to be cleared and grubbed within the roadway R.O.W. lines of a subdivision shall be clearly shown on the definitive plan in conjunction with the proposed landscaping. The intent of the Planning Board is to maintain as much of the original natural vegetation as possible within a subdivision. Trees to be preserved shall be physically protected from construction operations in a manner satisfactory to the Tree Warden. Areas to be cleared and grubbed shall be cleared of all stumps, brush, roots, boulders and trees not designated for preservation. All resulting debris from clearing and grubbing operations shall be properly disposed of off- site in accordance with all local, state and federal regulations. Stump dumps shall not be permitted within a subdivision. 
Clearing and grubbing shall be required as follows: 
a) A minimum of four (4’) feet from the proposed sideline of the travelled way of an 
Arterial, Collector or Minor Road 
b) A minimum of two (2’) feet from the sideline of the travelled way of a Lane  
c) Within areas required for grading purposes 
d) Within ten (10) feet of an underground utility  
e) As required to maintain sight lines  
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 44 

B. All loam and other yielding material not suitable for foundation material shall be stripped from the full length and width of the paved roadway area of each street or way –under the six (6) foot wide grass shoulders and under sidewalks- to a depth of four (4) feet below the finished sub-grade and to a greater depth as may be required by the Planning Board or by the Director of Public Works, and replaced with an approved material. The sub-grade shall be thoroughly compacted before applying the gravel surface. Ledge and large boulders occurring anywhere in the full cross-section of the roadway must be cleared to a minimum depth of eighteen (18) inches below the finish surface. Roadway crown shall be 2% percent. No loam or gravel shall be removed from the area shown on the Definitive Plan except in accordance with the approved Plan. 
C. Grade stakes shall be set and maintained at fifty (50) foot intervals on each side of the right­of-way. 
1.2 Sub-Base and Base 
A. The roadway shall be provided with a gravel base consisting of at least fifteen (15) inches compacted thickness of binding gravel [eighteen (18) inches in the case of Minor, Collector, Arterial and Industrial-Commercial Streets], satisfactory to the Director of Public Works, clean, free of organic matter, and containing no stones over three (3) inches in diameter, The gravel shall be spread in two (2) layers, each thoroughly watered and rolled true to line and grade. 
B. Before the gravel is spread, the roadbed shall be shaped to a true surface conforming to the proposed cross-section of the road. Rolling shall be with an approved three (3) wheel roller or equivalent, weighing not less than ten (10) tons. All layers shall be compacted to not less than ninety-five (95) percent of the maximum dry density of the material as determined by the Standard AASHTO Test Designation T-180 compaction test Method D, at optimum moisture content. Any depressions that occur, either during or after rolling, must be filled with additional gravel and re-rolled until the surface is true and even. When required by the Board or the Director of Public Works, samples of the gravel to be used shall be tested for gradation by a sieve analysis and the compacted gravel shall be tested for compaction. The Planning Board may require streets to be re-excavated if the gravel base is placed prior to Plan approval or prior to an inspection and approval of the base.  
The grading shall conform to the following requirements:  
SIEVE PERCENT PASSING 
1/2 inch 59% - 85% 
3/8 inch 45% - 80% 
No.4 40% - 75% 
No. 10 30% - 60% 
No. 40 10% - 35% 
No. 200 0% - 10% 

Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 45 

C. The completed gravel base shall be treated the full pavement width as specified by the Director of Public Works.  
D. Four (4) inches of dense graded crushed stone meeting the requirements of Section M2.01.7 of the Standard Specifications to be spread and compacted in accordance with Section 402 of the Standard Specifications. 
E. The base material shall continue beyond the edge of the travelled way a distance of six (6) feet to provide a stabilized shoulder for occasional parking of vehicles. 
1.3 Pavement 
A. The base and finish courses of roadways and driveways within the right-of- way shall be Type-I Bituminous concrete pavement applied as per the table below, in accordance with Section 460 of the Standard Specifications. 
Pavement Thickness Base Course Finish Course 
Lane    2” 1 ½” Minor Street 2 ½” 1 ½” Collector Street 2 ½” 2” 
B. The base course shall be applied after the treated roadway has been sufficiently compacted as approved by the Director of Public Works. No pavement shall be laid if frost is present in the ground. The finish course shall be applied only after the base course has weathered through at least one (1) winter and the temperature is 40º and rising 
2.0 SIDEWALKS 
2.1 Location, section and dimensions of concrete sidewalks shall be as shown in Figure 2. Sidewalks shall be at least six (6) inches higher than the adjacent roadway and at least 4’-6” wide. 
2.2 Sidewalks shall be constructed of four (4) inches of cement concrete on a minimum eight 
(8) inch gravel borrow sub-base conforming to the requirements of Section 701 of the Standard Specifications. Concrete shall have a minimum 28 (twenty-eight) day compressive strength of 4,000 psi with maximum 3/4 inch aggregate. One layer of No. 4, four by six inch (4x6) welded wire mesh shall be provided at mid-depth. The walking surface shall be broom finished. Concrete surfaces shall be coated on the top and sides with an approved sealer. Expansion joints (1/2 inch open) shall be provided at least every twenty (20) feet, with score joints at four (4) foot intervals. All expansion joints shall use a pre-formed expansion joint filler conforming to Section 
9.14.0 of the Standard Specifications. 
2.3 Sidewalks may meander to avoid destruction of existing major trees. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 46 
2.4
 All driveway aprons that cross proposed sidewalks shall be concrete to match the concrete sidewalk. Concrete driveway aprons shall be installed with the installation of sidewalks.  

3.0 
CURB OR BERM 


3.1 Curb or berm shall be placed along both shoulders of traveled ways.  
a.
 Hot Mix asphalt monoberm shall be installed along both sides of all streets except where vertical granite curb is required as set forth in Section 3.1 b. below.  

b.
 Vertical granite curbing Granite Curbing Type VA4 with six (6) inch reveal which is cut to the required radius, shall be placed after the binder course and before the finish course of Hot Mix Asphalt. 


 Granite curbing is required in the following locations:  
1) intersections vertical granite curbing shall include curb return radius curb, one 6 ft. long straight curb section, and a transition curb at each location.  
2) all curves having a radius of sixty (60) feet or less at the street line or a central angle of thirty (30) degrees or more shall have the gutter line curbed with curbing both circular and straight to fit the curve and the ends of the curve shall be extended by a straight section of curbing not less than five (5) feet long.  
 3) the straight leg of T- intersections and shall extend for the same length as the granite curb on the opposite side of the street. 
 4) roadway segments sloped steeper than six (6) percent, and shall terminate with 6 ft. long transition curbs. 
 5) the entire perimeter of all cul de sac turnarounds. Where a raingarden is proposed, curbing shall be omitted around cul-de-sac islands to allow stormwater runoff to flow into a cul-de-sac raingarden. 
3.2 Curbing shall be omitted along roadway segments or along entire roadways to allow stormwater runoff to flow into dry swales. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 47 

4.0 GRASS STRIPS AND CLEARED AREAS  
All areas disturbed by construction and grading operations adjacent to the pavement and sidewalk, within the limits of the Right-of-Way shall be seeded. A minimum of six (6) inches of loam (depth after compaction) shall be applied and the areas shall be seeded with grass seed. Composition of seed mixture must be indicated on the Definitive Landscape Plan. A dense robust vegetated area must be established and maintained until the development is certified as complete by the Board. These areas shall be periodically mowed and watered as required to maintain a neat appearance during construction of houses in the development. 
5.0 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES  
5.1 All underground utilities shall be marked with continuous plastic detector tape located in the backfill six (6) inches above the utility. 
5.2
 Water mains, hydrants and house lateral connections shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Manchester Department of Public Works.  

6.0
 GUARD RAILS  


Guard rails shall be required whenever the slope is greater than four (4) horizontal to one (1) vertical downhill, and the length of the slope is determined by the Board or the DPW Director to constitute a hazardous condition or there is a drop of more than four (4) feet from the Traveled Way to the bottom of slope. Guard rails shall comply with current Standard Specifications. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 48 

APPENDIX B 

DRAINAGE MATERIALS AND INSTALLATION SPECIFICATIONS  

1.0 GENERAL 
1.1 DESCRIPTION 
a) This section specifies the materials and methods of construction required for the construction of a storm drainage system for a proposed development 
b) An applicant may propose alternate materials and methods of construction which deviate from the requirements of these specifications provided that such proposed alternates are of equal or better quality to the materials and methods of construction specified in this section. The Board will be the sole judge as to the acceptability of any proposed alternate. 
1.2 STATE SPECIFICATIONS 
The term "Standard Specifications" in this section shall mean materials and methods of construction, and shall refer to the Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges of the Massachusetts Highway Department, dated 1988, including all amendments. 
1.3 NOTIFICATION 
The contractor shall notify the DPW Director in writing at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of beginning any construction within a public way. 
2.0 MATERIALS 
2.1 PIPE 
a) Pipe for storm drainage s systems shall be either reinforced concrete pipe (Class III minimum), HDE or corrugated plastic meeting the requirements of Sections M5.02.1 and M5.03.10 of the Standard Specifications, respectively. Minimum pipe size shall be twelve (12) inch diameter. Corrugated plastic pipe shall not be used as flared ends or in other applications where the pipe is exposed to vandalism or ultraviolet radiation. Corrugated plastic pipe shall have a smooth interior. 
b) Pipe joint material for reinforced concrete pipe shall be rubber ring or plastic gaskets made of tough, flexible, chemical-resistant material of such size and shape to ensure satisfactory, watertight pipe joints in conformance with ASTM-C443. Gaskets for joining pipe shall be compatible with the pipe system. Corrugated plastic pipe shall be firmly joined by an approved coupling. Methods for joining pipe shall be approved by the DPW Director. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 49 

2.2 MANHOLES AND CATCH BASINS 

a) Manholes and catch basins shall be precast concrete units conforming to the requirements of Section M4.02.14 of the Standard Specifications. Concrete for precast units shall have a minimum twenty-eight (28) day compressive strength of 4,000 psi. Precast units shall be designed for HS-20 loading. Joints between sections shall be tongue and groove, sealed with a rubber joint material conforming to ASTM C361. Exterior surfaces of precast units shall be sealed with a cold applied bituminous sealer. Size and dimensions of manholes and catch basins shall be approved by the DPW Director. 
b) Castings for frames, grates, covers and hoods shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A48, Grade 30, minimum. All castings shall be coated with an approved black asphaltum. 
c) Brick and mortar for field adjusting collars shall conform to the requirements of Sections M4.05.02 and M4.02.15 of the Standard Specifications, respectively. 
d) The minimum diameter of manholes shall be forty-eight (48) inches. Manholes shall have cast iron or reinforced plastic step rungs at twelve (12) inch spacing for access to the bottom. Steps shall be designed for a minimum load of three hundred (300) pounds. Manhole covers shall have the word "DRAIN" embossed on the cover unless otherwise directed by the DPW Director. 
e) Catch basins shall have a minimum three [3'-0"] foot sump provided. Cast iron hoods shall be provided on all outlet pipes to prevent floating oil and debris from entering the drainage pipe. 
2.3 PIPE OUTFALLS 
a) Flared end sections of pipe shall be reinforced concrete precast sections (Class III) conforming to the requirements of Sections M5.02.0 of the Standard Specifications. 
b) Headwalls and wingwalls for end sections shall be constructed of reinforced concrete with a minimum 28 day compressive strength of 4,000 psi conforming to the requirements of Sections M4.02.00 (4,000 psi, 3/4 inch, 610 pound cement) of the State Specifications. Steel bar reinforcement shall be ASTM A615, Grade 60. Headwalls and wingwalls shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of the Standard Specifications. 
c) All pipe outfalls shall be protected from erosion with stone for pipe ends conforming to the requirements of Section M2.02.3 of the Standard Specifications. 
3.0 CONNECTIONS TO EXISTING STRUCTURES  
3.1 Cut holes in existing structure walls for new pipe connections to the minimum size required for pipe installation. Completely fill the space around the pipe with stiff cement mortar for the full thickness of the wall. All pipes shall be cut flush with the inside of structure. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 50 

3.2
 Rim elevations of existing drainage structures shall be adjusted as required to meet new finished grades. Grade adjustments shall be made in the masonry leveling course. 

4.0
 EROSION CONTROL DURING CONSTRUCTION  


4.1 The drainage system shall be made operational as soon as it is complete. At no time shall a completed drainage system be prevented from operating. Until adjacent embankment cut and fill slopes are stabilized to prevent erosion, and during construction on adjacent lots, the contractor shall employ temporary erosion control measures as necessary to prevent sediment from entering the drainage system. 
4.2 The type and design of erosion control measures that will be required will vary from site to site and the specific cause of environmental degradation. The protective measures may consist of, but are not limited to: 
a.
 Temporary sedimentation pools for the protection of rivers, lakes, streams and ponds  

b.
 Temporary earth berms and slope drains to control and channel heavy runoff, thus preventing washouts 

c.
 Ditches and swales at bottoms of slopes 

d.
 Check dams in swales and ditches to slow runoff  

e.
 Filters at drain inlets 

f.
 Energy dissipaters at culvert outlets such as splash pads and rip rap 

g.
 Silt fences with or without straw wattle barriers 

h.
 Straw wattle barriers 


4.3 An erosion control plan describing materials and specific methods of erosion control must be submitted as part of the definitive plan submittal and shall be approved by the Board.  
4.4
 If the final top course of pavement will not be applied immediately, the catch basin grates shall be temporarily set at the base course elevation to allow storm water to enter the drainage system. When the final top course of pavement is applied, the grate elevations shall be adjusted to meet the final grades. 

5.0
 FINAL ACCEPTANCE 


Prior to final acceptance of the drainage system, all pipes, drainage structures, basins and swales shall be flushed and cleaned to remove any accumulated sediment and debris. All temporary erosion control measures shall be removed. 
The developer shall be responsible for snow plowing and sanding during inclement weather until a roadway is accepted by the Town. In the event of a public safety emergency, the developer shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the Town for failure to maintain safe and adequate access. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 51 

APPENDIX C 
INSPECTION AND TESTING OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

1.0 SCOPE 

Construction of all subdivision improvements must be inspected at each significant stage of construction to ensure compliance with the approved Definitive Subdivision Plan by the Board’s authorized Professional Engineer. Such inspection shall include observation of the work; review of plans for compliance, sketch plans, manufacturer’s literature, manufacturer’s technical drawings similar in content to shop drawings; measuring, sampling and testing; evaluation of field changes, and submission of construction inspection reports to the Board. 
1.1 REQUESTS FOR INSPECTIONS 
The applicant shall have sole responsibility for submitting requests for inspections to the Planning Board office in writing at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance and shall not proceed with work until the Board’s Engineer is on-site to observe with work. If the Board’s Engineer is unable to make required inspections for forty-eight (48) hours after the work is ready for inspection, the applicant shall notify the Planning Board Office so an alternate may make the inspection. 
2.0 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS 
The intent of the construction inspection process is to provide for thorough inspection all improvements at each significant stage of construction to ensure compliance with the approved Definitive Subdivision Plan. The Board or its professional consultant shall determine the number, timing, and scope of required inspections which shall include the following as a minimum: 
(1) 	
Review of SWPPP compliance documentation. 

(2) 	
Inspection of sedimentation and erosion controls; initial. 

(3) 	
Inspection of sedimentation and erosion controls; quarterly or following major storm events. 

(4) 	
Inspection of clearing and grubbing of right-of-way. 

(5) 	
Inspection of excavation below normal depth if applicable. 

(6) 	
Inspection of subgrade following completion of excavation if required by the Board. 

(7) 	
Review embankment material gradation test. 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016	 Page 52 

(8) 
Inspection of embankment construction. 

(9) 
Inspection of staking. 

(10) 
For stormdrain system, (i) review of manufacturer’s certificates, (ii) literature, (iii) and technical drawings for all materials and products furnished and installed. 

(11) 
Inspection of stormdrain system installation; (i) bottom of trench, (ii) each drain line installation before backfill, (iii) each drain structure installation before backfill, (iv) backfill in lifts. 

(12) 
Inspection of catchbasin and drain manhole castings. 

(13) 
Inspection of swales, raingardens, lawn depressions, building roof water recharge systems. 

(14) 
Inspection of sediment forebays, retention basins, and detention basins including inlet and outlet control structures and dewatering systems. 

(15) 
For sanitary sewer system, (i) review of manufacturer’s certificates, (ii) literature, (iii) technical drawings for all materials and products furnished and installed. 

(16) 
Inspection of sanitary sewer system installation; (i) bottom of trench or excavation, (ii) each sewer line installation before backfill, (iii) each sewer structure installation before backfill, (iv) backfill in lifts. 

(17) 
Inspection of sanitary sewer lateral installation; (i) bottom of trench, (ii) each lateral line installation before backfill, (iii) backfill in lifts. 

(18) 
Inspection of sanitary sewer manhole castings. 

(19) 
Observe sanitary sewer line, (i) sanitary sewer building service, (ii) sanitary manhole testing and review test results. 

(20) 
For water distribution system, (i) review of manufacturer’s certificates, (ii) literature, 


(iii) technical drawings for all materials and products furnished and installed. 
(21) 
Inspection of water distribution system; (i) bottom of trench, (ii) installation of each segment of watermain before backfill, (iii) backfill in lifts. 

(22) 
Inspection of valve box and curb box covers. 

(23) 
Inspection of watermain chlorination and disinfection and review of test results furnished by Applicant’s laboratory. 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 53 

(24) 
Inspection of watermain pressure and leakage testing and review of test results furnished by Applicant’s laboratory. 

(25) 
Inspection of building water service installation. 

(26) 
Inspection of hydrant installation and adjustment to required height above finished grade. 

(27) 
Review compaction tests for completed subgrade. 

(28) 
Inspection of fine grading and compacting subgrade. 

(29) 
Review gravel base material gradation test furnished by supplier. 

(30) 
Inspection of gravel base for roadway placement and compaction in lifts. 

(31) 
Inspection of dense graded crushed stone base placement and compaction in lifts. 

(32) 
Review gravel base material gradation test furnished by supplier. 

(33) 
Inspection of gravel base for sidewalks placement and compaction in lifts. 

(34) 
Review survey of center line and both gutter lines prior to placing roadway binder. 

(35) 
Review pavement mix. 

(36) 
Continuous inspection during installation of roadway binder course. 

(37) 
Computation of pavement quantities. 

(38) 
Inspection of curb, edging, and berm installation. 

(39) 
Inspection of curb inlet, throatstone, and transition curb installation. 

(40) 
Review pavement mix. 

(41) 
Continuous inspection during installation of sidewalk binder course. 

(42) 
Computation of pavement quantities. 

(43) 
Inspection of roadway tack coat. 

(44) 
Review pavement mix. 

(45) 
Continuous inspection during installation of roadway top course. 

(46) 
Computation of pavement quantities. 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 54 
(47) 
Inspection of sidewalk tack coat. 

(48) 
Continuous inspection during installation of sidewalk top course. 

(49) 
Computation of pavement quantities. 

(50) 
Inspection of curb-cut ramps for location only. The Town Administrator shall 
determine compliance with ADA standards. 


(51) 
Inspection of transformer pads. 

(52) 
Review approvals of electric, telephone, cable, and gas system layouts and locations provided by the respective utility companies. 

(53) 
Inspection of underground utility conduit, (i) structures, (ii) handholes (electric, phone, cable, gas). 

(54) 
Evaluation of materials certificates for loam and seed. 

(55) 
Inspection of loam and seed installation. 

(56) 
Inspection of retaining wall installation including inspection of subgrade, (i) inspection of forms and reinforcing steel, (ii) inspection of concrete pour, (iii) review of 7 day and 28 day cylinder tests furnished by Applicant’s laboratory. 

(57) 
Review of manufacturer’s detail drawings of guardrail. 

(58) 
Inspection of guardrail installations. 

(59) 
Inspection of street trees and plantings including cul-de-sac plantings. 

(60) 
Inspection of bounds and monuments and review of bounds and monuments on as-built survey. . 

(61) 
Inspection of fire alarm installation. 

(62) 
Inspection of street sign installation. 

(63) 
Inspection of street light installation. 

(64) 
Final cleanup inspection. 

(65) 
Payment of quarterly Town maintenance fees. 

(66) 
Review As-Built Acceptance Plan. 

(67) 
Review running description of right-of-way and easements. 

(68) 
Review submitted deeds. 

(69) 
Other review, testing, and inspections on a project specific basis. 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 55 
2.1 REPORTS 
The professional consultant shall indicate the date of inspection and shall file an inspection report with the Board subsequent to each inspection. 
2.1.1 FAILURE TO COMPLY 
Failure to comply with the inspection procedure may necessitate removal of improvements at the expense of the Applicant or rescission of the approval of the plan in accord with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 41, Section 81-W. 
2.2 LABORATORY TESTING 
The Applicant shall engage a Massachusetts licensed laboratory acceptable to the Board to obtain samples, conduct analysis and tests, and furnish test data and reports to the Board. Required tests include soils classification and properties tests, compaction tests for subgrade and embankments, disinfection tests for water mains, pressure and leakage tests for water mains, pressure and leakage tests for sanitary sewer mains, leakage tests for sanitary sewer manholes. 
2.3 ORDER 
The Board may establish the order of the required inspection and may require satisfactory completion of one step before the Applicant proceeds to the next. It may require tests to be done by the Applicant as a condition for approval when in the opinion of the Board it is advisable. 
3.0 ENGINEER'S REPORT 
3.1 The Board’s Engineer will report that the work has been performed in accordance with these Subdivision Rules and Regulations and the Definitive Plan. The Board’s Engineer will advise the Board when the work is not acceptable citing the reasons therefore. 
3.2 At any time during the progress of the work, the Board’s Engineer shall advise the Board immediately of any factors that may adversely affect the progress of the work.  
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 56 

APPENDIX D 
RIGHT OF WAY PROFILES 

Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 57 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 58 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 59 

APPENDIX E 
APPLICATION FORMS AND CHECKLISTS 

Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 60 

Fee Received: ($_____)______________________ Town Clerk, Manchester-by-the-Sea MA    Manchester-by-the-Sea Planning Board 
FORM A — APPLICATION FOR ENDORSEMENT OF PLAN 
BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE APPROVAL [ANR] 
Filing Fee: $250 per lot * 

Applicant shall comply with the requirements of Section 4 of the Subdivision Rules and Regulations and submit to the Manchester-by-the-Sea Planning Board through the Town Clerk, the Mylar and 10 prints of the plan, together with 10 executed copies of this Form A and a check in the amount of $250 per lot made payable to Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea.  
*Must be accompanied by a completed ANR Application Checklist 
Date: __________________Applicant: ______________________________________ Address:____________________________________Phone:________________ _______________________________________email: _____________________  
Owner [if other than Applicant]: __________________________________________ Address:____________________________________ Phone:________________ _______________________________________ email: ____________________ 
Engineer/Surveyor: _________________________________________________ Address:____________________________________ Phone: _______________ _______________________________________ Fax/email:_________________  
Essex South Registry Book:______Page:_______ 
Manchester-by-the-Sea Assessors Map: _____Lot:_____ 
Location and description of property:_______________________________ 
See http://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx for applicability: 
Zoning District: ________Water Resource Protection District: ________ Flood Plain: 
________ Flood Control District: ________ 
To The Planning Board of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea:    The undersigned, believing that the accompanying plan of his/her property in Manchester-by-the-Sea does not constitute a subdivision within the meaning of and the Subdivision Control Law, submits that plan for determination and endorsement that Planning Board approval under the Subdivision Control Law is not required. The undersigned believes that such approval is not required for the following reasons: (Circle as appropriate.) 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 61 

1. The division of the tract of land shown on the accompanying plan is not a subdivision because every lot shown on the plan has frontage of at least such distance as is presently required by Section 5 of the Manchester-by-the-Sea Zoning By-Law; and every lot shown on the plan has such frontage on: 
a.
 a public way or way which the Town Clerk certifies is maintained and used as a public way, namely____________________________________________________________________; or  

b.
 a way shown on a plan theretofore approved and endorsed in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law, namely ___________________________ on __________________, and subject to the following conditions _________________________________________________________ __________________________________________________________________________; or 

c.
 a private way in existence February 18, 1954 (when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea), having, in the opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable grades, and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land abutting thereon or served thereby, and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon, namely _______________________________________________________________.  


2.
 The division of the tract of land shown on the accompanying plan is not a "subdivision" because it shows a proposed conveyance/other instrument, namely _______________________ ______________________________________________________, which adds to/takes away from/changes the size and shape of, lots in such a manner so that no lot affected is left without frontage as required by Section 5 of the Manchester-by-the-Sea Zoning By-Law. 

3.
 The division of the tract of land shown on the accompanying plan is not a subdivision because two or more buildings, specifically ___________________________________ [buildings] were standing on the plan prior to February 18, 1954, the date when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea, and one of such buildings remains standing on each of the lots/said buildings as shown and located on the accompanying plan. Evidence of the existence of such buildings prior to the effective date of the subdivision control law is submitted as follows: _______________________________________________________ _____________________________________________________________________________. 

4.
 The accompanying plan is a Perimeter Plan and is not a subdivision because the plan does not show a division of land. 


Printed Name and Signature of Applicant: 
Printed Names and Signatures of All Persons Whose Land is the Subject of this ANR Plan (except applicant): 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 62 

Manchester-by-the-Sea Planning Board 
Approval Not Required Plan [ANR] Checklist 

Plans shall be submitted as black line prints at a suitable scale. At the time of submission all plans and information must be complete and accurate and in acceptable form as required by these Subdivision Rules and Regulations. 
Petitioner: Meeting Date: 1.___ Ten (10) copies of Form A Application filed with Town Clerk 2.___ Fee paid/amount ($250 per lot shown) = $ ________________ 3.___ Ten (10) copies and one (1) Mylar of the Plan, showing the following: a.___ Name and address of owner of record, petitioner & surveyor b.___ Deed reference or land court certificate number  c.___ Plan reference d.___ Date of application e.___ North arrow, locus sketch, date and scale  
f.
 ___ Signature block with space for seven signatures.. 

g.
 ___ Minimum frontage on approved way  

h.
 ___ Direct abutters noted by name and parcel number as determined from the Assessors    Office 

i.
 ___ Delineation and area of every lot - square feet and acres  

j.
 ___ Location of all existing structures including setback and side and rear yard designation, and septic systems  

k.
 ___Sufficient data to determine the location, direction and length of every street and way line, lot line and boundary line, monuments or references necessary to establish theses lines on 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 63 

the ground. 
l.___ Delineation of wetlands on the lots being created by the plan (including the lot being created by the remaining land)  
m.___ The zoning classification and location of any other boundaries that may lie within the locus of the plan : see http://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx 
Zoning District _____ Water Resource Protection District ____ 
Flood Plain_____ Flood Control District_____ 
n.
 ___The notation: “No official verification of any wetlands has been made or intended by Planning Board endorsement 

o.
 ___ The notation: "Planning Board endorsement does not certify compliance with Zoning Bylaw." 

p.
 ___In the case of the creation of a new lot, the remaining land area and frontage of the land in the ownership of the applicant shall be shown on the plan. 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 64 

Fee Received: ($____)____________________Town Clerk, Manchester-by-the-Sea, MA 

Manchester-by-the-Sea Planning Board 
FORM B — APPLICATION FOR TENTATIVE APPROVAL 
OF PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN 
Fee: $250 plus $100 per lot* 

Applicant shall comply with the requirements of Section 5 of the Subdivision Rules and Regulations, and shall submit to the Manchester-by-the-Sea Planning Board through the Town Clerk, by hand delivery or by registered or by certified mail, 18 executed copies of this Application Form B and 18 sets of the Preliminary Plans and supporting documents [and must contain the information listed in the Preliminary Subdivision Checklist in Appendix E]. The submission must be accompanied by the filing fee in the amount of $250 plus $100 per lot, with a check made payable to “Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea”[see Section 7 — Fees]. *The appropriate fee and amount of funds required to establish the special account [escrow] for the project must be verified by the Planning Director prior to submission; a W- 9 form is also required. 
Application must also be accompanied by a completed Preliminary Plan Application Checklist 
Date: ________________ To the Planning Board of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea: 
The undersigned, being the applicant as defined under Chapter 41, Section 81-L for tentative approval as a subdivision as allowed under the Subdivision Control Law and the Manchester-by-the-Sea Subdivision Rules and Regulations on a plan entitled: 
Name of Owner:________________________________________Phone:_______________ Address:__________________________________________ Fax/email: _______________  
Name of Developer:_____________________________________Phone:_______________ Address:___________________________________________Fax/email:_______________ 
Name of Engineer/Surveyor_______________________________Phone:______________ Address:___________________________________________Fax/email:_______________ 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 65 

Property Deed recorded in Essex South Registry Book:______ Page:______  and/or registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Land Court, Certificate of Title     No. __________________________: and said plan is free of encumbrances except for the following:_____________________________________________________________________ 
Property shown on Manchester-by-the-Sea Assessors Map:________ Page:_____________ 

Location and Description of property: see http://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx 
Zoning District____ Water Resource Protection District ____ 
Flood Plain____ Flood Control District____ 
Number of lots proposed_______________  Total acreage of tract ___________________ 
Applicant's Signature _______________________________________________________ 

 Applicant's Address _______________________________________________________  
Applicant's phone ____________________  FAX _____________________________ 
Applicant's email_________________________________________________________ 
Owner's signature and address [if other than applicant] 

Received by Board of Health: 
Date _______________________________ Time _______________________________ 
Signature of Agent ___________________________ 

Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 66 

Manchester-by-the-Sea Planning Board 
Preliminary Subdivision Plan Application Checklist

(To be submitted by Applicant with Application). 
Preliminary Plans shall be submitted as black line prints at a suitable scale. The purpose of the Preliminary Plan is to show sufficient information about the subdivision to enable the Board to form a clear basis for the evaluation of potential problems of the subdivision prior to the preparation of the Definitive Plan. 
Applicant: ________________________________________________________  
Planning Board Meeting Date: ________________________________________ 
1.
 __Application filed Date______________________________ 

2.
 __ Eighteen (18) copies of the plan and Eighteen (18) copies of Form B.  


3.__Fee paid/amount: Application for approval of a Preliminary Subdivision plan [Form B]: $250 plus $100 per lot) = $______________________; check payable to Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea 
4.__ The Plan shall carry the Subdivision name with the title “Preliminary Plan”, shall have a signature block in the same space on each page and shall show boundaries, north arrow, date, scale, legend, and the following: 
a.
 ___Names and addresses of the record owner, applicant and the name or names of the engineer and Registered Land Surveyor 

b.
 ___ Existing and proposed lines of streets, easements and any public areas within the subdivision. 

c.
 ___ Existing and proposed public water supply and utilities in the area. 

d.
 ___ Existing and proposed system of surface water, drainage and existing and proposed method of sewage disposal. 

e.
 ___ Existing on-site structures including septic systems.  

f.
 ___Names, approximate location and widths of streets within 200' of property.. 

g.
 ___ Topography of the existing land at two (2)-foot contour intervals. 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 67 

h.
 ___Location of all permanent monuments, large boulders, stone walls, vegetation and special features showing the outline of all woodlands, significant individual or group tree masses, rock outcroppings, roads and trails, flowing streams or waterways, drainage ways and ponds, noting those being disturbed by proposed ways, drainage easements, or any change in topography. 

i.
 ___An outline of all wetlands; also any areas within the Water Resource Overlay Protection District (WROPD) or the Flood Control District http://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx. 

j.
 ___A roadway profile drawn to a horizontal scale of 1"=40' and a vertical scale of 1"=4', showing all existing and proposed grades, drainage and sewer systems. 

k.
 ___Approximate boundary lines of proposed lots, with approximate areas and dimensions  

l.
 ___ Zoning of proposed subdivision and contiguous parcels. 

m.
 ___Physical, geological, environmental and other characteristics unique to the site but not covered in (b) through (l) above. 

n.
 ___ Direct abutters noted by name and parcel number as determined from the Assessors Office. 


5. ___ If the Preliminary Plan does not include all of the contiguous land owned by the applicant in the area, a plan, in a general manner, should be submitted of the overall proposed development. If the developer does not agree to provide future development plans to the Board, the Board shall assume that the remaining land will be developed to the maximum amount allowed under Zoning. 
ESCROW ACCOUNT: (Separate check payable to the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea and 
Signed W-9 form required) (after consultation with Planning Director). 

For 3 Lots or Less: $3,000 minimum deposit.  
For 4 or More Lots: $3,000 minimum deposit, plus $500 per lot in the proposed subdivision. 

Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 68 

Fee Received: ($____)____________________ Town Clerk, Manchester-by-the-Sea, MA               

Manchester-by-the-Sea Planning Board 
FORM C — APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF 
A DEFINITIVE SUBDIVISION PLAN 
Filing Fee: $500 per lot or $2500 [whichever is greater]* 

Applicant shall comply with the requirements of Section 6 of the Subdivision Rules and Regulations, and shall submit to the Manchester-by-the-Sea Planning Board through the Town Clerk by hand delivery or by registered or by certified mail, eighteen (18) executed copies of this completed Application Form C, one (1) Mylar and eighteen (18) sets of the Definitive Plan and supporting documents [and must contain the information listed in the Definitive Checklist]. The submission must be accompanied by the filing fee in the amount of $500 per lot or $2500 (whichever is greater), with a check made payable to “Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea”[see Section 7 — Fees]. The appropriate fee and amount of funds required to establish the special account [escrow] for the project must be verified by the Planning Director prior to submission; a W- 9 form is also required.* 
Application must also be accompanied by: 
• 
Completed Modification of a Definitive Plan Application Checklist 

• 
Certified List of Abutters and Abutters to Abutters within 300 ft of property line, to be 
purchased from the Assessor's office. 


• 
Check for the postage for mailing Legal Notices to Abutters [made out to “United States         Postal Service”] 

• 
Check for escrow account and W-9 form amount  


Date: _________________To the Planning Board in the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea: 
The undersigned, being the applicant as defined under Chapter 41, Section 81-L, for approval of a proposed subdivision under the Subdivision Control Law and the Manchester-by-the-Sea Rules and Regulations as shown on a plan entitled: ______________________________________ 
Name of Owner:________________________________________Phone:_______________ Address:__________________________________________ Fax/email: _______________  
Name of Developer:_____________________________________Phone:_______________ Address:___________________________________________Fax/email:_______________ 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 69 

Name of Engineer/Surveyor_______________________________Phone:______________ Address:___________________________________________Fax/email:_______________ 
Property Deed recorded in Essex South Registry Book:______ Page:______  and/or registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Land Court, Certificate of Title     No. __________________________: and said plan is free of encumbrances except for the following:_____________________________________________________________________ 
Property shown on Manchester-by-the-Sea Assessors Map:________ Page:_____________ Location and Description of property: see http://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx 
Zoning District____ Water Resource Protection District ____ 
Flood Plain____ Flood Control District____ 
Number of lots proposed_______________  Total acreage of tract ___________________ 
Said plan has ( ) has not ( ) evolved from a Preliminary Plan submitted to the Board on 
_______________________(date) and approved (with modifications) ( ) (disapproved) ( ) on 

____________________ (date). 
Received by Town Clerk: 
Date______________Time________Signature of Agent _____________________________ 

Received by Board of Health 

Date________________Time________Signature of Agent _________________________ The undersigned hereby submits said plan as a DEFINITIVE Plan in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Manchester-by-the-Sea Planning Board and makes application to the Board for approval of said plan. 
Applicant's Signature_____________________Applicant’s Address__________________       
Applicant's phone _______________FAX _______________  
Applicant's email_________________________________________________________ 
Owner's signature and address [if other than applicant] 

Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 70 
Manchester-by-the-Sea Planning Board Definitive Subdivision Plan Application Checklist
(To be submitted by Applicant with Application). 
Definitive Plans shall be submitted as black line prints at a suitable scale. At the time of submission all plans and information must be complete and accurate and in acceptable form as required by these Subdivision Rules and Regulations. 
Applicant: ________________________________________________________  
Planning Board Meeting Date: ________________________________________ 
1.
 __Application filed Date______________________________________________  

2.
 __ Eighteen (18) copies of Application Form C, one (1) Mylar and eighteen (18) sets of the plans; 


3.___Fee paid/amount: Application for approval of a Definitive Subdivision plan [Form C]: $500 per lot or $2500, whichever is greater = $ ____________; check payable to Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea 
4.___ The Plan shall carry the Subdivision name with the title “Definitive Plan”, shall have a signature block in the same space on each page and shall show boundaries, north arrow, date, scale, legend, and the following: 
a.
 ___Names and addresses of the record owner, applicant and the name or names of the 
engineer and Registered Land Surveyor 


b.
 ___Existing and proposed lines of streets, easements and any public areas within the 
subdivision. 


c.
 ___Existing and proposed public water supply and utilities in the area. 

d.
 ___Existing and proposed system of surface water, drainage and existing and proposed method of sewage disposal. 

e.
 ____Approximate boundary lines of proposed lots, with approximate areas and dimensions. 

f.
 ___ Names, approximate location and widths of streets within 200' of property.  


g.___ Topography of the existing land at two (2)-foot contour intervals. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 71 

h. ____Location of all permanent monuments, large boulders, stone walls, vegetation and special features showing the outline of all woodlands, significant individual or group tree masses, rock outcroppings, roads and trails, flowing streams or waterways, drainage ways and ponds, noting those being disturbed by proposed ways, drainage easements, or any change in topography. 
i.___ Outline of all wetlands; also areas within the Water Resource Overlay Protection District (WROPD) or Flood Control District http://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx 
j.
 ___ A roadway profile drawn to a horizontal scale of 1"=40' and a vertical scale of 1"=4', showing all existing and proposed grades, drainage and sewer systems. 

k.
 ____Zoning district(s) of proposed subdivision and contiguous parcels. 

l.
 ____ Existing on-site structures including septic systems. 

m.
 ___ Physical, geological, environmental and other characteristics unique to the site but not covered in (b) through (l) above. 

n.
 ___ Names and Assessors Map & Lot numbers of all direct abutters.  


5.___ Certified List of Abutters and Abutters to Abutters within 300 ft. of the property, to be purchased from the Assessor’s Office.  
6.
 ____ Postage to mail Legal Notices to Abutters.(check payable to U.S. Postal Service) 

7.
 ____ If the Definitive Plan does not include all of the contiguous land owned by the applicant in the area, a plan, in a general manner, should be submitted of the overall proposed development. If the developer does not agree to provide future development plans to the Board, the Board shall assume that the remaining land will be developed to the maximum amount allowed under Zoning. 


8.____ Environmental Impact Plan [ECIA] 
9.
 ____ Erosion Control Plan 

10.
 ____Drainage Calculations 


ESCROW ACCOUNT: (after consultation with Planning Director) A separate check payable to the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea and signed W-9 form also required). For 3 Lots or Less: $3,000 minimum deposit..For 4 or More Lots: $3,000 minimum deposit, plus $500 per lot in the proposed subdivision.      Total = __________ 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 72 

Filing Fee ($____)_____________Received by Town Clerk, Manchester-by-the-Sea MA 

Manchester-by-the-Sea Planning Board 
FORM C(M) — APPLICATION FOR 
OF A DEFINITIVE SUBDIVISION PLAN 
Filing Fee: $500 per lot or $2,500, whichever is greater* 

Applicant shall comply with the requirements of Section 6.17 of the Subdivision Rules and Regulations, and shall submit to the Manchester-by-the-Sea Planning Board through the Town Clerk by hand delivery, or by registered or certified mail, eighteen (18) executed copies of this Application Form C(M), one (1) Mylar original, and eighteen (18) copies of the Modified Definitive Plan [and must contain the information listed in the Modification of a Definitive Plan Checklist]. 
The submission must be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount of $500 per lot or $2500 (whichever is the greater), with a check made payable to “Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea” (see Section 7 — Fees]. *The appropriate fee and amount of funds required to establish the special account [escrow] for the project must be verified by the Planning Director prior to submission; a W-9 form is also required. 
Application must also be accompanied by: 
• 
Completed Modification of a Definitive Plan Application Checklist 

• 
Certified List of Abutters and Abutters to Abutters within 300 feet of the property line, 
purchased from the Assessor's office; 


• 
Check for the postage for mailing Legal Notices to Abutters (made out to United States 
Postal Service); 


• 
Check for escrow account and W-9 form amount  


Date: ________________ To the Planning Board of the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea: 
The undersigned, being the applicant as defined under Chapter 41, Section 81-L for tentative approval as a subdivision as allowed under the Subdivision Control Law and the Manchester-by-the-Sea Subdivision Rules and Regulations on a plan entitled: 
Name of Owner/Applicant:_______________________________Phone:_____________  Address:__________________________________________ Fax/email: _____________  
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 73 

Name of Developer:_____________________________________Phone:_____________ Address:___________________________________________Fax/email:_____________ 
Name of Engineer/Surveyor_______________________________Phone:____________ Address:___________________________________________Fax/email:_____________ 
Property Deed recorded in Essex South Registry Book:______ Page:______ and/or registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Land Court, Certificate of Title No. ___________________________________: and said plan is free of encumbrances except for the following:_______________________________________ 
______________________________________________________________________________. 
Property shown on Manchester-by-the-Sea Assessors Map:_____ Page:_____________ 
Location and Description of property: See:http://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx Zoning District____ Flood Plain____ 
Flood Control District____ Water Resource Protection District ____ 
Total acreage of tract _________________Number of lots proposed_________ 
Owner/Applicant Signature ______________________ ___________________________ 
 Applicant's Address ____________________________________ ____________________ Applicant's phone/email ______________________________________________________ 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 74 

Modification of a Definitive Subdivision Plan 
Application Checklist

(To be submitted by Applicant with Application). 
Modified Definitive Plans shall be submitted as black line prints at a suitable scale. At the time of submission all plans and information must be complete and accurate and in acceptable form as required by these Subdivision Rules and Regulations. 
Applicant: ________________________________________________________  
Planning Board Meeting Date: ________________________________________ 
1.
 __Application filed Date______________________________________________  

2.
 __ Eighteen (18) copies of Application Form C, one (1) Mylar and eighteen (18) sets of the plans; 


3.___Fee paid/amount: Application for approval of a Modification of a Definitive Subdivision Plan [Form C(M): $500 per lot or $2500, whichever is greater = $____________; check payable to Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea 
4.___ The Plan shall carry the Subdivision name with the title “ Modified Definitive Plan”, shall have a signature block in the same space on each page and shall show boundaries, north arrow, date, scale, legend, and the following: 
a.
 ___Names and addresses of the record owner, applicant and the name or names of the 
engineer and Registered Land Surveyor 


b.
 ___Existing and proposed lines of streets, easements and any public areas within the 
subdivision. 


c.
 ___Existing and proposed public water supply and utilities in the area. 

d.
 ___Existing and proposed system of surface water, drainage and existing and proposed method of sewage disposal. 

e.
 ____Approximate boundary lines of proposed lots, with approximate areas and dimensions. 

f.
 ___ Names, approximate location and widths of streets within 200' of property.  


g.___ Topography of the existing land at two (2)-foot contour intervals. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 75 

h. ____Location of all permanent monuments, large boulders, stone walls, vegetation and special features showing the outline of all woodlands, significant individual or group tree masses, rock outcroppings, roads and trails, flowing streams or waterways, drainage ways and ponds, noting those being disturbed by proposed ways, drainage easements, or any change in topography. 
i.___ Outline of all wetlands and areas within the Water Resource Overlay Protection District 
(WROPD) or Flood Control District http://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx 
j.
 ___ A roadway profile drawn to a horizontal scale of 1"=40' and a vertical scale of 1"=4', showing all existing and proposed grades, drainage and sewer systems. 

k.
 ____Zoning district(s) of proposed subdivision and contiguous parcels. 

l.
 ____ Existing on-site structures including septic systems. 

m.
 ___ Physical, geological, environmental and other characteristics unique to the site but not covered in (b) through (l) above. 

n.
 ___ Names and Assessors Map and Lot numbers of all direct abutters.  


5.___ Certified List of Abutters and Abutters to Abutters within 300 ft. of the property, to be purchased from the Assessor’s Office.  
6.
 ____ Postage to mail Legal Notices to Abutters (check payable to U. S. Postal Service) 

7.
 ____ If the Modified Definitive Plan does not include all of the contiguous land owned by the applicant in the area, a plan, in a general manner, should be submitted of the overall proposed development. If the developer does not agree to provide future development plans to the Board, the Board shall assume that the remaining land will be developed to the maximum amount allowed under Zoning. 


8.____ Environmental Impact Plan [ECIA] 
9.
 ____ Erosion Control Plan 

10.
 ____Drainage Calculations 


ESCROW ACCOUNT: (after consultation with Planning Director) A separate check payable to the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea and signed W-9 form also required). For 3 Lots or Less: $3,000 minimum deposit..For 4 or More Lots: $3,000 minimum deposit, plus $500 per lot in the proposed subdivision.      Total = __________ 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 76 

APPENDIX F 
SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION FORMS UNDER THE ZONING BY-LAW 
and 
EARTH REMOVAL PERMIT UNDER THE GENERAL BY-LAWS 

Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 77 

APPENDIX F 
SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION FORMS UNDER THE ZONING BY-LAW 
and 
EARTH REMOVAL PERMIT UNDER THE GENERAL BY-LAWS 

A. Application Fees 

All applications submitted to the Planning Board under the Zoning By-Law, and the General By­laws shall be subject to the following fees: 
Applications for Determination under Section 4.9 of the Zoning By-Law Ground and 
Surface Water Overlay Protection Districts: $100 
Applications for Special Permit under Section 4.9 of the Zoning By-Law Ground and 
Surface Water Overlay Protection Districts: $100 
Applications for Special Permit under Section 4.10 of the Zoning By-Law for a Personal 
Wireless Telecommunications Facility: $500 
Applications for Special Permit under 6.2.8 of the Zoning By-Law for a Common Driveway Special Permit: $250 per lot served 
Applications for Special Permit under Section 6.16 of the Zoning By-Law for a 
Topographical Changes and Land Clearing Special Permit [Residential Districts]: $300 
Applications for Special Permit under Section 6.17 of the Zoning By-Law for a Wind 
Energy Conversion Facilities Special Permit: $2,000 
Applications for any Special Permit application under the Zoning By-Law not otherwise 
herein specified: $175 
Applications for Site Plan Review: $150 
Applications for Driveway/Curb Cut: $100 
Applications for Earth Removal Permit under the General By-laws, Article XII – Earth 
Removal, Section 10: Filing Fee [due with the application for permit]: $500 [Also applies to renewal applications.] Permit fee [due prior to issuance of permit]: $200.00 per month for permit period after first month. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 78 

Such other charges as it shall find necessary for clerical, civil engineering and other 
consultants, legal, and inspection expenses in connection with any application for a 
permit, its review by the Board and post-permit monitoring. The applicant shall deposit 
funds for such charges with the Town as the Board shall prescribe. 
The Board may waive fees if and as it deems appropriate. These fees and charges shall apply to all applications for earth removal permits filed after the date of adoption of the above fee schedule, and to all permits issued pursuant thereto 
B. Related charges under Section 7.9. 
In connection with any application to (or request for determination by) the Planning Board, all expenses for advertising, recording and filing of documents, and for the reasonable fees (and expenses) for the employment of outside consultants as the Planning Board shall select, if and when it shall determine to do so, shall be borne by the applicant. The applicant shall be advised of the selection of an outside consultant, and of the sum to be deposited with the Town in a special account for the reasonable fees for the employment of the same. Such special account shall be established and dealt with in MGL C.44 § 53G. 
The applicant may make an administrative appeal from the Planning Board’s selection of any such outside consultant, such appeal to be made to the Town’s Board of Selectmen and limited to claim that the consultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum required statutory qualifications (which as specified by MGL C.44 § 53G are either an educational degree in or related to the field at issue or three or more years of practice in the field at issue or a related field). As provided by MGL C.44 §53G, the required time limits for action on an application by the Planning Board shall be extended by the duration of such administrative appeal, and if no decision is made by the Town’s Board of Selectmen within one month following the filing of such administrative appeal, the selection made by the Planning Board shall stand.  
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 79 

OFFICE OF THE PLANNING BOARD Town Hall, Manchester-by-the-Sea, MA 01944 _____________________@_______m. 
    Town Clerk 
Hearing Date:_____________________        Site Viewing: _____________________        Granted: __________ Denied:________        Decision Due: ____________________        Decision filed with the Town Clerk: 
      (for office use) Nature of Action Requested: 
____Request for Determination under Section 4.9 of the Zoning By-Law. Fee $100 
Name of Owner:________________________________________Phone/Email____________________ Address:_____________________________________________________________________________ 
Location of lot________________________________________________________________________ 
(No.)  (Street) Assessors Map No:________ Lot No .__________ Zoning district ______________ Water Resource Protection District: ______   http://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx Flood Plain:_____ Flood Control District:_____ 
Title of Attached Plan:_________________________________________________________________ 
Date of Plan: ________________________________ Lot No. on Plan: _________________________ 
Prepared by:_________________________________________________________________________ 
Dimensions of Lot: Frontage: __________________________ft. Depth: ____________________ft 
Area: existing_____________ s.f. Proposed impervious ___________________s.f. 
Mitigation measured proposed (swales, leach pits, etc.)________________________________________ 
The undersigned owns no other real estate contiguous to land which is subject of this application except 
as follows: ___________________________________________________________________________ 

Specific action requested, including use:  

      Signed:______________________________________      Print Name:___________________________________      Date:_________________________________________ 
Fee: Determination under 4.9 $100 ___.  ____________________________. Received by Town Clerk 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 80 

OFFICE OF THE PLANNING BOARD Town Hall, Manchester-by-the-Sea, MA 01944 _____________________@_______m. 
    Town Clerk 
Hearing Date:_____________________        Site Viewing: _____________________        Granted: __________ Denied:________        Decision Due: ____________________        Decision filed with the Town Clerk: 
      (for office use) Nature of Action Requested: ____Request for Special Permit under Section 4.9 of the Zoning By-law. Fee $175 
Name of Owner:________________________________________Phone/Email____________________ Address:_____________________________________________________________________________ 
Location of lot________________________________________________________________________ 
(No.)  (Street) Assessors Map No:________ Lot No .__________ Zoning district ______________ Water Resource Protection District: ______   http://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx Flood Plain:_____ Flood Control District:_____ 
Title of Attached Plan:_________________________________________________________________ 
Date of Plan: ________________________________ Lot No. on Plan: _________________________ 
Prepared by:_________________________________________________________________________ 
Dimensions of Lot: Frontage: __________________________ft. Depth: ____________________ft 
Area: existing_____________ s.f.  Proposed impervious ___________________s.f. 
Mitigation measured proposed (swales, leach pits, etc.)________________________________________ 
The undersigned owns no other real estate contiguous to land which is subject of this application except 
as follows: ___________________________________________________________________________ 

Specific action requested, including use:  

      Signed:______________________________________      Print Name:___________________________________      Date:_________________________________________ 
The scheduling of a Public Hearing does not necessarily deem the application to be acceptable to the Planning Board. Fee: Special Permit under 4.9 $175 ___.  ______________________________Received by Town Clerk 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 81 

(Section 4.9, page 2) Supplemental Information 
Zoning By-Law Requirements 
4.9 
Water Resource Overlay Protection District 4.9.5.1(p) Land uses that result in the rendering impervious of more than 15% or 2,500 square feet of any lot, whichever is greater, unless a system for artificial recharge of precipitation is provided, which is satisfactory to the Planning Board, that will not result in the degradation of groundwater quality 

A special permit is required from the Planning Board for land uses that do not meet the criteria of 4.9.5.1(p); see 4.9.5.2 Special Permit uses in Zones II and III, and A, B, and C. 

5.4 	
Minimum Area and Dimensional Requirements Lot Coverage Requirements 


Zoning District Maximum % Lot by Structures and Impervious Surfaces A  30% B  35% C  25% D  50% E  25% 
General District 	70% except as noted [See 4.3.11.2 for multiple dwellings] 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016	 Page 82 

OFFICE OF THE PLANNING BOARD Town Hall, Manchester-by-the-Sea, MA 01944 ______________@________________ 
    Town Clerk 
Hearing Date:_____________________        Site Viewing: _____________________        Granted: __________ Denied:________        Decision Due: ____________________        Decision filed with the Town Clerk: 
      (for office use) Nature of Action Requested: Request for Special Permit under Section _______of the Zoning By-law.  Other (Specify) __________________________________________________ 
Name of Owner:__________________________________________Phone/Email__________________________ 
Address:_____________________________________________________________________________ 
Location of lot________________________________________________________________________ 
(No.)  (Street) Assessors Map No:________ Lot No .__________ Zoning district ______________ Water Resource Protection District: ______ 
Flood Plain:_____ Flood Control District:_____ 
seehttp://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx 
Title of Attached Plan:_________________________________________________________________ Date of Plan: ________________________________ Lot No. on  Plan: __________________________ 
Dimensions of Lot: Frontage: __________________________feet. Depth: ____________________feet Area:________________________________________________________________________________ The undersigned owns no other real estate contiguous to land which is subject of this application except as follows: ___________________________________________________________________________ 
Specific action requested, including use: 
      Signed:______________________________________      Print Name:___________________________________      Date:_________________________________________ 
The scheduling of a Public Hearing does not necessarily deem the application to be acceptable to the Planning Board. $ fee paid _________________Town Clerk 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 83 

Special Permit (page 2). Rules and Regulations adopted in accordance with MGL Chapter 40A. 
1. 	Applications for special permits must be submitted to the Town Clerk 
a. 	A Public Hearing of the board will be scheduled. 
2. 	Eighteen (18) copies of all applications to the Board shall be filed with the Town Clerk on forms prescribed by the Board and shall state: 
a. 	
the name and address of the petitioner; 

b. 	
which section of the Zoning By-law governs the Special Permit; 

c. 	
the specific provisions of the Zoning By-law involved; 

d. 	
the use for which a Special Permit is sought; 

e. 	
description of the land to be affected; 

f. 	
the name and address of the owner of the land if other than the petitioner; 

g. 	
a declaration of the status or interest of the petitioner if other than the owner of the land; 

h. 	
disclosure as to whether the land to be affected by a Special Permit is contiguous to other land held in common ownership; 

i. 	
a drawing to scale indicating lot dimensions and area, proposed lot lines, location, and dimensions of all structures on the lot; all abutters; front, rear and sideline setbacks; location of public ways, and 

j. 	
in the case of Special Permits which affect the USE of buildings, an adequately detailed, scale floor plan of the building in question will be furnished. 


3. 	All applications shall be accompanied by a filing fee with checks made payable to the Town of Manchester by the Sea. 
SPECIAL PERMIT $ 
a. Any application not complying with the requirements of paragraphs 2 and 3 shall not be considered properly filed and shall not be assigned for hearing until such time as it is in compliance. 
4. 	In the event that the Board Chairman deems an application inadequate to a proper understanding of the matter or otherwise not properly filed, the applicant shall be advised and given an opportunity to bring the application into compliance. 
a. 	
An application may be dismissed for failure to comply with these rules. 

b. 	
Formal notice of dismissal of any application for non-compliance with these rules shall be filed with the Town Clerk. 


5. 	After assignment of a hearing date, the Planning Board’s clerk shall notify the Board of Assessors of the location of the land affected, 
a. 	
The clerk shall also file copies of the application, when applicable, with the Board of Health, Conservation Commission and Board of Selectmen. 

b. 	
The Planning Board shall publish a notice of the hearing of all applications for which a hearing date has been assigned in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea and shall mail notices to the applicant and all interested parties as determined by the Board in accordance with the provisions of MGL Chapter 40A, Section 11, and all other interested parties who, in the opinion of the Board are deemed to be particularly affected. 

c. 	
Between the date of the first publication and the date of the hearing, there shall be an interval of not less than fourteen (14) days and the notice shall be published twice. 


6. 	
Minutes of the proceedings at Public Hearings shall be kept by the clerk to the Board. 

7. 	
The Board may, by majority vote, require further submission or waive any provision of these rules for good cause shown, provided that such waiver shall not be inconsistent with any provisions of the Zoning By-laws or the General Laws of the Commonwealth. 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016	 Page 84 

OFFICE OF THE PLANNING BOARD Town Hall, Manchester-by-the-Sea, MA 019444 ______________@________________ 
    Town Clerk 
Hearing Date:_____________________        Site Viewing: _____________________        Granted: __________ Denied:________        Decision Due: ____________________        Decision filed with the Town Clerk: 
      (for office use) Nature of Action Requested: Application for Site Plan Review Under 6.5 of the Zoning By-Law. Fee $150 
Applicant:______________________________________________________________ Owner, if different:_______________________________________________________ 
Address:_______________________________________________________________ Telephone:____________________ Fax:_______________ Email:________________ 
Location of Lot_______________________________________________________________________
  (No.) (Street) Water Resource Protection District:_______________________________________________________ Assessor’s Map:_____ Lot:_____ Zoning District:_____ Flood Control District:___________________ See http://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx Title of Attached Plan:________________________________________ Date of Plan:______________ 
Dimensions of Lot: Area _________sf  Frontage__________ sf  Impervious surface _____________ sf 
See reverse for other requirements 
Parking spaces existing:_____ Total proposed spaces:________ 
Specific action requested, including use: 
Number of Dwelling units: _____ Square footage of each Dwelling unit: a)_______ __ sf  b) ________sf c)___________ sf  d)___________ sf 
Previous Special Permits or Variances: Decision date/s_____________ Granted by:________________ 
The undersigned owns no other real estate contiguous to land which is the subject of this application except as follows: Assessor’s Map & Lot _________________________________________________ 
FEE: $150    Signed:____________________________________________ Received:   Print Name: _______________________________________     Date:_____________________________________________ 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 85 

 (Site Plan Review page 2) Adopted from the Town of Manchester-by-the-Sea Zoning By-Law 
The Building Inspector shall not approve any application subject to this section without receipt of written plan approval from the Planning Board, unless thirty (30) days elapse from the date of transmittal of plans to the Planning Board without receipt of such review from the Planning Board. 
6.5.3 Procedure: 
Applications for building permits for construction subject to Site Plan Review shall be accompanied by: a) a Site Plan Review application b) twelve (12) prints of the plans of the proposal. 
6.5.4 Application Requirements Plans to be prepared by a Registered Architect, Landscape Architect, or Professional Engineer. Site plan shall be prepared at a scale no greater than 1” = 40’, and shall show: 
a) 	All existing and proposed buildings, existing and proposed contour elevations, structures, parking spaces, driveway openings, driveways, service areas, facilities for sewage, refuse and other waste disposal and for surface water drainage, wetlands, surface water, areas subject to the 100-year flood, and landscape features such as fences, walls, trees and planting areas, walk and lighting, both existing and proposed 
b) the relation of locus map at a scale not greater than 1” = 2,000’ [Assessor’s Map] 
c) all contiguous land owned by the Applicant or by the owner of the property. 

The Applicant shall submit: a) Material as may be required regarding measures proposed to prevent pollution of surface or ground water, soil erosion, increased runoff, changes in groundwater level, and flooding 
b) 	Such material as may be required regarding design features intended to integrate the proposed new development into the existing landscape, to enhance aesthetic assets, and to screen objectionable features from neighbors 
c) 	Such material as may be required regarding the projected traffic-flow patterns into and upon the site for both vehicles and pedestrians and an estimate of the projected number of motor vehicle trips to and from the site for an average day, and for peak hours. 
6.5.5 Costs Incurred Expenses incurred by the Planning Board in connection with site plan review, including the reasonable fees and expenses of any consultants retained by the Planning Board, shall be borne by the Applicant. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016	 Page 86

APPLICATION FOR DRIVEWAYS/ CURB CUTS UNDER MANCHESTER-BY-THE-SEA ZONING BY LAW SECTION 6.2.7 
Construction that involves a driveway or entrance from the traveled portion of a street requires a permit from the Planning Board. 
This application for Driveways/Curb Cuts is to be filed with the Town Clerk with the following: 
___ Copy of Assessor’s map showing map number, and lot indicated by arrow. 
___ Site Plan prepared by Registered Architect, Landscape Architect, or Professional Engineer showing entire lot indicating: . location of property lines, edge of roadway, front yard setback, 5’ side and rear setbacks; . existing and proposed buildings and structures; . location and dimension of radius of proposed driveway, parking and/or garage; . approximate distance to and location of storm sewers, hydrants; . approximate distance to and location of drains; . identify any impediments to sign lines, such as utility poles, fences, walls, trees, crests of hill in 
roadway, etc; . identify radius of curb cut apron (15’ min. recommended); . describe measures to mitigate run-off or erosion, i.e. gravel or grass swales, catch basins, etc. 
Name of Applicant (print:______________________________________________________________ 
Telephone ___________________ Email __________________ Fax________________ 

Address of Property:__________________________________________________________________ 

Assessor’s Map:___________ Lot:___________ Zoning District:__________________ 

Check if in Overlay District: 
Flood Plain:________ Flood Control District:__________ Historic District:_________ 
Water Resource Overlay Protection District:_______________ 

see http://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx For WROPD: Area (s.f.): Lot ________ Impervious surfaces: Structures _____________  Other _____________ Proposed new ___________ 
Name and address of owner if other than applicant:_________________________________________ 
Date: ________ Name (signed):___________________ Name Printed:________________________ 
1 set of application and attachments to Town Clerk 9 sets of application and attachments to Planning Board 
Fee: $100 Received by Town Clerk ____________________ on ____________ 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 87 

(Driveways/Curb Cuts application, page 2) 
Excerpt from Section 6.2.7 of the Manchester-by-the-Sea Zoning By-law: 
“The applicant shall: (a), at least seven days prior to filing the application, mail a notice (in the form specified by the Planning Board) to all property owners within one hundred feet of the locus for which a driveway/curb cut is sought as such property is identified in the most recent information available at the Assessor’s Office, (b) certify in such application that such notice has been mailed, (c) attach to such application a list of the names and addresses of those notified, and file the application (with the filing fee, as established by the Planning Board) with the Planning Board by submission to the Town Clerk.” 
I hereby certify that I have complied with the requirements of the above paragraph of Section 6.2.7 of the Zoning By-law. 
Name: 
Date: 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 88 

(Driveways/Curb Cuts application, page 3) 
In accordance with Section 6.2.7 of the Zoning By-law, the Manchester-by-the-Sea Planning Board will hold a meeting on _______________ at __________ p.m. at the Town Hall, Manchester-by-the-Sea, MA to consider the application of __________________________________ for Driveways/Curb Cuts to access an existing lot at ______________________________. Assessor’s Map No. ____, Lot No. ____, Zoning District __________. 
Any person interested or wishing to be heard on this matter should appear at the time and place above designated. 
   Chairman of the Planning Board 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 89 

OFFICE OF THE PLANNING BOARD Town Hall, Manchester-by-the-Sea, MA 01944 ______________@________________ 
    Town Clerk 
Hearing Date:_____________________        Site Viewing: _____________________        Granted: __________ Denied:________        Decision Due: ____________________        Decision filed with the Town Clerk: 
      (for office use) Nature of Action Requested: Application for Earth Removal Permit under the General By-laws, Article XII-Earth Removal 
Applicant shall submit 18 (eighteen) copies of applications and plans. 
Filing Fee [due with the application for permit]: $500 [Also applies to renewal applications.] 
Permit fee [due prior to issuance to permit]: $200.00 per month for permit period after first month, and 
Such other charges as it shall find necessary for clerical, civil engineering and other consultants, legal, 
and inspection expenses in connection with any application for a permit, its review by the Board and post-
permit monitoring. The applicant shall deposit funds for such charges with the Town as the Board shall 
prescribe. 

The Board may waive fees if and as it deems appropriate. These fees and charges shall apply to all 
applications for earth removal permits filed after the date of adoption of the above fee schedule, and to all 
permits issued pursuant thereto 

Application for Earth Removal Permit under the General By-laws, Article XII-Earth Removal, Section 
3(b). Any person wishing to remove more than 250 cubic yards of earth from a property in the Town shall 
file a formal application with the Planning Board, which application shall include the following specific 
information and supporting documentation: 

1.
 the location of the proposed excavation; 

2.
 the legal name and address of the owner of the property involved; 

3. 
the legal name and address of the petitioner, which address shall be used by the Board for all correspondence hereunder; 

4.
 property lines, names and address of all abutting property owners, including those across any streets; 

5. 
a detailed plan of the land involved, prepared by a Registered Civil Engineer, or a registered surveyor, and acceptable to the Board, at a scale of 1”:20’, or as determined appropriate, showing the entire parcel of land based on a perimeter survey and showing existing topography by five (5) foot contours within one hundred (100) feet of, and including, the site of the proposed excavation or to the property line. This contour plan shall show locations of a sufficient number of test borings made to determine the average depth of topsoil before excavation 

6. 
a detailed plan of the land involved, prepared by a Registered Civil Engineer, or a registered surveyor, and acceptable to the Board, showing five (5) foot contours of a site as of the completion of the excavation project, all drawn to a scale acceptable to the Board. The plan shall further show the maximum depth that the applicant intends to excavate, the type of material the applicant intends to extract from the 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 90 
land, the manner and depth in which he shall replace the top soil, and thee type of reseeding and planting he proposes to use; 
7.
 natural features such as wetlands, the 100-year flood plain, ground cover and surface and ground water. Water-table elevation shall be determined by test pits and soil borings. A log of soil borings shall be included, taken to the depth of the proposed excavation, congruent with the size and geological makeup of the site; 

8.
 a topographical map showing drainage facilities, final grades, and proposed vegetation and trees; 

9.
 erosion and sediment-control plan; 

10.
 the amount and cost of proposed restoration materials; 

11. 
the location of monitoring wells which have been used to establish the high water table. The highest elevation of the water table shall be determined by observation wells monitored during the months of April and May. The observation wells’ location shall be determined by the Conservation Commission or its agent. The information concerning height of water table shall be gathered before application for a permit is made to the Planning Board; 

12.
 the proposed form of performance security to be used; and 

13. 
copies of the information outlined in the above articles one (1) through twelve (12) shall be filed with the Town Clerk and the Planning Board. 

14.
 Outline of all areas within the Water Resource Overlay Protection District (WROPD) 


http://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx 
Fee: $500 Received: 
Town Clerk 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 91 

APPENDIX G 

ASSESSMENT STUDY STANDARDS/MISC. 
HYDROGEOLOGIC STUDY GUIDELINES 

1.0 Base Map 
Should include: 
1.1 Existing surface water bodies and wetlands 
1.2 Location of existing wells and septic systems for abutting properties 
1.3 Existing and planned land surface elevations 
1.4 Groundwater contours at minimum two (2) foot intervals 
1.5 
Detailed description of proposed project, including: 
a) location of planned septic systems 
b) water supply wells 
c) residential dwellings 
d) lawn areas 
e) paved areas 


2.0
 Background Information 


Should include: 
2.1 Existing condition of ground and surface water quality, including physical characteristics and water chemistry. Measurements shall specifically include concentrations of total phosphorus if in the recharge zone of freshwater pond; nitrate-nitrogen if in the recharge zone of saltwater pond or embayment; and nitrate- nitrogen if in a zone of contribution to a private or public water supply well. 
2.2 Subsurface geology 
2.3 Surface drainage patterns 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 92 

3.0 Analysis Of Development Impact 
The analysis of the impact of the development will vary depending on its location in relation to sensitive water resources within the Town. One of four categories will apply. They are: 1) Zone II protection areas to public drinking water supplies; 2) contributing areas to fresh water lakes or ponds; 3) contributing areas to coastal estuaries; and 4) those areas designated as not impacting in a significant way the sensitive water resources. Subdivisions with upland in excess of 80,000 square feet per buildable lot would be designated as being in the fourth category. No further analysis of development impact by subdivision in category four need to be performed, unless specifically required by the Planning Board. 
3.1 Zone II Protection Areas to Public Drinking Water Supplies 
Analysis should include: 
The existing condition of the water supply, including well location and construction and the quality of water pumped by the well. 
A calculation of the total nitrogen loading from the proposed development (in pounds per year) and the predicted nitrogen concentration in ground water underneath the development (in mg/1) using loading rates provided in Table G-1 below. 
A calculation of the predicted nitrogen concentration in ground water pumped by the water supply well from throughout the Zone II area. This analysis must include a calculation of the total loading within the Zone II area from all sources under saturation or build-out conditions. The loading analysis should use the loading rates provided in Table G-1 below. 
A comparison of the results of the post-development Zone II loading analysis to the critical nitrogen concentration of 5 mg/l for water pumped by the water supply well. If the predicted concentration is above 5 mg/l, the applicant must indicate nitrogen reduction measures for the proposed development that will reduce the nitrogen loading so the predicted concentration is 5 mg/l or less. 
3.2 Contributing Areas to Fresh Water Lakes or Ponds 
Analysis should include: 
A map showing the boundaries of the contributing area based on ground water flow and/or surface water runoff. 
A calculation of the total phosphorus loading from the proposed developmnet (in pounds per year) using loading rates provided in TABLE G-2 below. 
Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 93 

A calculation of the predicted phosphorus concentration in the fresh water system from sources throughout the contributing area. This analysis must include a calculation of the loading within the contributing area from all sources under saturation or build-out conditions. The loading analysis should use the loading rates provided in TABLE G-2 below. 
A comparison of the results of the post-development phosphorus loading analysis to the critical phosphorus concentration of 0.2 mg/l for the fresh water resource. If the predicted concentration is above 0.2 mg/l, the applicant must indicate phosphorus reduction measures for the proposed development that will reduce the phosphorous loading so the predicted concentration is 0.2 mg/l or less. 
3.3 Contributing Areas to Coastal Ponds or Estuaries 
Analysis should include: 
A map showing the boundaries of the contributing area based on ground water flow. 

A flushing calculation showing how quickly water and associated nutrients and other 
contaminants are removed from the coastal system into Massachusetts Bay. 

A calculation of the total nitrogen loading from the proposed development (in pounds per year) 
using loading rates provided in Table G-1 below. 

A calculation of the predicted nitrogen loading to ground water (in pounds per year) throughout 
the contributing areas. This analysis must include a calculation of the total loading within the 
contributing area from all sources under saturation or build-out conditions. The loading analysis 
should use the loading rates provided in Table G-1 below. 

A comparison of the results of the predicted loading analysis for the post-development condition 
to the critical nitrogen loading levels provided in TABLE G-3 below which are based on the 
flushing characteristics of the coastal system. If the predicted concentration is above the critical 
loading levels, the applicant must indicate nitrogen reduction measures for the proposed 
development that will reduce the nitrogen loading so the predicted concentration is reduced to, or 
below the critical rate. 

Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 94 

Table G-1 Nitrogen Loading Analysis Parameters 
SOURCE  CONCENTRATION  LOADING RATE  FLOW/RECHARGE  
Sewage  40 mg N/liter  (6.72 lbs N/person/yr) (165 gallons/dwelling)  55 gallons/person/day  
Fertilizer (Lawns)  (0.9 lbs N/1000 sq. ft./yr.)  18 in./year  
Pavement Runoff  2.0 mg N/liter  (.42 lbs N/1000 sq.ft./yr.)  40 in./yr  
Roof Runoff  0.75 mg N/liter  (0.15 lbs N/1000 sq.ft./yr.)  40 in./yr  
Precipitation  0.05 mg N/liter  (0.005 lbs N/1000 sq.ft./yr.)  18 in./year  

Average Loading Rate Per Dwelling (25.3 lbs/yr) 
*Agricultural fertilizer loading rates should be determined for dominant local crops, if appropriate.  

TABLE G-2 Watershed Phosphorus Loading Model Build-out Conditions 
QUANTITY  SOURCE LOADING  PERSISTENCE  LOADING LBS/YR.  
GROUNDW A TER   
Septic Systems  *  9.6 lbs/unit/yr   0.20   **   
Lawns  *  0.91 lbs/5000 sq.ft/yr  0.19  **  
Agricult.Fields (w/ manure) (acres)  *  10 lbs/acre/yr  0.24  **  
Feedlots (acres)  *  227 lbs/acre/yr   0.24  **  
Forested (acres)   *  0.2 lbs/acre/yr  0.37  **  
Road Drainage (acres)  *  0.92 lbs/acre/yr  0.00  **  
TOTAL (Loading to Stream/Pond)  ***  
STORMWATER FLOW  
Septic Systems  *  9.6 lbs/unit/yr   0.31   **   
Lawns  *  0.91 lbs/5000 sq.ft/yr  0.31  **  
Agricult.Fields (w/ manure) (acres)  *  10 lbs/acre/yr  0.40  **  
Feedlots (acres)  *  227 lbs/acre/yr   0.40  **  
Forested (acres)   *  0.2 lbs/acre/yr  0.63  **  
Road Drainage (acres)  *  0.92 lbs/acre/yr  1.00  **  
TOTAL (Loading to Stream/Pond)  ***  
TOTAL LOADING  ****  

Runoff/Recharge Calculations:  

Soils   Runoff  Runoff  Recharge  Result   
(acres)  (ft/yr)  (M gal/yr/acre)  (ft/yr)  (M gal/yr/acre)  
Glacial Till  *  1  0.3258  0.25  0.0814  
Sandy Soils   *  0.25   0.0814  1.50  0.4887  
Total  ***  0.4072  0.569  
Average stormflow (cfs) 1.86  Average baseflow (cfs) 0.69  

Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 95 

NOTE: *Number of acres times 43,560 square feet times runoff/recharge in ft/yr times 7.48 gallons per cubic foot equal gallons per year. Convert to liters and convert pounds per year to milligrams to get MG/L concentration. 
** quantity of *** quantity times unit loading times persistence measured in pounds per year  **** Sum of groundwater and stormwater flows  Column total  
TABLE G-3 Recommended Critical Nitrogen Loading Limits 
Type of Embayment  SB* Waters  SA* Waters  Sensitive Waters  
Shallow:  
Flushing in less than or equal to 5 days  350 mg/M3/Vr  200 mg/M3/Vr  100 mg/M3/Vr  
Flushing in greater than 5 days  30 g/M2/yr  15 g/M2/yr  5 g/M2/yr  
Deep: Use lesser loading rate  500 mg/M3/Vr or 45 g/M2/yr  260 mg/M3/Vr or 20 g/M2/yr  130 mg/M3/Vr or 10 g/M2/yr  
Vr = residence time/square root (1+ residence time)  
* SB and SA are classifications for coastal waters relating to existing, desired water quality based on waterbody type, location, size, etc. and adjacent land uses. SB is lower quality based on waterbody type, location, size, etc. and adjacent land uses. SB is a lower quality than SA. The Commonwealth of Massachusetts has classified all coastal waters under the authority of 314 CMR 4, and has currently classified Duxbury coastal waters as SA.  

OUTLINE OF MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR A TRAFFIC STUDY REPORT 
1. 	
Introduction 
Project Description Locus Map 


2. 	
Description of Existing Conditions 


Existing Road Geometrics 
Lane and shoulder widths 
Lateral Clearances 
Horizontal and Vertical Alignment Intersection Geometrics 
Traffic Signalization 
Sight Distances 

Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016	 Page 96 

Abutting Land Uses and Zoning 
Existing Traffic Characteristics Based on Traffic Counts or Observation  

Vehicle Speeds Average Daily Traffic (ADT) Peak Hour Traffic Directional Distribution Truck Percentage for ADT and Peak Hour Turning Movements at Adjacent Intersections Pedestrian Volumes  
Accident Data Collection and Analysis 
Summary of Three Year Accident History Accident Diagrams 
Evaluation of Accidents 

3. Projected Traffic Impacts Due to Proposed Development  
Methodology for Making Projections Average Daily Traffic (ADT) 
Peak Hour Traffic 
Directional Distribution 

Truck Percentage for ADT and Peak Hour Turning Movements at Adjacent Intersections Pedestrian Volumes  
4. 
Proposed Methods of Mitigating Traffic Impacts  

5.
 Level of Service Chart 


Geometric Improvements Traffic Signalization  
Level  Delay in Seconds  Description  
A  Less Than 5.0  Very little delay, rare stopping  
B  5.1 – 15.0  Majority of vehicles do not stop  
C  15.1 – 25.0  Some pass-through, significant # stop  
D  25.1 – 40.0  Most stop, sometimes twice in cycle  
E  40.1 – 60.0  Almost all stop, cycle failure frequent  
F  Greater than 60.0  Gridlock  

Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 97 

MAPS 
[Maps for official use are at on file at Town Hall or available at 
http://host.appgeo.com/manchesterma/Map.aspx 
Zoning Districts [ZBL Section 3.2] 
‘New’ District D [ZBL Section 4.2] 
Bennett’s Brook Drainage Area/Flood Control District [ZBL Section 4.7] 
Water Resource Overlay Protection Districts [ZBL Section 4.9] 
Watershed for Gravelly Pond/Round Pond [ZBL Section 4.9] 
Zone of Contribution to Lincoln Street Well [ZBL Section 4.9] 

Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 98 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 99 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 100 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 101 


Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 102 



Subdivision Rules and Regulations June 2016 Page 104 




Town By-law Article X Section 20C: Short Term Paying Guest in Homes
Purpose: The rental of residential premises to short term paying guests, not otherwise
expressly licensed for such purpose by the Town of Manchester by the Sea or other
proper authority, shall be allowed only in properties whose owners have obtained an
annual license in accordance with the requirements of this by-law from the Board of
Selectmen. The licensing process is designed to protect the health and welfare of the
short term paying guests, to ensure an orderly and transparent process for operating
small-scale rental services, and to protect the tranquility of residential neighborhoods.
Applicability: The rental of residential premises to short term paying guests is allowed
in owner-occupied residential premises pursuant to being licensed in accordance with this
by-law and consistent with the Town’s Zoning By-law. Short term paying guests are
those who are staying in a dwelling unit for less than 6 consecutive nights. The Board
may allow short term paying guests provided suitable accommodations exist as
determined by the Board in accordance with this by-law.
Process: Every owner of residential premises who offers rentals to short term paying
guests must first obtain a license to do so from the Board of Selectmen. Licenses are
valid for a calendar year and must be renewed annually. Application for a license can be
made at any time but the license shall expire December 31 of the subject year. A
completed application will be reviewed and a decision rendered at a public meeting of the
Board of Selectmen.
Applications: Application shall be made on a form approved by the Board of Selectmen
and shall contain sufficient information to determine the scope of the proposed short term
rental operation, including location, number of rooms to be rented and whether meals
prepared at the house will be served. Completed applications will be reviewed and acted
upon within 3 weeks of submittal.
By completing the application form, applicants shall be confirming the following:
1. The property complies with applicable Board of Health regulations and Fire
Department safety measures (fire/smoke alarms and CO monitors)
2. Name of a local authorized agent who can act on behalf of the owner in the
absence of the owner in the case of any problems, violations or emergencies
should they arise while the owner is not present.
3. Agreement to maintain a guest registry showing the name of each guest and the
night(s) of their stay. The registry shall be made available for review at any time
at the request of the Enforcement Agent and/or Board of Selectmen.
Application Fee: The Board of Selectmen annually shall set a fee for applying for a Short
Term Guest Rental Home License. Said fee initially shall be set at $100.
The Board of Selectmen shall grant licenses to those persons submitting applications in
compliance with the requirements of this by-law. A license issued under this by-law
shall not be deemed to supersede the application of any other lawful requirements
applicable to the use authorized therein, including the necessity of obtaining other
licenses or permits.
Owners are encouraged to adhere to guidelines for the short term rental of rooms that the
Selectmen shall promulgate from time to time.
Complaints and Enforcement:
1. The Board of Selectmen may designate such Town officials as they deem appropriate
to carry out the enforcement duties under this by-law. The Town Administrator shall
supervise enforcement actions.
2. If the Enforcement Agent, as designated by the Board of Selectmen, concludes that
there has been a violation of this by-law or of the conditions of any license issued
hereunder, the agent shall send notice ordering cessation of the improper activities to
the license holder, by registered mail to the address stated on the initial Application, .
3. If a license holder persists in such violation, the Enforcement Agent may seek
enforcement of this bylaw through the mechanisms set forth in Article I, Section 4 of
the General By-laws, and the penalty for violations of this by-law shall be a fine of
$300 for each day an offense occurs.
4. In the event that a license holder persists in such violations, the Board may notify the
license holder by mail, as above, of a hearing to be held not less than four (4) days
thereafter to show cause why said license should not be revoked, and following said
hearing, may in its discretion, modify, revoke or amend the license.
5. Upon petition of the property owner and/or license holder, abutters, or upon its own
initiative, the Board of Selectmen may hold a hearing to determine whether or not the
terms of this by-law, any other applicable state, federal or local law, or the license
itself are being complied with, and/or whether or not activities conducted pursuant to
a license issued under this bylaw constitute a nuisance or adversely impact the public
health, safety or welfare.
6. The Board of Selectmen may, after hearing, mandate licensure, or modify, revoke or
suspend a license issued hereunder. In addition, should the Board of Selectmen, after
conducting a hearing, determine that a violation has occurred; it may direct the
Enforcement Agent to seek enforcement of this by-law as set forth in paragraph 3,
above.
Validity: The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof. This bylaw shall go into effect January 1, 2017.




