Article I.
Title, Authority and Purpose
§171-1. Short Title. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance” of the Town of Palmer,
Massachusetts," hereinafter referred to as "this Ordinance
§171-2. Authority. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 40A of the General Laws of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, as amended by Chapter 808 of the Acts of 1975, as amended,
herein called the "Zoning Act."
§171-3. Purpose. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
This ordinance is enacted for the following purposes: to lessen congestion in the streets; to conserve
health; to secure safety from fire, flood, panic, and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to
prevent overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population; to encourage housing for
persons of all income levels; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water supply,
drainage, sewerage, schools, parks, open space and other public requirements; to conserve the value
of land and buildings, including the conservation of natural resources and the prevention of blight and
pollution of the environment; to encourage appropriate uses of land throughout the Town; and to
preserve and increase amenities by the promulgation of regulations to fulfill said objectives.
This ordinance was written with careful thought and reasonable consideration to the character of this
community. Careful consideration has also been given to defining each district and to the suitability
of particular uses within those districts. This ordinance was written to help guide land development
policies and proposals of the Planning Board, in order to make Palmer a more viable and more
pleasing place to live, work, and play.
Article II
Definitions
§171-4. General.
For the purpose of this ordinance and unless the context of usage clearly indicates another meaning,
certain terms and words shall have the meaning given herein. Words used in the present tense include
the future; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular; the words "used" or
"occupied" include the words "designed," "arranged," "intended," or "offered," to be used or occupied;
the words “building," "structure," "lot," "land," “plot”, or "premises" shall be construed as though
followed by the words "or any portion thereof"; and the word "shall" is always mandatory and not
merely directory. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-5. Definitions.
ABANDONMENT: The cessation of a nonconforming use as indicated by the visible or otherwise
apparent intention of an owner to discontinue a nonconforming use of a structure or lot; or the removal
of the characteristic equipment or furnishing used in the performance of the nonconforming use, without
its replacement within two (2) years by similar equipment or furnishings; or the cessation of a
nonconforming use or use of a structure caused by its replacement with a conforming use or structure.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT: A subordinate dwelling unit that is intended for use as a complete,
independent living facility located in a residence constructed as, and having the character of, a single
family residence, which subordinate dwelling unit does not substantially alter the character and
appearance of the residential structure or its conformity with the character of the neighborhood.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: See BUILDING, ACCESSORY.
ACCESSORY SIGN: See SIGN, ACCESSORY.
ACCESSORY USE: See USE, ACCESSORY.
ADULT RETAIL BUSINESS: A retail business establishment including a bookstore, having a
substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, and other matter which are
distinguished or characterized by the emphasis depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or
sexual excitement as defined in General Laws, Chapter 272, §31. For purposes of this definition, the
phrase “substantial or significant portion” means an amount of stock in trade or sales of books,
magazines, videos, peep show booths, or other visual or audio material which is greater than ten percent
of the entire stock or sales.
ADULT THEATRE: An enclosed building used for presenting material distinguished by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in General
Laws, Chapter 272, §31, where such material constitutes a substantial or significant portion of materials
shown. For purposes of this definition “substantial or significant portion” means movies, films, videos,
tapes or other visual or audio materials are greater than ten percent of all such material shown or played.
ADULT USE BUSINESS: Any business defined in this ordinance, and in Chapter 40A, §9A, M.G.L.,
as may be amended, as an adult bookstore, an adult motion picture theater, an adult paraphernalia store,
an adult video store, or an establishment which displays live nudity for its patrons. (Amended Ord 2007-
07, RTCM 3/7/07)
AGENCY VEHICLE: Any vehicle such as an automobile, van, light or heavy truck, bus, tractor, snow
removal vehicle or motorcycle that is used by the employees or agents of the organization to conduct
regular or special business. This definition excludes those vehicles used by individual employees or
agents to commute to the site from their homes.
AGRICULTURE FAIR: A principal use operated either for profit or not for profit, with the principal
purpose being the promoting of agricultural activities, whether these be provided to the public at large or
to the members of any particular organization and including, but not limited to, any of the following
uses: entertainment, amusement, sports, recreation, racing, storage and handling of animals, judging,
showing and auctioning of animals, overnight camping of scouts and other like organizations.
AGRICULTURE: A use which has as its principal purpose the raising of agricultural products for
commercial or home use, but not including the raising of livestock or farm animals on parcels of five (5)
acres or less, and not including the sale of products, except for products raised on the premises. This
term shall include aquaculture, floriculture, horticulture, vitaculture and silvaculture.
ALTERATION: Any construction, rearrangement, reconstruction or other similar action resulting in a
change in the structural parts, height, number of stories, exits, size, use or location of a building or other
structure.
ANTENNA: A device used to receive or transmit telecommunications or radio signals. Such signals
shall include, but not be limited to radio, television, cellular telephone, paging, personal communications
services (PCS), and microwave communications. Examples include panels, microwave dishes, and
single poles known as whip antennae.
APARTMENT BUILDING: A building containing three or more dwelling units including apartment
houses and garden apartments but not including townhouses.
AQUIFER: Geologic formation composed of rock or sand and gravel that contain significant amounts
of potentially recoverable potable water. Aquifer locations in the Town of Palmer are depicted on a map
entitled “Aquifer Protection District: Palmer, originally prepared by the Pioneer Valley Planning
Commission, February 1987” and revised February 28, 2005, available for review at the Town
Administration Building. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
AVERAGE FINISHED GRADE: A reference horizontal plane representing the average of finished
ground level adjoining a building at all exterior walls.
AWNING/CANOPY: A structure attached to a building, the function of which is to shelter the
building's window(s) or door(s), and pedestrians from rain, wind and sun.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: See FLOOD ELEVATION, BASE.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade.
BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN PATHWAY: Any facility or site improvement which separates
bicycle and pedestrian traffic from vehicular traffic. Such pathways may include but are not limited to:
specially marked bicycle and pedestrian routes within parking areas, raised walkways, off road bicycle
paths, and sidewalks.
BOARD OF APPEALS: The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Palmer, Massachusetts.
BOARDING HOUSE, ROOMING HOUSE: A building in which rooms and sometimes meals are
provided for compensation to persons other than members of the family or proprietor.
BUILD TO LINE: An alignment that visually defines the front yard setback from a street or public
right-of-way established by buildings and structures along that street. In the Village Center District, the
Average Build-To-Line for a proposed site is calculated by averaging the front yard setbacks of the three
closest, existing primary structure on both sides of the proposed site (a total of 6 structures).
BUILDING: A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, with or without a roof,
enclosed within exterior walls or firewalls, built to form a structure for the shelter of persons, animals, or
property.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A detached building, the use of which is customarily incidental and
subordinate to that of the principal building, and which is located on the same lot as that occupied by the
principal building or on a contiguous lot under same ownership.
BUILDING AREA: The ground area enclosed by the walls of a building, together with the area of all
covered porches and other roofed portions, including areas covered by building overhangs in excess of
eighteen (18) inches and uncovered decks at least thirty (30) inches above grade.
BUILDING, ATTACHED: A building having any portion of one or more walls in common with
adjoining buildings.
BUILDING COVERAGE: The building area expressed as a percent of the total lot area.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building having open space on all sides.
BUILDING LINE: The line established by this ordinance beyond which a building shall not extend,
except as specifically provided in this ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is
located.
BUILDING, NONCONFORMING: A building, lawfully existing at the effective date of this
ordinance, or any subsequent amendment thereto, which does not conform to one or more of the
applicable regulations for the district in which the building is located. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM
3/7/07)
BUSINESS: Customary commercial pursuits and transactions.
BUSINESS OFFICE: See OFFICE.
BUSINESS SERVICE AND SUPPLY SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: Any building wherein the
primary occupation is the provision of services or supplies to the business, commercial, industrial or
institutional community but not including retail sales to the general public except as a secondary and
subordinate ancillary activity.
CAMPGROUND: A lot upon which two or more campsites are located, established or maintained for
occupancy by the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes.
CAMPSITE: A plot of land within a campground intended for the accommodation of one tent,
recreation vehicle or other individual camping unit on a temporary basis not to exceed thirty (30) days
for the same unit in any twelve (12) month period.
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY: A statement signed by the Building Inspector setting
forth either that a building or structure complies with the zoning ordinance or that a building, structure or
parcel of land may lawfully be employed for specified uses, or both. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM
3/7/07)
CLUB OR LODGE: An organization of persons incorporated pursuant to the provisions of
membership corporations laws or the benevolent orders laws, which is the owner, lessee or occupant of
an establishment operated solely for a recreational, social, patriotic, political, benevolent or athletic
purpose, but not for pecuniary gain and includes the establishment so operated.
CLUSTER RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: A development undertaken in accordance with the
provisions of §171-76 of this ordinance, which may consist of a variety of dwelling types integrated with
each other and with a significant area of common open space, and developed at a density not exceeding
that which would be ordinarily expected from a typical conventional subdivision. (Amended Ord 2007-
07, RTCM 3/7/07)
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A vehicle registered for commercial use with the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts or other state.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE: See HALFWAY HOUSE.
COMPOSTING FACILITY: A site at which materials capable of being composted are collected,
separated, processed, recovered, or otherwise made capable of reuse or use in a different form. Such
materials may also be sold at such site. This definition is intended to be limited to the composting of
organic materials.
CONSTRUCTION SUPPLY ESTABLISHMENT: A retail establishment the primary purpose of
which sells, rents, leases, services, and/or otherwise maintains materials and/or equipment involved in
construction activities, including, but not limited to hardware, lumber, and equipment sales, and
millwork. The hiring out of construction equipment intact with an operator is not considered to be a part
of a construction supply establishment.
DAMAGE TO THE ENVIRONMENT: Any destruction, damage or impairment, actual or probable,
to any of the natural resources or aesthetic beauty of any place within the commonwealth including, but
not limited to, air pollution, water pollution, improper sewage disposal, pesticide pollution, excessive
noise, improper operation of dumping grounds, impairment and eutrophication of rivers, streams,
floodplains, lakes, ponds, or other surface or subsurface water resources, destruction of seashores, dunes,
marine resources, underwater archaeological resources, wetlands, plant life, open spaces, natural areas,
parks, or historic districts or sites.
DISTRICT: A zoning district as established by Article III of this ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007- 07,
RTCM 3/7/07)
DORMITORY: A building containing sleeping rooms, dining rooms, common rooms, and accessory
facilities intended exclusively for the use of students of an educational institution, having been
constructed or converted by that institution or with its specific authorization.
DRIVE-THROUGH ESTABLISHMENT: A business establishment wherein patrons are usually
served while seated in parked vehicles in the same lot. The term "drive-through" includes drive-through
service establishments such as banks, cleaners, and the like; and automotive service stations, gasoline
stations, or the like.
DRIVE-THROUGH EATING ESTABLISHMENT: A business establishment wherein food is
usually served to or consumed by patrons while they are seated in parked motor vehicles.
DRIVE-THROUGH USE: An establishment which by design, physical facilities, service, or by
packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods, or be
entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles.
DRIVEWAY: A space, located on a lot, built for access to a garage or off-street parking or loading
space.
DWELLING: A privately or publicly owned permanent building which is occupied in whole or part as
the home residence or sleeping place of one or more persons. The terms "one-family", "two-family",
"three-family" or "multi-family" dwelling shall not include hotel, lodging house, hospital, membership
club, mobile home, or dormitory.
DWELLING, MOBILE HOME: A single-family residential unit with all of the following
characteristics;
A. Designed for long-term occupancy, and containing sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a
tub or shower bath and kitchen facilities with plumbing and electrical connections provided for
attachment to outside systems.
B. Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels or on a flat bed or other trailer or
detachable wheels.
C. Arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete, conventionally designed to
include major appliances and furniture, and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, location on foundation supports, connection to utilities, and the
like.
D. Designed for removal to and installation or erection on other sites.
A mobile home shall be defined to include two (2) or more units, separately towable, which when
joined together have the characteristics as described above. For the purposes of this ordinance, a mobile
home shall not be deemed a "one-family dwelling". (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
DWELLING, MODULAR UNIT: A factory-fabricated transportable building designed to be used by
itself or to be incorporated with similar units at a building site into a modular structure that will be a
finished building in a fixed location. The term is intended to apply to major assemblies, and does not
include prefabricated panels, trusses, plumbing trees, and other prefabricated sub-elements incorporated
into a structure at the site. For the purpose of this ordinance a modular unit shall not be deemed a
"mobile home" but shall be regarded as a conventional dwelling, subject to the rules and regulations
contained herein. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building containing four (4) or more dwelling units and including
apartment houses and garden apartment house, but not including a townhouse.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A detached building containing one dwelling unit, also referred to as a
"single family dwelling".
DWELLING, THREE-FAMILY: A detached building containing three (3) dwelling units, but not
including a townhouse.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A detached building containing two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: Three or more living and sleeping rooms providing complete living facilities for
the use of one or more individuals constituting a single housekeeping unit, with permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation; and including any unit which is rented, leased, or
including a unit available under a condominium or cooperative arrangement.
DWELLING UNIT, EFFICIENCY: One or two living and/or sleeping rooms providing complete
living facilities for one or two individuals constituting a single housekeeping unit, with permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation; and including any unit which is rented,
leased, or including a unit available under a condominium or cooperative arrangement
EARTH PRODUCTS EXCAVATION: The removal of the following earth products: sand, gravel or
smaller unprocessed rock, clay, earth loam, and/or topsoil.
ELDERLY HOUSING: The word elderly housing shall include state-aided or federally aided housing
developments for the elderly and/or communities consisting of either a structure or structures
constructed expressly for use as housing for persons fifty-five (55) or over or sixty-two (62) or over, on
one (1) parcel or on contiguous parcels of land, totaling at least five (5) acres in size or as is consistent
with M.G.L. Chapter 151B §4, Subsection 6 as may be amended from time to time. (Amended ATM,
May 14, 2001, Article 29)
ESSENTIAL FACILITIES: Facilities necessary for the provision of services ordinarily provided by
municipalities, public corporations, and public or private utilities, which facilities must provide a link
(interrupted only by intermediate facilities) between central facilities of the utility and individual lots
served including, but not necessarily limited to gas, water, and sewer mains; storm sewers; electrical and
communication wires, whether underground or overhead; police and/or fire call boxes, hydrants, and
other stations or terminals of such continuous systems; and facilities accessory to such systems,
including but not limited to manholes, telephone poles, and the like, but not including any intermediate
facility, such as a major electrical sub-station; a telephone dial center, or a sewage pumping station, any
facility defined under municipal facilities, any use listed under the definition of heavy public use, or any
facility of a public corporation or of a public or private utility which is separately listed in Table of Use
Regulations.
ESTABLISHMENTS WHICH DISPLAY LIVE NUDITY: An establishment which provides live
entertainment for its patrons, which includes the display of nudity as that term is defined in Chapter 272,
§31, M.G.L. as may be amended.
EXTENDED CARE HOME: SEE NURSING HOME:
FAMILY: Any number of individuals related by blood, marriage, or legal adoption living together as a
single housekeeping unit. (and including necessary domestic help such as nurses or servants) A group of
individuals not related by blood, marriage, or legal adoption, but living together as a single housekeeping
unit. For purposes of controlling residential density each such group of four (4) individuals shall
constitute a single family.
FAMILY DAY CARE (in the home): Any private residence which on a regular basis, receives for
temporary custody and care for compensation during part or all of the day, children under seven years of
age or children under sixteen years of age if such children have special needs; provided however, in
either case, that the total number of children under sixteen years of age in a family day care in the home
shall not exceed six, including participating children living in the residence. Family day care in the
home shall not mean a private residence used for an informal cooperative arrangement among neighbors
or relatives, or the occasional care of children with or without compensation therefore, or where all of
the children are of the family of the owner/occupant of the private residence.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME LARGE (in the home): Allows for the care of children as described
in family day care home above. The maximum number of children will be ten children including the
provider’s children. In this situation an assistant must be employed.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME PLUS (in the home): Allows for the care of six children as stated in
Family Day Care Home, plus two additional school age children or an amount as currently defined by
state law.
FARM: An area devoted to agricultural uses with a minimum area of five (5) acres.
FILLING: Any deposit, placement, storage and/or redistribution of soil, earth, sand, gravel, rock, loam,
or other similar material on any land, wetland, or in watercourses and including the conditions resulting
therefrom.
FLEA MARKET: A temporary outdoor sales event in which vendors sell personal used or handcrafted
items to the general public. Specific regulations can be found in §171-87.
FLOOD ELEVATION, BASE or FLOOD ELEVATION, ONE HUNDRED YEAR: The flood
elevation shall be as indicated on the "Flood Insurance Rate Map", prepared by the US Department of
Housing and Urban Development for the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOODPROOFED: To be made watertight to the level of the one hundred (100) year flood with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability
of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy as certified by a registered
professional engineer.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors including
basements of a principal building as measured from the interior faces of its exterior walls. It does not
include cellars; unenclosed porches or attics not used for human occupancy; malls within a shopping
center utilized purely for pedestrian circulation and/or decorative purposes between individual shops of
the center; any floor space in an accessory or principal building intended and designed for the parking of
motor vehicles in order to meet the parking requirements of this ordinance; or any such floor space
intended or designed for accessory heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment. (Amended Ord
2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The ratio of the gross floor area to the total lot area.
FRATERNITY AND/OR SORORITY: A building containing sleeping rooms, dining rooms,
common rooms, and accessory facilities intended exclusively for the use of students of a college or
university who belong to a group or organization which involves common living and which group is
organized and operated with the specific approval and under the regulations of the institution.
FRONTAGE: See LOT FRONTAGE
FUNERAL ESTABLISHMENT: A building or part thereof used for human funeral services. Such
building may contain space and facilities for:
A. Embalming and the performance of other services necessary for the preparation of the dead for
burial,
B. The performance of autopsies and other surgical procedures,
C. The storage of caskets, funeral urns, and other related funeral supplies,
D. The storage of funeral vehicles,
E. Facilities for cremation,
F. The living quarters of an individual and that individual’s family, whose bonafide occupation is
in the funeral establishment.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A garage(s) for housing motor vehicles, with a capacity of not more than three
(3) vehicles for a single family dwelling, plus the capacity for one additional vehicle for each additional
dwelling unit.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building other than a private or community garage used for maintenance,
repair and storage of vehicles and equipment.
GROUNDWATER: All the water found beneath the surface of the ground.
HALFWAY HOUSE or COMMUNITY RESIDENCE: A building containing sleeping rooms,
common rooms, dining rooms, and accessory facilities intended exclusively for the use of participants of
a program of rehabilitation of individuals prior to their complete reentry into normal society, which
program is formally recognized by an agency of the Commonwealth. One or more individuals
responsible for the operation of a halfway house shall be resident therein, and facilities for such resident
director and his family shall be provided.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Material including but not limited to, any materials, in whatever form,
which because of its quantity, concentration, chemical, corrosive, flammable, reactive, toxic, infectious
or radioactive characteristics, either separately or in combination with any substance or substances,
constitutes a present or potential threat to human health, safety, welfare, or to the environment, when
improperly stored, treated, transported, disposed of, used, or otherwise managed. The term shall not
include oil.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: A waste which is hazardous to human health or the environment as
designated by the US Environmental Protection Agency under 40 CFR 250 and the Regulations of the
Massachusetts hazardous Waste Management Act, M.G.L., c 21C.
HEAVY PUBLIC USE: Any building, structure, or use of land, whether such use is conducted on
public property or not, by an agency (if not already exempt from local zoning) of:
A. A city or town other than the Town of Palmer.
B. A county.
C. The commonwealth.
D. The United States.
E. And any of the following specific uses conducted by the Town of Palmer: truck or equipment
storage garage or yard; vehicle repair garage; sewage treatment or water treatment plant; incinerator;
sanitary landfill; or waste recycling plant; or any privately owned and/or operated sanitary landfill;
dump; incinerator; or water or sewage treatment facility; or sewage lift station.
HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average finished grade within ten (10) feet from the walls of
the structure to the top of the structure of the highest roof beams of a flat roof, the deck of a mansard
roof, or the mean level of the highest gable or slope of a hip roof. For structures having roofs or outside
top coverings other than those listed here, or structures having no roof at all, the height shall be defined
as the vertical distance from average finished grade to the highest point.
HISTORICAL SOCIETY: A society or group that serves as the keeper of records and authentic
materials that can explain and authenticate past times, places and/or events. A Historical Society may be
a municipal group or other private group.
HOME OCCUPATION: A vocation, trade, small business, craft, art or profession which can be
conducted in entirety within the main (principal) or accessory building of a property by a bonafide
resident or residents of that main building and which, by nature of its limited size and scope, will not
cause any outward manifestation (such as traffic generation, parking congestion, noise or air pollution,
materials storage, public service, utility demand, etc.) which is uncharacteristic of or an additional
disturbance to the particular residential neighborhood in which said property is located. The following
occupations shall be specifically excluded:
Any clinic, veterinary hospital, restaurant, retail or wholesale supply shop or store, mortuary, office of
doctor, lawyer, real estate or insurance agent. (See §171-81 for additional Special Permit criteria.)
HOSPITAL: A building providing, among others, twenty-four (24) hour inpatient services for persons
admitted thereto for the diagnosis, medical, surgical or restorative treatment or other care of human
ailments, including a sanitarium.
HOSPITAL, VETERINARY: A building providing for the diagnosis and treatment of ailments of
animals other than human, including facilities for overnight care, but not including crematory facilities.
HOTEL: A building or group of buildings, part of a building containing rooming units without
individual cooking facilities for transient occupancy and having a common entrance or entrances or
individual exterior entrances; and including an inn, motel, motor inn and tourist court, but not including
a boarding house, lodging house or rooming house.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES: Materials or structures on or above the ground that do not allow
precipitation to infiltrate the underlying soil.
INDUSTRIAL PARK, BUILDINGS: An area in which one or more industries form a unit and for
which a plan of development for the site is required.
INDUSTRY: Manufacturing, fabricating, assembling, finishing, packaging, processing or research and
development.
JUNK: Any worn out, castoff, or discarded articles or material which is ready for destruction or has
been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some use. Any article or material which, unaltered
or unchanged and without further reconditioning, can be used for its original purpose as readily as when
new shall not be considered junk.
JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle not capable of being used as such in its existing
condition by reason of being damaged or dismantled or failing to contain parts necessary for operation
and otherwise qualifying as junk.
JUNK YARD: The use of any area, whether inside or outside of a building, for the storage, keeping, or
abandonment of junk, or scrap or discarded materials, or the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of
automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof.
KENNEL: A building or buildings for the keeping or breeding of dogs or other permitted small
animals.
LARGE-SCALE CONFERENCE/ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES: An indoor or outdoor land
use attracting large numbers of both local and regional visitors for conference and/or entertaining
purposes including, but not limited to, business meetings, sporting events, concerts, family events and
amusements, and trade shows. A large scale conference facility is defined as having a minimum of one
hundred seventy-five (175) hotel rooms and/or greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of
meeting and exhibition space and could include meeting and exhibition rooms, guest rooms, suites,
resort amenities, dining and food services, personal services for the occupants of the facility, gaming
facilities if duly authorized by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and entertainment. A large-scale
entertainment facility is defined as having a minimum seating capacity of two thousand (2,000) seats or
capacity for a minimum of two thousand (2,000) visitors during peak hours and could include arenas,
amphitheaters, mega theaters, stadiums and ballparks, other sports facilities, and theme parks.
LEACHABLE WASTES: Waste materials including solid wastes, sludge and pesticide and fertilizer
wastes capable of releasing water-borne contaminants to the environment.
LIGHT INDUSTRY: Light industries include those businesses which manufacture, process, store,
package, or distribute goods and materials, and, are, in general, dependent on raw materials refined
elsewhere.
LIVESTOCK: Livestock shall include horses, cows, goats, sheep, pigs, llamas, donkeys, burros,
rabbits, chickens, geese, ducks, and similar animals.
LIVING SPACE: The net floor area within a dwelling unit exclusive of utility rooms, closets, attics,
and cellars.
LOADING SPACE: An off-street space at least twelve (12) feet in width, fifty (50) feet in length and
with a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet, having an area of not less than thirteen hundred
(1,300) square feet which includes access and maneuvering space used exclusively for loading and
unloading of goods and materials from one vehicle. The dimensions of the loading space may be
reduced by the Building Inspector to not less than three hundred (300) square feet, which includes
access, and maneuvering space, when it is clearly evident that service vehicles utilizing said space will
not require the area listed above.
LODGING HOUSE: A building containing four (4) or more lodging units.
LODGING UNIT: One or more rooms for the semi-permanent use of one, two, or three individuals not
living as a single housekeeping unit and not having individual kitchen facilities. A "lodging unit" shall
include rooms in boarding houses, lodging houses or rooming houses. It shall not include convalescent,
nursing or rest homes; dormitories or charitable, educational or philanthropic institutions; or apartments,
hotels or tourist homes/bed and breakfast facilities.
LOT: An area or parcel of land or any part thereof, in common ownership, designated on a plan filed
with the Building Inspector by its owner or owners as a separate lot and having boundaries identical with
those recorded in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds. The following shall not be counted toward
land within the minimum lot area: Land under permanent water bodies; land within public ways, and
land within private ways and rights-of-ways where the general public has the right of access by
automotive vehicles. When calculating the lot area for multiple occupancy buildings, wetlands and lands
exceeding a natural forty-five degree angle will be excluded.
LOT CORNER: A lot at the point of intersection of and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting
streets. In the case of a corner lot, the rear lot line shall be the line opposite the street line on which the
building would be numbered.
LOT COVERAGE: The percent of the total lot area that is covered by main buildings, accessory
structures, parking areas or other structures so as to render the land impervious.
LOT DEPTH: The minimum distance required in any district as set forth in the Table of Dimensional
Requirements. Lot depth shall be the distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line as measured
perpendicular to the front lot line or extension thereof.
LOT FRONTAGE: A continuous lot line along the sideline of a street, which provides safe,
convenient and meaningful vehicular and utility access to the buildable portion of the lot. Calculation of
the “frontage” dimensional requirements shall be in conformance with the Table of Dimensional
Requirements of this chapter.
LOT, INTERIOR: Any lot other than a corner lot or a through lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The property line dividing a lot from a single street right-of-way. In the case of
a corner lot or a through lot, at least one front lot line shall conform to the minimum lot frontage
requirement.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line most nearly opposite from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line not a front or rear lot line.
LOT, NONCONFORMING: See PRE-EXISTING NON-CONFORMING LOT.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot which abuts two (2) streets, but not at their intersection.
LOT, WIDTH: The required minimum distance between side lot lines, measured at the minimum front
set back line for any given district. The minimum lot width shall be equal to the minimum frontage
required in any given district.
MEDICAL CENTER: A building or group of buildings used for the offices and facilities accessory to
the practice of licensed medical practitioners, (including physicians, dentists, optometrists,
ophthalmologists, and persons engaged in all fields related generally to medicine, but not including
veterinarians) and including such common facilities as an outpatient clinic or emergency treatment
rooms, but not including inpatient facilities.
MEMBERSHIP CLUB: A social, sports, or fraternal association or organization, which is used
exclusively by members and their guests and is not conducted as a gainful business and which does not
hold a license to sell alcoholic beverages.
MEMBERSHIP CLUB, FOR PROFIT: A business or organization that is used exclusively by
members and their guests for shopping in a wholesale or group sale atmosphere.
MOBILE HOME: See DWELLING, MOBILE HOME.
MODULAR HOME: See DWELLING, MODULAR HOME.
MODULAR UNIT: A factory-fabricated transportable building designed to be used by itself (for
classroom or office space) or to be incorporated with similar units at a building site into a modular
structure that will be a finished building in a fixed location. The term is intended to apply to major
assemblies, and does not include prefabricated panels, trusses, plumbing trees, and other prefabricated
sub-elements incorporated into a structure at the site. For the purpose of this ordinance a modular unit
shall not be deemed a "mobile home”. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle self-propelled, which are permitted and requires a valid registration
legally issued by a governmental authority in order to be operated on a public way. A motor vehicle
shall include, but not be limited to automobiles, trucks, buses, motor homes, motorized campers,
motorcycles, motor scooters, and tractors.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESSORIES: Any part or parts of any motor vehicle.
MUNICIPAL FACILITIES: Facilities utilized in the provision of services normally provided by
municipalities, such as schools, parks, playgrounds, municipal office buildings, and the like, but not
including any facility defined under essential facilities, any facility defined as a heavy public use, or any
use, specifically listed in the Table of Use Regulations.
NON-ACCESSORY SIGN: See SIGN, NON-ACCESSORY.
NURSING HOME: Also known as extended care home, rest home, or convalescent home. A nursing
facility is any place containing beds for two (2) or more patients, established to render domiciliary and/or
nursing care for chronic or convalescent patients and which is properly licensed by the Commonwealth,
but not including child care homes, or facilities for the care of drug addicts, alcoholics, mentally ill or
developmentally disabled patients.
OFFICE OR BUSINESS OFFICE: A room, studio, suite or building in which a person transacts his
business or carries on his stated occupation. For the purpose of this ordinance, an office shall not
involve manufacturing, fabrication, production, processing, assembling, cleaning, testing, repair or
storage of materials, goods and products which are physically located on the premises. An office shall
not be deemed to include a veterinary hospital. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD ELEVATION: See FLOOD ELEVATION, BASE.
OPEN SPACE: The space on a lot unoccupied by buildings or structures, unobstructed to the sky by
man-made objects other than walks, swimming pools, and terraced areas, not devoted to streets,
driveways, off-street parking or loading spaces and expressed as a percentage of total lot area.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING BOARD: The Outdoor Advertising Board of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts or any board or official, which may hereafter, succeed to its powers or functions.
OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL USE: A principal (but not accessory) use operated
either for profit or not for profit, with the principal purpose being the provision of outdoor recreational
facilities, whether these be provided to the public at large or to the members of any particular
organization, and including, but not limited to any of the following uses: fishing, golf, tennis, or
swimming club, or golf driving range, sports camp, campground, marina, or horseback riding
establishment. (Amended ATM, May 15, 2001, Article 29 and ATM, June 16, 2003 Article 11)
OWNER: The duly authorized agent, attorney, purchaser, and devisee, trustee, lessee, or any person
having vested or equitable interest in the use, structure or lot in question.
PARKING SPACE: A space at least nine (9) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length, with at
least eighteen (18) feet of backing-up and maneuvering area directly behind the space (which may be
shared with a space directly behind it), as exclusive use as a parking stall for one motor vehicle.
PEDESTRIAN FRIENDLY: The presence of facilities and design features that make a physical
environment safe, convenient and aesthetically pleasing to pedestrians. These include but are not limited
to: walkable distances between uses (i.e. under ¼ mile); sidewalks, paths and walkways; continuous
visual interest (i.e. public art, plantings, pavement patterns, uninterrupted line of buildings, attractive
fencing in front of parking areas, murals on blank walls, infill development, pocket parks, etc.);
consumer uses (i.e. restaurants, shops, cinemas, markets); trees for shade; awnings for shelter; buildings
and landscaping elements sited to provide windbreaks; presence of people (i.e. sidewalk cafes, street
vendors, evening business hours); good maintenance; buffers between vehicles and pedestrians (i.e.
planted medians, on street parking, grade separation); paths connecting adjacent uses; crosswalks and
ramps; traffic calming devices; traffic lights; over and underpasses.
PERMIT, TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY: A permit issued by the Building Inspector indicating
near-compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and allowing occupancy or use on a temporary
basis while full compliance is achieved. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
PERSONAL AND CONSUMER SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: Any building wherein the
primary occupation is the repair, care of, maintenance or customizing of personal properties that are
worn or carried about the person or are a physical component of the person. For the purpose of this
ordinance, personal service establishments shall include, but need not be limited to, barber shops, beauty
shops, pet grooming establishments, laundering, cleaning and other garment servicing establishments,
tailors, dressmaking shops, shoe cleaning or repair shops, health clubs, and other similar places of
business, but not including offices of physicians, dentists, and veterinarians, or any establishment with a
gross floor area of more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
PRE-EXISTING NONCONFORMING LOTS: A lot which, when originally created, conformed to
any zoning requirements relative to minimum lot area, minimum lot width and frontage, and/or
minimum lot depth which were then in effect, but which zoning requirements have since been amended
so that said lot would no longer conform in all respects to such new requirements.
PRE-EXISTING NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES: A structure or addition which, when
originally constructed, was lawfully in existence or lawfully begun and conformed to any zoning
requirements relative to minimum setbacks, maximum floor area ratio or other dimensional and area
requirements which were then in effect, but which zoning requirements have since been amended so that
such structure or addition would now require a Variance.
PRE-EXISTING NONCONFORMING USE: A use which, when originally commenced, was
lawfully in existence or lawfully begun and was permitted in the Zoning District in which it was located,
but since then the Zoning ordinance has been amended so that such use would now require a Special
Permit or would be prohibited. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
PRIMARY AQUIFER RECHARGE AREA: Areas which are underlain by surficial geologic
deposits including glaciofluvial or lacustrine stratified drift deposits or alluvium or swamp deposits, and
in which the prevailing direction of groundwater flow is toward the area of influence of water supply
wells.
QUICK VEHICLE SERVICING: Shall refer to a facility servicing vehicles in a quick manner such
as car washes, vehicle lubrication facilities and like businesses. (Added ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29)
RECEIPT: As used herein, receipt of an application or of a request means an official receipt on the
forms or in the format prescribed by the board or agency responsible for reviewing the application and
accompanied by all of the supporting materials or documentation and fees by the board or agency as
being necessary at the time of or the signature of an appropriate official showing the time and date of the
receipt, such stamp or signature to be used only after the entire application, including all supporting
material has been checked for completeness and accuracy.
REPAIR SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: Any building wherein primary occupation is the repair and
general servicing of appliances, tools, and other small machinery common to use in homes or businesses,
but not including automotive repair or automobile service stations; or any place wherein the primary
occupation is interior decorating, to include reupholstering and the making of draperies, slipcovers, and
other similar articles, but not to include furniture or cabinet making establishments.
SECONDARY RECHARGE AREA: Areas which are underlain by surficial geologic deposits
including till or bedrock, and in which the prevailing direction of surface waterflow is toward public
water supply wells or potential sites for such wells.
SERVICE STATION: A building or part thereof whose chief activity is the selling of gasoline, oil
and related products for motor vehicles or the provision of lubricating service or general auto repair.
SETBACK: The minimum distance from a lot line to a building placed thereon, or feature thereof as is
required in a particular situation by the TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY
REGULATIONS. Said Setback shall be measured perpendicular (at right angles) to the lot line. At no
point shall any structure on the lot be any closer to any street line, whether said street line directly abuts
the lot or not, than the minimum front yard setback requirement for that Zoning District.
SETBACK, FRONT: Setback required from a front line and from any street line of a corner lot or a
through lot.
SETBACK LINE: A line, whether straight or not, which denotes the location of the minimum setback.
SETBACK, REAR: Setback required from a rear line.
SETBACK, SIDE: Setback required from a sideline.
SIGN: Any permanent or temporary structure, device, letter, work, model, banner, pennant, insignia,
trade flag, balloon or blimp or representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an advertisement,
announcement, or direction, or is designed to attract the eye by any means including intermittent or
repeated motion or illumination.
SIGN, ACCESSORY: Any sign that advertises or indicates the person occupying the premises on
which the sign is erected or maintained or the business transacted thereon, or advertises the property
itself or any part thereof as for sale or rent, and which contains no other matter.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign used to direct attention to a service, product sold, or other activity
performed on the same premises upon which the sign is located.
SIGN, GENERAL ADVERTISING: Any sign advertising products or services other than products or
services available on the lot on which the sign is located, or any sign which is not located within two
hundred (200) feet of the building or other structure at which the products or services thereon are
available.
SIGN, GROUND: A sign erected on or affixed to the land including any exterior sign not attached to a
building.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: A sign used simply to identify the name, address, and title of an individual
family or firm occupying the premises upon which the sign is located or to give information, such as
time or temperature.
SIGN, NON-ACCESSORY: Any sign not an accessory sign.
SIGN, SURFACE AREA OF: For a sign, either free-standing or attached, the area shall be considered
to include all lettering, background whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed, but not
including any supporting framework and bracing, which are incidental to the display itself. For a sign
consisting of individual letters, designs and symbols attached to or painted directly on the surface of a
building, wall, window, awning/canopy or other approved surfaces, with no other background, the area
shall be considered to be that of the smallest quadrangle which encompasses all of the letters, designs,
and symbols. The largest side of a two-sided sign shall be used in calculating the surface area of such a
sign provided that the two sides are joined at an angle of no greater than sixty (60) degrees.
SIGN, WALL: A sign affixed to the exterior wall of a building and extending not more than fifteen
(15) inches therefrom.
SPECIAL PERMIT: A special authorization to conduct a particular use or to take advantage of a
particular situation set forth in this ordinance, subject to the provisions of this ordinance, the Table of
Use Regulations, where applicable, and the particular section authorizing the special permit where
applicable. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY: The Planning Board unless otherwise specified in
the Chapter. In certain situations the Special Permit Granting Authority may be the Zoning Board of
Appeals or the Town Manager where designated. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
STORY: The portion of a building, which is between one floor level and the next higher floor level. If
a mezzanine floor area exceeds one-third (1/3) of the area of the floor immediately below it, the
mezzanine shall be deemed to be a story. A basement shall be deemed to be a story, and a cellar shall
not be deemed to be a story. An attic shall not be deemed to be a story if unfinished and without human
occupancy.
STORY, HALF: A story under a gable, hipped, or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least
two opposite exterior walls are not more than two (2) feet above the floor of such story.
STRUCTURE: A combination of materials for permanent or temporary occupancy of use, such as a
building, bridge trestle, tower, framework, retaining wall, tank, tunnel, tent, stadium, reviewing stand,
platform, swimming pool, shelters, piers, wharves, bin, fence, sign, gasoline pumps, recreational courts,
or the like.
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING: A structure lawfully existing at the effective date of this
ordinance, or any subsequent amendments thereto, which does not conform to all applicable regulations
of this ordinance for the district in which it is located. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, which
either increases the building area or size or the original structure by ten percent (10%) or more, or the
cost of which equals or exceeds ten percent (10%) of the assessed value of the original structure either
(a) before the improvement is started, or (b) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored,
before the damage occurred.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY: Towers and/or antennae and accessory structures and
equipment used in receiving or transmitting telecommunications or radio signals from a mobile
communication source and transmitting those signals to another wireless site, and other communication
source or receiver or to a central switching computer which connects the mobile unit with land-based
telephone lines.
TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER: The structure designed to support equipment and antennae
used to transmit and/or receive telecommunications or radio signals. Examples of such structures
include freestanding towers, guy towers, monopoles and lattice towers.
TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY PERMIT: See PERMIT, TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY.
TOURIST HOME/BED AND BREAKFAST: An owner-occupied single-family home containing
rooming units for transient occupancy for compensation, (without individual kitchen facilities and with
an individual or shared bath/toilet facility, with at least one toilet, one bath/shower and one wash basin,
separate from those required for the single-family dwelling), which share a common entrance for the
single-family dwelling. The use of that portion of the dwelling devoted to transient occupancy shall be
secondary to the use of the dwelling as a single-family residence and shall not change the character
thereof. Breakfast may be the only meal served.
TOWN HOUSE: A row, attached side-to-side (not on top of each other), of at least four (4) and not
more than eight (8) dwelling units. Each unit in the row may be owned by a separate owner.
TRADESMAN: Builder, carpenter, electrician, painter, plumber, tree surgeon, landscape gardener or
similar building trade occupation.
TRUCKING TERMINAL: Business which services or repairs commercial trucks which are not
owned by the business.
UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle required to be registered by law of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts for operation on public ways, not so registered.
USE: The purpose for which a structure or lot is arranged, designed, or intended to be used, occupied
or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY: A use which is customarily incidental, subordinate to, and supporting of the
principal use of a lot or structure and is located on the same parcel or contiguous parcels as the principal
structure or use. A food service establishment commensurate with the activity shall be considered an
accessory use to a permitted outdoor recreational use; for the purposes of this definition, a restaurant or
banquet facility associated with or in connection with an outdoor recreational golf facility shall be
deemed an accessory use. (Amended ATM, May 15, 2001, Article 29)
USE, MIXED: Two or more Principal Uses occupying the same structure or lot, where more than one
Principal Use is permitted on the lot.
USE, NONCONFORMING: See PRE-EXISTING NON-CONFORMING USE.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The main or primary purpose for which a structure or lot is designed, arranged, or
intended, or for which it may be used, occupied or maintained under this ordinance. Any other use
within the main structure or the use of any other structure or land on the same lot and incidental or
supplementary to the principal use and permitted under this ordinance shall be considered an accessory
use. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
USE, SUBSTANTIALLY DIFFERENT: A use which by reason of its normal operation would cause
readily observable differences in patronage, service, appearance, noise, employment or similar
characteristics from the use to which it is being compared.
VARIANCE: Such departure from the terms of this ordinance as the Board of Appeals, upon appeal in
specific cases, is empowered to authorize under the terms of Article V. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM
3/7/07)
VETERINARY HOSPITAL: See HOSPITAL, VETERINARY:
WATERSHED: Lands lying adjacent to watercourses and surface water bodies, which create the
catchment or drainage areas of such water.
WETLANDS: Includes, but not limited to, wet meadow, marshes, swamps, bogs, areas where
groundwater, flowing or standing surface water or ice provide a significant part of the supporting
substrate for a plant community for a significant part of the year; emergent and submergent plant
communities in inland water; that portion of any bank which touches any inland waters; and the land,
including submerged land, which consists of any soil types designated as, but not limited to, very poorly
drained as identified by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as may be amended from time to time, of
the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture, of the Massachusetts
Wetlands Protection Act and any local wetlands ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
YARD: A portion of a lot located within a required setback area which must remain unobstructed
artificially from the ground to the sky except as may be allowed by specific provisions of this ordinance.
(Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
YARD, FRONT: The portion of a lot lying between the front line and the principal structure on said
lot.
YARD, REAR: The portion of a lot lying between the rear line and the rear line of the principal
structure on said lot.
YARD, SIDE: The portion of a lot lying between a sideline and the corresponding sideline of the
principal structure on the lot.
Article III
Establishment of Districts
§171-6. Division into Districts.
The Town of Palmer, Massachusetts, is hereby divided into Zoning Districts to be designated as
follows:
Full Name Short Name Class
Rural Residence RR Residential "R" District
Suburban Residence SR Residential "R" District
In Town Residence TR Residential "R" District“
Village Center District I VCI Village “V” District
Village Center District II VCII Village “V” District
Village Center District III VCIII Village “V” District
Village Center District IV VCIV Village “V” District
General Business GB Business "B" District
Highway Business HB Business "B" District
Neighborhood Business NB Industrial "I" District
General Industry B IB Industrial “I” District
Urban Renewal Industrial Park URIP Industrial “I” District
Water Supply Protection WSP Overlay “0” District
Floodplain F Overlay “0” District
Districts may be grouped by "Class" and may be referred to herein by the class name or by the
abbreviations "R Districts", “V Districts”, "B Districts", "I Districts", or "O Districts".
§171-7. Special Flood Plain District.
The Flood Plain District is established as an overlay district to all other districts. The general
boundaries of the Flood Plain District are shown on the Town of Palmer Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM), dated November 4, 1981, as Zones A, A1-30 to indicate the one-hundred-year floodplain. The
exact boundaries of the district are defined by the one-hundred-year water surface elevations shown on
the FIRM and further defined by the flood profiles contained in the Flood Insurance Study, dated
November 4, 1981. The floodway boundaries are delineated on the Town of Palmer Flood Boundary-
Floodway Map (FBFM), dated November 4, 1981, and further defined by the Floodway Data Tables
contained in the Flood Insurance Study. These two (2) maps, as well as the accompanying study, are
incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the Planning Board.
§171-8. Superimposed Overlay Zoning District.
A Water Supply Protection District and Flood Plain District are established as an overlay and are
considered to be superimposed over the other districts shown on the Zoning Map, as recognition of the
special conditions which exist in such areas. See Floodplain District – Article XII and Water Supply
Protection District – Article XIV for applicable regulations.
§171-9. Zoning Map.
The location and boundaries of the Zoning Districts are hereby established as shown on a map titled,
"Zoning Map of the Town of Palmer, Massachusetts", and which is hereby declared to be a part of this
ordinance. The official copy of the Zoning Map shall be the map which is located in the Office of the
Building Inspector, which copy shall be identified as authentic, attested by the Town Clerk and the imprinted
seal of the Town under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the official copy of the
Zoning Map of the Town of Palmer, Massachusetts – Article III §171-9, which was adopted by the
Town Meeting, February 28, 2000." In addition, this copy of the map shall carry a statement, attested by
the Town Clerk, indicating the fact that all adopted amendments are incorporated therein, as well as a
history of all such amendments. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-10. Changes to Map.
Any change in the location of boundaries of a Zoning District hereafter made through the amendments
of this ordinance shall be indicated by the alteration of such map, such changes to be dated and
authenticated as prescribed in §171-9. The map thus altered is declared to be part of such map, and the
map thus altered is declared to be part of the ordinance thus amended. The Planning Board shall be
responsible for making the approved changes to the Zoning Map. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM
3/7/07)
§171-11. Boundaries of Districts.
Where any uncertainty exists with respect to the boundary of any district as shown on the Zoning Map,
the following rules apply:
A. Where a boundary is indicated as a street, alley, railroad, watercourse or other body of water, it
shall be construed to be the centerline or middle thereof, or where such boundary approximates a
Town boundary, then to the limits of the Town boundary.
B. Where a boundary is indicated as following approximately or parallel to a street, railroad,
watercourse, or other body of water, it shall be construed to be parallel thereto and at such distance
therefrom as shown on the Zoning Map. If no dimension is given, such distance shall be
determined by the use of the scale shown on the Zoning Map.
C. Where a dimensioned boundary coincides within ten (10) feet or less with a lot line, the boundary
shall be construed to be the lot line.
D. Where a zoning boundary is indicated as intersecting the centerline of a street, railroad,
watercourse or other water body, and unless it is otherwise indicated, it shall be construed to intersect
at right angles to said centerline or in the case of a curved centerline, at right angles to the tangent to
the curve at the point of intersection.
E. The Flood Plain and Water Supply Protection Districts are superimposed over any other districts
established by this ordinance. The rules for these superimposed (overlay) districts shall be in addition
to, rather than in place of, the rules for such underlying other districts. The boundaries of these
districts are shown on the Aquifer Protection District Map, Palmer, Massachusetts and the Town of
Palmer Flood Insurance Rate Map. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
F. Where a question arises and no dimensions or official lot lines of record are shown, then the
district boundaries shall be determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
Article IV
Interpretation and Application
§171-12. Interpretation.
The provisions of this ordinance, and all subsequent amendments thereto, shall be interpreted to be the
minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the health, safety, morals, or the general welfare of
the inhabitants of the Town of Palmer, Massachusetts. The provisions of this ordinance are not intended
to repeal, amend, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with any lawfully adopted ordinance,
covenants, regulations, or rules. Whenever the regulations made under the authority hereof differ from
those prescribed by any statute, ordinance, or other regulations, that provisions which imposes the
greater restriction or the higher standard shall govern. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-13. Application.
Except as herein provided, the provisions of this ordinance shall apply to the erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, or use of buildings, structures, or use of land. Except as herein provided,
any existing conforming use, structure, or lot shall not by any action become nonconforming and any
existing nonconforming use, structure, or lot shall not become further nonconforming. (Amended Ord
2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-14. Existing Buildings and Land.
This ordinance shall not apply to existing buildings or structures, nor to the existing use of any building
or structure or of land, to the extent to which it is legally used at the time of adoption of this ordinance,
but it shall apply to any change of use thereof and to any alteration of a building or structure when the
same would amount to reconstruction, extension or structural change, and to any alteration of a building
or structure to provide for its use for a purpose or in a manner substantially different from the use to
which it was put before alteration, or for its use for the same purpose to a substantially greater extent.
(Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-15. Reserved.
(Amended ATM – June 16, 2003 – Article 11.)
§171-16. Reserved.
Article V
Administration and Enforcement
§171-17. Building Inspector.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector who is also the Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO) to
administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-18. Permit Required.
Any building, sign or structure to be erected, altered or changed in use shall require a building
permit from the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector, who is also the Zoning Enforcement
Officer, shall first determine that no town ordinance affecting land, building or structures has been or
will be violated. Any application for such a permit shall be accompanied by a plan showing the
shape and dimensions of the building, lot or premises to be built upon, including the location and size
of all buildings or structures affected. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
Any application for a permit shall be submitted, accompanied by such information as may be
necessary to provide for the execution and enforcement of this ordinance. The Building Inspector
shall keep a record of all applications, plans, and permits on file. The Building Inspector shall take
action in writing on an application for a permit, either granting the permit or disapproving the
application, within thirty (30) days of receipt of application. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-19. Previously Approved Permits.
The status of previously approved permits shall be as determined by the Zoning Act.
§171-20. Filing Copy of Permit with Assessors.
A copy of each building permit shall be filed by the proper authority with the Town Assessor
within thirty (30) days. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-21. Replacement of Destroyed Buildings.
Any building existing at the time of adoption of this chapter which is destroyed by fire, explosion,
the act of public enemy or act of God may be replaced on its lot, regardless of lot size, provided that
said new building is equal to or exceeds the fair market value of the original building at the time of
the casualty. Said replacement of building must be under construction within one (1) year from the
date of casualty.
§171-22. Certificate of Use and Occupancy Required.
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy any structure or lot thereafter erected or altered unless the
Building Inspector has issued a Certificate of Use and Occupancy and has specified thereon, the use
to which the structure or lot may be put. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office
of the Building Inspector. Buildings accessory to dwellings when completed at the same time shall
not require a separate certificate of occupancy. Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a
temporary certificate may be issued for a period not exceeding six (6) months, during the completion
of alterations or during partial occupancy of a building, pending its completion. No temporary
certificate shall be issued prior to its completion if the building fails to meet the requirements of
applicable building ordinances and state laws or this ordinance to such a degree as to render it unsafe
for the occupancy proposed. In situations where, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, a single
structure or group of related structures may not be issued a certificate of occupancy because not all of
the spaces within the structure(s) are yet completed, he may issue a single certificate of occupancy
which specifies certain areas as not being included. Such areas will be required to have a separate
certificate of occupancy prior to their use and occupancy. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-23. Permit and Certificate Fees.
Fees shall be established by the Town Manager, but shall exempt municipal buildings from the
requirements for payment of the municipal portion of such fees. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM
3/7/07)
§171-24. Permit Time Limits.
Any work for which any permit has been issued by the Building Inspector shall be actively prosecuted
within six (6) months and completed within twelve (12) months of the date of issuance of the
permit. For reasonable cause, the Building Inspector may grant one or more (but not more than three
(3) extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding ninety (90) days each for both actively
prosecuting the work and for completing the work. Any project not competed within the applicable
time limits shall be in violation of this ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
A Special Permit granted under the provisions of §171-28. shall lapse within twelve (12) months
(including such time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal) from the grant
thereof if a substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced except for good cause, or if, in the case
of a permit for construction, construction has not begun by such date except for good cause.
§171-25. Violations.
The Building Inspector shall serve a notice of VIOLATION and ORDER to any owner or person
responsible for the erection, construction, reconstruction, completion, conversion, or alteration of a
structure or change in use, increase in intensity of use or extension or displacement of use of any
structure or lot in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this ordinance, or
in violation of any provision of this ordinance, and such order shall direct the discontinuance of the
unlawful action, use or condition and the abatement of the violation within a time to be specified by
the Building Inspector. Any owner, who having been served with a notice, and who ceases any work
or other activity, or who fails to complete the structure, shall not leave any structure or lot in such
conditions as to be a hazard or menace to the public safety, health, morals or general welfare.
(Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
If the Building Inspector is requested in writing to enforce the ordinance against any person
allegedly in violation of the same and declines to act, he shall notify, in writing, the party requesting
such enforcement of any action or refusal to act, and the reasons therefore, within fourteen (14) days
of receipt of such request. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-26. Prosecution of Violation.
If the notice of VIOLATION and ORDER is not complied with promptly, the Building Inspector,
upon written request to the Town Attorney shall have available the services of the Town Attorney in
instituting the appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity to prevent any unlawful action, use
or condition and to restrain, correct or abate such violation. If the Building Inspector shall refuse or
fail to so request the services of the Town Attorney, the Town Manager may require him to do so.
Delay by the Building Inspector in instituting said proceedings shall not be imputed to the Town of
Palmer. Penalties for violations may upon conviction, be affixed in an amount not to exceed one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day or portion of a day that any violation is allowed
to continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Amended Ord 2007-07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-27. Zoning Board of Appeals, Variances, Appeals and Findings. (Amended ATM, May 14,
2001, Article 29)
A. Membership. There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals of five (5) members and two (2)
associate members, appointed as provided in Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws.
B. Powers. The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals, as provided in Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts
General Laws.
(2) To hear and decide applications for special permits upon which the board is empowered to
act under said ordinances or bylaws.
(3) To hear and decide petitions for variances set forth in section of Chapter 40A.
(4) To hear and decide appeals from decisions of a zoning administrator, if any, in accordance
with Chapter 40A, §13.
(5) To hear and decide applications for Findings upon which the Board is (6) Empowered to
act under said ordinance or ordinances (Added ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29) (Amended Ord
2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
C. Variances and Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear applications for variances and
appeals subject to the provisions of Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws.
D. Time Limitations. No appeal or petition for a variance from the terms of this ordinance with
respect to a particular parcel of land or the building thereon, and no application for special permit
which has been unfavorably acted upon shall be again considered within two (2) years after the date
of such unfavorable action, except as provided in Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws
(Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-28. Special Permits.
Certain uses, structures, or conditions are designated within the Table of Use Regulations as
requiring a special permit. Such permit shall be granted only after application for a hearing by the
special permit granting authority and subject to the provisions of Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts
General Laws and this ordinance. The Special Permit Granting Authority responsible for hearing a
particular proposal shall be that board or other entity designated by the coding in the Table of Use
Regulations. (Ed. note: these designations are given at the beginning of Article VII. Use
Regulations) In situations where there is no specific board indicated as having the authority to issue a
special permit, the Special Permit Granting Authority shall be the Planning Board. (Amended Ord
2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
A. Filing:
(1) Application for a special permit shall be made to the Town Clerk and Planning Board
Office or other appropriate Office as indicated in this Chapter on forms provided for that
purpose, accompanied by the required fee. Specific rules governing the application and fee
shall be adopted by each Special Permit Granting Authority along with its rules of procedure
and shall be applicable to those special permits which are under its jurisdiction. When the application
has been received in a completed form as defined by said rules, a copy shall be
forwarded to the Town Clerk. The stamp of the Town Clerk shall designate the date of filing.
Copies shall also be delivered to the Special Permit Granting Authority, and to such other
departments and boards as may be determined in the rules of the special permit granting
authority.
B. Hearing, Notice and Decision.
(1) The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within sixty five (65) days after the filing of
an application with the Special Permit Granting Authority, a copy of which shall be given to the
Town Clerk by the applicant.
(2) The Planning Board shall require notice be given by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town once in each of two successive weeks, the first publication to be not less
than fourteen (14) days before the hearing, and by posting such notice in a conspicuous place in
Town Hall.
(3) Notice shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the petitioner, abutters, owners of land
directly opposite on any public or private street or way, owners of land within three hundred
(300) feet of the property line as they appear on the most recent tax list including those in
another town, and the Planning Boards of all abutting towns.
(4) The Special Permit Granting Authority shall act within ninety (90) days (or any agreed
upon extended time) following the public hearing. Failure to take action upon application
within the ninety (90) days or extended time shall be deemed approval of the special permit.
(5) Upon granting of a Site Plan Approval a copy shall be issued to the owner or applicant if
other than the owner, of the decision. No special permit shall take effect until a copy of the
decision has been certified by the Town Clerk stating that twenty (20) days have elapsed and no
appeal has been filed, or if such appeal has been filed that it has been dismissed or denied and
until it is recorded in the Registry of Deeds wherein the land is located.
(6) (Amended ATM – June 16, 2003 – Article 11 (item 6 was deleted))
(7) All Special Permits are terminable by the SPGA for violation of any conditions upon which
it is granted or upon violations of this bylaw after hearing by the SPGA with notice to all
interested parties.
C. Standards for Reviewing:
(1) Before granting a special permit, the Special Permit Granting Authority, with regard to the
nature and condition of all adjacent structures and uses, and the district within which the same
is located, shall find all of the following general conditions to be fulfilled:
(a) The use requested is listed in the Table of Use Regulations as a special permit in the
district for which application is made or is so designated elsewhere in this ordinance.
(Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(b) The requested use will be harmonious with the appropriate and orderly development
of the zoning district in which it is proposed to be located and will be harmonious
with the visual character of the neighborhood in which it is proposed.
(c) The requested use will not create undue traffic congestion or unduly impair pedestrian
safety.
(d) The requested use will not overload any public water, drainage or sewer system or any
other municipal system to such an extent that the requested use or any developed use
in the immediate area or in any other area of the Town will be unduly subjected to
hazards affecting health, safety, or the general welfare.
(e) Any special regulations for the use as set forth in Article XV – Special Permit and
Exceptions are fulfilled.
(f) The requested use will not unduly impair the integrity or character of the district or
adjoining zones, nor be detrimental to the health, morals, aesthetic qualities of the
adjacent area and the neighborhood, or general welfare. The use shall be in harmony
with the general purpose and intent of the ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM
3/7/07)
(g) The suggested use shall not significantly deteriorate any natural resource or natural
resource area within the Town.
(h) The application and proposed project shall employ adequate methods to protect
adjacent areas from detrimental or offensive uses on the site by provision of adequate
surface water drainage; buffers against light, sight, sound, dust and vibration; and
preservation of light and air. (Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29)
(i) The application and proposed project shall ensure that there will be protection of
environmental features on the site and in adjacent areas.
(2) The Special Permit Granting Authority shall also impose, in addition to any applicable
conditions specified in this ordinance, such additional conditions as it finds reasonably
appropriate to safeguard the neighborhood or otherwise serve the purposes of this ordinance,
including, but not limited to, the following: front, side or rear yards greater than the minimum
required by this ordinance; screening buffers or planting strips, fences, or walls, as specified by
the Special Permit Granting Authority; modification of the exterior appearance of the structures;
limitation upon the size, number of occupants, method and time of operation, time duration of
permit, or extent of facilities; traffic features in accordance with the regulations of loading or
other special features beyond the minimum required by this ordinance. Such conditions shall be
imposed in writing, and the applicant may be required to post bond or other security for
compliance with said conditions in an amount satisfactory to the Special Permit Granting
Authority. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
D. Adult Uses:
(1) In addition to other requirements and procedures relating to the application for, or the
issuance of, special permits, as set forth in this Chapter or in the General Laws of Chapter 40A,
§9 and §9A, the following conditions apply to special permit for adult retail businesses adult
use business and adult theatres:
(a) No adult retail business, adult use business or adult theatre shall receive a permit
unless it is located at least one thousand (1,000) feet from any district designated
under this ordinance for residential use and one thousand (1,000) feet from any
existing residential use whether such use exists by special permit or as a pre-existing
non-conforming use, or one thousand (1,000) feet from any primary or secondary
school, public or private, library, park, playground, recreational area or church.
(Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(b) No adult retail business, adult use business or adult theatre shall receive a permit
unless it is located at least one thousand (1,000) feet from any other adult retail
business or adult theatre.
(c) The Special Permit Granting Authority shall impose conditions on any permit granted
for an adult retail business or adult theatre to protect minors and to further the
purposes and intent of the Zoning Ordinance. Among the restrictions it shall consider
shall be conditions: (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
[1] Prohibiting the dissemination of sexually explicit materials to minors at the locus.
[2] Requiring the applicant or owner of the premises to display sexually explicit
materials or sexually explicit paraphernalia in such a way as to prevent minors
from viewing them.
[3] Conditioning the continued validity of the permit on compliance with its
conditions and requiring its revocation after hearing with notice to interested
parties if the grantee violates the conditions of the permit.
[4] Expressly granting the permit for personal use of the applicant only rather than as
a grant to the locus.
[5] Limiting the duration of the permit and the operating hours of the establishment.
§171-29. Site Plan Review/Approval Process.
A. Purpose
(1) The purpose of this section is to identify which projects require a site plan review and sets
objective criteria and procedures for the review of such projects that will have significant
impacts on the Town. Site plan review also allows the town to ensure compliance with the
goals and objectives of the Town, and the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, to minimize
adverse impacts of such development, and to promote development which is harmonious with
surrounding areas; in particular to assure proper drainage, safe access, adequate parking and
loading spaces, public convenience and safety and adequate consideration of abutting land
owners. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
B. When Required
(1) Site plan approval is required for all uses of land or buildings other than single or two
family dwellings. This requirement applies to all new construction other than single or two
family homes in all zoning districts. It also applies to any expansion of an existing use and to
any change of use of an existing building, provided however, that the expansion or change of
use will result in or is contemplated to result in one or more of the following:
(a) An increase of floor area of twenty five (25) percent or more.
(b) An increase in motor vehicle traffic at or to the site of twenty five (25) percent or
more.
(c) An increase of parking spaces at the site of twenty-five (25) percent or more.
(d) An increase in the number of tenants at the site of twenty-five (25) percent or more.
(e) An increase in the number of employees employed at the site of twenty-five (25)
percent or more.
(2) The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to waive the necessity for
Planning Board approval for changes in use and for structural changes to existing buildings, as
well as to new construction of a minor nature such as accessory buildings if he deems the
change to be insignificant in that the change or addition will not have a substantial impact on
the site or surrounding area. The criteria listed above in paragraph (1) shall be used as a guide
only in making this determination. This waiver is subject, however, to ratification by a vote of
the Planning Board at its next regular meeting. Notwithstanding a grant of a waiver as provided
for herein, no building permit nor any occupancy permit shall be issued until ratification by the
Planning Board. Should the Planning Board fail to ratify the waiver, full site plan review shall
be required. (Amended – Special Town Meeting, June 24, 2002, Article 2)
(3) In such cases where a site plan review is required, the Special Permit and the Site Plan
Review shall be conducted as a single administrative review process, with the Special Permit
Granting Authority casting a single vote at its conclusion. The SPGA shall adopt regulations
for the execution of its duties under this Article.
C. Site Plan Objectives/Review/Approval Criteria:
(1) In reviewing a site plan application the Planning Board shall take into consideration the
health, safety and welfare of the public in general and the immediate neighborhood in
particular, and may prescribe reasonable conditions and safeguards to ensure the
accomplishment of the following general objectives:
(a) That the subject and adjoining premises are protected against serious detriment by
provision for the safe carrying and discharge of surface water drainage, sound and
sight buffers, and that the development of the site will preserve sensitive
environmental features such as steep slopes, wetlands and large rock outcroppings and
will attempt to preserve public scenic views or historically significant features as well
as preservation of light and air.
(b) That there are provisions for convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian
movement within the site and on adjacent streets, the location of driveway openings in
relation to traffic, access by emergency vehicles, and to adjacent streets and, when
necessary, compliance with other regulations for the handicapped, minors and the
elderly.
(c) That all proposed pedestrian access ways do not create traffic hazards and are:
adequate, but not excessive in number; adequate in width, grade, alignment, and
visibility; adequate distance from street corners and other access ways; and are
adequately designed for other safety considerations.
(d) That there is the provision of an adequate amount of, and safe arrangement of offstreet
parking and loading spaces in relation to the proposed uses of the premises to
prevent on-street and off-street traffic congestion.
(e) That there is a relationship of structures and open spaces to the natural landscape,
existing buildings and other community assets in the area and will be in harmony with
the surrounding neighborhood; and that there is compliance with other requirements
of the ordinance; and that the general landscaping of the site complies with the
purpose and intent of this ordinance; that existing trees are preserved to the maximum
extent possible; that parking, refuse and storage areas are suitably screened during all
seasons from the view of adjacent residential areas and public rights-of-way.
(Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(f) That lighting of the site shall be adequate at ground level for the protection and safety
of the public in regard to pedestrian and vehicular circulation; that the glare from the
installation of outdoor lights and illuminated signs is properly shielded from the view
of adjacent property and public rights-of-way.
(g) That all utility systems are suitably located, adequately designed and properly
installed to serve the proposed uses, and to protect the property from adverse
pollution.
(h) Mitigation of adverse impacts on the Town's resources including the effect on the
water supply and distribution system, sewage collection and treatment systems, fire
protection, and streets.
(i) General conformance with the intent of the ordinance as it pertains to the zoning
district. (Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29) (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM
3/7/07)
(2) The Planning Board may require such appropriate conditions, limitations, and safeguards
which it feels are necessary to assure the project meets the criteria of (a)-(i) above.
D. Procedures.
(1) Application for Site Plan Approval shall be made to the Planning Board in a form
prescribed by the Board and shall be accompanied by four (4) sets of plans, building elevations,
and any other necessary information to show the detail of the proposed use of land or buildings.
(2) All applications shall include plans of the property prepared by a land surveyor registered in
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(3) All plans shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a Massachusetts registered engineer,
architect or landscape architect, whichever is appropriate.
(4) All plans shall contain the following information:
(a) General Information:
[1] Name and address of applicant and owner of record as listed on the Town’s tax
rolls. If the applicant is not the owner of record, the latter shall also sign the
application.
[2] Date, north arrow, and numerical and graphical scale on map.
[3] A written description of the proposed use or uses.
[4] A table or chart indicating the proposed number or amount and types of uses, lot
area, lot width, yards, building height, lot coverage, floor area, parking spaces,
landscaping and open spaces as they are required.
(b) Location Map:
[1] An accurate scale map at a scale of 1” = 1,000’ shall be submitted showing the
subject property and all property and streets within one thousand (1000) feet.
[2] Location, width and purpose of all existing and proposed easements and rights-ofway
on the property.
(c) Buildings and Uses:
[1] Location, dimensions, area, height and setbacks of all existing and proposed
buildings, signs, fences, and walls.
[2] Location of all existing and proposed uses and facilities such as swimming pools,
lighting, tanks, refuse containers, etc.
(d) Parking, Loading and Circulation:
[1] Location, arrangement and dimensions of automobile parking spaces, aisles,
vehicular drives, fire lanes, entrances, exits and ramps. (Amended ATM, June 16,
2003, Article 11)
[2] Location, arrangement and dimensions of loading and unloading areas.
[3] Location and dimensions of the pedestrian walkways, entrances and exits.
[4] Estimated peak hour traffic volumes generated by the proposed use in relation to
existing volumes and projected future conditions.
(e) Signs and Lighting:
[1] Location, size, height, orientation and design of all signs.
[2] Location, size, height, orientation and design of any outdoor lighting.
(f) Utilities:
[1] Location and design of all existing and proposed sanitary sewer, storm drainage,
water supply facilities and refuse collection areas as well as other underground and
above ground utilities. All utilities shall be placed underground unless the
applicant can substantiate that such underground placement is impractical.
[2] All refuse containers shall be screened from view from the street, and wherever
possible shall be located at the rear of the property.
(g) Topographic Map:
[1] The site plan map shall illustrate the existing and proposed conditions of the
property including existing and proposed contours at intervals of five (5) feet or at
an interval as needed to show detail as required by sound engineering practices,
referred to USGS MSL datum, and the location of all existing wooded areas,
watercourses, wetlands and other significant features and, where appropriate, the
boundary of the flood hazard area, water supply protection area or other overlay
district areas.
(h) Landscaping Plan:
[1] The landscaping plan shall illustrate the existing and proposed landscape
development of the property, including the location, general layout, type and size
of buffer or landscape area, plant material, fencing, screening devices, decorative
paving or other materials proposed.
(i) Other Information:
[1] Other information as may be necessary to determine compliance with the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
[2] Any hazardous materials and wastes associated with the proposed use as listed by
the US Environmental Protection Agency.
[3] All abutters shall be noted on the plan.
(5) Upon request, the Planning Board may, at its discretion, waive the submission by the applicant
of any of the required information. All waivers must be requested in writing at the time of
application; however, waivers will not be decided until the Public Hearing. If the waiver is not
granted then all parties will agree to continue the hearing to allow sufficient time for the
applicant to submit the required information.
E. Hearing, Notice and Decision.
(1) The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within sixty-five (65) days after the receipt
of an application as defined in this chapter. a copy of which shall be given to the Town Clerk by
the applicant.
(2) The Planning Board shall require notice be given by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town once in each of two (2) successive weeks, the first publication to be not
less than fourteen (14) days before the hearing, and by posting such notice in a conspicuous
place in Town Hall.
(3) Notice shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the petitioner, abutters, owners of land
directly opposite on any public or private street or way, owners of land within three hundred
(300) feet of the property line as they appear on the most recent tax list including those in
another town, the Planning Boards of all abutting towns.
(4) The Planning Board shall act within ninety (90) days (or any agreed upon extended time)
following the public hearing. Failure to take action upon application within the ninety (90)
days or extended time shall be deemed approval of the site plan.
(5) Upon granting of a Site Plan Approval a copy shall be issued to the owner or applicant if
other than the owner, of the decision. No Site Plan Approval shall take effect until a copy of
the decision has been certified by the Town Clerk stating that twenty (20) days have elapsed
and no appeal has been filed, or if such appeal has been filed that it has been dismissed or
denied, is recorded in the Registry of Deeds wherein the land is located.
§171-30. Reserved.
§171-31. Appeal Periods.
No variance or special permit, or any extension, modification or renewal thereof, shall take effect
until a copy of the decision bearing the certification of the Town Clerk that twenty (20) days have
elapsed after the decision has been filed in the Office of the Town Clerk and no appeal has been filed
or that if such appeal has been filed, that it has been dismissed or denied, is recorded in the Hampden
County Registry of Deeds.
No work shall commence including excavating or earth removal and on-site grading, with regard to
a specific project for which a special permit or variance has been granted, until all applicable appeal
periods have expired.
§171-32. Extensions, Modifications or Renewals.
Any extensions, modifications or renewals of a Special Permit or Variance shall follow the same
statutory procedures as are required for the original granting of a Special Permit or Variance.
§171-33. Duration.
A special permit or site plan approval granted by the Special Permit Granting Authority shall lapse
if a substantial use thereof has not commenced within one year, or in the case of construction, if
construction has not begun. Exception may be made for good cause by the Special Permit Granting
Authority.
Article VI
Dimensional and Density Regulations
§171-34. Applicability of Dimensional and Density Regulations.
The regulations for each district pertaining to minimum lot area, minimum lot width, minimum lot
depth, minimum front yard depth, minimum side yard width, minimum rear yard depth, maximum
height of buildings, and maximum building area be as specified in this Article and as set forth in the
Table of Dimensional and Density Regulations, and subject to the further provisions of this ordinance.
(Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-35. Table of Dimensional and Density Regulations.
NOTE: The following table of Dimensional and Density Regulations shall apply to all development
within the Town of Palmer, except as these standards may be varied elsewhere in this ordinance. (Added
ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29, Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
Residential Uses: RR SR TR
Single Family Home With Public
Water & Sewer
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet) 60,000 30,000 20,000
Minimum Lot Frontage & Minimum Lot
Width (Feet) 150’ 150’ 100’
Minimum Lot Depth (Feet) 200’ 200’ 200’
Minimum Front Yard (Feet) 50’ 50’ 30’
Minimum Side Yard (Feet) 30’ 30’ 15’
Minimum Rear Yard (Feet) 30’ 30’ 15’
Maximum Building Coverage
(Percentage) 50% 50% 50%
Maximum Building Height (Feet) 35’ 35’ 35’
Single Family Home Without Public
Water & Sewer
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet) 60,000 30,000 30,000
Minimum Lot Frontage & Minimum Lot
Width (Feet) 150’ 150’ 150’
Minimum Lot Depth (Feet) 200’ 200’ 200’
Minimum Front Yard (Feet) 50’ 50’ 30’
Minimum Side Yard (Feet) 30’ 30’ 15’
Minimum Rear Yard (Feet) 30’ 30’ 15’
Maximum Building Coverage
(Percentage) 50% 50% 50%
Maximum Building Height (Feet) 35’ 35’ 35’
Two Family Home
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet) Not
Permitted
Not
Permitted 30,000
Minimum Lot Frontage & Minimum Lot
Width (Feet) NA NA 150’
Residential Uses: RR SR TR
Minimum Lot Depth (Feet) NA NA 200’
Minimum Front Yard (Feet) NA NA 50’
Minimum Side Yard (Feet) NA NA 30’
Minimum Rear Yard (Feet) NA NA 30’
Maximum Building Coverage
(Percentage) NA NA 50%
Maximum Building Height (Feet) NA NA 35’
Three or Four Family Home
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet) Not
Permitted
Not
Permitted 60,000
Minimum Lot Frontage & Minimum Lot
Width (Feet) NA NA 200’
Minimum Lot Depth (Feet) NA NA 300’
Minimum Front Yard (Feet) NA NA 75’
Minimum Side Yard (Feet) NA NA 50’
Minimum Rear Yard (Feet) NA NA 75’
Maximum Building Coverage
(Percentage) NA NA 50%
Maximum Building Height (Feet) NA NA 35’
Townhouse or Condominium Or
multi-family units (Allowed in the RR
District only for elderly housing –
Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article
29)
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet)
20,000 per
unit or
family.
20,000 per
unit or
family
20,000 per
unit or
family
Minimum Lot Frontage & Minimum Lot
Width (Feet) 400’ 400 400
Minimum Lot Depth (Feet) 500’ 500’ 500’
Minimum Front Yard (Feet) 50’ 50’ 50’
Minimum Side Yard (Feet) 75’ 75’ 75’
Minimum Rear Yard (Feet) 75’ 75’ 75’
Maximum Building Coverage
(Percentage) 50% 50% 50%
Residential Uses: RR SR TR
Maximum Building Height (Feet) NA 35’ 35’
Residential Accessory Building
Attached:
Minimum Front Yard 50’ 50’ 30’
Minimum Side Yard 30’ 30’ 15’
Minimum Rear Yard 30’ 30’ 15’
Detached:
Minimum Front Yard 50’ 50’ 30’
Minimum Side Yard 10’ 10’ 10’
Minimum Rear Yard 10’ 10’ 10’
Swimming Pools
Minimum Front Yard 50’ 50’ 30’
Minimum Side Yard 15’ 15’ 15’
Minimum Rear Yard 15’ 15’ 15’
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS URIP IA IB
MAIN BUILDING & ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet) None 43,560 43,560
Minimum Lot Frontage & Minimum Lot
Width (Feet) None 200 None
Minimum Lot Depth (Feet) None 200 None
Minimum Front Yard (Feet) 50’ 50’ 50’
Minimum Side Yard (Feet)
*None if abutting railroad tracks 50’* 50’* 50’*
Minimum Rear Yard (Feet)
*None if abutting railroad tracks 50’* 50’* 50’*
Maximum Building Coverage
(Percentage) 40% 50% 50%
Maximum Building Height (Feet) 40’ 50’ 50’
BUSINESS DISTRICTS HB GB NB*
MAIN BUILDING & ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet) 40,000 40,000 40,000
Minimum Lot Frontage & Minimum Lot
Width (Feet) 200’ 200’ 200’
Minimum Lot Depth (Feet) 200’ 200’ 200’
Minimum Front Yard (Feet) 50’ 50’ 50’
Minimum Side Yard (Feet) 30’ 30’ 30’
Minimum Rear Yard (Feet) 30’ 30’ 30’
Maximum Building Coverage
(Percentage) 50% 50% 50%
Maximum Building Height (Feet) 50’ 50’ 50’
VILLAGE CENTER DISTRICTS
See Village Center Zoning Sheets for
Requirements for the VC Districts
NOTE: NB* Any lot in the NB zone that is being utilized for residential use shall conform to the lot
size requirements and setback requirements as specified for the zoning district of the surrounding
residential neighborhood. (Note added ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29)
§171-36. Reserved.
§171-37. Reserved. (Amended ATM, June 16, 2003, Article 11)
§171-38. Screening and Buffers.
For screening and buffer requirements please see Article XVI for detailed descriptions of the
requirements for each
§171-39. Floodway.
No encroachments (including fill), new construction, substantial improvements, or any other
development shall be permitted within the regulatory floodway, as designated on the FEMA Map(s),
unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided, demonstrating to the
satisfaction of the appropriate town authority that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the one hundred (100) year flood.
§171-40. Accessory Structures.
In residential and business districts, accessory structures shall conform to the provisions set forth in the
Table of Dimensional and Density Regulations, §171-35. (Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29)
They must be located on the lot so as not to violate the minimum front yard, height restrictions.
Any accessory below-ground swimming pool shall be completely enclosed by a fence at least four
(4) feet in height, having a self-closing gate with a latch.
In all districts, an accessory structure attached to the principal building shall be considered as an
integral part thereof and shall be subject to front, side, and rear yard requirements applicable to the
principal building. Where the Building Inspector finds:
A. That a lot is to be used for residential purpose.
B. That such lot was created before the date of adoption of this ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007- 07,
RTCM 3/7/07)
C. That such lot contains a principal structure.
D. That such lot more closely conforms to the lot dimensions of the next less restrictive zone than
the one in which it is located, the required setbacks of that zone may be applied in lieu of the
setbacks required under Article VI Dimensional and Density Regulations.
§171-41. Other General Dimensional and Density Provisions.
In addition to the regulations in this section above, the following regulations shall apply:
A. Existing residential uses in business or industrial districts shall be subject to the regulations for the
particular type of dwelling in the TR district.
B. Pre-existing nonconforming Residential Uses which are now prohibited in the Zoning District in
which they are located shall conform to the provisions of §171-83 Pre-Existing Non-Conforming Uses,
Structures and Lots.
C. In the case of one-family, two-family, and three-family dwellings, no more than one principal
building may be built on any single lot. In all other cases (such as with condominiums or
townhouses), more than one principal structure may occupy the same lot, provided that if they
aggregate they do not represent a more intensive use of land than would be allowed if all uses were
contained within a single structure.
D. (Amended ATM, June 16, 2003, Article 11, item 4 deleted)
E. Projections into required yards or other required open spaces are permitted subject to the
following:
(1) Balcony or bay window may project up to two (2) feet into a required yard or other open space
and provided it is limited in total length to no more than one-half (½) the length of the building
face.
(2) Open terrace or steps or stoop, under four (4) feet in height may project into a required yard or
open space up to one-half (½) the required setback.
(3) Steps or stoop over four (4) feet in height, windowsill, chimney, roof eave, fire escape, fire
tower, awnings, storm enclosure, or similar architectural features may project not more than
three (3) feet into a required yard open space.
(4) Generators, air-conditioner units and like equipment may be located within the set-back
provided that such equipment is adequately shielded to comply with noise and other regulations
as specified in this ordinance or other regulations and state statutes. (Amended, Special Town
Meeting, June 24, 2002, Article 2, (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
F. The provisions of this ordinance governing the height of buildings shall not apply to chimneys,
cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, skylights, ventilators, electronic equipment, elevator shafts, and
other necessary appurtenances usually carried above the roof, nor to domes, towers, stacks, or spires, if
not used for human occupancy and if not occupying more than twenty (20) percent of the ground floor
area of the building; nor to ornamental towers, observation towers, radio broadcasting towers,
telecommunication towers (Added ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29), television and radio antennae and
other like structures, which do not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the lot area; nor to public,
agricultural or institutional buildings, or buildings or private schools not conducted for profit that are
primarily used for school purposes, provided the expected appurtenances are not located within the
flight paths of an airport or heliport as defined by FAA regulations, and approved by the FAA, and
further provided that no tower or similar structure may be located closer to a property line than the
distance equal to its height. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
G. The maximum gross floor area for any single business establishment in a NB District shall not
exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet.
H. At no street intersection in any district shall any obstruction to vision exceeding three (3) feet in
height above the plane established by the intersecting streets be placed or permitted to grow, on any
lot within the triangle formed by the lot lines abutting the intersection and a line connecting points
on these lot lines at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from the point of intersection of the lot lines.
This restriction shall also apply to the intersection of a street and a driveway in a "B" or "I" District.
I. A fence, hedge, wall, or other structure or vegetation may be maintained on any lot provided that in
the front yard area, no such structure or vegetation shall be over three (3) feet in height above the
adjacent ground within five (5) feet of the front lot line unless it can be shown that such vegetation will
not restrict visibility in such a way as to hinder the safe entry of a vehicle from any driveway to the
street.
J. Within the SR, TR, NB, and GB districts, the Planning Board may allow, by special permit, a
different front yard set back than that otherwise currently allowed within the district under the
following conditions:
(1) The land for which the special permit is sought is, at the time of application, an unimproved,
vacant lot and the applicant is seeking to construct a primary building for a use allowed in the
district by right or special permit;
(2) At least one lot, within two hundred fifty (250) feet of either side of the applicant's parcel,
and having frontage on the same street, on the same block and lying within the same district,
has a structure built before the current front yard set back was required but with less front yard
set back than that currently required;
(3) The proposed set back is not closer to the front line than the set back of a building within
two hundred fifty (250) feet of either side of the applicant's parcel.
§171-42. Reserved.
§171-43. Reserved.
§171-44. Dimensional and Density Regulations for Lots Located in More Than One Zoning District.
Where a lot is located in more than one zoning district, the following dimensional and density
regulations shall apply:
A. Frontage - The frontage requirement for the district in which a majority of the frontage is
located shall apply. In cases where the frontage is of equal length in all districts, then the most
restrictive shall apply.
B. Lot Area - The lot area requirement for the district in which a majority of the lot area is located
shall apply. In cases where the lot area is of equal area in all districts, then the most restrictive shall
apply.
C. All Other Dimensional and Density Regulations - Those dimensional and density regulations
required in a particular district shall apply to that portion of the lot, or structure, located in said district.
§171-45. Vehicular Egress/Access to a Lot and Common Driveways.
Vehicular egress/access to a lot must be across the front lot line of the lot meeting the minimum
frontage requirements, except that in particular instances, the Planning Board may issue a Special Permit
permitting vehicular egress/access to a lot over a front lot line having less than the required minimum
frontage, or over any side lot line or rear lot line.
A. Common Driveways may be allowed by special permit in accordance with the provisions of
§171-28 and subject to the following:
(1) A common driveway in any “R” District shall serve no more than two lots. The driveway
shall lie entirely within the lots being served. In the “I” Districts, or in the “GB” or “HB” Districts,
the Planning Board may grant a special permit to allow a common driveway to serve more than
two lots when it can be shown that the sharing of a driveway will result in a benefit to the
neighborhood due to decreased curb cuts and traffic flow. (Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article
29)
(2) Frontage along a common driveway shall not constitute frontage. The only area to be counted
as frontage is that land which meets the requirements as specified in the definition of frontage in
the Zoning Ordinance; furthermore, no common driveway shall be accepted as a public way; nor
shall the Town of Palmer under any circumstances be held liable for construction, reconstruction,
maintenance, or snow removal on any common driveway. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM
3/7/07)
(3) Under no circumstances shall the Town of Palmer be held liable in the event that emergency
vehicles cannot get to their destination because of improper construction or maintenance of a
common driveway. It shall be the owner’s responsibility to be sure that the driveway is passable
for emergency vehicles at all times.
(4) Each landowner served by the common driveway shall be jointly and severally responsible and
liable for the repair and maintenance of all portions of the common driveway to which more than
one landowner holds a right-of-way.
B. Driveway Standards.
(1) Alignment and Dimensions.
(a) The width of the right of way shall be forty (40) feet.
(b) The minimum width of a common driveway surface shall be eighteen (18) feet.
(c) The common driveway shall have three (3) foot gravel shoulders on each side.
(d) The slope or grade of a common drive shall in no place exceed eight percent (8%) if
unpaved or twelve percent (12%) if paved.
(e) The common drive shall intersect a public way at an angle of not less than eighty (80)
degrees.
(f) The minimum curvature of a common driveway shall be sufficient for a fire engine to
negotiate, generally no less than a radius of fifty (50) feet.
(g) There shall be a turnaround area at the resident end of the driveway. Such turnaround
shall accommodate safe and convenient turning by fire trucks and other emergency
vehicles.
(h) The maximum length of a common driveway shall be fifteen hundred (1,500) feet.
(i) Other standards may be set based on site configurations, including requirements for
drainage.
(j) These standards may be waived when, the Planning Board finds that such action is not
inconsistent with the purpose and intent of the Zoning Ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007-
07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(2) Construction.
(a) The common driveway shall be constructed of a minimum fifteen (15) inches gravel
base with an oil and stone top layer of one half (½) inch consisting of three (3)
successive layers of three quarter (¾) inch crushed trap rock stone, one half (½) inch
crushed trap rock stone and one quarter (¼) inch crushed trap rock stone, with a crown
sufficient for drainage.
(b) Drainage shall be adequate to dispose of surface runoff. Culverts shall be installed if
deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
(c) These standards may be waived when, the Planning Board finds that such action is not
inconsistent with the purpose and intent of the Zoning Ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007-
07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(3) Alignment and Dimensions.
(a) The common driveway, at its intersection with the street, must provide a leveling off
area with a slope no greater than one percent (1%) for the first twenty (20) feet and a
slope no greater than five percent (5%) for the next thirty (30) feet.
(b) Minimum safe sight distance must be provided at the intersection of a common
driveway with a street.
(c) These standards may be waived when the Planning Board finds that such action is not
inconsistent with the purpose and intent of the Zoning Ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007-
07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(4) Street Numbers and Identification.
(a) Each common driveway shall be assigned one street number; each residence served by
the common driveway shall be assigned a letter to use together with the common
driveway number for purposes of address and identification. All common driveways
shall be clearly marked at the intersection of the driveway and the frontage road by a
sign stating the driveway number and house letters, sufficiently readable from the road
to serve the purpose of emergency identification. All other house numbering standards
of the Town of Palmer shall be adhered to.
§171-46. Reserved.
Article VII
Use Regulation
§171-47. Applicability of Use Regulations.
Except as provided in this ordinance, no building, structure, or land shall be used except for the
purposes permitted in the district as described in this article. Any use not listed shall be construed to
be prohibited. Uses permitted by right, by special permit, or by site plan approval provisions of
ordinance, shall be subject, in addition to the use regulations contained in the Article, to all of the
other provisions of this ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-48. Use Regulations.
This ordinance divides the Town into various zoning districts. The purposes of each district and the
uses permitted in each district are outlined in the following sections of the ordinance. The Tables of Use
Regulations on the following pages is hereby declared to be a part of this ordinance. In the Tables, the
following designations shall apply: (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
A. "Y" shall designate uses allowed by right in the district indicated.
B. “T" shall designate uses allowed in the district indicated, but only with a special permit granted by
the Town Manager subject to the provisions of Article V. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
C. “SP" shall designate uses allowed in the district indicated, but only with a special permit from the
Planning Board subject to the provisions of Articles V.
D. “SPA” shall designate uses allowed in the district indicated, but only with site plan approval from
the Planning Board subject to the provisions of Article V.
E. “SP/SPA” shall designate uses allowed in the district indicated, but only with special permit and
site plan approval from the Planning Board subject to the provisions of Article V.
F. “N” shall designate uses not allowed in the district indicated.
§171-49. Accessory Uses.
A. Any use which is accessory to a principal use allowed by right shall be allowed only in connection
with such allowed principal use. Any use which is accessory to a principal use allowed by
special permit, and which is not specifically included in the original special permit, shall be allowed
only after issuance of a new special permit. Cessation of a principal use shall require cessation of
any accessory use which is not otherwise allowed as a principal use. The Building Inspector shall
be responsible for determining what uses are principal, and what uses are accessory.
B. A use, whether or not on the same parcel as activities permitted as a matter of right, accessory to
activities permitted as a matter of right, which activities are necessary in connection with scientific
research or scientific development or related production, may be permitted upon the issuance of a
special permit, provided the Planning Board finds that the proposed accessory use does not
substantially derogate from the public good.
§171-50. Temporary Events.
A. A temporary event or use occurring on a parcel or parcels of land located in a zoning district in
which such event or use is not permitted, may be permitted by the Town Manager in accordance
with the regulations as established by the Town Manager for such events. (Amended Ord 2007- 07,
RTCM 3/7/07)
Article VIII
Residential Zones
§ 171-51. Residential Zones.
Purpose. The rural residential and suburban residential zones are intended to preserve land and to
provide housing opportunities for individual households. The regulations are intended to create,
maintain and promote single-dwelling neighborhoods. They allow for some non-household living
uses but not to such an extent as to sacrifice the overall image and character of the single-dwelling
neighborhood. The regulations preserve the character of neighborhoods by providing three different
zones with different densities and development standards. It is intended that these regulations will
promote desirable low-density residential areas by promoting aesthetically pleasing environments,
safety, privacy, energy conservation, and recreational opportunities. These regulations will also help
to preserve open space for wildlife habitat, conservation and passive recreation uses and the
remaining prime agricultural lands and forestlands within the town by providing for cluster
residential developments. Larger lot sizes in some areas within the town will also aid in the
preservation of natural resources and will also help to establish a sewer avoidance area where lot
sizes are such that it will eliminate the necessity of extending sewer lines into these areas. The site
development standards allow for flexibility of development while maintaining compatibility within
the Town’s various neighborhoods. In addition, the regulations provide certainty to property owners,
developers, and neighbors about the limits of what is allowed.
The Town Residential Zones (Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29) are intended to provide
opportunities for multi-dwelling housing. The regulations are intended to create and maintain higher
density residential neighborhoods. At the same time, they allow for large-scale institutional
campuses and other non-residential uses but not to such an extent as to sacrifice the overall
residential neighborhood image and character.
The Town Residential Zones (Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29) are distinguished
primarily by density and development standards. The regulations are intended to create desirable
residential areas by promoting aesthetically pleasing environments, safety, privacy, energy
conservation, and recreational opportunities. The development standards generally assure that new
development will be compatible with the Town’s character. At the same time, the standards allow for
flexibility for new development. In addition, the regulations provide certainty to property owners,
developers, and neighbors about the limits of what is allowed.
§171-52. List of the Residential Zones.
The full names and abbreviations of the residential zones are listed below.
Full Name Abbreviation
Rural Residential/Agricultural RR
Suburban Residential SR
Town Residential TR
(Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29)
§171-53. Other Zoning Regulations.
The regulations in this chapter state the allowed uses and development standards for the base zones.
Sites with overlay zones are subject to additional regulations. The Official Zoning Map and Overlay
Maps indicate which sites are subject to these additional regulations.
§171-54. Use Regulations.
Primary Uses.
A. Allowed Uses. Uses allowed in the residential zones are listed in §171-55, the Table of Use
Regulations with a "Y". These uses are allowed if they comply with the standards and other
regulations of this ordinance. Being listed as an allowed use does not mean that a proposed use will
be permitted if the criteria of this section cannot be met. In addition, a use listed is subject to all
other requirements of this chapter. Uses that are allowed may also require site plan approval as
indicated in § 171-29. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
B. Special Permit Uses. Uses allowed by special permit only are designated with a “SP”. These
uses are subject to the special permit criteria as described in this ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007-
07, RTCM 3/7/07)
C. Site Plan Approval. Uses allowed by site plan approval only are designated with a “SPA”.
These uses are subject to the site plan approval criteria as described in this ordinance. (Amended
Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-55. Table of Use Regulations – Residential Zones.
ZONING DESIGNATION: RR SR TR
Residential Categories
Single Family Residence Y Y Y
Household Living Y Y Y
Cluster Residential Developments SP SP SP
Tourist Home/ Bed & Breakfast SP/SPA SP/SPA SP/SPA
Accessory Apartments For Family
Member SP/SPA SP/SPA SP/SPA
Accessory Apartments For Rental to Non-
Family Member N SP/SPA SP/SPA
Elderly Housing Single Family Housing
Community (Amended ATM, May 14,
2001, Article 29).
Y Y Y
Elderly Housing – Multi-family units,
apartments, townhouses and
condominiums. (Amended ATM, May
14, 2001, Article 29).
SP/SPA SP/SPA SP/SPA
Two Family Dwellings N
N (amended
STM 5-15-00
Article 15)
Y
Town Houses N SP/SPA SP/SPA
Condominiums N SP/SPA SP/SPA
Three Family Home N N SP/SPA
Multi Family Residential Units N N SP/SPA
Lodging Houses N SP/SPA SP/SPA
Commercial Categories
Home Occupation Uses SP SP SP
Sole Proprietor-No on-site employees
or customers Y Y Y
Veterinary Hospital in which all
animals are kept inside pens or buildings. SP/SPA N N
Retail Sales And Service N N N
Office N N N
Quick Vehicle Servicing N N N
Vehicle Repair N N N
Commercial Parking N N N
Self-Service Storage N N N
Campground SP/SPA N N
Commercial Outdoor Recreation SP/SPA SP/SPA N
Major Event Entertainment N N N
Industrial Categories
Manufacturing And Production N N N
Warehouse And Freight Movement N N N
ZONING DESIGNATION RR SR TR
Wholesale Sales N N N
Industrial Service N N N
Railroad Yards N N N
Waste-Related N N N
Institutional Categories
Basic Utilities SP SP SP
Community Service/ Municipal Uses
Parks And Open Areas Y Y Y
Municipal Uses Y Y Y
Public or Private School, College or
University Y Y Y
Historical Society (may incl. residence
of caretaker) Y Y Y
Nursing Home SP/SPA SP/SPA SP/SPA
Assisted Living facility or life care
facility SP/SPA SP/SPA SP/SPA
Medical Centers N N N
Religious Institutions Y Y Y
Elder Day Care in the Home Y Y Y
Family Day Care in the Home (including
Family Day Care Home Plus and Family
Day Care Home Large)
Y Y Y
Private Daycare, Nursery Care or
Kindergarten SPA SPA SPA
Other Categories
Agriculture, floriculture, vitaculture,
aquaculture, silvaculture Y Y Y
Temporary Greenhouse or stand for
retail sale of agricultural products Y Y Y
Non-Commercial forestry
and growing of all vegetables Y Y Y
Heliport/Airport SP/SPA N N
Commercial Telecommunications
Towers SP/SPA SP/SPA SP/SPA
Earth Removal Operations SP/SPA N N
§171-56. Planned Senior Housing Development. (Amended at ATM, May 6, 2002)
Planned Senior Housing Developments shall be subject to Special Permit pursuant to § 171-28 of
the Palmer Zoning Ordinance, and Site Plan Approval pursuant to § 171-29 of the Palmer Zoning
Ordinance. In addition to the other criteria set forth in these Sections and the General Laws, these
procedures and standards shall apply to all Planned Senior Housing Developments. (Amended Ord
2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
A. Purpose. The purpose of the planned senior housing development section is to allow for
flexible residential developments intended to serve the fifty-five (55) and older population of our
community. These residential developments may include townhouses, condominiums, multi-family
units and apartments. The development standards are flexible to help make the housing more
affordable by allowing units to be clustered thereby requiring less infrastructure to be constructed.
Preservation of open space and conservation of significant natural features will also be required in
these types of housing developments. The open space will allow areas for passive recreation uses,
community gardens, walking paths, swimming pools, tennis courts and other similar amenities.
B. Use Regulations. The following uses shall be permitted in a Planned Senior Residential
Development:
(1) One family detached dwellings.
(2) Townhouses.
(3) Condominiums.
(4) Multi-family dwellings not to exceed four (4) units per building.
(5) Any recreational use or community facility associated with the development; including, but
not limited to such as tennis courts, swimming pools, gardens; community buildings and
clubhouses.
(6) Any accessory use as defined in §171-5 of this Ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM
3/7/07)
C. Minimum Lot Size Requirements. The dimensional requirements for a Planned Senior Housing
Development are as follows:
(1) The minimum parcel size is ten (10) acres. Land under permanent water bodies shall not be
counted towards the minimum lot area. No more than fifty (50) percent of the lot shall be
wetlands, encumbered by easements or be unusable due to other conditions.
(2) The parcel must have a minimum of sixty (60) feet of frontage on a public way as defined
in this chapter. Parcels within the Planned Senior Housing Development have no minimum
frontage requirement.
(3) The minimum front setback shall be one hundred (100) feet. Side and rear setbacks shall be
seventy-five (75) feet. These setbacks apply only to the periphery of the property. There shall
be no setback requirements for the individual structures within the Planned Senior Housing
Development, however no two (2) residential structures shall be placed any closer together than
ten (10) feet.
(4) A buffer strip suitable to provide a visual barrier between adjoining properties of at least
thirty (30) feet must be maintained along the perimeter of the property. Additional buffering
may be required by the Board when deemed necessary to buffer sensitive areas. The Planning
Board may modify or waive the buffer requirement where topography, or other circumstances
warrant a change. A buffer plan must be submitted as part of the application.
(5) In certain circumstances the Planning Board may grant a special permit to allow a reduction
in the side yard setback, but in no instance shall a side setback requirement be reduced to any
less than thirty (30) feet. These special permits are discretionary. The Planning Board shall
consider the following criteria when considering granting a special permit for a reduction in the
side yard setback:
(a) The applicant must demonstrate through the use of visual tools why the proposed
development cannot meet the minimum side yard setback.
(b) The applicant shall not vary the side setback requirement any more than is necessary
to accommodate the stated need for dimensional relief.
(c) The applicant must demonstrate that there is no reasonable alternative site and
building design that would maintain the dimensional requirements of the ordinance.
(Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(d) The applicant must demonstrate that the intent of the ordinance will met, even with a
reduction in the side yard setback. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
D. Density Requirements. One (1) dwelling unit will be allowed for every thirty thousand (30,000)
square feet in the development.
E. Parking and Circulation Requirements. All Planned Senior Housing Developments shall
provide for the following:
(1) There shall be an adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of pedestrian circulation,
roadways, driveways and parking.
(2) Vehicular access to the Planned Senior Housing Development shall be provided from an
existing public way, which in the opinion of the Planning Board is adequate to service the
proposed development. As a matter of public safety, an alternate emergency access may be
required.
(3) Roads and walkways within the Planned Senior Housing Development shall be privately
owned and maintained and shall be designed in accordance with sound engineering practices
and shall be designed with sufficient width, suitable grade and adequate construction to safely
provide for the needs of vehicular and pedestrian traffic generated by the development.
(4) Garages or off-street parking spaces, or a combination thereof, shall be provided for all
occupants, employees and visitors, and shall be not less than two (2) spaces per dwelling unit in
accordance with §171-95 of the Palmer Zoning Ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM
3/7/07)
F. Common Open Space Requirements. All Planned Senior Housing Developments shall provide
the following:
(1) All land within the Planned Senior Housing Development which is not covered by
buildings, roads, driveways, parking areas of other development, or which is not set aside as
private yards, patios or gardens for the residents shall be common open space. The area of the
common open space shall equal at least forty (40%) percent of the total area of the development
tract. Such land shall have a shape, dimension, character and location suitable to assure its use
for park, recreation, conservation, or agricultural purposes by all the residents of the
development.
(2) Suitable and usable outdoor recreational area or areas shall be provided for the use of the
tenants. At least six thousand (6,000) square feet per dwelling unit must be usable open space
for active and passive recreation. Such space shall not include wetlands as determined by the
Conservation Commission. Usable open space shall be defined to include land for community
gardens, hiking/jogging paths, tennis courts, swimming pools, or similar facilities. Structures
or buildings accessory to recreation, conservation or agricultural uses may be erected by shall
not exceed two (2%) percent coverage of the common open land.
(3) Further subdivision of common open land or its use for other than recreation, conservation,
or agriculture, except for easements for underground utilities shall be prohibited. Provision
shall be made so that the common open space shall be owned in common and accessible to the
owners and residents of all units in the development, or by membership corporation, trust or
association whose members are the owners and residents of the units.
G. Community Facility.
(1) Unless waived by the Planning Board, a community room or facility must be established for
use by the residents. There shall also be room for meetings and other functions held by the
residents.
H. Community Association.
(1) An owners’ association shall be established, requiring membership of each lot or unit
owner, in the Planned Senior Housing Development. The association shall be responsible for
the permanent maintenance of communal water, sewage, recreational and thoroughfare
facilities. An association agreement of covenant shall be submitted with the Special Permit
application guaranteeing the continuing maintenance of such common utilities, land and
facilities, assessing each unit a share of maintenance expenses. Such agreement shall be
forwarded to The Town Attorney for his/her comments. In the case of rental units, the property
owner shall be responsible for all maintenance of the facility as detailed above. (Amended Ord
2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(2) Such agreements or covenants shall provide that in the event that the association fails to
maintain the common facilities in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the
agreement, the Town may, after notice to the association and Public Hearing, enter upon such
land and maintain it in order to prevent the common land from becoming a public nuisance.
The covenants and agreements shall also provide that the cost of such maintenance by the Town
shall be assessed ratably against the properties within the development.
I. Application Contents. All applications for a Planned Senior Housing Development shall include
the following:
(1) A completed application form.
(2) A project report narrative explaining the nature of the proposal including work that will be
done on the property, the development concept, the number of units, the number of bedrooms
per unit, the number of projected occupants, the projected number of average daily trips from
the development, the total lot coverage, the total open space, and a description of any other
significant site features and site amenities to be provided. The narrative should also detail
provisions for sewage disposal and water supply.
(3) A site plan prepared in accordance with the site plan section of this ordinance. The plan
shall include the layout of all private ways to be constructed within the development. Plans
shall also detail the proposed drainage system, complete with drainage calculations and any
other information as may be required by the Town of Palmer Regulations Governing the
Subdivision of Land. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(4) Information as required by Special Permits, §171-28 and Site Plan Approval, §171-29 shall
be submitted to allow the Planning Board to determine that the site plan objectives/review and
approval criteria detailed in these Sections can be met.
J. Enforcement. In addition to all other enforcement tools available to the Board, the Board shall
require the following:
(1) As a condition of its approval, the Planning Board may establish time limits for any
development or phases thereof.
(2) Before any building permits are issued for buildings in a given phase, the developer may be
required to provide the Town with performance security in a form and amount satisfactory to
the Planning Board to guarantee the construction of required site improvements.
Article IX
Business Zones
§171-57. Business Zones.
Purpose. The business zones are for areas of the Town designated for business and commercial
uses. The differences in the zones reflect the diversity of business areas in the Town. The zones are
distinguished by the uses allowed and the intensity of development allowed. Some of the zones
encourage business areas that are supportive of surrounding residential areas, while other zones allow
business areas which have a community or regional market. The regulations promote uses and
development which will enhance the economic viability of the specific business district and the town
as a whole.
In general, a wide range of uses is allowed in each zone. Limits on the intensity of uses and the
development standards promote the desired character for the commercial area. The development
standards are designed to allow a large degree of development flexibility within parameters which
support the intent of the specific zone. In addition, the regulations provide certainty to property
owners, developers, and neighbors about the limits of what is allowed.
§ 171-58. List of Business Zones.
A. Neighborhood Business Zone. The Neighborhood Business (NB) zone is intended for small
sites in or near dense residential neighborhoods. This zone encourages the provision of small-scale
retail and service uses for nearby residential areas. Some uses which are not retail or service in
nature are also allowed so a variety of uses may locate in existing buildings. Uses are restricted in
size to promote a local orientation and to limit adverse impacts on nearby residential areas.
Development is intended to be pedestrian-oriented and compatible with the scale of surrounding
residential areas. Parking areas are restricted, since their appearance is generally out of character
with the surrounding residential development and the desired orientation of the uses. In certain
situations this zone is intended for small commercial sites and areas in or near less dense or
developing residential neighborhoods. The emphasis of the zone is on uses which will provide
services for the nearby residential areas, and on other uses which are small scale and have little
impact. Uses are limited in intensity to promote their local orientation and to limit adverse impacts
on nearby residential areas.
B. Village District - Mixed Commercial/Residential Zone. The Village Center District I, II, III and
IV provide for Mixed Commercial/Residential uses within one zone. This zone promotes
development that combines commercial and housing uses in a single building and enhances older
business areas that have a storefront character. This zone allows increased development on busier
streets without fostering a strip commercial appearance. This development type will support transit
use, provide a buffer between busy streets and residential neighborhoods, and provide new housing
opportunities in the Town. The emphasis of the nonresidential uses is primarily on locally oriented
retail, service, and office uses. Other uses are allowed to provide a variety of uses that may locate
in existing buildings. Development will consist primarily of businesses on the ground floor with
housing on upper stories. Development is intended to be pedestrian-oriented with buildings close
to and oriented to the sidewalk, especially at corners. (Please see individual VC Zone information
for specific allowable uses development criteria. This section is located in Article X)
C. General Business Zone. The General Business Zone is intended to preserve and enhance older
commercial areas that have a storefront character. The zone intends that new development in these
areas will be compatible with this desired character. The zone allows a full range of retail, service
and business uses with a local and regional market area. The desired character includes areas
which are predominantly built-up, with buildings close to and oriented towards the sidewalk
especially at corners. Development is intended to be pedestrian-oriented and buildings with a
storefront character are encouraged.
D. Highway Business Zone. The Highway Business Zone is intended to allow autoaccommodating
commercial development in areas along highways that have already been
predominantly built in this manner and in some new highway areas. This zone allows for a range
of retail and service businesses with a local or regional market. Due to the size and scope of these
businesses they are not in character with the business zones located within the central business
areas of the town. These businesses are expected to be auto-accommodating. The zone's
development standards will promote attractive development, and more open and pleasant street
appearance. It is hoped that the resulting development will be aesthetically pleasing for motorists,
pedestrians and the businesses themselves.
§171-59. Other Zoning Regulations.
The regulations in this chapter state the allowed uses and the development standards for the base
zones. Sites with overlay zones are subject to additional regulations. The Official Zoning Map and
Overlay Maps indicate which sites are subject to the additional regulations.
§171-60. List of the Business Zones.
The full names and abbreviations of the business zones are listed below.
Full Name Abbreviation
General Business GB
Highway Business HB
Neighborhood Business NB
§171-61. Use Regulations.
A. Primary Uses
(1) Allowed Uses. Uses allowed in the business zones are listed in §171-62, Table of Use
Regulations – Business Zones with a "Y". These uses are allowed if they comply with the
standards and other regulations of this Chapter. Being listed as an allowed use does not mean
that a proposed use will be permitted if the criteria of this section cannot be met. In addition, a
use listed is subject to all other requirements of this chapter. Uses that are allowed may also
require site plan approval as indicated in §171-29.
(2) Special Permit Uses. Uses allowed by special permit only are designated with a “SP”.
These uses are subject to the special permit criteria as described in this ordinance. (Amended
Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(3) Site Plan Approval. Uses allowed by site plan approval only are designated with a “SPA”.
These uses are subject to the site plan approval criteria as described in this ordinance.
(Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-62. Table of Use Regulations – Business Zones.
ZONING DESIGNATION HB GB NB
Mixed Categories
Single Family Residence Y Y Y
Household Living Y Y Y
Cluster Residential Developments SP SP SP
Tourist Home/ Bed & Breakfast SP/SPA SP/SPA SP/SPA
Accessory Apartments For Family
Member SP/SPA SP/SPA SP/SPA
Accessory Apartments For Rental to
Non-Family Member SP/SPA SP/SPA SP/SPA
Two Family Dwellings Y Y Y
Multi Family Dwellings SP/SPA SP/SPA N
Condominiums SP/SPA SP/SPA N
Town Houses SP SP N
Lodging Houses SP SP N
Commercial Categories
Mixed uses consisting of any of the
following types of uses: residential, retail,
service and commercial uses (All
residential uses must be located above the
first floor) provided that the proposed uses
are allowed in that district. (Amended
ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29).
Y Y Y
Home Occupation Uses Y Y SP
Sole Proprietor-No on-site employees or
customers Y Y Y
Veterinary Hospital in which all animals
are kept inside pens or buildings. SP SP SP
Retail Establishments selling principally
convenience goods including but not
limited to: food, drugs, and proprietary
goods with a maximum floor area
limitation of 5,000 square feet per floor of
any single establishment (Amended ATM,
May 14, 2001, Article 29)
SPA SPA SP/SPA
ZONING DESIGNATION HB GB NB
Retail Establishments selling principally
convenience goods including but not
limited to: food, drugs, and proprietary
goods with a maximum floor area
limitation of 10,000 square feet per floor
of any single establishment.
SPA SPA N
Retail Establishments selling principally
convenience goods including but not
limited to: food, drugs, and proprietary
goods with a floor area exceeding 10,000
square feet per floor of any single
establishment.
SP/SPA N N
Retail establishments selling general
merchandise, including, but not limited to,
dry goods, apparel and accessories,
furniture and home furnishings, home
equipment, small wares and hardware and
including discount and limited price
variety stores with a maximum floor area
limitation of 5,000 square feet per floor for
any single establishment (Amended ATM,
May 14, 2001, Article 29)
SPA SPA SP/SPA
Retail establishments selling general
merchandise, including, but not limited to,
dry goods, apparel and accessories,
furniture and home furnishings, home
equipment, small wares and hardware and
including discount and limited price
variety stores with a maximum floor area
limitation of 10,000 square feet per floor
for any single establishment.
SPA SPA N
Retail establishments selling general
merchandise, including, but not limited to,
dry goods, apparel and accessories,
furniture and home furnishing, home
equipment, small wares and hardware and
including discount and limited price variety
stores with a floor area greater than 10,000
sq. ft. per floor for any single establishment
but not exceeding 20,000 square feet per
floor for any single establishments.
(Amended Ord 2006-11, RTCM 3/1/06
SP/SPA SP/SPA N
ZONING DESIGNATION HB GB NB
Retail establishments selling general
merchandise, including, but not limited to,
dry goods, apparel and accessories,
furniture and home furnishings, home
equipment , small wares and hardware
and including discount and limited price
variety stores with a floor area exceeding
of 20,000 square feet per floor for any
single establishment. (Amended Ord 2006-
11, RTCM Mar 1, 06
SP/SPA N N
Eating and drinking establishments where
consumption is primarily intended to be
within the building
SPA SPA SP/SPA
Tradesman with on-site employees and
customers SPA SP/SPA SP/SPA
Tradesman with only one employee and
meeting the criteria of a home-occupation Y Y Y
Sole proprietor with no on-site employees
or customers Y Y Y
Miscellaneous professional and business
office and service including, but not limited
to, medical, legal, and other professional
services and finance, insurance and real
estate offices
SPA SPA SP/SPA
Business service and supply service
establishments SPA SPA SP/SPA
Repair service establishments SPA SPA SP/SPA
Commercial parking lot or structure
including a public garage SPA SPA N
Night club/dance hall SP/SPA SP/SPA N
Hotel/Motel SP/SPA SP/SPA N
Personal and consumer service
establishment SPA SPA SPA
Funeral establishment SP/SPA N N
Membership club operated for profit SP/SPA SP/SPA N
Membership Club not operated for profit SPA SPA SPA
Medical center including accessory
medical research and associated facilities SP/SPA N N
ZONING DESIGNATION HB GB NB
Automotive repair or automobile service
station (not including junkyard or open
storage of abandoned automobiles or other
vehicles) subject to obtaining gas storage
permit where necessary from Board of
Selectmen and/or Fire Department.
SPA SP/SPA N
Motion picture establishment - indoor SPA SP/SPA N
Pool or billiards hall, amusement arcade,
bowling alley SPA SP/SPA N
Establishments selling foods prepared on
the premises where consumption is
primarily off the premises
SPA SP/SPA SP/SPA
Teen Center Y Y Y
Outdoor commercial Recreation use SP/SPA N N
Large Scale Conference/Entertainment
Facility SP/SPA SP/SPA SP/SPA
Miniature Golf Course SPA N N
Drive Through Facility SP/SPA SP/SPA SP/SPA
Construction Supply establishments SP/SPA N N
Wholesale bakery, wholesale laundry, or
dry cleaning plant SP/SPA N N
Business service and supply
establishments SPA N N
Repair service establishments SPA SP/SPA SP/SPA
Establishments selling, leasing or renting
new and/or used automobiles, trucks, boats,
motorcycles, household and camping
trailers and new automobile tires and other
accessories
SPA N N
Office SPA SPA SP/SPA
Quick Vehicle Servicing SPA N N
Vehicle Repair SPA N N
Self-Service Storage SP/SPA N N
Major Event Entertainment SP/SPA N N
Community Service/Municipal Uses
Colleges Y Y Y
ZONING DESIGNATION HB GB NB
Heavy Public Use TM TM TM
Historical Society (may incl. residence
of caretaker) Y Y Y
Nursing Home SP/SPA N N
Hospice, Assisted Living facility or life
care facility SP/SPA N N
Religious Institutions SPA SPA SPA
Family Day Care in the Home (Including
Family Day Care Home Plus and Large) Y Y Y
Private Daycare, Nursery Care or
Kindergarten SPA SPA SPA
Professional Office Building for
physicians, surgeons, Dentists and other
medical and paramedical and paradental
personnel facilities.
SPA SPA N
Clinic or emergency healthcare facility or
facility For the promotion and maintenance
of good health
SPA SPA N
Other Categories
Agricultural uses, except a greenhouse
or stand for retail sales Y Y Y
Temporary Greenhouse or stand for retail
sale of agricultural products Y Y Y
Year round greenhouse or stand for
wholesale and retail sale of agricultural
products
Y Y Y
Non-Commercial forestry and growing of
all vegetables Y Y Y
Flea Market TM TM TM
Airport SP/SPA N N
Commercial Telecommunications Towers SPA SPA SPA
Bus passenger terminal and taxi facilities SP/SPA SP/SPA N
Railroad passenger terminal SP/SPA SP/SPA N
Article X
Village Center Districts.
§171-63. Village Center Districts.
The Village Center District Zoning sections are listed on the following pages.
§171-64. Reserved.
§171-65.
A. Criteria for granting a Special Permit for Front Yard setbacks in excess of ten (10) feet in the
Village Center Districts.
(1) The Planning Board shall consider the following criteria when considering granting a
special permit for front yard setbacks in excess of ten (10) feet:
(a) Applicant must demonstrate through the use of visual tools why the proposed
development cannot meet the maximum front yard requirement.
(b) The applicant shall, where feasible, use vegetation, fencing, or other architectural and
landscape design elements to maintain or establish a visual connection between the
public street and the building façade.
(c) The applicant shall make reasonable efforts to define and reinforce the average build
to line of the street on which it faces by utilizing trees, hedges, walls or fences. If the
average build to line exceeds the maximum front yard requirement for the proposed
use; the average build to line shall be that maximum front yard requirement for the
proposed use.
(d) The applicant shall not exceed the maximum front yard requirement any more than is
necessary to accommodate the stated need for the larger front yard.
B. Criteria for granting a Special Permit for varying dimensional requirements in the Village
Center Districts.
(1) The Planning Board shall consider the following criteria when considering granting a
special permit for varying dimensional requirements in the Village Center Districts:
(a) Applicant must demonstrate through the use of visual tools why the proposed
development cannot meet the maximum front yard requirement
(b) The applicant shall not vary any dimensional requirement any more than is necessary
to accommodate the stated need for the dimensional relief.
(c) Applicant must demonstrate that there is no reasonable alternative site and building
design that would maintain the dimensional requirements of the bylaw.
(d) Applicant must demonstrate that the proposed design of development makes adequate
provisions for public safety, provides adequate control over vehicular traffic, and
further enhances the amenities if the site and of the Village Center District.
(e) For proposals that exceed the maximum building height, the applicant shall
demonstrate that the portion of the proposed structure does not significantly degrade
solar access to surrounding properties.
(f) The Board shall find the extent to which the proposed development plan is, or is not,
consistent with the purpose of the Village Center District bylaw.
A. Purpose
Village Center District I (VCI)
1. Purpose
It is the purpose of this bylaw to
allow for the orderly and planned
development of Palmer’s downtown
area.
The bylaw seeks to encourage the
following characteristics:
• Retail shops, residences, offices,
civic facilities and parks will be
located in close proximity so that
these uses are within walking
distance of the downtown center.
•A broad range of commercial
enterprises and institutional uses
will provide a vital center for daily
activities.
• A finite physical area will define
the downtown and provide a framework
for the continuation of a
strong sense of community.
2. Organization
The Village Center District I bylaw
is presented in three sections.
Section A describes the purpose
and organizational structure of the
bylaw. Section B describes general
requirements for proposals. Section
C presents a table of uses and standards
for proposed development in
the VCI District.
Village Center District I Palmer Town Center Palmer, Massachusetts
a. Alternate planting locations
within this zoning district may
be allowed when the Planning
Board determines that planting
on the same lot is not feasible.
A vegetation maintenance
agreement shall be provided
by the applicant to ensure that
off-site plantings are
maintained and replaced when
necessary.
a. Existing trees shall be maintained
where feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in the
front or rear yard for each 25 feet
of street frontage.(minimum of
one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species whenever
possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less than
3&1/2 inch caliper at time of
planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 10 feet
Front max: 20 feet
Rear: 25 feet
Side: 08 feet
Applicant may increase the maximum
front yard with a Special Permit
from the Planning Board. For criteria
refer to Section 171.65
a. Maximum building height:
35 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
70%
c. Maximum lot coverage:
70%
d. For Single-family detached:
Frontage(min) 25 feet
e. For Duplex:
Frontage(min) 60 feet
Applicant may vary these
dimensional standards with a Special
Permit from the Planning Board. For
criteria, refer to Section 171.65
a. Single-family detached
dwellings
b. Duplex dwelling
c. Accessory uses
customary to residential
structures
a. Alternate planting
locations within this
zoning district may be
allowed when the Planning
Board determines that
planting on the same lot is
not feasible. A vegetation
maintenance agreement
shall be provided by the
applicant to ensure that
off-site plantings are
maintained and replaced
when necessary.
a. Existing trees shall be maintained
where feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in the
front or rear yard for each 25 feet
of street frontage.(minimum of
one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species whenever
possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less than
3&1/2 inch caliper at time of
planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 10 feet
Front max: 20 feet
Rear: 30 feet
Side: 12 feet
Applicant may increase the maximum
front yard with a Special
Permit from the Planning Board.
For criteria refer to Section 171.65
a. Maximum building height:
42 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
60%
c. Maximum lot coverage:
75%
d. For Apartment:
Frontage(min) 70 feet
For Townhouse
Frontage(min) 20 feet
Applicant may vary these
dimensional standards with a
Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For criteria,
refer to Section 171.65
a. Apartment buildings
(fewer than 5 units)
b. Townhouse dwelling
c. Accessory uses customary
to residential structures
The following uses are
permitted by Special Permit
from the Planning Board:
a.) Apartment buildings
over 5 units. Should be
Apartment buildings 5 units
or over
(amended ATM 5/14/01)
a. Alternate planting locations
within this zoning district may
be allowed when the Planning
Board determines that planting
on the same lot is not feasible.
A vegetation maintenance
agreement shall be provided
by the applicant to ensure that
off-site plantings are
maintained and replaced when
necessary.
b. Applicant may increase the
maximum front yard with a
Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For criteria,
refer to Section 171.65
a. Existing trees shall be maintained
where feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in the
front or rear yard for each 25 feet
of street frontage.(minimum of
one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species whenever
possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less than
3&1/2 inch caliper at time of
planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 00 feet*
Front max: 10 feet
Rear: 30 feet
Side: 05 feet
b. For buildings, or portion of
buildings, with residential uses
on the ground floor, the front
yard shall be a minimum of 5
feet.
c. See special note 5.b.
a. Maximum building height:
45 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
70%
c. Maximum lot coverage:
90%
d. Frontage (min.) 25 feet
Applicant may vary these
dimensional standards with a
Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For criteria,
refer to Section 171.65
Any combination of uses
allowed by right, or by
Special Permit, in this
zoning district may be located
within a building,
within inter-connected
buildings, or on the same
lot. Any proposed use in a
mixed use development
that requires a Special
Permit must obtain the
approval of the appropriate
Special Permit Authority.
a. Alternate planting
locations within this
zoning district may be
allowed when the
Planning Board
determines that planting
on the same lot is not
feasible. A vegetation
maintenance agreement
shall be provided by the
applicant to ensure that
off-site plantings are
maintained and
replaced when
necessary.
b. Drive through
establishments must
conform to
requirements of Section
171.91 of this Article.
a. Existing trees shall be
maintained where feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted
in the front or rear yard for
each 25 feet of street
frontage.(minimum of
one tree)
c. The applicant is
encouraged to use native
plant species whenever
possible.
d. Trees shall measure not
less than 3&1/2 inch caliper
at time of planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 00 feet
Front max: 10 feet
Rear: 15 feet
Side: 05 feet
Applicant may increase the
maximum front yard with a
Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For
criteria refer to Section
171.65.
a. Maximum building height:
45 feet
b. Maximum building
coverage:
70%
c. Maximum lot coverage:
90%
d. Frontage (min.) 25 feet
Applicant may vary these
dimensional standards with a
Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For criteria,
refer to Section 171.65
a. Banks and financial
institutions
b. Offices
c. Retail sales of goods &
services
d. Restaurants, except for
drive-through facilities
e. Professional medical
offices
f. Artists studios
g. Drycleaner/Laundry
The following uses are
permitted by Special Permit
from the Planning Board
(amended ATM 5/14/01):
h. Neighborhood motor
vehicle service station
i. Lodging, less than 12 units
j. Amusement business
k. Drive-through
establishment
(See special note 5.b.)
a. Alternate planting
locations within this
zoning district may be
allowed when the
Planning Board
determines that planting
on the same lot is not
feasible. A vegetation
maintenance agreement
shall be provided by the
applicant to ensure that
off-site plantings are
maintained and
replaced when
necessary.
a. Existing trees shall be
maintained where feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in
the front or rear yard for each
25 feet of street
Frontage.(minimum of one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged
to use native plant species
whenever possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less
than 3&1/2 inch caliper at time
of planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 10 feet
Front max: 30 feet
Rear: 15 feet
Side: 15 feet
Applicant may increase the
maximum front yard with a
Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For criteria
refer to Section 171.65.
a. Maximum building height:
(not including decorative
towers or steeples)
45 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
70%
c. Frontage(min.) 80 feet
Applicant may vary these
dimensional standards with a
Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For criteria,
refer to Section 171.65
a. Accessory uses
b. Governmental facility
c. Meeting hall
d. Educational facility
e. Library
f. Museum
g. Club house
h. Religious building
i. Visual and performing
arts center
j. Emergency services
facility.
a. Existing trees shall be
maintained where feasible.
b. The applicant is encouraged
to use native plant species
whenever possible.
a. Yard requirements
for public use structures
shall be those standards
established for accessory
structures in the district.
a. No dimensional
requirements.
b. No minimum frontage.
a. Parks
b. Playgrounds
c. Playing fields
d. Community open
space, recreational
facility
a. The following special
notes refer to all
applications within each
land use category in the
VCI District.
a. The following landscape
standards apply to all structures
constructed within the
VCI District.
a. The following yard
standards apply to all
structures constructed within
the VCI District.
a. The following
dimensional standards apply
to all structures constructed
within the VCI District.
a. The following uses
are permitted in all areas
within the VCI District
subject to the standards
set forth in this bylaw.
1.Land Use 2.Dimensions 3.Yards 4.Landscape 5.Special Notes
I.General II.Public III.Civic IV. Comm ercial
LOCUS MAP
PALMER
Downtown Area
Village Center District 1 Not an official zoning map
V. Mixed Use Village Density
VI.Residentia l
Moderate Density
VII.Residential
B. Requirements C.
1. General Requirements
In the VCI District, the existing
uses of land and building shall
not be changed, altered, or enlarged,
and no new uses of land or construction
of new buildings will be permitted
except in conformance with the
provisions of this By-Law.
5. Special Permits
A. Uses allowed by Special Permit
from the Planning Board are listed in
the Land Use table of this Bylaw.
B. Submittal requirements and review
standards for Special Permits
are listed in Article V, Section 171.28
of the Palmer Zoning Bylaw.
2. Reference to Map
The VCI District is herein established
to include all areas designated
“VCI” as delineated on the
Zoning District Map of the Town
of Palmer, on file with the Planning
Board and the Town Clerk.
6. Prohibited Uses
The following uses are prohibited
within the VCI District:
a. Chemical manufacturing
b. Enameling, plating, and
painting (not including artist’s
studios)
c. Scrap or junk yards
d. Kennels
e. Retail operations over
40,000 square feet in size (except
in structures existing at the time
of adoption of this bylaw)
f. Mobile homes
g. Mineral extraction
3. Permitted Uses
In the VCI District, all permitted
uses are designated in the Land
Use table. Uses are clustered by use
type including Public, Civic, Commercial,
Mixed Use, Village Density
Residential, and Moderate Density
Residential. Standards and requirements
for proposed activities
in the VCI District, including
Land Use, Dimensions, Yards,
Landscape, and Special Notes are
located in this table
4. Site Plan Review
A. All applications in the VCI District
are subject to Site Plan Review by the
Planning Board with the following
exceptions:
1. Single family dwellings
2. Duplex dwellings
B. Submittal requirements and standards
for Site Plan Review are listed
in Article V, Section 171.29 of the
Palmer Zoning Bylaw.
7. Parking Requirements-Note
A. Detailed parking standards are presented
in Article XVIII, Section 171.95
(A)(2) of the Palmer Zoning Bylaw.
B. Requirements for handicapped access
and loading spaces are located in Article
XVIII, Section 171.97 of this bylaw.
8. Severability
The invalidity, unconstitutionality, or
illegality of any provisions of this bylaw
shall not have any effect upon the validity
constitutionality, or legality of any other
provision of this bylaw.
A. Purpose
Village Center District II (VCII)
1. Purpose
It is the purpose of this bylaw to
allow for the orderly and planned
development of the Village of
Three Rivers.
The bylaw seeks to encourage the
following characteristics:
• Residences, retail shops, offices,
civic facilities and parks will be
located in close proximity
so that these uses are within walking
distance of the village center.
•A broad range of housing types
and places of business will provide
a vital center for daily activities.
• A finite physical area will define
the downtown and provide a framework
for the continuation of a
strong sense of community.
2. Organization
The Village Center District II bylaw
is presented in three sections.
Section A describes the purpose
and organizational structure of the
bylaw. Section B describes general
requirements for proposals. Section
C presents a table of uses and standards
for proposed development in
the VCII District.
B. Requirements
a. Alternate planting locations
within this zoning district may
be allowed when the Planning
Board determines that planting
on the same lot is not feasible.
A vegetation maintenance
agreement shall be provided
by the applicant to ensure that
off-site plantings are
maintained and replaced when
necessary.
a. Existing trees shall be maintained
where feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in the
front or rear yard for each 25 feet
of street frontage.(minimum of
one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species whenever
possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less than
3&1/2 inch caliper at time of
planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 10 feet
Front max: 20 feet
Rear: 25 feet
Side: 08 feet
Applicant may increase the maximum
front yard with a Special
Permit from the Planning Board. For
criteria refer to Section 171.65
a. Maximum building height:
35 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
70%
c. Maximum lot coverage:
70%
d. For Single-family detached:
Frontage(min) 25 feet
e. For Duplex:
Frontage(min) 60 feet
Applicant may vary these
dimensional standards with a Special
Permit from the Planning Board. For
criteria, refer to Section 171.65
a. Single-family detached
dwellings
b. Duplex dwelling
c. Accessory uses
customary to residential
structures
a. Alternate planting locations within this
zoning district may be allowed when the
Planning Board determines that planting
on the same lot is not feasible. A
vegetation maintenance agreement shall
be provided by the applicant to ensure
that off-site plantings are maintained and
replaced when necessary.
b. Applicant may increase the maximum
front yard with a Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For criteria, refer to
Section 171.65
a. Existing trees shall be maintained where
feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in the
front or rear yard for each 25 feet
of street frontage.(minimum of
one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species whenever
possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less than
3&1/2 inch caliper at time of
planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 00 feet*
Front max: 10 feet
Rear: 30 feet
Side: 05 feet
b. For buildings or portions of buildings
With residential uses on the ground floor,
the front yard shall be a minimum of
5 feet
c. See special note 5.b.
a. Maximum building height:
45 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
70%
c. Maximum lot coverage:
90%
d. Frontage (min) 25 feet
Applicant may vary these dimensional
standards with a Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For criteria, refer to
Section 171.65
Any combination of uses
allowed by right, or by Special Permit, in
this zoning district
may be located within a building,
within inter-connected
buildings,or on the same lot.
Any proposed use in a mixed
use development that requires
a Special Permit must obtain
the approval of the appropriate
Special Permit Authority
a. Alternate planting locations
within this zoning district may
be allowed when the Planning
Board determines that planting
on the same lot is not feasible.
A vegetation maintenance
agreement shall be provided
by the applicant to ensure that
off-site plantings are
maintained and replaced when
necessary.
a. Existing trees shall be maintained
where feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in the
front or rear yard for each 25 feet
of street frontage.(minimum of
one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species whenever
possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less than
3&1/2 inch caliper at time of
planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 10 feet
Front max: 20 feet
Rear: 30 feet
Side: 12 feet
Applicant may increase the maximum
front yard with a Special
Permit from the Planning Board. For
criteria refer to Section 171.65
a. Maximum building height:
42 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
60%
c. Maximum lot coverage:
75%
d. For Apartment:
Frontage(min) 70 feet
For Townhouse
Frontage(min) 20 feet
Applicant may vary these
dimensional standards with a Special
Permit from the Planning Board. For
criteria, refer to Section 171.65
a. Apartment buildings
(fewer than 5 units)
b. Townhouse dwelling
c. Accessory uses customary
to residential structures
The following uses are
permitted by Special Permit
from the Planning Board:
a.) Apartment buildings
over 5 units. Should be
Apartment buildings 5 units or
over
(amended ATM 5/14/01)
a. Alternate planting locations
within this zoning district may
be allowed when the Planning
Board determines that planting
on the same lot is not feasible.
A vegetation maintenance
agreement shall be provided
by the applicant to ensure that
off-site plantings are
maintained and replaced when
necessary.
a. Existing trees shall be maintained
where feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in the
front or rear yard for each 25 feet
of street frontage.(minimum of
one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species whenever
possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less than
3&1/2 inch caliper at time of
planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 20 feet
Front max: 30 feet
Rear: 30 feet
Side: 30 feet
b. Applicant may increase the
maximum front yard with a Special
Permit from the Planning Board. For
criteria, refer to Section 171.65
a. Maximum building height:
50 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
70%
c. Maximum lot coverage:
85%
d. No minimum frontage
Applicant may vary these
dimensional standards with a Special
Permit from the Planning Board. For
criteria, refer to Section 171.65
The following uses are
permitted in existing
structures by Special Permit
from the Planning Board:
a. Corporate offices
b. Warehousing
c. Light industrial
a. Alternate planting locations
within this zoning district may
be allowed when the Planning
Board determines that planting
on the same lot is not feasible.
A vegetation maintenance
agreement shall be provided
by the applicant to ensure that
off-site plantings are
maintained and replaced when
necessary.
b. Drive through
establishments must conform
to requirements of Section
171.91 of this Article.
a. Existing trees shall be
maintained where feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in
the front or rear yard for each 25
feet of street frontage.(minimum
of one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species
whenever possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less
than 3&1/2 inch caliper at time
of planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 00 feet
Front max: 10 feet
Rear: 15 feet
Side: 05 feet
Applicant may increase the
maximum front yard with a
Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For criteria
refer to Section 171.65.
a. Maximum building height:
45 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
70%
c. Maximum lot coverage:
90%
d. Frontage (min.) 25 feet
Applicant may vary these
dimensional standards with a
Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For criteria,
refer to Section 171.65
a. Banks and financial
institutions
b. Offices
c. Retail sales of goods &
services
d. Restaurants, except for
drive-through facilities
e. Neighborhood motor
vehicle service station
f. Professional medical
offices
g. Lodging, less than 12 units
h. Artists studios
i. Drycleaner/Laundry
The following uses are
permitted by Special Permit
from the Planning Board:
j. Drive-through establishment
(See special note 5.b.)
a. Alternate planting locations
within this zoning district may be
allowed when the Planning Board
determines that planting on the
same lot is not feasible. A
vegetation maintenance agreement
shall be provided by the applicant
to ensure that off-site plantings are
maintained and replaced when
necessary.
a. Existing trees shall be maintained
where feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in the
front or rear yard for each 25 feet
of street frontage.(minimum of
one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species whenever
possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less than
3&1/2 inch caliper at time of
planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 10 feet
Front max: 30 feet
Rear: 15 feet
Side: 15 feet
Applicant may increase the
maximum front yard with a
Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For criteria
refer to Section 171.65.
a. Maximum building height:
(not including decorative
towers or steeples)
45 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
70%
c. Frontage(min.) 80 feet
Applicant may vary these
dimensional standards with a Special
Permit from the Planning Board. For
criteria, refer to Section 171.65
a. Accessory uses
b. Governmental facility
c. Meeting hall
d. Educational facility
e. Library
f. Museum
g. Club house
h. Religious building
i. Visual and performing
arts center
j. Emergency services facility
a. Existing trees shall be maintained
where feasible.
b. The applicant is encouraged to use
native plant species whenever
possible.
a. Yard requirements
for public use structures
shall be those standards
established for accessory
structures in the district.
a. Dimensional requirements
for public use structures
Shall be those standards
established for accessory
structures in the district.
b. No minimum frontage
a. Parks
b. Playgrounds
c. Playing fields
d. Community open
space, recreational facility
a. The following special notes
refer to all applications within
each land use category in the
VCII District.
a. The following landscape
standards apply to all structires
constructed within the
VCII District.
a. The following landscape
standards apply to all structires
constructed within the
VCII District.
a. The following landscape
standards apply to all structires
constructed within the
VCII District.
a. The following landscape
standards apply to all
structures constructed
within the VCII District.
1.Land Use 2.Dimensions 3.Yards 4.Landscape 5.Special Notes
Village Center District II Village of Three Rivers Palmer, Massachusetts
LOCUS MAP
Not an official zoning map
C.
I.General II.Public III.Civic IV.Commercial Village Density
VI.Residential
Moderate Density
VII.Residentia l V.Industrial VII.Mixed Use
1. General Requirements
In the VCII District, the existing
uses of land and building shall
not be changed, altered, or enlarged,
and no new uses of land or construction
of new buildings will be permitted
except in conformance with the
provisions of this By-Law.
5. Special Permits
A. Uses allowed by Special Permit
from the Planning Board are listed in
the Land Use table of this Bylaw.
B. Submittal requirements and review
standards for Special Permits
are listed in Article V, Section 171.28
of the Palmer Zoning Bylaw.
2. Reference to Map
The VCII District is herein established
to include all areas designated
“VCI” as delineated on the
Zoning District Map of the Town
of Palmer, on file with the Planning
Board and the Town Clerk.
6. Prohibited Uses
The following uses are prohibited
within the VCII District:
a. Chemical manufacturing
b. Enameling, plating, and
painting (not including artist’s
studios)
c. Scrap or junk yards
d. Kennels
e. Retail operations over
40,000 square feet in size (except
in structures existing at the time
of adoption of this bylaw)
f. Mobile homes
g. Mineral extraction
3. Permitted Uses
In the VCII District, all permitted
uses are designated in the Land
Use table. Uses are clustered by use
type including Public, Civic, Commercial,
Mixed Use, Village Density
Residential, and Moderate Density
Residential. Standards and requirements
for proposed activities
in the VCII District, including
Land Use, Dimensions, Yards,
Landscape, and Special Notes are
located in this table
4. Site Plan Review
A. All applications in the VCII District
are subject to Site Plan Review by the
Planning Board with the following
exceptions:
1. Single family dwellings
2. Duplex dwellings
B. Submittal requirements and standards
for Site Plan Review are listed
in Article V, Section 171.29 of the
Palmer Zoning Bylaw.
7. Parking Requirements-Note
A. Detailed parking standards are presented
in Article XVIII, Section 171.95
(A)(2) of the Palmer Zoning Bylaw.
B. Requirements for handicapped access
and loading spaces are located in Article
XVIII, Section 171.97 of this bylaw.
8. Severability
The invalidity, unconstitutionality, or
illegality of any provisions of this bylaw
shall not have any effect upon the validity
constitutionality, or legality of any other
provision of this bylaw.
Village Center District III Village of Bondsville Palmer, Massachusetts
A. Purpose
Village Center District III (VCIII)
1. Purpose
It is the purpose of this bylaw to
allow for the orderly and planned
development of the Village of
Bondsville.
The bylaw seeks to encourage the
following characteristics:
• Residences, retail shops, offices,
civic facilities and parks will be
located in close proximity
so that these uses are within walking
distance of the village center.
•A broad range of housing types
and places of business will provide
a vital center for daily activities.
• A finite physical area will define
the downtown and provide a framework
for the continuation of a
strong sense of community.
2. Organization
The Village Center District III
bylaw is presented in three sections.
Section A describes the purpose
and organizational structure of the
bylaw. Section B describes general
requirements for proposals. Section
C presents a table of uses and standards
for proposed development in
the VCII District.
B. Requirements
a. Alternate planting
locations within this zoning
district may be allowed
when the Planning Board
determines that planting on
the same lot is not feasible.
A vegetation maintenance
agreement shall be provided
by the applicant to ensure
that off-site plantings are
maintained and replaced
when necessary.
a. Existing trees shall be maintained
where feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in the
front or rear yard for each 25 feet
of street frontage.(minimum of
one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species whenever
possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less than
3&1/2 inch caliper at time of
planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 00 feet
Front max: 10 feet
Rear: 30 feet
Side: 05 feet
Applicant may increase the maximum
front yard with a Special
Permit from the Planning Board. For
criteria refer to Section 171.65
a. Maximum building height:
45 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
70%
c. Maximum lot coverage:
90%
d. Frontage (min.) 25 feet
Applicant may vary these dimensional
standards with a Special Permit from
the Planning Board. For criteria, refer
to Section 171.65
Any combination of uses
allowed by right, or by
Special Permit, in this
zoning district may be located
within a building,
within inter-connected
buildings, or on the same lot.
Any proposed use in a mixed
use development that
requires a Special Permit
must obtain the approval of
the appropriate Special
Permit Authority.
a. Alternate planting
locations within this zoning
district may be allowed
when the Planning Board
determines that planting on
the same lot is not feasible.
A vegetation maintenance
agreement shall be provided
by the applicant to ensure
that off-site plantings are
maintained and replaced when
necessary.
a. Existing trees shall be maintained
where feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in the
front or rear yard for each 25 feet
of street frontage.(minimum of
one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species whenever
possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less than
3&1/2 inch caliper at time of
planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 10 feet
Front max: 20 feet
Rear: 25 feet
Side: 08 feet
Applicant may increase the maximum
front yard with a Special
Permit from the Planning Board. For
criteria refer to Section 171.65
a. Maximum building height:
35 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
70%
c. Maximum lot coverage:
70%
d. For Single-family detached:
Frontage(min) 25 feet
For Duplex:
Frontage(min) 60 feet
Applicant may vary these dimensional
standards with a Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For criteria, refer to
Section 171.65
a. Single-family detached
dwellings
b. Duplex dwelling
c. Accessory uses customary
to residential structures
a. Alternate planting
locations within this zoning
district may be allowed
when the Planning Board
determines that planting on
the same lot is not feasible.
A vegetation maintenance
agreement shall be provided
by the applicant to ensure
that off-site plantings are
maintained and replaced
when necessary.
b. Applicant may increase
the maximum front yard
with a Special Permit from
the Planning Board. For
criteria, refer to Section
171.65
a. Existing trees shall be maintained
where feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in the
front or rear yard for each 25 feet
of street frontage.(minimum of
one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species whenever
possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less than
3&1/2 inch caliper at time of
planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 10 feet
Front max: 20 feet
Rear: 30 feet
Side: 12 feet
b. For buildings, or portion
of buildings, with residential
uses on the ground floor, the
front yard shall be a
minimum of 5 feet.
c. See special note 5.b.
a. Maximum building height:
42 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
60%
c. Maximum lot coverage:
75%
d. For Apartment:
Frontage (min.) 70 feet
For Townhouse:
Frontage(min) 20 feet
Applicant may vary these
dimensional standards with a
Special Permit from the Planning
Board. For criteria, refer to
Section 171.65
a. Apartment buildings
(fewer than 5 units)
b. Townhouse dwelling
c. Accessory uses customary
to residential structures
The following uses are
permitted by Special Permit
from the Planning Board:
a.) Apartment buildings
over 5 units. Should be
Apartment buildings 5 units
or over
(amended ATM 5/14/01)
a. Alternate planting
locations within this
zoning district may be
allowed when the
Planning Board
determines that planting
on the same lot is not
feasible. A vegetation
maintenance agreement
shall be provided by the
applicant to ensure that
off-site plantings are
maintained and replaced
when necessary.
b. Drive through
establishments must
conform to requirements
of Section 171.91 of this
Article.
a. Existing trees shall be maintained
where feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in the
front or rear yard for each 25 feet
of street frontage.(minimum of
one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species whenever
possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less than
3&1/2 inch caliper at time of
planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 00 feet
Front max: 10 feet
Rear: 15 feet
Side: 05 feet
Applicant may increase the
maximum front yard with a
Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For criteria
refer to Section 171.65.
a. Maximum building height:
45 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
70%
c. Maximum lot coverage:
90%
d. Frontage (min.) 25 feet
Applicant may vary these
dimensional standards with a
Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For criteria,
refer to Section 171.65
a. Banks and financial
institutions
b. Offices
c. Retail sales of goods &
services
d. Restaurants, except for
drive-through facilities
e. Neighborhood motor
vehicle service station
f. Professional medical
offices
g. Lodging, less than 12
units
h. Artists studios
i. Drycleaner/Laundry
The following uses are
permitted by Special Permit
from the Planning Board:
j. Drive-through
establishment
(See special note 5.b.)
a. Alternate planting
locations within this
zoning district may be
allowed when the
Planning Board
determines that planting
on the same lot is not
feasible. A vegetation
maintenance agreement
shall be provided by the
applicant to ensure that
off-site plantings are
maintained and replaced
when necessary.
a. Existing trees shall be maintained
where feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in the
front or rear yard for each 25 feet
of street frontage.(minimum of
one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species whenever
possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less than
3&1/2 inch caliper at time of
planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 10 feet
Front max: 30 feet
Rear: 15 feet
Side: 15 feet
Applicant may increase the
maximum front yard with a
Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For criteria
refer to Section 171.65.
a. Maximum building height:
(not including decorative
towers or steeples)
45 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
70%
c. Frontage(min.) 80 feet
Applicant may vary these
dimensional standards with a
Special Permit from the Planning
Board. For criteria, refer to
Section 171.65
a. Accessory uses
b. Governmental
facility
c. Meeting hall
d. Educational facility
e. Library
f. Museum
g. Club house
h. Religious building
i. Visual and performing
arts center
j. Emergency services
facility.
a. Existing trees shall be maintained
where feasible.
b. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species whenever
possible.
a. Yard requirements
for public use structures
shall be those standards
established for accessory
structures in the district
a. Dimensional requirements for
public use structures shall be those
standards established for
accessory structures in the district.
b. No minimum frontage
a. Parks
b. Playgrounds
c. Playing fields
d. Community open
space, recreational
facility
a. The following special
notes refer to all
applications within each
land use category in the
VCIII district.
a. The following landscape
standards apply to all structures
constructed within the
VCIII District
a. The following yard
standards apply to all structures
constructed within the
VCIII District.
a. The following dimensional
standards apply to all structures
constructed within the
VCIII District.
a. The following uses are
permitted in all areas
within the VCIII District
subject to the standards
set forth in this bylaw.
1.Land Use 2.Dimensions 3.Yards 4.Landscape 5.Special Notes
LOCUS MAP
Not an official zoning map
VII. Mixed Use Moderate Density
VI.Residential
Village Density
V.Residential IV. Commercial III.Civic II.Public I.General
C.
1. General Requirements
In the VCIII District, the existing
uses of land and building shall
not be changed, altered, or enlarged,
and no new uses of land or construction
of new buildings will be permitted
except in conformance with the
provisions of this By-Law.
5. Special Permits
A. Uses allowed by Special Permit
from the Planning Board are listed in
the Land Use table of this Bylaw.
B. Submittal requirements and review
standards for Special Permits
are listed in Article V, Section 171.28
of the Palmer Zoning Bylaw.
2. Reference to Map
The VCIII District is herein established
to include all areas designated
“VCIII” as delineated on the
Zoning District Map of the Town
of Palmer, on file with the Planning
Board and the Town Clerk.
6. Prohibited Uses
The following uses are prohibited
within the VCIII District:
a. Chemical manufacturing
b. Enameling, plating, and
painting (not including artist’s
studios)
c. Scrap or junk yards
d. Kennels
e. Retail operations over
40,000 square feet in size (except
in structures existing at the time
of adoption of this bylaw)
f. Mobile homes
g. Mineral extraction
3. Permitted Uses
In the VCIII District, all permitted
uses are designated in the Land
Use table. Uses are clustered by use
type including Public, Civic, Commercial,
Mixed Use, Village Density
Residential, and Moderate Density
Residential. Standards and requirements
for proposed activities
in the VCI District, including
Land Use, Dimensions, Yards,
Landscape, and Special Notes are
located in this table
4. Site Plan Review
A. All applications in the VCIII District
are subject to Site Plan Review by the
Planning Board with the following
exceptions:
1. Single family dwellings
2. Duplex dwellings
B. Submittal requirements and standards
for Site Plan Review are listed
in Article V, Section 171.29 of the
Palmer Zoning Bylaw.
7. Parking Requirements-Note
A. Detailed parking standards are presented
in Article XVIII, Section 171.95
(A)(2) of the Palmer Zoning Bylaw.
B. Requirements for handicapped access
and loading spaces are located in Article
XVIII, Section 171.97 of this bylaw.
8. Severability
The invalidity, unconstitutionality, or
illegality of any provisions of this bylaw
shall not have any effect upon the validity
constitutionality, or legality of any other
provision of this bylaw.
Village Center District IV Village of Thorndike Palmer, Massachusetts
A. Purpose
Village Center District IV (VCIV)
1. Purpose
It is the purpose of this bylaw to
allow for the orderly and planned
development of the Village of
Thorndike.
The bylaw seeks to encourage the
following characteristics:
• Residences, retail shops, offices,
civic facilities and parks will be
located in close proximity
so that these uses are within walking
distance of the village center.
•A broad range of housing types
and places of business will provide
a vital center for daily activities.
• A finite physical area will define
the downtown and provide a framework
for the continuation of a
strong sense of community.
2. Organization
The Village Center District IV
bylaw is presented in three sections.
Section A describes the purpose
and organizational structure of the
bylaw. Section B describes general
requirements for proposals. Section
C presents a table of uses and standards
for proposed development in
the VCIV District.
B. Requirements
LOCUS MAP
Not an official zoning map
a. Alternate planting locations
within this zoning district may be
allowed when the Planning Board
determines that planting on the
same lot is not feasible. A
vegetation maintenance agreement
shall be provided by the applicant
to ensure that off-site plantings are
maintained and replaced when
necessary.
a. Existing trees shall be maintained
where feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in the
front or rear yard for each 25 feet
of street frontage.(minimum of
one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species whenever
possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less than
3&1/2 inch caliper at time of
planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 10 feet
Front max: 20 feet
Rear: 25 feet
Side: 08 feet
Applicant may increase the maximum
front yard with a Special
Permit from the Planning Board. For
criteria refer to Section 171.65
a. Maximum building height:
35 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
70%
c. Maximum lot coverage:
70%
d. For Single-family detached:
Frontage(min) 25 feet
e. For Duplex:
Frontage(min) 60 feet
a. Single-family detached
dwellings
b. Duplex dwelling
c. Accessory uses
customary to residential
structures
a. Alternate planting locations within this
zoning district may be allowed when the
Planning Board determines that planting
on the same lot is not feasible. A
vegetation maintenance agreement shall
be provided by the applicant to ensure
that off-site plantings are maintained and
replaced when necessary.
b. Applicant may increase the maximum
front yard with a Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For criteria, refer to
Section 171.65
a. Existing trees shall be maintained where
feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in the
front or rear yard for each 25 feet
of street frontage.(minimum of
one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species whenever
possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less than
3&1/2 inch caliper at time of
planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 00 feet*
Front max: 10 feet
Rear: 30 feet
Side: 05 feet
b. For buildings or portions of buildings
With residential uses on the ground floor,
the front yard shall be a minimum of
5 feet
c. See special note 5.b.
a. Maximum building height:
45 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
70%
c. Maximum lot coverage:
90%
d. Frontage (min) 25 feet
Applicant may vary these dimensional
standards with a Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For criteria, refer to
Section 171.65
Any combination of uses
allowed by right, or by Special
Permit, in this zoning district
may be located within a building,
within inter-connected
buildings,or on the same lot.
Any proposed use in a mixed
use development that requires
a Special Permit must obtain
the approval of the appropriate
Special Permit Authority
a. Alternate planting locations
within this zoning district may
be allowed when the Planning
Board determines that planting
on the same lot is not feasible.
A vegetation maintenance
agreement shall be provided
by the applicant to ensure that
off-site plantings are
maintained and replaced when
necessary.
a. Existing trees shall be maintained
where feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in the
front or rear yard for each 25 feet
of street frontage.(minimum of
one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species whenever
possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less than
3&1/2 inch caliper at time of
planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 10 feet
Front max: 20 feet
Rear: 30 feet
Side: 12 feet
Applicant may increase the maximum
front yard with a Special
Permit from the Planning Board. For
criteria refer to Section 171.65
a. Maximum building height:
42 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
60%
c. Maximum lot coverage:
75%
d. For Apartment:
Frontage(min) 70 feet
For Townhouse
Frontage(min) 20 feet
Applicant may vary these
dimensional standards with a Special
Permit from the Planning Board. For
criteria, refer to Section 171.65
a. Apartment buildings
(fewer than 5 units)
b. Townhouse dwelling
c. Accessory uses customary
to residential structures
The following uses are
permitted by Special Permit
from the Planning Board:
a.) Apartment buildings
over 5 units. Should be
Apartment buildings 5 units or
over
(amended ATM 5/14/01)
a. Alternate planting locations
within this zoning district may be
allowed when the Planning Board
determines that planting on the
same lot is not feasible. A
vegetation maintenance agreement
shall be provided by the applicant
to ensure that off-site plantings are
maintained and replaced when
necessary.
b. Applicant may increase the
maximum front yard with a
Special Permit from the Planning
Board. For criteria, refer to
Section 171.65
a. Existing trees shall be maintained
where feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in the
front or rear yard for each 25 feet
of street frontage.(minimum of
one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species whenever
possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less than
3&1/2 inch caliper at time of
planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 20 feet
Front max: 30 feet
Rear: 30 feet
Side: 30 feet
b. For buildings, or portion of
buildings, with residential uses on
the ground floor, the front yard shall
be a minimum of 5 feet.
c. See special note 5.b.
a. Maximum building height:
50 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
70%
c. Maximum lot coverage:
85%
d. No minimum frontage
Applicant may vary these
dimensional standards with a Special
Permit from the Planning Board. For
criteria, refer to Section 171.65
The following uses are
permitted in existing
structures by Special Permit
from the Planning Board:
a. Corporate offices
b. Warehousing
c. Light industrial
a. Alternate planting locations
within this zoning district may
be allowed when the Planning
Board determines that planting
on the same lot is not feasible.
A vegetation maintenance
agreement shall be provided
by the applicant to ensure that
off-site plantings are
maintained and replaced when
necessary.
b. Drive through
establishments must conform
to requirements of Section
171.91 of this Article.
a. Existing trees shall be
maintained where feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in
the front or rear yard for each 25
feet of street frontage.(minimum
of one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species
whenever possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less
than 3&1/2 inch caliper at time
of planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 00 feet
Front max: 10 feet
Rear: 15 feet
Side: 05 feet
Applicant may increase the
maximum front yard with a
Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For criteria
refer to Section 171.65.
a. Maximum building height:
45 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
70%
c. Maximum lot coverage:
90%
d. Frontage (min.) 25 feet
Applicant may vary these
dimensional standards with a
Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For criteria,
refer to Section 171.65
a. Banks and financial
institutions
b. Offices
c. Retail sales of goods &
services
d. Restaurants, except for
drive-through facilities
e. Neighborhood motor
vehicle service station
f. Professional medical
offices
g. Lodging, less than 12 units
h. Artists studios
i. Drycleaner/Laundry
The following uses are
permitted by Special Permit
from the Planning Board:
j. Drive-through establishment
(See special note 5.b.)
a. Alternate planting locations
within this zoning district may be
allowed when the Planning Board
determines that planting on the
same lot is not feasible. A
vegetation maintenance agreement
shall be provided by the applicant
to ensure that off-site plantings are
maintained and replaced when
necessary.
a. Existing trees shall be maintained
where feasible.
b. One tree shall be planted in the
front or rear yard for each 25 feet
of street frontage.(minimum of
one tree)
c. The applicant is encouraged to
use native plant species whenever
possible.
d. Trees shall measure not less than
3&1/2 inch caliper at time of
planting.
e. See special note 5.a.
a. The following yard
requirements shall apply:
Front min: 10 feet
Front max: 30 feet
Rear: 15 feet
Side: 15 feet
Applicant may increase the
maximum front yard with a
Special Permit from the
Planning Board. For criteria
refer to Section 171.65.
a. Maximum building height:
(not including decorative
towers or steeples)
45 feet
b. Maximum building coverage:
70%
c. Frontage(min.) 80 feet
Applicant may vary these
dimensional standards with a Special
Permit from the Planning Board. For
criteria, refer to Section 171.65
a. Accessory uses
b. Governmental facility
c. Meeting hall
d. Educational facility
e. Library
f. Museum
g. Club house
h. Religious building
i. Visual and performing
arts center
j. Emergency services facility
a. Existing trees shall be
maintained where feasible.
b. The applicant is encouraged
to use native plant species
whenever possible.
a. Yard requirements
for public use structures
shall be those standards
established for accessory
structures in the district.
a. Dimensional requirements
for public use structures
Shall be those standards
established for accessory
structures in the district.
b. No minimum frontage
a. Parks
b. Playgrounds
c. Playing fields
d. Community open
space, recreational facility
a. The following special notes
refer to all applications within
each land use category in the
VCIV District.
a. The following landscape
standards apply to all structires
constructed within the
VCIV District.
a. The following landscape
standards apply to all structires
constructed within the
VCIV District.
a. The following landscape
standards apply to all structires
constructed within the
VCIV District.
a. The following landscape
standards apply to all
structures constructed
within the VCIV District.
C. 1.Land Use 2.Dimensions 3.Yards 4.Landscape 5.Special Notes
I.General II.Public III.Civic IV.Commercial V.Industrial
Village Density
VI.Reside ntia l
Moderate Density
VII.Residentia l VII .Mixed Use
5. Special Permits
A. Uses allowed by Special Permit
from the Planning Board are listed in
the Land Use table of this Bylaw.
B. Submittal requirements and review
standards for Special Permits
are listed in Article V, Section 171.28
of the Palmer Zoning Bylaw.
1. General Requirements
In the VCIV District, the existing
uses of land and building shall
not be changed, altered, or enlarged,
and no new uses of land or construction
of new buildings will be permitted
except in conformance with the
provisions of this By-Law.
2. Reference to Map
The VCIV District is herein established
to include all areas designated
“VCIV” as delineated on the
Zoning District Map of the Town
of Palmer, on file with the Planning
Board and the Town Clerk.
6. Prohibited Uses
The following uses are prohibited
within the VCIV District:
a. Chemical manufacturing
b. Enameling, plating, and
painting (not including artist’s
studios)
c. Scrap or junk yards
d. Kennels
e. Retail operations over
40,000 square feet in size (except
in structures existing at the time
of adoption of this bylaw)
f. Mobile homes
g. Mineral extraction
3. Permitted Uses
In the VCIV District, all permitted
uses are designated in the Land
Use table. Uses are clustered by use
type including Public, Civic, Commercial,
Mixed Use, Village Density
Residential, and Moderate Density
Residential. Standards and requirements
for proposed activities
in the VCIV District, including
Land Use, Dimensions, Yards,
Landscape, and Special Notes are
located in this table
7. Parking Requirements-Note
A. Detailed parking standards are presented
in Article XVIII, Section 171.95
(A)(2) of the Palmer Zoning Bylaw.
B. Requirements for handicapped access
and loading spaces are located in Article
XVIII, Section 171.97 of this bylaw.
4. Site Plan Review
A. All applications in the VCIV District
are subject to Site Plan Review by the
Planning Board with the following
exceptions:
1. Single family dwellings
2. Duplex dwellings
B. Submittal requirements and standards
for Site Plan Review are listed
in Article V, Section 171.29 of the
Palmer Zoning Bylaw.
8. Severability
The invalidity, unconstitutionality, or
illegality of any provisions of this bylaw
shall not have any effect upon the validity
constitutionality, or legality of any other
provision of this bylaw.
Article XI
Urban Renewal Industrial Park District
§171-66. Urban Renewal Industrial Park District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide the Town of Palmer with a mix of sound,
clean industrial development and high-density residential uses while conserving natural resources
and protecting and enhancing the environment.
B. Uses Permitted.
(1) Industrial
(a) Plants for the manufacture, light fabrication, processing, conversion, alteration,
finishing, assembly and wholesaling of products, provided that such use does not
create a hazard or nuisance through danger of pollution, fire or explosion, noise,
vibration, dust, waste, smoke, fumes or odor.
(b) Research, experimental or testing laboratories, subject to performance standards stated
in Subsection B (1) (a) above.
(c) Public safety building or public utility building.
(d) Uses accessory to primary uses, including restaurant (totaling no more than three
percent (3%) of the total space of the primary use), warehousing, freight depot, off
street parking, off street loading and other uses which are clearly incidental to the
primary uses and meet the performance standards of the primary uses.
(e) Warehousing, storage and transfer of lumber and/or steel and such other building
materials. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(2) Public open space.
(a) Open spaces shall be retained, insofar as possible, in their natural state except for
passive recreation facilities such as trails, walkways, benches, etc. (Other open spaces
as specifically indicated in the Palmer Industrial Urban Renewal Plan, dated 1972,
may be used for active recreation purposes, such as playgrounds or ball fields.)
(3) Residential.
(a) Multi-family dwellings for three (3) or more families, including but not limited to
apartments, townhouses or row houses and held as condominiums or cooperatives, or
other forms of ownership. Density shall not exceed more than twenty (20) dwelling
units per acre.
(b) Permitted uses shall also include uses accessory to the housing use, such as off-street
parking.
C. Building Requirements. All parcels of land within the project area shall conform to the
following requirements:
(1) Site coverage by buildings.
(a) Industrial use: not exceeding forty percent (40%) of the parcel area.
(b) Residential use: not exceeding twenty percent (20%) of the parcel area.
(2) Building height.
(a) Industrial use: not exceeding forty (40) feet.
(b) Residential use: not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet or three (3) stories.
(3) Building setback.
(a) Industrial use: no requirement adjacent to a railroad right-of-way and not less than
fifty (50) feet from all other property lines.
(b) Residential use: no less than thirty (30) feet from a public street, eighty (80) feet from
the top bank of the Swift River, and thirty-five (35) from all other property lines.
D. Parking and loading standards.
(1) Off street parking spaces shall be provided in an amount sufficient to serve each use and so
located to provide safe and convenient access.
(a) Industrial. For industrial uses, a minimum of one (1) parking space shall be provided
for each two (2) employees on the maximum work shift or one (1) parking space for
every seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of building area used for production
whichever is greater.
(b) Residential. For residential uses, a minimum of one and one-half (1½) parking spaces
shall be provided for each dwelling unit other than those designed for the elderly in
which case a minimum of one (1) space per three (3) dwelling units will suffice. Each
space shall contain at least one hundred eighty (180) square feet in area and shall be
provided with proper ingress and egress.
(c) Off-street parking areas shall not be located within twenty (20) feet of a public way.
Parking areas shall be adequately drained and paved with an all-weather, dust free
surface. Access at the street line shall be limited to well defined points, and in no case
shall there be unrestricted access along the length of the street.
(2) Off-street loading
(a) A minimum of one (1) off street loading space shall be provided for the
first ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross building floor area and an
additional space shall be provided for each twenty-five thousand (25,000)
square feet thereafter. The minimum size of each loading space shall be
twelve (12) feet wide by thirty-five (35) feet long, except that the width of
each space may be reduced to ten (10) feet where there are adjacent spaces
without intervening obstructions.
(b) Loading spaces shall be located on the sides of buildings which do not front on a
street.
E. Screening
Screening in the form of evergreen shrubs and/or trees shall be provided and maintained along the
boundaries of any parcel abutting open space areas and along the boundary of the Urban Renewal
Industrial Park District. This screening shall be adequate to effectively screen the industrial uses,
including parking areas from the open space areas and other areas surrounding the project area.
F. Signs.
(1) Signs for industrial and recreational uses shall be directly related to the principal use of the
parcel upon which they are located, except that one (1) announcement sign for the industrial
park and its occupants may be located at the major entrance to the area.
(2) One (1) freestanding sign of not more than twelve (12) square feet in area per face is
permitted on each separate use parcel. In addition, signs attached flat against the wall of a
building are permitted, provided that they do not exceed one (1) square foot in area for each
linear foot of horizontal length of facade on which they are mounted. A limited number of
signs, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area each, are permitted as necessary for directional
purposes to entrances and exits, parking and loading areas. Flashing signs, animated signs, roof
signs and billboards are prohibited.
G. Exterior lighting.
All exterior lights shall be designed and placed so that they do not reflect into adjacent buildings
or towards areas outside the project area.
Article XII
Industrial Districts
§171-67. Industrial A District.
A. Purpose: The industrial zones are for areas within the Town that are reserved for industrial uses
and for areas that are of mixed use, but have a strong industrial orientation. The regulations
promote areas which consist of uses and developments which will support the economic viability of
the zoning district and the town. Review and approval of these uses are required to be certain that
there will be protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public, address area character and
environmental concerns.
B. Uses Permitted with Site Plan Approval in Industrial A.
(1) Any manufacturing or industrial use, including processing, fabrication and assembly,
provided that no such use shall be permitted which would be detrimental or offensive or tend to
reduce property values in the same or adjoining districts by reason of dirt, odor, fumes, smoke,
gas, sewage, refuse, noise, excessive vibration or danger of explosion or fire. A list of uses
allowed with site plan approval follows:
(a) Manufacturing.
(b) Processing.
(c) Packing.
(d) Office Buildings.
(e) Public Utility Uses.
(f) Research Laboratories and Research Facilities.
(g) Accessory buildings and uses located on the same lot with the main buildings.
(h) Warehousing, including but not limited to temporary storage containers, storage
buildings and industrial storage.
(i) As an accessory use to a permitted manufacturing or warehousing use, retail sales
shall be permitted, but in no case shall retail sales space exceed fifteen (15%) percent
or the total floor area of the principal building.
(j) Farming or other agricultural uses.
(k) Above ground radio and television broadcasting stations and towers,
telecommunication towers and accessory structures. (Amended ATM, May 14, 2001,
Article 29)
(l) Iron, steel or other metal manufacture or processing, drop forging with power
hammer, boiler works, heavy weight casting including galvanizing or other treatment.
C. Uses which may be allowed by Special Permit and Site Plan Approval in Industrial A.
(Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29)
(1) Regular open air-storage of materials, merchandise, products or equipment needed in
connection with, or produced by, the principal use of the premises. These uses shall include,
but not be limited to, Lumber Yards and Contractors Yards.
(2) Large Scale Conference/Entertainment Facilities
(3) Sales and Service Uses (Amended – Special Town Meeting – June 24, 2002. Article 2)
D. Uses which may be allowed by Special Permit and Site Plan Approval in Industrial B:
(1) Any manufacturing or industrial use, including processing, fabrication and
assembly, provided that no such use shall be permitted which would be detrimental
or offensive or tend to reduce property values in the same or adjoining districts by
reason of dirt, odor, fumes, smoke, gas, sewage, refuse, noise, excessive vibration or
danger of explosion or fire. A list of uses allowed by special permit and site plan
approval follows:
(a) Manufacturing.
(b) Processing.
(c) Packing.
(d) Office Buildings.
(e) Public Utility Uses.
(f) Research Laboratories and Research Facilities.
(g) Accessory buildings and uses located on the same lot with the main buildings.
(h) As an accessory use to a permitted manufacturing or warehousing use, retail sales
shall be permitted, but in no case shall retail sales space exceed fifteen (15%) percent
or the total floor area of the principal building. (Amended ATM, May 14, 2001,
Article 29)
E. Prohibited Uses in Industrial A or B.
(1) Abattoir.
(2) Ammonia, chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture.
(3) Commercial coal yard, coal storage or commercial salt storage.
(4) Creosote manufacturing.
(5) Distillation of coal, wood or bones.
(6) Fertilizer or potash manufacturing or refining.
(7) Glue or size manufacturing or process involving recovery from fish or animal offal.
(8) Leather processing.
(9) Paint manufacture.
(10) Incineration of infectious and biogenetic research material.
(11) Waste hauling establishments.
(12) Recycling centers.
F. Prohibited Uses in Industrial B.
(1) Warehousing as a primary use.
G. Special Guidelines:
(1) All requirements as outlined in Article V for Special Permit and Site Plan Approval shall
apply.
(2) Landscaping and Buffer requirements in Article XVI shall be followed.
(3) Parking and Loading requirements are outlined in Article XVIII.
(4) All other applicable sections of this ordinance shall be adhered to. (Amended Ord 2007- 07,
RTCM 3/7/07)
Article XIII
Floodplain District
§171-68. Floodplain District. (Revised ATM – June 7, 2004)
A. Purpose.
(1) The purposes of this district are:
(a) To provide that lands in the Town of Palmer subject to seasonal or periodic flooding
as described hereinafter shall not be used for residence or other purposes in such a
manner as to endanger the health or safety of the occupant thereof.
(b) To protect persons and property within the Town of Palmer from hazards of flood
inundation by assuring the continuation of natural flow patterns and the maintenance
of adequate and safe floodwater storage capacity.
(c) To protect the community against pollution and costs which may be incurred when
unsuitable uses occur along watercourses, wetlands, ponds, and reservoirs or in areas
subject to flooding.
(2) The Floodplain District is established as an overlay district to all other districts. All
development, including structural and nonstructural activities, whether permitted by right or by
special permit, must be in compliance with MGL C. 131, §40, and with the requirements of the
Massachusetts State Building Code pertaining to construction in floodplains.
B. District Delineation.
(1) The general boundaries of the Floodplain District are shown on the Town of Palmer Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated November 4, 1981, as Zones A, Al-30 to indicate the one
hundred year (100) floodplain. The exact boundaries of the district are defined by the one
hundred (100) year water surface elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the
flood profiles contained in the Flood Insurance Study, dated May 4, 1981. The floodway
boundaries are delineated on the Town of Palmer Flood Boundary-Floodway Map (FBFM),
dated November 4, 1981, and further defined by the Floodway Data Tables contained in the
Flood Insurance Study. These two (2) maps, as well as the accompanying study, are
incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the Planning Board.
(2) The above-described Floodplain District is hereinafter also referred to as the "floodplain".
The floodway is hereby defined to include both the area shown as within the floodway on the
above-referenced maps and the area within the floodplain which lies ten (10) feet or more
below the elevation of the floodplain limits. The boundaries of the floodway shall be
determined by the limits of the more extensive of the aforesaid areas.
(3) Within Zone A, where the one hundred (100) year flood elevation is not provided on the
FIRM, the developer/applicant shall obtain any existing flood elevation data and it shall be
reviewed by the Building Inspector for its reasonable utilization toward meeting the elevation or
floodproofing requirements, as appropriate, of this Article and of the State Building Code. If
the data is sufficiently detailed and accurate it shall be relied upon to require compliance with
this Chapter and the State Building Code.
(4) Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision proposals or other developments
greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, within unnumbered A
zones.
C. Notification of Watercourse Alteration
(1) Notify in a rivervine situation, the following of any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse:
(a) Adjacent Communities
(b) NFIP State Coordinator
Massachusetts Office of Water Resources
251 Causeway Street
Suite 600-700
Boston, Ma. 02114-2104
(c) NFIP Program Specialist
FEMA Region 1 Room 462
J.W. McCormack Post Office and Courthouse
Boston, Ma. 02109
D. Permitted Uses.
(1) The following uses of low flood damage potential and causing no obstruction to flood flows
shall be allowed, provided that they are permitted in the underlying district and they do not
require structures, fill or storage of materials or equipment:
(a) Outdoor recreational uses, including fishing, boating, play areas, etc.
(b) Conservation of water, plants and wildlife.
(c) Wildlife management areas, foot, bicycle and/or horse paths.
E. Special Permit Uses.
(1) Uses which may be established in the floodplain, but not in the floodway, by special permit
in accordance with the regulations in Article V - Administration and Enforcement.
(a) Nonresidential buildings, structures, or uses which comply in all respects with the
provisions of the underlying district, including excavation, filling, and storage of
equipment or materials.
(b) Construction and maintenance of at-grade roads, driveways, utilities and other
associated roadway facilities when access to land that is not situated in the floodplain
is not possible because of ownership patterns or the provisions of the rules and
regulations governing subdivision of land in the Town of Palmer, Massachusetts.
F. Use Regulations.
(1) Reference to Existing Regulations.
(a.) The floodplain district is established as an overlay district to all other districts. All
development in the district, including structural and non-structural activities, whether
permitted by right or by special permit must be in compliance with Chapter 131, §40
of the Massachusetts General Laws and with the following:
[1] Section of the Massachusetts State Building Code which addresses floodplain and
coastal high hazard areas. (currently 780 CMR 3107.0 “Flood Resistant
Construction”
[2] Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
.(currently 310 CMR 10.00)
[3] Inland Wetlands Restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 13.00).
[4] Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage, DEP.
(currently 310 CMR 15, Title 5)
(2) Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the above referenced state
regulations may only be granted in accordance with the required variance procedures of these
state regulations.
G. General Regulations:
(1) The portion of any lot within the area delineated in Subsection B hereof may be used to
meet the area and yard requirements for the district or districts in which the remainder of the lot
is situated.
(2) All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements to existing
structures and other development, are prohibited unless certification by a registered professional
engineer is provided by the applicant, demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in
any increase in flood levels.
(3) All Substantial improvements to existing residential structures must have their lowest floor,
including basements, elevated to or above the base flood levels.
(4) All new non-residential structures and substantial improvements to existing structures must
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated or floodproofed to or above the base flood
level.
(5) Mobile homes are prohibited within the floodway.
Article XIV
Water Supply Protection District
§171-69. Water Supply Protection District.
A. Purpose. To promote health, safety and welfare of the community by protecting and preserving
the surface and groundwater resources of the Town and the region from any use of land or
buildings which may reduce the quality and quantity of its water resources.
B. Scope of Authority. The water supply protection district is an overlay district and shall be
superimposed on the other districts established by this ordinance. All regulations of the Town of
Palmer Zoning ordinance applicable to such underlying districts shall remain in effect, except that
where the Water Supply Protection District imposes additional regulations, such regulations shall
prevail. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
C. District Delineation.
(1) The Water Supply Protection District is herein established to include all lands within the
Town of Palmer lying within the primary and secondary recharge areas of groundwater aquifers
and watershed areas of reservoirs which now or may in the future provide public water supply.
The map entitled "Aquifer Protection District", Town of Palmer, on file with the Town Clerk,
delineates the boundaries of the district.
(2) Where the bounds delineated are in doubt or in dispute, the burden of proof shall be upon
the owner(s) of the land in question to show where they should properly be located. At the
request of the owner(s) the Town may engage a professional hydrogeologist to determine more
accurately the location and extent of an aquifer or primary recharge area, and may charge the
owner(s) for all or part of the cost of the investigation.
D. Definitions.
Groundwater: All water found beneath the surface of the ground.
Watershed: Lands lying adjacent to watercourses and surface water bodies which create the
catchment or drainage areas of such water.
Impervious Surfaces: Materials or structures on or above the ground that do not allow
precipitation to infiltrate the underlying soil.
Leachable Wastes: Waste materials including solid wastes, sludge and pesticide and fertilizer
wastes capable of releasing water-borne contaminants to the environment.
Trucking Terminal: Business which services or repairs commercial trucks which are not owned
by the business.
Hazardous Waste: A waste which is hazardous to human health or the environment. Hazardous
wastes have been designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under 40CFR 250 and
the Regulations of the Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Management Act, MGL, Chapter 21C.
Aquifer: Geologic formation composed of rock or sand and gravel that contain significant
amounts of potentially recoverable Potable water. Aquifer locations in the Town of Palmer are
depicted on the most recent map entitled “Aquifer Protection District Map – Jan 2006 as Amended
by STCM March 23,2005. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
Primary Aquifer Recharge Area: Areas which are underlain by surficial geologic deposits
including glaciofluvial or lacustrine, stratified drift deposits or alluvium or swamp deposits, and in
which the prevailing direction of groundwater flow is toward the area of influence of water supply
wells.
Hazardous Material: Material including but not limited to, any materials,in whatever form, which
because of its quantity, concentration, chemical, corrosive, flammable, reactive, toxic, infectious or
radioactive characteristics, either separately or in combination with any substance or substances,
constitutes a present or potential threat to human health, safety, welfare, or to the environment,
when improperly stored, treated, transported, disposed of, used, or otherwise managed. The term
shall not include oil.
Secondary Aquifer Recharge Area: Areas which are underlain by surficial geologic deposits
including till or bedrock, and in which the prevailing direction of surface waterflow is toward
public water supply wells or potential sites for such wells.
E. Permitted Uses.
(1) The following uses are permitted within the Water Supply Protection District, provided that
they comply with all applicable restrictions in this ordinance, including but not limited to this
Section. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(a) Single family residences.
(b) Residential accessory uses, including garages, driveways, private roads, utility rights
of way, and on site wastewater disposal systems.
(c) Agricultural uses such as farming, grazing and horticulture.
(d) Forestry and nursery uses.
(e) Outdoor recreational uses, including fishing, boating and play areas.
(f) Conservation of water, plants, and wildlife; wildlife management areas.
(g) Excavation for earth removal, provided that the requirements of §171-69,G,(1) are
met, and an earth removal permit is granted by the Planning Board.
(h) Childcare facilities and family day care homes as defined in M.G.L. Chapter 40A.
(i) Structures for educational or religious purposes.
F. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited within the Water Supply Protection District.
(1) Business and industrial uses, not agricultural, including but not limited to metal plating,
chemical manufacturing, wood preserving, furniture stripping, dry cleaning, and auto body
repair, which generate, use, treat, process, store or dispose of hazardous wastes, except for the
following:
(a) Very small quantity generators of hazardous waste, as defined by 310 CMR 30.00 as
amended, which generate less than twenty (20) kilograms or six (6) gallons of
hazardous waste per month may be allowed by Special Permit in accordance with
§171-69 J. of this ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(b) Household hazardous waste collection centers or events operated pursuant to 310
CMR 30.390 as amended.
(c) Waste oil retention facilities required by M.G.L. C. 21. §52A.
(d) Treatment works approved by Mass. Department of Environmental Protection and
designed in accordance with 314 CMR 5.00 for the treatment of contaminated ground
or surface waters.
(2) Business or industrial uses, not agricultural, which dispose of or process wastewaters on
site.
(3) Trucking terminals, bus terminals, gasoline sales, automotive service and repair shops,
commercial fuel oil storage or sales.
(4) Car washes, except when located on public water and sewer.
(5) Any floor drainage systems in existing facilities, in industrial or commercial process areas,
which discharge to the ground without a DEP permit or authorization.
(6) The storage of sludge and septage, unless such storage is in compliance with 310 CMR
32.30 and 310 CMR 32.21.
(7) Solid waste landfills, dumps, auto recycling, auto graveyards, junk and salvage yards,
landfilling or storage of sludge and septage with the exception of the disposal of brush or
stumps.
(8) Storage of liquid hazardous materials, as defined in MGL C. 21E, and or liquid petroleum
products of any kind, except for the following:
(a) Storage which is incidental to:
[1] Normal household use and outdoor maintenance or the heating of a structure.
[2] Waste oil retention facilities required by Mass. General Laws C. 21, §52A.
[3] Emergency generators required by statute, rule or regulations.
[4] Treatment works approved by the Mass. Department of Environmental Protection
designed in accordance with 314 CMR 5.00 for the treatment of contaminated
ground or surface waters, provided that such storage shall be in a free standing
above ground container within a structure or within the basement of a structure,
within a diked, impermeable area sufficient to contain the volume of the tank plus
ten percent (10%) to prevent spills or leaks from reaching groundwater, and
provided that the storage tanks and piping must comply with all applicable
provisions of 527 CMR 9.00 Massachusetts Board of Fire Prevention regulations.
(b) Replacement of storage tanks or systems for the keeping, dispensing, or storing of
gasoline, which existed at the time of adoption of this ordinance provided that:
(Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
[1] All such replacement storage tanks or systems shall be located underground as
required by mass. Board of Fire Prevention regulations 527 CMR 14.
[2] All such storage systems shall be protected by one of the secondary containment
systems specified in Mass. Board of Fire Prevention regulations 527 CMR
9.08(3).
[3] The head of the Fire Department may deny an application for tank replacement, or
approve it subject to conditions if he/she determines that it constitutes a danger to
public or private water supplies in accordance with 527 CMR 9.26 (4) (d).
(c) Replacement of all other storage tanks for liquid petroleum products other than
gasoline, which must be above ground, in accordance with §171-69,F.(8) (a) above.
(9) Outdoor storage of salt, de-icing materials, pesticides or herbicides.
(10) Dumping or disposal on the ground, in water bodies, or in residential septic systems of any
toxic chemical, including but not limited to septic system cleaners which contain toxic
chemicals such as methylene chloride and 1-1-1 trichlorethane, or other household hazardous
wastes. (See list of prohibited chemicals at Board of Health or Town Clerk's Office)
(11) Stockpiling and disposal of snow or ice removed from highways and streets located
outside the Water Supply Protection District that contains sodium chloride, calcium chloride,
chemically treated abrasives or other chemicals used for snow and ice removal.
(12) Wastewater Treatment works subject to 314 CMR 5.00 (any treatment works which
discharge contaminants to the ground, except sanitary discharges less than fifteen thousand
(15,000) gallons per day which are in compliance with Title V) except the following:
(a) The replacement or repair of an existing system(s) that will not result in a design
capacity greater than the design capacity of the existing system(s).
(b) The replacement of an existing subsurface sewage disposal system(s) with wastewater
treatment works that will not result in a design capacity greater that the design
capacity of the existing system(s).
(c) Treatment works designed for the treatment of contaminated ground or surface waters
subject to 314 CMR 5.00.
G. Restricted uses. The following are restricted in the Water Supply Protection District:
(1) Excavation for removal of earth, loam, sand, gravel and other soils or mineral substances
shall not extend closer than five (5) feet above the historical high groundwater table (as
determined from on-site monitoring wells and historical water table fluctuation data compiled
by the United States Geological survey whichever is higher). Monitoring wells shall be
installed by the property owner in advance of excavation to verify groundwater elevations. In
order to verify changes in elevations and direction of flow through triangulations, three (3)
monitoring wells shall be installed. The Planning Board shall have the option to require
additional monitoring wells as appropriate to the site. The number and location of monitoring
wells shall be based upon the slope of the terrain and the size of the parcel to be developed.
(2) This section shall not apply to excavations incidental to permitted uses, including but not
limited to providing for the installation or maintenance of structural foundations, freshwater
ponds, utility conduits or on site sewage disposal or to excavation sites less than five (5) acres
in size;
(a) Access road(s) to extractive operation sites shall include a gate or other secure
mechanism to restrict public access to the site.
(b) Upon completion of earth removal operations, all altered areas shall be restored with
topsoil and vegetative plantings suitable to control erosion on the site.
(3) Sodium chloride for ice control shall be used at the minimum salt to sand ratio which is
consistent with the public highway safety requirements, and its use shall be eliminated on roads
which may be closed to the public in the winter.
(4) The storage of sodium chloride, calcium chloride, chemically treated abrasives or other
chemicals used for the removal of ice and snow on roads shall be covered and located on a
paved surface, with berms within a structure designed to prevent the generation and escape of
contaminated run-off or leachate.
(5) Fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, lawn care chemicals, or other leachable materials shall be
used in accordance with the Lawn Care Regulations of the Massachusetts Pesticide Board, 333
(CMR 10.03 (30,31), as amended, with manufacturer’s label instructions and all other necessary
precautions to minimize adverse impacts on surface and groundwater.
(6) Installation of on-site sewage disposal systems shall not be installed in areas where soil
percolation rates are faster than two (2) minutes per inch without additional measures imposed
by the Board of Health. (See Board of Health Regulations)
(7) The storage of commercial fertilizers and soil conditioners shall be within structures
designed to prevent the generation and escape of contaminated run-off or leachate.
(8) To the extent feasible, all new permanent animal manure storage areas shall be covered
and/or contained to prevent the generation and escape of contaminated run-off or leachate.
(9) All liquid hazardous materials as defined in M.G.L. Chapter 21E, must be stored either in a
free standing container within a building, or in a free standing container above ground level
with protection to contain a spill the size of the container's total storage capacity.
H. Drainage.
(1) To the extent feasible, all run-off from impervious surfaces shall be recharged on site by
being diverted toward areas covered with vegetation for surface infiltration. Such run-off shall
not be discharged directly to rivers, streams or other surface water bodies. Dry wells shall be
used only where other methods are infeasible, and shall be preceded by oil, grease and sediment
traps to facilitate removal of contamination. All detention basins and similar drainage
structures shall be permanently maintained in full working order by the owner(s).
I. Area Regulations.
(1) Within the primary aquifer recharge area the minimum allowable lot size shall be sixty
thousand (60,000) square feet in areas not served by municipal sewerage systems.
J. Special Permit Uses
(1) Uses allowed by Special Permit. Permitted uses are specified in Section E, in addition, the
following uses may be allowed by Special Permit obtained from the Planning Board:
(a) Commercial, industrial, governmental, or educational uses which are allowed in the
underlying district, and which are not prohibited in Section F.
(b) Any enlargement, intensification or alteration of an existing commercial or industrial
use.
(c) The rendering impervious of more than fifteen percent (15%) or twenty-five hundred
(2,500) square feet of any lot, provided that a system for artificial recharge of
precipitation to groundwater is developed, which shall not result in degradation of
groundwater (See §171-69, H)
(2) Requirements for Special Permit in the Water Supply Protection District. The applicant
shall file six (6) copies of a site plan prepared by a qualified professional with the Special
Permit Granting Authority. The site plan shall at minimum include the following information
where pertinent.
(a) A complete list of chemicals, pesticides, fuels and other potentially hazardous
materials to be used or stored on the premises in quantities greater than those
associated with normal household use.
(b) Those businesses using or storing such hazardous materials shall file a hazardous
materials management plan with the Planning Board, Hazardous Materials
Coordinator, Fire Chief, and Board of Health which shall include:
[1] Provisions to protect against the discharge of hazardous materials or wastes to the
environment due to spillage, accidental damage, corrosion, leakage or vandalism,
including spill containment and clean up procedures.
[2] Provisions for indoor, secured storage of hazardous materials and wastes with
impervious floor surfaces.
[3] Evidence of compliance with the Regulations of the Massachusetts Hazardous
Waste Management Act 310 CMR 30, including obtaining an EPA identification
number from the Mass Department of Environmental Protection. .
[4] The Board of Health shall be charged with the enforcement of this §171-69.
J.(2)(b).
(c) Drainage recharge features and provisions to prevent loss of recharge.
(d) Provisions to control soil erosion and sedimentation, soil compaction, and to prevent
seepage from sewer pipes.
(e) Evidence of compliance with the Regulations of the Massachusetts Hazardous Waste
Management Act 310 CMR 30.
3. Additional Procedures for Special Permit in the Water Supply Protection District:
(a) The Special permit Granting Authority shall follow all special permit procedures
contained in the zoning ordinance. In addition, the Planning Board shall refer copies
of the application to the board of Health, Conservation Commission, Town Engineer,
and Water Commissioners of the appropriate district which shall review the
application, and following a vote of the Board/Department, shall submit their
recommendations and comments to the Planning Board. Town Agencies which desire
to make recommendations shall do so at the Public Hearing of the SPGA. (Special
Permit Granting Authority).
(b) After notice and public hearing, and after due consideration of the reports and
recommendations of the Board/Departments, the Planning Board may grant such a
Special Permit provided that it finds that the proposed use:
[1] Will not, during construction or thereafter, have an adverse environmental impact
on groundwater resources in the district.
[2] Will not adversely affect the existing or potential quality and quantity of water in
the Water Supply Protection District.
[3] Is appropriate to the natural topography, soils and other characteristics of the site
to be developed.
[4] Has adequate public sewerage and water facilities.
K. Nonconforming Uses in the Water Supply Protection District.
(1) Nonconforming uses which were lawfully existing, begun or in receipt of a building or
special permit prior to the first publication of notice of public hearing for this ordinance may be
continued. Such non-conforming uses may be extended or altered, provided that the applicant
receives a Special Permit from the Planning Board which shall determine if the proposed
change would increase the danger of groundwater pollution and thus be “substantially more
detrimental to the neighborhood” as specified in M.G.L., Chapter 40A, §6. (Amended Ord 2007-
07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(a) Applicants shall follow procedures specified in Section 171-69.J. of this ordinance.
(Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
Article XV
Special Permit and Special Exception Conditions
In addition to the general conditions and procedures established in Article V of this ordinance for all
special permits and special exception uses, the following additional requirements and procedures shall
apply as indicated for the following uses: (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-73. Earth Products Excavation Operations.
Earth products excavation operation shall include the removal of sand, gravel, loam, sod or other earth
materials. Rock quarry operations shall be prohibited within the Town of Palmer. For the removal of
sand, gravel, loam, sod or other earth materials, other than that which is incidental to and in connection
with the construction of a building for which a permit has been issued in accordance with Article V,
and for processing and treating raw materials, the following conditions shall govern:
A. Earth Products Excavation Operation
(1) The Special Permit Granting Authority may issue a special permit and site plan approval for
the removal of sand, gravel, loam, sod or other earth materials from any property within the
Town of Palmer in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for the Development, Operation
and Closeout of Earth Removal Operations as adopted and amended by the SPGA.
(2) An earth products excavation operation will only be permitted on those lots considered by
the Planning Board to have suitable access onto roads of sufficient width and capacity to
support maximum projected loads.
(3) No permit for an earth products excavation operation shall be issued if such an operation
will, in the opinion of the Planning Board, cause any of the following:
(a) Endanger the public health and safety.
(b) Constitute a nuisance.
(c) Result in clear detriment to the normal use of adjacent property by reason of noise,
dust or vibration.
(d) Result in traffic hazards in residential areas or excessive congestion on, or physical
damage to, public roads.
(e) Unacceptable depletion of natural resources other than the earth products proposed
for excavation. In addition, no such operation shall be permitted in the WSP District if
such operation will lower the level of the water table, interfere with the natural flow
pattern of any watercourse, or reduce the flood storage capacity of any watercourse.
(4) Any earth products excavation operation is subject to special permit and site plan approval
as well as to the Rules and Regulations for the Development, Operation and Closeout of Earth
Removal Operations as adopted and amended by the SPGA.
(5) On site crushing will not be allowed in any residential district except under the following
circumstances, and only when all of the following can be met:
(a) Crushing will only be allowed as a use incidental to earth removal.
(b) Crushing will only be allowed at closeout where such activity is necessary to allow
the removal of material and or debris from the site.
(c) The Planning Board shall have the authority to place limits on the hours and days of
operation and duration of time such activity will be allowed.
(d) Crushing will only be allowed by special permit when the applicant can demonstrate
that there is a need for such activity in conjunction with closeout of the entire gravel
operation or a portion of the operation.
(6) On site screening will not be allowed in any residential district except under the following
circumstances, and only when all of the following can be met:
(a) Screening will only be allowed as a use incidental to earth removal.
(b) The Planning Board shall have the authority to place limits on the hours and days of
operation and duration of time such activity will be allowed.
(c) Screening will only be allowed when it is requested and approved as part of the
special permit for earth removal and when the applicant can demonstrate that there is
a need for such activity in conjunction with the operation.
B. Exemptions.
(1) The removal of earth material in any of the following operations shall be exempt from this
section:
(a) The removal of less than five hundred (500) cubic yards of material in the aggregate in
any year from any one lot.
(b) The transfer of material from one part of a lot to another part of the same lot.
(c) The removal of material necessarily excavated in connection with lawful construction of
a building, structure, street, driveway, sidewalk, path or other appurtenance provided
the quantity of material removed does not exceed that actually displaced by the portion
of such building, structure, street, driveway, sidewalk, path or other appurtenances
below finished grade.
(d) Non-Commercial earth products excavation as described below shall conform to the
requirements set forth in C. below.
C. Non-Commercial Earth Products Excavation
(1) The Planning Board may issue a special permit for earth removal to homeowners within the
Town of Palmer when the undertaking of such operation is necessary to make the yard more
usable, safer and/or aesthetically pleasing. An earth products excavation operation will only be
permitted on those lots considered by the Planning Board to have suitable access onto roads of
sufficient width and capacity to support maximum projected loads.
(2) No permit for an earth products excavation operation shall be issued if such an operation
will, in the opinion of the Planning Board, cause any of the following:
(a) Endanger the public health and safety.
(b) Constitute a nuisance.
(c) Result in clear detriment to the normal use of adjacent property by reason of noise,
dust or vibration.
(d) Result in traffic hazards in residential areas or excessive congestion on, or physical
damage to, public roads.
(e) Unacceptable depletion of natural resources other than the earth products proposed
for excavation. In addition, no such operation shall be permitted in the WSP District if
such operation will lower the level of the water table, interfere with the natural flow
pattern of any watercourse, or reduce the flood storage capacity of any watercourse.
(3) Any non-commercial earth products excavation operation is subject to special permit and
site plan approval as well as to the following conditions:
(a) Any special permit and site plan approval issued for such an operation shall expire one
(1) year from the date of issue unless otherwise agreed upon. The applicant must file
another special permit and site plan application for renewal of the operation for the
following year or for any subsequent year in which operation is anticipated. The
Planning Board reserves the right to deny renewal if, in its judgment, the operation has
not satisfactorily conformed to the approved plan or to conditions as stated in the
record of the Board.
(b) The applicant shall pay all necessary public hearing fees and application review fees if
any.
(c) The applicant shall also submit three (3) sets of plans with the application for special
permit containing the following:
[1] A boundary survey of the parcel or parcels in question at a scale of no less than
one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet, prepared by a land surveyor registered
with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
[2] Topographic information showing existing contours, proposed contours at year's
end, and ultimate contours at the time of site closeout, all at no more than two-foot
intervals, prepared by a land surveyor registered with the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts. The maximum slope in any operating area shall not exceed three
(3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical (3:1), and the maximum slope at
close-out of any area shall not exceed four (4) feet horizontal to one (1) foot
vertical (4:1). (Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29)
[3] Delineation of naturally wooded areas on the site.
[4] Provisions for drainage run-off.
[5] Undisturbed buffer areas of at least fifty (50) feet from any property boundary, at
least fifty (50) feet from any public way, and at least one hundred (150) feet from
any building.
(d) All suitable topsoil, which exists at the beginning of the operation, shall be held in
reserve. At the time of close-out of each operating area, a minimum thickness of three
(3) inches of fertile topsoil shall be placed over all disturbed areas to support
vegetative growth. Plantings of a suitable type as determined by the Planning Board
shall be installed and maintained at close-out of each operating area to effectively
control erosion from water and wind.
(e) No blasting and/or drilling whatsoever shall be permitted as part of the operation.
(f) Hours of operation shall be not more than the following: Monday through Friday, 7:30
AM to 4:00 PM, Saturday, 8:00 AM to 12 Noon. No operation shall be allowed on
Sundays and Holidays unless specifically approved by the Planning Board.
(g) The Planning Board reserves the right to require that the applicant’s application and
plans be reviewed by an outside consulting or engineering firm. If such a review is
required the expense of the review shall be the responsibility of the applicant. No
special permits shall be granted until all fees have been paid.
(h) The Planning Board may waive any portion of the earth excavation regulations of
these ordinances if, after considering and reviewing the information provided, the
Planning Board finds that there are appropriate circumstances which warrant such
action. However, following a hearing prior to which the applicant has been duly
noticed, the Planning Board may revoke any previously granted waiver if, in its
opinion, the public health, safety and welfare is judged to be sufficiently at risk if such
waiver were to continue in effect. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(For Earth Removal Operations, See Chapter 233 of the Code of the Town of Palmer)
§171-74. Filling of Any Water or Wet Area.
A. For the filling in of any pond, lake, swamp, or other existing body of water or wet area where
such filling is not covered by Article XIII Floodplain District or XIV Water Supply Protection
District; and where such filling in requires an amount of fill equivalent to five hundred (500) cubic
yards or more, or where the area to be filled in exceeds ten thousand (10,000) square feet and only
subject to the approval by the Palmer Conservation Commission (prior to the filing an application for
a special permit) under the applicable provisions of State law on inland wetlands, the following
conditions apply:
(1) A site plan shall be submitted as required in Article V, including the following
additional information:
(a) The premises and surrounding area within one hundred (100) feet showing.
(b) Existing and proposed contour lines at intervals of not more than two (2) feet resulting
from the proposed filling in, in relation to the topography of the premises.
(c) A tie-in to the nearest road intersection.
(d) A plan for lighting if night operation is contemplated.
(2) Provision shall be made for temporary and permanent drainage of the site.
(3) Fills shall be limited to terrace fills which are not to exceed ten (10) feet at any one time nor
be within ten (10) feet of an adjacent property line or any cut.
(4) Re-grading of all or parts of the slopes resulting from such fill shall be carried out.
(5) At least six (6) inches of topsoil shall be replaced over all filled or otherwise disturbed
surfaces with seeding with a perennial cover crop, re-seeded as necessary to assure uniform
growth and soil surface stabilization.
(6) Where any fill will have a depth of ten (10) feet or more and create a slope of more than one
vertical in two horizontal, there shall be a substantial fence enclosing the fill at least six (6) feet in
height with suitable gates. Such fence shall be located ten (10) feet or more from the edge of the
fill.
§171-75. Filling of Land Other Than Water or Wet Area.
A. For the filling in of any land area where such filling operation is not covered by the provisions
contained in Article XIII – Floodplain District and Article XIV – Water Supply Protection District of
this ordinance, or which is not excepted in Section 1 below, no such filling in of land shall proceed
without first securing a special permit according to the regulations and procedures set forth in Article
V of this ordinance, subject to the provisions contained herein. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM
3/7/07)
(1) Exemptions. The filling in of any land area shall be exempt from this Section provided all
of the following conditions are complied with:
(a) A filling-in operation which does not exceed a total of five hundred (500) cubic yards
of material.
(b) A filling-in operation which does not exceed a total area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet on any lot, land parcel or subdivision thereof.
(c) A filling-in operation which is associated with acceptable agricultural land
management practices, including, but not limited to, plowing and construction of
agricultural structures; nursery operations, such as the removal and/or transplanting
of cultivated sod, shrubs, and trees; logging operations.
(d) Filling-in operations associated with refuse disposal and sanitary landfill facilities
within the Town of Palmer and operated in accordance with all appropriate State and
local regulations.
(e) Filling-in operations necessary in connection with lawful construction of a building,
structure, street, driveway, sidewalk, path or other appurtenance.
(f) Filling, as a maintenance measure, or for landscaping purposes on existing developed
lots or parcels, provided that the aggregate of area(s) affected does not exceed ten
thousand (10,000) square feet, the grade change does not exceed twelve (12) inches
at any point and does not alter the drainage patterns; and the filling-in does not
involve a quantity of material in excess of one hundred (100) cubic yards.
(2) Permit Procedures
(a) The procedure for granting a special permit shall be as set forth in Article V of this
ordinance for all special permits except that special permits granted under this section
shall be for a period not to exceed one (1) year. For a continuation of an operation
beyond a period designated in the initial permit, a new application must be made and
a new special permit must be granted in the same manner as for the initial permit
except that the Board may waive requirements for submittal of materials required by
this section. The applicant must request the waiver in writing. All other provisions
relating to operational standards and permit procedures shall apply. A separate permit
shall be required for each separate non-contiguous site, as for any expansion on the
same site. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(3) Required Site Plan.
(a) A site plan shall be filed with the Planning Board for any land which is to be filled
and is covered by either Article XIII, or Article XIV of this ordinance and is not
exempted under the provisions of §171-75.(1). Site plans for fill areas shall be
prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer or a Registered Land Surveyor and
reviewed according to the provisions of §171-28 and §171-29. Submission of site
plans shall include, in addition to the material required in §171-28 and §171-29, the
following: (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
[1] The premises and surrounding area within one hundred (100) feet
showing the area to be filled in, property lines within which the filling
is proposed, and tie-in to the nearest road intersection, existing and
proposed contour lines at intervals of not more than two (2) feet
resulting from the proposed filling in, in relation to the topography of
the premises.
[2] The location of any buildings, structures, utilities, sewers, water and storm drains
within one hundred (100) feet of the site.
[3] A certification of the quantity of fill involved.
[4] Detailed plans of all temporary and permanent drainage provisions, retaining
walls, cribbing, vegetative practices, erosion and sedimentation control measures
and all other protective measures and devices utilized or constructed in connection
with the area to be filled.
[5] A timing schedule and sequence indicating the anticipated starting and completion
dates.
[6] Other plans, drawings or materials as may be required by the Building Inspector or
the Planning Board.
(4) Conditions.
(a) For the filling in of any land area subject to the provision of §171.75 of this ordinance,
the following conditions shall govern: (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
[1] Provision shall be made for adequate temporary and permanent drainage of the
site.
[2] Fills shall be limited to terrace fills which are not to exceed ten (10) feet at any one
time nor be within ten (10) feet of an adjacent property line or cut.
[3] Re-grading of all or parts of the slopes resulting from such fill shall be carried out.
[4] At least three (3) inches of topsoil shall be replaced over all filled or otherwise
disturbed surfaces seeded or sodded with a perennial cover crop, re-seeded or resodded
as necessary to assure uniform growth and soil surface stabilization.
[5] Where any fill will have a depth of ten (10) feet or more and create a slope of more
than one (1) vertical in two (2) horizontal, there shall be a substantial fence
enclosing the fill at least six (6) feet in height with suitable gates. Such fence shall
be located ten (10) feet or more from the edge of the fill.
[6] Filling of land area that falls within the superimposed Water Supply Protection
District is prohibited unless otherwise allowed in Article XIV.
[7] The planned filling in of any land area shall be consistent with any recreation,
conservation and open space plan as prepared by the Town Planning Board and/or
Conservation Commission.
[8] Documentation shall be submitted as to the effect of such filling-in activities on
drainage, both within the immediate area and sufficiently far downstream, as
required by the Building Inspector and/or the Planning Board.
[9] Provisions shall be made such that the filling in of any land area shall not impair
surface drainage, constitute an erosion hazard nor act as a source of sedimentation
to any adjacent land or watercourse.
[10] Provisions shall be made such that the filling in of any land area does not impair
the safe and efficient operation of any on-site sewage disposal or drainage
facilities nor those located on adjacent properties.
[11] Provisions shall be made to reduce the area and duration of exposure of fill
material(s) and to reduce the velocity of run-off, both during and after the
completion of the filling-in activity in order to minimize the potential of soil
erosion and siltation problems.
[12] Provisions shall be made for the adequate control of dust during filling-in
operations.
[13] All disturbed fill areas shall be promptly seeded or sodded with a suitable ground
cover and supplemented with other suitable plantings as soon as the season
permits.
[14] No final slopes shall exceed a slope of more than one (1) foot vertical in four (4)
feet horizontal.
[15] No filling in of land shall cause or permit any soil, earth, sand, gravel, rock,
stone loam, or other fill material, or water or liquid to be deposited upon or to roll,
flow or work upon or over the premises of another without the express consent of
the owner of such premises so affected; nor shall any filling in of land cause or
permit any soil, earth, sand, gravel, rock, stone loan, or other fill material or water
or liquid to be deposited, or to roll, flow, or wash upon or over any public street,
street improvement, road, sewer, storm drain, water course, or right-of-way, or
public property.
[16] Such other conditions as may be deemed necessary and reasonable shall be
imposed by the Planning Board in order to prevent damage to public or private
property or any sewer, storm drain, or watercourse, or to prevent the filling in of
land from being conducted in a manner hazardous to life or property, or in a
manner likely to create a nuisance.
§171-76. Cluster Development.
A. For residential development in a clustered concept (a concept whereby the residences are
clustered on a portion of the lot, thereby leaving more of the parcel undeveloped and in open space,
the purpose of which is to: a) preserve the rural character of the community by maximizing and
preserving expanses of open space in their natural state; b) provide a buffer between developments,
and; c) serve a functional relationship to each of the lots in the development) in those districts for
which such an option is allowed by the Table of Use Regulations, the following rules and conditions
shall apply:
(1) A development plan on standard twenty-four (24) inch by thirty-six (36) inch sheets, for the
entire tract at a scale of one inch equals one hundred (100) feet, shall be prepared by a registered
land surveyor or registered professional engineer registered in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts. The plan shall be submitted to Planning Board and shall show at least the
following:
(a) Existing and proposed contours at two (2) foot intervals on the tract and within fifty (50)
feet thereof.
(b) The location and acreage of areas to be devoted to specific uses.
(c) Existing and proposed streets, parking areas, drainage and utility systems, including
sewer and water, street lighting, landscaping, fire alarm systems, sidewalks, and
easements, and natural features.
(d) Proposed clustered residential density of development and gross density of development
in terms of square feet per family.
(e) The proposed location of parks, open spaces and other public or community uses.
(f) Such other information as may be required by the Planning Board.
(2) For those proposed developments which will also involve the subdivision of land and/or
require the Planning Board's Approval under the Subdivision Control Law:
(a) a Definitive Subdivision Plan shall be filed with the Special Permit Application in lieu
of the Development Plan (said Definitive Subdivision Plan shall also include all of the
information required in (1) above).
And,
(b) The Definitive Subdivision Plan shall be filed with the Planning Board for Approval
under the Subdivision Control Law at the same time that the Special Permit for the
Open Space Residential Development is filed.
(3) The tract for which an Open Space Residential Development is proposed shall be in a single
ownership or control at the time of application, and shall be comprised of at least four (4)
contiguous acres.
(4) The use and density requirements shall apply in lieu of the similar provisions of the Table
of Use Regulations and the Table of Dimensional and Density Regulations in Article VI. All
other zoning provisions shall apply. Prior to submitting a Special Permit Application, applicants
should be sure that the lots are configured sufficiently to locate the proposed structures on the lot
in conformance with the required setbacks.
(a) The minimum clustered lot area is the land area required for the siting of each
residential building exclusive of streets, water area, open space, and common land.
Each to be located on its own individual lot. For townhouses and multi-family
structures, all of the structures shall be located on one lot under common ownership.
The total number of units shall be determined by sub-section (5) below.
(b) When the rear or side yard of an individual lot in the development abuts a lot not in that
development, then said rear yard and side yard building setbacks shall be equal to those
required for a non-clustered lot in that Zoning District.
(5) The maximum number of dwelling units in the development shall be computed by
multiplying the total tract area (less wetland and proposed roadways) by the density shown
below for the appropriate zone:
(a) RR - .95 dwelling units per acre
(b) SR - 1.95 dwelling units per acre
(c) TR - 3.90 dwelling units per acre
(d) Fractions over one-half (½) may be increased to the nearest whole unit, and fractions
under one-half (½) shall be decreased to the nearest whole unit. (Amended ATM,
May 14, 2001, Article 29)
(6) The proposal shall conform to the provisions of any and all applicable local, state and federal
rules and regulations.
(7) If the development or individual lots are served by both an on-site water supply (well) and an
on-site sewage disposal system (septic tank), then the required Minimum Clustered Lot area is
doubled, and the density is based on a ratio of .47 dwelling units per acre.
(8) Of the total tract area, at least fifty (50) percent (of which at least seventy-five (75) percent
shall be neither bordering vegetated wetlands (as defined in M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40, the
Wetlands Protection Act and 310 CMR) nor have a slope of over five (5) percent) shall be set
aside as Common Open Space. A functional relationship shall exist between the Common Open
Space areas and the proposed residential clusters. Such Common Open Space shall be restricted
to open space, agricultural uses, recreational uses such as tot-lot, park, playground, play field, golf
course, or conservation area,
(a) Such Common Open Space shall have suitable access to and from the development's
street(s), and shall conform to the requirements of the Palmer Subdivision Regulations
in effect at the time of Application.
(9) Such Common Open Space shall be placed under a Conservation Restriction/Easement in
accordance with the provisions of M. G. L. Chapter 184, §31-33 as amended. Such common land
shall be conveyed to an organization or the legal entity established for the purpose of owning and
maintaining such common land. Such organization shall be created by covenants running with
the land, and such covenants shall be included with the submitted development plan and shall be
subject to approval by the Town Attorney. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(a) Such organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose of any common open space
by sale or otherwise (except to an organization conceived and organized to own and
maintain the common open space), without first offering to dedicate the same to the
Town.
(b) Covenants creating such organization shall provide that in the event the organization
established to own and maintain common open space, or any successor organization,
shall at any time after establishment of the development fail to maintain the common
open space in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the development plan,
the Town may serve notice in writing upon such organization or upon the residents of
the development setting forth the manner in which the organization has failed to
maintain the common open space in reasonable condition, and said notice shall contain
a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within thirty (30) days thereof,
and shall state the date and place of a public hearing thereon which shall be held within
twenty (20) days of the notice. At such hearing the Town may modify the terms of the
original notice as to the deficiencies and may grant an extension of time within which
they shall be cured. If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the
modifications thereof shall not be cured within said thirty (30) days or any extension
thereof, the Town, in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within the
development and to prevent the common open space from becoming a public nuisance,
may enter upon said common open space and maintain the same for one year. Said
entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the common open
space except when the same is voluntarily dedicated to the public by the owners.
Before the expiration of said one-year period, the Town shall, upon its initiative or upon
the request of the organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance of the
common open space, call a public hearing upon notice in writing to such organization or
to the residents of such development, to be held by the Planning Board, at which
hearing the organization shall show cause why such maintenance by the Town shall not,
at the election of the Board continue for a succeeding one-year period. If the Board
shall determine that such organization is ready and able to maintain the common open
space in reasonable condition at the end of said one-year period, the Town shall cease to
maintain the common space at the end of said one-year period. If the Board shall
determine that such organization is not ready and able to maintain the common open
space in a reasonable condition, the Town may, in its discretion, continue to maintain
the common open space during the next succeeding year, and subject to a similar
hearing and determination in each year thereafter.
(c) The covenants creating such organization shall further provide that the cost of such
maintenance by the Town shall be assessed ratably against the properties within the
development that have a right of enjoyment of the common open space, and shall
become a charge of said properties, and such charge shall be paid by the owners of said
properties within thirty (30) days after receipt of a statement therefor.
(d) The covenants shall provide that each dwelling unit shall have an equal say in
determining the affairs of the organization; that costs shall be assessed equally to each
dwelling unit; and that the organization shall be retained in the control of the developer
no longer than until a majority of dwelling units are conveyed to permanent owners.
(e) Where appropriate, and with the approval of the Planning Board, by virtue of the large
size of a development or of the diversity of uses or dwelling types therein, more than
one separate and distinct organization may be created. Separate organizations may not
be created, however, where one might be too small (in terms of the number of lots
included) to operate efficiently, or where one has a responsibility for too large or costly
(to maintain) parcel of open space in proportion to that under the responsibility of other
organizations within the same development.
§171-77. Reserved.
§171-78. Heavy Public Use.
A. For a special permit for the construction of, development of, or use of any lot for a heavy public
use, the following conditions shall apply:
(1) A statement shall be submitted indicating the need for the facility or use and the rationale for
its development, the criteria used in selecting a site, and the location of all alternative sites
considered, and the reasons for not selecting them.
(2) A plan for the use of the site shall be submitted to the Building Inspector for transmittal to the
Town Manager, showing, in addition to the material required in §171-29 the following: (Amended
Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(a) Two (2) foot contours on the parcel and within fifty (50) feet thereof.
(b) The location and dimensions of all buildings, structures, and exterior use areas,
including all parking areas and driveways.
(c) The location of buffer strips, screening provisions (with details attached), and areas to
be preserved in a natural state, all these to be sufficient to preclude visibility of the uses
and structures from adjoining parcels.
(d) Such other facts as the Town Manager may require. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM
3/7/07)
(3) In considering an application for a heavy public use, the Town Manager shall be particularly
cognizant of potential noise, odors, or other detrimental environmental nuisances which might be
generated; of traffic and the ability of the local street network to accommodate increased traffic;
of the ability of the utility systems to accommodate any increased demands which might be placed
upon them by the proposed use; and of the applicable provisions of the adopted comprehensive
plan of the Town. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§ 171-79. Reserved.
§ 171-80. Reserved.
§ 171-81. Home Occupation Special Permit Criteria.
A. Requirements. All Home Occupations and Special Permits issued for Home Occupations shall
comply with the following:
(1) It must be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the building or property for
residential/dwelling purposes.
(2) It must be conducted by the principal practitioner who occupies the main building as his/her
bonafide residence, with no more than one other person engaged in the occupation except
members of the immediate family also residing in such building.
(3) It must not occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the gross combined floor area of the
main building, and the accessory structure (if such accessory structure is utilized for said home
occupation).
(4) One (1) sign may be displayed advertising the Home Occupation provided:
(a) It does not exceed two (2) square foot in area. (Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article
29)
(b) It is attached to the structure next to or on the entryway for said Home Occupation.
(c) It is not illuminated.
(5) Goods may only be offered for sale from the premises if the Planning Board expressly
permits it in the issued Special Permit.
(6) All goods sold must be produced or manufactured on the premises, or must be an accessory
item to such goods, or to the services provided on the premises. (Amended ATM June 16, 2003,
Article 11)
(7) The hours of operation shall be expressly stated in the Special Permit issued by the Planning
Board.
(8) The hours and frequency of deliveries of products and/or materials shall be expressly stated in
the Special Permit issued by the Planning Board.
(9) If said Home Occupation takes place in an accessory structure: (Amended Ord 2007- 07,
RTCM 3/7/07)
(a) Constructed prior to the date of the adoption of the ordinance, than said
structure must conform to the setback requirements for accessory structures in that
District.
(b) Constructed after the date of the adoption of this ordinance, than said structure must
conform to the setbacks requirements for a principal structure in that District.
(10) It shall produce no noise, obnoxious odors, vibrations, glare, fumes or electrical interference
which would be detectable to normal sensory perception beyond the lot line.
(11) The portion of any structure utilized for a Home Occupation shall conform to all applicable
Fire, Building, Electrical, Plumbing and Health codes.
(12) Prior to the commencement of any Home Occupation, a Certificate of Occupancy must be
received from the Building Inspector for any structure, or portion thereof, used for said
occupation.
(13) All Special Permits for Home Occupation must be renewed once, immediately following the
first year of operation. Said renewal process shall follow the same procedures as an original
Special Permit submission. There is no guarantee that the permit will be renewed if the applicant
has not met conditions in the previous year.
(14) All special Permits for Home Occupations are Non-Transferable and are specifically issued
to a specific applicant for a specific Home Occupation.
(15) All Special Permits are terminable by the SPGA for violation of any conditions upon
which it is granted or upon violations of this bylaw after hearing by the SPGA with notice to all
interested parties.
§171-82. Reserved.
§171-83. Pre-Existing Non-Conforming Uses, Structures and Lots.
Except as hereinafter provided, this Zoning Ordinance shall not apply to structures or uses lawfully
in existence or lawfully begun, or to a building or special permit issued before the first publication of
notice of the public hearing on this Ordinance, but shall apply to any change or substantial extension
of such use, to a building or special permit issued after the first notice of said public hearing, to any
reconstruction, extension or structural change of such structure, and to any alteration of a structure
began after the first notice of said public hearing to provide for its use for a substantially different
purpose or for the same purpose in a substantially different manner or to a substantially greater
extent, except where alteration, reconstruction, extension or structural change to a single or two
family residential structure does not increase the non-conforming nature of said structures.
(Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
A. Objectives. The provisions of this section are intended to achieve the following purposes:
(1) Allow non-conforming situations to continue until they are discontinued or abandoned.
(Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29)
(2) Encourage change in non-conforming situations towards greater compliance with the
provisions of this ordinance and to reduce the degree of non-conformity. Where a nonconforming
situation is proposed to be changed, to encourage greater conformity with all the
provisions of the ordinance and the objectives and procedures stated in this ordinance.
(Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(3) To allow for the alteration, expansion or extension of a non-conforming use subject to the
issuance of a Finding by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals as specified. Nonconforming
uses in residential zones shall be subject to more restrictive standards than those in
non-residential zones.
(4) To permit possible expansion of non-conforming buildings provided there are no
demonstrable adverse impacts on the adjoining properties.
(5) In the event of the involuntary destruction in whole or part of a non-conforming situation,
to permit the reconstruction of the non-conforming situation so that the owner, and tenants, if
any, are not subjected to substantial economic loss while, at the same time, seeking to achieve
greater conformity with the provisions of this ordinance and to reduce any adverse impact on
the surrounding area. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(6) To permit the treatment of non-conforming situations to be varied by the type of zoning
district and the type of non-conformity, i.e. to have a different approach for uses, structures, and
parking lots.
B. Applicability.
(1) Non-conforming situations. For the purpose of this ordinance, non-conforming situations
are those uses, building, structures, parking lots, parking spaces, loading bays, signs,
landscaping and other activities that are now subject to the provisions of this ordinance which
were lawful before this ordinance was adopted, or before amendments to this ordinance which
are applicable to the situation were adopted, and such situations do not now conform to the
provisions of this ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(2) Non-Complying Situations. For the purposes of this ordinance, non-complying situations
are those uses, building, structures, lots, parking spaces, loading bays, signs, landscaping and
other activities that are subject to the provisions of this ordinance which were unlawfully
created after this ordinance was adopted or after amendments to this ordinance which are
applicable to those situations were adopted, and are in violation of this ordinance and may be
called non-complying situations. (Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29, amended Ord
2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(3) Non-complying Situations Six (6) Years or Older. In accordance with Massachusetts
General Law (MGL), Chapter 40A, §7, any structure, or part thereof, which has been improved
and used in accordance with the terms of a building permits issued by a duly authorized person,
may not be the subject of an enforcing action by the Town to compel the removal, alteration or
relocation of said structure, or the abandonment, limitation or modification of the use allowed
by said permit unless enforcement action is commenced within six (6) years from the date of the
alleged violation of law. Uses and structures in existence for six (6) years or more and which
qualify under this section are considered to be non-conforming situations and are entitled to
treatments as such, as provided in this section.
(4) Non-Complying Structures Ten (10) Years or Older. In accordance with MGL, Chapter
40A, §7, any structure, or part thereof, which has not been in compliance with this ordinance, or
the conditions set forth in any Special Permit or variance affecting the structure, may not be the
subject of an enforcement action by the Town unless enforcement action is commenced within
ten (10) years from the date of the alleged violation of law. Structures in existence for ten years
or more and which qualify under this section are considered to be non-conforming situations
and are entitled to treatments as such provided that any proposed change, alteration or extension
will not affect the non-complying conditions. Any change, alteration or extension of the noncomplying
condition shall be subject to the provisions of the ordinance and require that form of
relief which would otherwise be necessary to allow said change, alteration or expansion.
(Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
C. Limitations.
A use building, structure, lot, parking space, loading bay, sign, landscaping or any other activity
which is non-conforming, but not non-complying, may be continued but may not be increased,
expanded or altered, except as may be specifically authorized by this section. If such nonconforming
situation is abandoned or terminated, as set forth below, it may not be resumed except
in compliance with this ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
D. Lawfully Created Situations.
A use, building, structure, lot, parking area, loading bay, sign, landscaping or any other activity, is
considered to be lawfully created with respect to zoning requirements if:
(1) It was in existence on June 16, 1980 when the zoning ordinance was originally adopted, or
(Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(2) Subsequent to June 16, 1980, it was permitted by the zoning ordinance either by right or by
Special Permit and was in existence prior to the effective date of any amendment which
rendered it non-conforming. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
E. Uses by Variance Which are Not Non-Conforming.
A use, building, structure, lot, parking area, loading bay, sign, landscaping or any other activity
which is not otherwise permitted and does not comply with this ordinance and exists due to the
granting of a variance, is not a non-conforming situation, is not entitled to the treatments afforded
by this section, and is bound by the conditions of the variance as granted. (Amended Ord 2007- 07,
RTCM 3/7/07)
F. Once in Conformity, or Closer to Conformity, Cannot Revert.
Once a use, building, structure, lot, parking area, loading bay, sign, landscaping or any other
activity which had been non-conforming, is brought into conformity with this ordinance, it shall not
be permitted to revert to nonconformity. Once a use, building, structure, lot, parking area, loading
bay, sign, landscaping or any other activity which had been non-conforming, is brought closer to
conformity with this ordinance, i.e. the amount or degree of nonconformity is reduced it shall not
be permitted by right to revert to nonconformity with the provisions of this ordinance which is
greater than the closest amount or degree of conformity which it has achieved. (Amended ATM,
May 14, 2001, Article 29, amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
G. Change in Lot that Results in Non-Compliance.
No lot upon which there is a building or for which a building permit is in force shall be subdivided
or otherwise changed in area or shape, except through public acquisition, so as to result in a
violation applicable to either the lot or the building. A lot already non-conforming shall not be
changed in area or shape so as to increase the degree of nonconformity with the requirements of
this ordinance; however, a non-conforming lot may be changed in area or shape in order to move
closer to conformity with the requirements of this ordinance. Said change shall be allowed by right.
No building permit, Special Permit, Certificate of Occupancy, or Approval of a Subdivision Plan
under the Subdivision Control Law shall be issued with reference to said transferred land until both
the lot retained and the newly created lot(s) meet the requirements of this ordinance. (Amended Ord
2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
H. Nonconformity Resulting From Public Action.
If as a result of public action, a use, building, structure, lot, parking area, loading bay, sign,
landscaping or any other activity no longer complies with this ordinance, it shall be considered to
be non-conforming and entitled to the treatment afforded by this section, provided it was in
compliance or lawfully non-conforming at the time of the public acquisition. (Amended Ord 2007-
07, RTCM 3/7/07)
I. Discontinuance, Abandonment.
(1) A non-conforming use or structure or other non-conforming situation is considered to be
discontinued or abandoned whenever:
(a) It is not used for a period of twenty-four (24) consecutive months, or
(b) It is abandoned (as defined in this ordinance). (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(2) Discontinuance or abandonment of a part of a non-conforming use, structure or situation
shall not normally be considered to be evidence of discontinuance or abandonment of the
whole, unless that part which is discontinued or abandoned is the part which causes the nonconformity.
(3) The rights of a non-conforming use, structure, building, lot, parking space, loading bay,
sign, landscaping or other situation are not affected by a change in ownership, tenancy or
management unless such ownership, tenancy or management is specifically a condition of the
issuance of the permit.
J. One and Two Family Dwellings. (Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29)
(1) Non-Conforming Uses. An existing non-conforming one-family or two-family owner
occupied dwelling or structures accessory thereto which is non-conforming with respect to use
may be enlarged or extended for use for the same purposed provided that a Finding is issued by
the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) that the extension or enlargement is not substantially more
detrimental that the existing use to the neighborhood.
(2) Non-Conforming Structures. An existing non-conforming one-family or two-family
dwelling or structure accessory thereto which is non-conforming with respect to minimum
setback, may be enlarged or extended in any other direction in compliance with this ordinance,
or in any other direction without encroaching any further than the original non-conformity, by
the issuance of a building permit. That part of an existing non-conforming dwelling which is
non-conforming only with respect to a minimum setback and/or density requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance may not be enlarged or extended in that setback or requirement, except by a
Finding issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) that: (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM
3/7/07)
(a) The degree of proposed non-conformity is not substantially more detrimental than the
existing non-conformity to the neighborhood with particular consideration of abutting
properties;
(b) The site coverage of the dwelling within the minimum setback is not increased to an
extent so as to be substantially more detrimental than the existing non-conformity to
the neighborhood, with particular consideration of abutting properties; and
(c) The Board determines that the extension or enlargement is appropriate in scale and
mass for the neighborhood, with particular consideration of abutting properties.
K. Other than One and Two Family Dwellings.
(1) Non-Conforming Uses. A non-conforming use may be continued to the same degree and
for the same purpose. An existing non-conforming use may be altered, expanded or extended
for use for the same purpose or changed for use for a different purpose provided that a Finding
is issued by the Planning Board as specified below:
(a) The Planning Board may grant a Finding for alteration, change, expansion or
extension of a non-conforming use provided that the Board determines that the
alteration, change, expansion or extension is not substantially more detrimental than
the current use.
(2) Non-Conforming Structures. An existing non-conforming building, other than a one-family
or two-family dwelling, which is non-conforming with respect to minimum setback may be
enlarged or extended in any other direction in compliance with this ordinance by the issuance of
a building permit, (and other permits as appropriate) provided all other uses, structures, and
activities on the lot comply fully with the requirements of this ordinance. That part of an
existing non-conforming structure which is non-conforming only with respect to a minimum
setback and/or density requirements of the Zoning Ordinance may not be enlarged or extended
in that setback or requirements, except by a Finding issued by the Planning Board that:
(Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(a) The degree of proposed non-conformity is not substantially more detrimental than the
existing non-conformity to the neighborhood with particular consideration of abutting
properties.
(b) The site coverage of the dwelling within that minimum setback is not increased to an
extent so as to be substantially more detrimental than the existing non-conformity to
the neighborhood, with particular consideration of abutting properties.
(c) The Board determines that the extension or enlargement is appropriate in scale and
mass for the neighborhood, with particular consideration of abutting properties.
(3) An existing non conforming building, other than a one-family or two-family dwelling,
which is non-conforming with respect to dimensional and/or density requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance for the district in which said building is located, other than minimum setback, may
not be enlarged or extended except by a Finding issued by the Planning Board. (Amended Ord
2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
L. Non-Conforming Lots.
Any lot which does not comply with the provisions of this ordinance with respect to minimum lot
area, minimum lot frontage, or minimum lot width or with the requirements then in effect at the
time of recording or endorsement, whichever occurs sooner, shall not be subdivided or otherwise
changed in area or shape, except through public action, so as to be in violation of the provisions of
this ordinance. A lot already non-conforming with respect to those provisions may be changed to
be made closer in compliance, but once brought closer into compliance; i.e., the amount or degree
of nonconformity is reduced, it shall not be permitted to revert to noncompliance which is greater
than the closest amount or degree of compliance which it had achieved. A lot, which is nonconforming,
shall not preclude the issuance of permits allowed pursuant to Article V. (Amended
Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
M. Non-Conforming Off Street Parking and Loading.
(1) Existing Non-Conforming Parking Spaces, Loading Bays
(a) Any off street parking spaces or loading bay in existence on the effective date of this
ordinance or thereafter established, which serve a building or use, may not be
reduced in number or changed in location or design contrary to the ordinance
requirements so as to increase the degree of non-conformity with said requirements.
(Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(b) If the use of an existing structure or lot, which does not have sufficient parking or
loading areas, including a use which has no off-street parking or loading area, is
changed to a different type of use for which a different number of parking spaces or
loading bays is required as set forth in this ordinance, and there is not increase in the
net floor area, the following rules shall apply: (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM
3/7/07)
[1] If there is a net increase in the number of required parking spaces or loading
bays, that net increase shall be provided, which number shall not include any
existing parking spaces or loading bays, or,
[2] If there is a net decrease in the number of required parking spaces or loading
bays, that lesser number shall be the new basis for determining whether, in the
future, there is a net increase in the number of parking spaces or loading bays
required.
[3] If it is proposed to increase the net floor area of a building, whether by addition
to the exterior of the building or by internal reconstruction, and the building
does not have sufficient off-street parking of loading area, full compliance with
the applicable parking requirements for the entire building shall be a condition
of the issuance of a building permit for the construction of the increase of net
floor area.
N. Parking and Loading Requirements for a Building Destroyed, Damaged or Demolished.
If a building for which sufficient off-street parking or loading area as required under the standards
of this ordinance, is not provided is destroyed, damaged or demolished by the owner, the new
building may be reconstructed or replaced if otherwise permitted by this ordinance, without
providing additional parking spaces or loading bays, provided the new use is the same type of use
as the use before the destruction, damage or demolition, or is a type of use that requires the same or
fewer parking spaces or loading bays. If parking spaces or loading bays were provided before the
destruction, damage, or demolition, at least the same number of spaces or bays shall be provided.
(Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29,Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
O. Repair, Reconstruction, Continuance.
Routine maintenance and repairs are permitted to a non-conforming structure, sign, parking space
or loading bay or other non-conforming situation to maintain it in sound conditions and presentable
appearance.
P. Reconstruction After Involuntary Destruction (By Right).
Any non-conforming use, structure, building, sign, parking space or loading bay or other nonconforming
situation which is destroyed or damaged by explosion, collapse, fire, storm, natural
disaster or other catastrophic event, any of which is beyond the control of the owner, may within
three (3) years from the date of such damage or destruction, be reconstructed to the same extent as
the original, provided there is no increase in the site coverage or the gross floor area or the degree
of nonconformity and the reconstruction conforms to the current requirements of this ordinance to
the maximum extent practicable in the opinion of the Building Inspector. In this context, to the
maximum extent practicable shall consider extreme site conditions, such as steep grades, the
presence of ledge or other unsuitable soil conditions, or the shape and configuration of the lot.
(Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
Q. Reconstruction After Destruction (By Finding).
The Planning Board may grant a finding for the reconstruction of a use, structure, building, sign,
parking space or loading bay or other situation allowed by Finding, which is destroyed or damaged
by explosion, collapse, fire, storm, natural disaster or any other catastrophic event, any of which is
beyond the control of the owner or by the proposed voluntary action of the owner, to demolish, in
whole or in part, in a manner different from the prior conditions, provided the Board determines
that:
(1) The degree of proposed non-conformity is not substantially more detrimental than the
existing non-conformity to the neighborhood with particular consideration of abutting
properties.
(2) The site coverage of the dwelling within that minimum setback is not increased to an extent
so as to be substantially more detrimental than the existing non-conformity to the neighborhood,
with particular consideration of abutting properties; and the Board determines that the extension
or enlargement is appropriate in scale and mass for the neighborhood, with particular
consideration of abutting properties.
(3) The Board determines that the extension or enlargement is appropriate in scale and mass for
the neighborhood, with particular consideration of abutting properties. (Amended – Special
Town Meeting – June 24, 2002 – Article 2)
R. Vesting of Rights During Adoption of Amendments.
(1) A use, building, structure, lot, sign, parking space or loading bay or other situation which
would comply with the provision of this ordinance at the time at which a building permit is
issued or a Special Permit is granted, but would not comply with a proposed amendment to this
ordinance, shall be considered to be con-conforming and may be completed, continued, or
maintained provided: (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(a) The building permit was issued or the Special Permit was granted before the first
publication of notice of public hearing of the proposed amendment, and substantial
physical construction or start of operations is begun within six (6) months of the
issuance of the building permit or the grant of a Special Permit and is carried through
to its completions as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable. If the
construction is not completed within eighteen (18) months of the issuance of the
building permit or the grant of the Special Permit, the rights to non-conforming status
shall cease and the construction shall comply with this ordinance, as amended.
(Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(2) The filing of an application for either a building permit or a Special Permit is not sufficient
to vest rights. The building permit must be issued for the Special Permit must be granted prior
to such first publication of notice.
(3) In the event of the filing and subsequent approval of a definitive subdivision plan, an
exemption from an amendment to this ordinance and a right to be treated under the previously
existing provision of this ordinance may be vested, as set forth in MGL, Chapter 40A, §6.
(Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
S. Approval Not Required Plans.
(1) In the event of the filing and subsequent endorsement of an "Approval Not Required" plan,
referred to in §81P of Chapter 41, §81K-81GG, the Subdivision Control Law, an exemption
from an amendment to this ordinance affecting the use of land only and a right to be treated
under the previously existing provisions of this ordinance may be vested, as set forth in MGL,
Chapter 40A §6. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(2) In the event that rights have been vested under a previous version of the Zoning Ordinance,
an owner may proceed as if that version of the Zoning Ordinance applied to his/her property
and he/she may use the most current versions of the Zoning Ordinance, but must use either
version of the Zoning Ordinance fully and cannot select provisions of both versions. (Amended
Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-84. Mobile Homes.
As used in this article the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
Trailer: A vehicle used or intended to be used for human habitation, whether designed to be drawn
by a motor vehicle or self-propelled, and any so-called automobile trailer or trailer coach, including
any portable structure, means of conveyance or vehicle so designed, constructed and/or altered or
converted in any manner as to permit occupancy thereof for dwelling purposes or sleeping purposes.
Trailer or Mobile Home Park: Any lot of land upon which two (2) or more trailer coaches or
mobile homes occupied for dwelling purposes are located, and shall include any buildings, structures,
fixtures, and equipment used in connection with trailers.
A. Use Restrictions
(1) No person shall park, store or occupy a trailer for living or business except as follows:
(2) The owner of land may permit occupancy of said land by a non-paying guest for a period
not exceeding twenty (20) days in a calendar year.
(3) A trailer may be occupied by the owner of a lot or tract of land as a temporary dwelling
incidental to the construction of a home. In no case shall the trailer be occupied for more than
one (1) year, during which time the construction of the permanent dwelling is to be completed
and the dwelling occupied.
(4) A mobile home already legally existing on a lot within the town of Palmer may be replaced
in accordance with the regulations of the Town of Palmer provided that the replacement mobile
home meets or exceeds the value of the mobile home already existing on the lot.
B. Requisites for the Issuance of a Building Permit.
(1) No building permit for such trailers or mobile home shall be granted unless the
following conditions are met:
(a) Only one (1) trailer or mobile home shall be placed on a lot.
(b) The lot or tract of land on which the trailer is to be located shall contain a minimum of
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, with a minimum of one hundred (100) feet
frontage on a public way (or in the case of the existing mobile home park a private
way within the park.)
(c) The trailer shall be set back at least seventy (70) feet from the centerline of a public
way or private way on which the trailer is located.
(d) No trailer or mobile home shall be located within fifty (50) feet of an existing building
or dwelling.
(e) A tract of land or a lot shall mean any parcel, regardless of its size, which is owned
under single deed.
C. Exceptions
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to a travel trailer or camping trailer
stored or parked on a lot not intended for occupancy as a residence, overnight
accommodations or business purpose on its location.
§171-85. Telecommunication Towers, Antennae and Facilities.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this regulation is to regulate the location and number of
telecommunication towers and antennae, minimize their adverse visual effect through careful
design, siting and vegetative screening, and encourage the shared or joint use of towers and
facilities. These regulations are consistent with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 in
that they do not discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services, do not prohibit or
act to prohibit the provision of personal wireless services, and do not regulate the placement and
construction of personal wireless service facilities on the basis of the environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities comply with Federal Communications
Commissions regulations regarding such emissions.
Telecommunication towers, antennae and facilities are permitted in all districts as outlined in
Table of Use Regulations for Business and Residential Districts in this ordinance and as outlined in
the Industrial Sections of this ordinance subject to special permit and site plan approval plus the
following conditions: (Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29, Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM
3/7/07)
(1) To discourage the proliferation of telecommunication towers, shared use of tower structures
is both permitted and encouraged. Placement of more than one tower on a lot may be permitted
if all setbacks, design and landscape requirements are met for each tower. Applications for new
towers shall be accompanied by documentation that no existing or planned tower or other
structure can accommodate the applicant's antennae or transmitter. The application shall
include documentation regarding the availability of any existing or approved
telecommunication towers or other structures within the transmission area that meets the needs
of the applicant.
(a) It shall be a condition of any special permit issued under this regulation that the
permit holder shall exercise good faith in allowing other providers to share space or
co-locate on the site, provided that such shared use does not impair the technical level
or quality of service. In the event that a dispute arises as to whether the permit holder
has exercised good faith in accommodating other users, the Planning Board may
require an independent technical study at the expense of either or both the permit
holder and the applicant.
(2) Telecommunication towers are prohibited within existing Town and National Register
Historic Districts, as well as along designated scenic roads, and if the Planning Board
determines that the proposed location is within and will seriously degrade scenic view areas.
(3) The lot upon which a telecommunication tower is proposed must meet the minimum lot
area requirements for the zoning district within which the lot is located.
(4) The tower and/or antenna shall be erected to the minimum height necessary to satisfy the
technical requirements of the telecommunication facility. Documentation of the minimum
height needed, prepared by a professional telecommunication systems engineer, shall
accompany the application for a special permit. Such documentation may include propagation
modeling and/or test results.
(5) All new structures must meet the minimum setback requirements for the zoning district
within which the subject lot is located, or be set back from all property lines a distance equal to
one hundred and five percent (105%) of the height of the structure whichever is greater. Guy
anchors shall also meet the minimum setback requirements for the respective zone.
(6) Towers and antennae shall be of subdued, non-reflective color which shall blend with its
surroundings.
(7) In addition to other applicable buffer area requirements of this ordinance, landscape buffers
shall be required around the perimeter of all structures, including guy anchors. Such landscape
buffers shall include evergreen trees planted of sufficient height and planted at a sufficient
distance to provide visual screening as determined during the site plan review process.
(Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(8) Signal lights or illumination shall not be permitted unless required by the Federal
Communications Commission or the Federal Aviation Administration.
(9) No advertising or signage, other than warning signs, shall be permitted on any tower.
(10) All unused communication towers shall be removed within twelve (12) months of
cessation of use. In the event that an unused tower is not removed within twelve (12) months of
cessation of use the tower and associated facilities may be removed by the Town and the cost of
removal assessed against the property. As a condition of special permit and site plan approval,
the Planning Board may require a bond to insure removal of abandoned towers.
(11) No new or existing telecommunications service shall interfere with public safety
telecommunications or with any existing television or radio signal. All applications for
facilities under this regulation shall be accompanied by a study which provides a technical
evaluation of existing and proposed transmissions and indicates all potential interference
problems.
(12) Satellite dishes under ten (10) feet in diameter are exempt from this regulation when
ground mounted or located on an existing building.
§ 171-86. Campgrounds.
A. Campground: A campground is a permitted use in the RR district subject to special permit and
site plan review approval and subject to the following conditions:
(1) There shall be a minimum lot area of ten (10) acres.
(2) The average density of the campground shall not exceed eight (8) campsites per acre.
(3) Each campsite shall have a minimum width of fifty (50) feet and a minimum area of
twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet.
(4) No building or campsite shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of any property line.
(5) Campsites for recreational vehicles over twenty (20) feet in length shall be grouped in an
area separate from other campsites.
(6) Campground roads shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet per travel lane and shall be
readily traversable with a well-drained surface.
(7) Roads to be used by recreational vehicles over twenty (20) feet in length shall have a
minimum internal radius of sixty (60) feet.
(8) Turnarounds shall be provided for all dead-end roads over one hundred (100) feet in length,
and those to be used by recreational vehicles over twenty (20) feet in length shall have a
minimum internal radius of sixty (60) feet.
(9) Water supply, sanitary conveniences and sewage facilities shall be provided in accordance
with the Health and Sanitation Standards for Recreation Vehicle Parks of the National Fire
Protection Association (Chapter 4 of NFPA Publication 501D, as amended.)
(10) If provided, electrical systems shall be in accordance with Chapter 6 of NFPA Publication
501D, as amended.
(11) Provision shall be made for fire safety in accordance with Chapters 5 and 7 of NFPA
Publication 501D, as amended.
(12) Within the campground, one dwelling may be permitted for the residence of the
campground owner or operator.
(13) Within the campground, the sale of camp supplies and a snack bar are permitted accessory
uses provided they do not exceed five hundred (500) square feet in floor area and they are used
only by persons using the campground.
§171-87. Flea Markets.
A. Flea Market: A flea market as defined in these ordinances is a permitted use subject to the
issuance of a permit from the Town Manager (TM) and the Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO)
subject to the following conditions: (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(1) The applicant shall submit a letter stating the location of the market, the maximum number
of vendors and the dates and hours of the market.
(2) The applicant shall also submit a letter from the property owner or owners in question,
giving permission for the market to occur on the stated dates and hours.
(3) The applicant shall also submit a plan to scale, of the property in questions, showing the
actual market location and parking area for both vendors and customers. All parking shall be
off-street and located on the lot in question, or an abutting lot which, in the opinion of the TM
and ZEO, provides safe, convenient access to the market. If an abutting lot is used, written
permission must also be submitted from the owner or owners of such lot as well. Parking shall
be located on a sturdy, flat, all weather surface. In addition, the applicant must demonstrate
safe ingress and egress between abutting streets and the proposed parking area. (Amended Ord
2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(4) All flea markets shall occur during daylight hours between April 1, and October 31, and
shall occur only on those dates and hours when no other business activity is occurring on the
property in question. However, no property shall be the site of a flea market for more than
fourteen (14) days in a sixty (60) day period
(5) Any food sales must first be approved by the Board of Health.
(6) No structures of any kind, other than canopies, portable sanitation units and one
freestanding ground sign, shall be erected or installed on the property in question. Any
canopies, portable sanitation facilities or sign shall be removed immediately after the
conclusion of the market that day. Sign area and location shall be as required in Article XVII of
these ordinances for the District in question. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(7) The Town Manager may consult with Department of Public Works Director, Police
Department and/or Safety Committee for input on traffic patterns, volume and safety concerns.
(Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-88. Large Scale Conference/Entertainment Facilities.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this regulation is to regulate conference and entertainment facilities
that are large in scale and attract visitors from beyond the Town's and even the region's boundaries.
Such facilities may be business or entertainment oriented and may provide ancillary services that
are customarily associated with the principal use.
B. Large-scale conference/entertainment facilities are permitted in the GB, HB and IND-A zoning
districts subject to approval of a special permit and site plan review and subject to the following
conditions:
(1) The minimum lot area shall be five (5) acres for large-scale conference facilities and fifteen
(15) acres for large-scale entertainment facilities (or a combination facility.)
(2) Public water and public sewer shall serve the site.
(3) All structures and outdoor activities shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet
from any property line.
(4) The maximum height of any structure shall not exceed that allowed in the applicable zone,
except where for each additional foot of setback from all property lines, an additional one foot
of height may be achieved to a maximum of one hundred (100) feet, except as noted hereafter,
any structure proposed over one hundred (100) feet in height must be so noted in the special
permit application, which shall be accompanied by a detailed visual impact analysis to
determine whether or not the proposed structure would be widely seen and be a negative impact
on the Town's landscape or on the neighborhood in which it will be located. Structures judged
to have a negative impact shall not be approved by the Planning Board.
(5) The minimum lot width and depth shall be four hundred (400) feet. Because of the large
number of visitors that may be attracted, these facilities shall be located where primary access
to and from the site is via arterial streets or State highways. The special permit application shall
be accompanied by a detailed traffic study which projects how much traffic will be generated
on both a daily and peak hour basis and probable travel routes to the site.
(6) In approving the plan, the Board may approve waivers of Article XVIII, Off Street Parking
and Loading regulations, in terms of the number of spaces required, the location of spaces, and
the surfacing of spaces depending upon the type and scale of the proposed use as long as the
Board finds that the waiver will be consistent with public safety and convenience.
(7) The proposed facility shall not produce noise levels that will negatively impact upon
existing residential neighborhoods. This includes noise produced by the use or activity itself,
from the participants or visitors to the site, from loudspeakers, or from any other source at, or
associated with, the facility. The Board may require a noise projection study to be performed or
submitted. In general, no facility shall emit noise beyond the boundaries of the subject property
which will be received by residentially used or zoned land that exceeds seventy (70) dBA
during the day or fifty (50) dBA after 10:00 PM and before 7:00 AM. The Board may limit
hours of operation of a use in the interest of minimizing or eliminating nighttime noise.
(8) Outdoor lighting at the proposed facility shall not spill over beyond the site's property
boundaries and shall be the minimum intensity necessary to adequately and safely light the
facility, its parking lot and its access drives.
(9) The maximum size of a freestanding sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
No flashing signs, neon lighting or signs that are lit from within shall be permitted. All lighting
must be exterior lit white light only. All other requirements of Article XVII Signs shall apply.
(10) A landscaped buffer with a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet width shall be provided
along all property lines. The Board may require an increased buffer based upon the size,
intensity and location of the facility. A detailed buffer plan must be submitted with the
application for Special Permit and Site Plan Approval. All requirements of Article XVI –
Landscaping, Screening and Buffers must be adhered to.
§ 171-89. Accessory Dwelling Units.
A. Accessory dwelling units are allowed in certain situations to:
(1) Create new housing units while respecting the look and scale of single-dwelling
neighborhoods.
(2) Increase the housing stock of existing neighborhoods in a manner that is less intense than
alternatives.
(3) Allow more efficient use of existing housing stock and infrastructure.
(4) Provide a mix of housing that responds to changing family needs and smaller households.
(5) Provide a means for residents, particularly seniors, single parents, and families with grown
children, to remain in their homes and neighborhoods, and obtain extra income, security,
companionship and services.
(6) Provide a broader range of accessible and more affordable housing.
B. Where These Regulations Apply.
(1) An accessory dwelling unit may be added to a house, attached house, or manufactured
home in an R zone only as indicated in Article VII Use Regulations and the Tables of Use
Regulations.
C. Design Standards.
(1) Purpose. Standards for creating accessory dwelling units address the following purposes.
(a) Ensure that accessory dwelling units are compatible with the desired character and
livability of Palmer's residential zones.
(b) Respect the general building scale and placement of structures to allow sharing of
common space on the lot, such as driveways and yards.
(c) Ensure that accessory dwelling units are smaller in size than houses, attached houses,
or manufactured homes.
(d) Provide adequate flexibility to site buildings so that they fit the topography of sites.
(2) Generally. The design standards for accessory dwelling units are stated in this section. If
not addressed in this section, the base zone development standards apply.
D. Requirements for all accessory dwelling units.
All accessory dwelling units must meet the following:
(1) Creation. An accessory dwelling unit may only be created through the following methods:
(a) Converting existing living area, attic, basement or garage.
(b) Adding floor area.
(c) Constructing a new house, attached house, or manufactured home with an internal
accessory dwelling unit.
(2) Other uses. An accessory dwelling unit is prohibited in a house with a Home Occupation
except when the accessory dwelling is for a family member.
(3) Location of entrances. Only one entrance to the house may be located on the front facade of
the house, attached house, or manufactured home facing the street, unless the house, attached
house, or manufactured home contained additional front doors entrances before the conversion
accessory dwelling unit was created. An exception to this regulation is entrances that do not
have access from the ground such as entrances from balconies or decks.
E. Parking.
(1) Purpose. The parking requirements balance the need to provide adequate parking while
maintaining the character of single-dwelling neighborhoods and reducing the amount of
impervious surface on a site. More parking is required when a vacant lot is being developed
because generally, the site can more easily be designed to accommodate two parking spaces
while minimizing impervious surface. In the Village Center Districts where an accessory
dwelling unit is being added to a site with an existing dwelling unit, it may be permissible to not
require additional impervious surface if adequate on-street parking is available such as in a
municipal lot.
(2) The following parking requirements apply to accessory dwelling units. All parking must
meet the requirements of Article XVIII Parking Standards:
(a) No additional parking space required. No additional parking space is required for the
accessory dwelling unit if it is created on a site with an existing house, attached house,
or manufactured home.
(b) One additional parking space required. One additional parking space is required for
the accessory dwelling unit as follows:
[1] When the accessory dwelling unit is created at the same time as the house, or
manufactured home.
F. Maximum size.
The size of the accessory dwelling unit may be no more than thirty-three percent (33%) of the
living area of the house, attached house, or manufactured home or eight hundred (800) square feet,
whichever is less.
G. Additional requirements for accessory dwelling units created through the addition of floor area.
(1) Accessory dwelling units created through the addition of floor area must meet the following
design standards:
(a) Exterior finish materials. The exterior finish material must be the same or visually
match in type, size and placement, the exterior finish material of the house, attached
house, or manufactured home.
(b) Roof pitch. The roof pitch must be the same as the predominant roof pitch of the
house, attached house, or manufactured home.
(c) Trim. Trim on edges of elements on the addition must be the same in type size and
location as the trim used on the rest of the house, attached house, or manufactured
home.
(d) Windows. Windows must match those in the house, attached house, or manufactured
home in proportion (relationship of width to height) and orientation (horizontal or
vertical).
(e) Eaves. Eaves must project from the building walls the same distance as the eaves on
the rest of the house, attached house, or manufactured home.
§ 171-90. Bed & Breakfast Facilities.
A. Purpose.
This Article provides standards for the establishment of bed and breakfast facilities. The
regulations are intended to allow for a more efficient use of large, older houses in residential areas
if the neighborhood character is preserved to maintain both the residential neighborhood experience
and the bed and breakfast experience. These regulations enable owners to maintain large
residential structures in a manner which keeps them primarily in residential uses. The proprietor
can take advantage of the scale and often the architectural and historical significance of a residence.
The regulations also provide an alternative form of lodging for visitors who prefer a residential
setting.
B. Description.
Bed and breakfast facility. A bed and breakfast facility is one where an individual or family
resides in a home and rents bedrooms to guests.
C. Where These Regulations Apply.
These regulations apply to bed and breakfast facilities in the residential zones where permitted as
outlined in §171-55 Table of Use Regulations – Residential Zones and §171-62 Table of Use
Regulations – Business Zones.
D. Use-Related Regulations.
(1) Accessory use. A bed and breakfast facility must be accessory to a Household Living use
on a site. This means that the individual or family who operates the facility must occupy the
house as their primary residence. The house must be at least five (5) years old before a bed and
breakfast facility is allowed.
(2) Maximum size. Bed and breakfast facilities are limited to a maximum of five (5) bedrooms
for guests.
(3) Employees. Bed and breakfast facilities may have non-resident employees for the lodging
activity such as booking rooms and food preparation, if approved as part of the Special Permit.
Hired service for normal maintenance, repair and care of the residence or site such as yard
maintenance may also be approved. The number of employees and the frequency of employee
auto trips to the facility may be limited and/or monitored as part of a Special Permit approval.
E. Services to guests.
(1) Food services may only be provided to overnight guests of a bed and breakfast facility.
F. Meetings and social gatherings.
(1) Commercial meetings. Activities including luncheons, banquets, parties, weddings,
meetings, charitable fund raising, commercial or advertising activities, or other gatherings for
direct or indirect compensation, are prohibited at a bed and breakfast facility.
(2) Private social gatherings. Private social gatherings for ten (10) or fewer guests are allowed
without limit as part of a normal Household Living use at the site. All participants in the social
gathering are counted as guests except for residents.
(3) Historical landmarks. A bed and breakfast facility which is located in a historical landmark
and which receives special assessment from the State, may be open to the public for four (4)
hours one (1) day each year. This does not count as either a commercial meeting or a private
social gathering.
G. Site-Related Standards.
(1) Development standards. Bed and breakfast facilities must comply with the development
standards of the base zone, and overlay zone as applicable.
(2) Appearance. Residential structures may be remodeled for the development of a bed and
breakfast facility. However, structural alterations may not be made which prevent the structure
being used as a residence in the future. Internal or external changes which will make the
dwelling appear less residential in nature or function are not allowed. Examples of such
alterations include installation of more than three (3) parking spaces within the front yard
setback, paving of required setbacks, and commercial-type exterior lighting.
(3) Signs. Signs must meet the requirements of Article XVII Signs (c) Signs Permitted in any
“R” District.” (Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29)
H. Site Plan Approval.
Bed and breakfast facilities require a site plan approval. The procedure for this review is outlined
in Article V Administration and Enforcement. The approval criteria are stated in this section.
I. Monitoring.
All bed and breakfast facilities must maintain a guest logbook. It must include the names and
home addresses of guest’s, guest's license plate numbers if traveling by car, dates of stay, and the
room number of each guest. The log must be available for inspection by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer or Designated Agent of the Town of Palmer upon request.
J. Pre-Established Bed and Breakfast Facilities.
(1) Facilities without a revocable permit. Bed and breakfast facilities that were operating
before the date of adoption of this Article and which did not receive a permit, may continue to
operate as an approved use if the operator can show proof that the operation was established
prior to that date. The requirements for verification are listed below.
(a) The facility was operating with a Town business license from the Town of Palmer,
Town Clerk's Office.
(b) The facility paid taxes as required by the State or Federal Government for this facility.
(c) Other official documentation can be provided to the Planning Board office sufficient
to verify the operation of this facility.
(2) Alterations and Expansions. The approved conditional use status provided for in Subsection
A. above applies only to the number of bedrooms, and size of facility that existed on the date of
adoption of this Article. Any expansions of building area or alterations, that increase the
intensity of the facility, are not allowed unless approved through a site plan approval as
provided in Article V.
§ 171-91. Drive-Through Facilities.
A. Purpose.
The regulations of this section are intended to allow for drive-through facilities by reducing the
negative impacts they may create. Of special concern are noise from idling cars and voice
amplification equipment, lighting, air pollution and queued traffic interfering with on-site and offsite
traffic and pedestrian flow. The specific purposes of this chapter are to:
(1) Reduce noise, lighting, air pollution and visual impacts on abutting uses, particularly
residential uses.
(2) Promote safer and more efficient on-site vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
(3) Reduce conflicts between queued vehicles and traffic on adjacent streets.
B. When These Regulations Apply.
(1) Uses. The regulations of this chapter apply to all uses that have drive-through facilities.
(a) Site development. The regulations of this chapter apply only to the portions of the site
development that comprise the drive-through facility. The regulations apply to new
developments, the addition of drive-through facilities to existing developments, and
the relocation of an existing drive-through facility. Drive-through facilities are not a
right; the size of the site or the size and location of existing structures and abutting
structures may make it impossible to meet the regulations of this section. In addition
drive through facilities must comply with all other requirements of the base zone
and/or overlay zone that the property is located in
(b) Parts of a drive-through facility. A drive-through facility is composed of two parts -
the stacking lanes and the service area. The stacking lanes are the space occupied by
vehicles queuing for the service to be provided. The service area is where the service
occurs. In uses with service windows, the service area starts at the service window. In
uses where the service occurs indoors, the service area is the area within the building
where the service occurs. For other development, such as gas pumps, air
compressors, vacuum cleaning stations, the service area is the area where the vehicles
are parked during the service.
C. Setbacks and Landscaping.
(1) All drive-through facilities must provide the setbacks and landscaping stated below.
(a) Abutting an R zone. Service areas and stacking lanes must be set back thirty (30) feet
from all lot lines which abut R zones. The setback must be landscaped to at least the
standard as stated in Article XVI Landscaping, Screening and Buffers.
(b) Abutting a B, I or VC zone. Service areas and stacking lanes must be set back
twenty (20) feet from all lot lines which abut B or I zones. The setback must be
landscaped to at least the standard as stated in Article XVI Landscaping, Screening
and Buffers.
(c) Abutting a street. Service areas and stacking lanes must be setback fifty (50) feet
from all street lot lines. The setback must be landscaped to at least the standard as
stated in Article XVI Landscaping, Screening and Buffers.
D. Vehicular Access.
All driveway entrances, including stacking lane entrances, must be at least fifty (50) feet from an
intersection. The distance is measured along the property line from the junction of the two street
lot lines to the nearest edge of the entrance.
E. Stacking Lane Standards:
These regulations ensure that there is adequate on-site maneuvering and circulation areas, ensure
that stacking vehicles do not impede traffic on abutting streets, and that stacking lanes will not have
nuisance impacts on abutting residential lands.
(1) Gasoline pumps. A minimum of thirty (30) feet of stacking lane is required between a curb
cut and the nearest gasoline pump.
(2) Other drive-through facilities.
(a) Primary facilities. A minimum of one hundred and fifty (150) feet for a single
stacking lane or eighty (80) feet per lane when there is more than one stacking lane, is
required for all other drive-through facilities. A stacking lane is measured from the
curb cut to the service area. Stacking lanes do not have to be linear.
(b) Accessory facilities. A stacking lane is not required for accessory facilities where
vehicles do not routinely stack up while waiting for the service. Examples are
window washing, air compressor, and vacuum cleaning stations.
(3) Stacking lane design and layout. Stacking lanes must be designed so that they do not
interfere with parking and vehicle circulation.
(4) Stacking lanes identified. All stacking lanes must be clearly identified, through the use of
means such as striping, landscaping, and signs.
§171-92. Self Service Storage.
A. Purpose.
Self-Service Storage uses have some characteristics in common with both commercial use and
industrial uses. This chapter provides regulations so that Self-Service Storage uses can be
appropriately sited in either industrial zones or some commercial zones, while maintaining the
desired character and function of the specific zones. In general, Self-Service Storage uses are
similar to other commercial uses in that they provide a service to residential and business uses. The
character of their development is often more similar to industrial buildings and their low activity
level does not add to the vitality of a commercial area.
B. Use Regulations.
Other uses on the site such as the rental of trucks or moving equipment must meet the use and
development standards of the base zone or overlay zone.
C. Development Standards.
(1) The development standards of the base zone apply unless the standard is superceded by
regulations in this section.
(a) Purpose. The special development standards in the HB and IND zones are intended
to allow self-service storage facilities to locate on certain sites in these zones where
they can be close to the residential and business uses that they serve. At the same
time, the development standards direct their location to sites that do not have major
frontage on commercial streets. This prevents large sections of the commercial streets
from being developed with uses that have extremely low activity levels which detract
from the vitality and desired interaction among commercial uses in the area. This also
allows them to locate on odd-shaped or infill sites that are difficult to develop for
many commercial uses.
(b) Storage areas. The maximum size of individual storage areas (each individual storage
unit within the building) in HB and IND zones is five hundred (500) square feet.
(Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29)
(c) Internal circulation. The internal circulation between buildings must be adequate to
provide access for emergency vehicles. (Amended ATM – June 16, 2003 – Article 11)
(d) Parking. For parking requirements see Article XVIII, Parking and Loading.
(e) Outside Storage. Outside storage shall be prohibited. Any large exterior parking
stalls for boats, campers, etc. shall be to the rear of the property and adequately
screened so as not to be visible from the street or abutting properties.
D. Self-Service Storage Design Guidelines.
(1) Purpose. Design review is required for new buildings in the HB and IND zones to ensure
that the development has a high design quality appropriate to the designed character of the zone
and to avoid the monotonous look of many industrial-style buildings. These design guidelines
are used to review new Self-Service Storage uses in the HB and IND zones. In addition to all
other required plans, an elevation and façade plan must be submitted at the time of application
for a Special Permit/Site Plan Approval.
(a) Building and roof design. The building and roof are designed to be compatible with
surrounding development, especially nearby residential uses. Considerations include
design elements that break up long, monotonous building or rooflines and elements
that are compatible with the desired character of the zone.
(b) Building materials. The materials used for buildings, roofs, fences and other
structures are compatible with the desired character of the zone and are visually
pleasing, especially near residential uses.
(c) Street facades. The design and layout of the street side of the site provides a varied
and interesting facade. Considerations include the use of setbacks, building
placement, roof design, variations in building walls, fencing, other structural
elements, and landscaping.
(d) Landscaping. The landscaping on the site provides appropriate transition from public
to private spaces, separates and buffers the buildings from other uses especially
abutting residential uses, and provides visual relief from stark, linear building walls.
(e) Fencing. Any proposed fencing is designed to be compatible with the desired
character of the area and is especially sensitive to abutting residential uses. Use of
rolled razor wire or barbed wire is discouraged.
(f) Security. The perimeter of the site is designed to provide adequate security for both
the site and abutting sites. Considerations include fence and wall materials and
placement, type and placement of landscaping including thorny plant materials and
desired visibility or privacy.
Article XVI
Landscaping, Screening and Buffers
§171-93 Landscaping, Screening and Buffers.
A. Purpose.
(1) The Town recognizes the aesthetic, ecological, and economic value of landscaping and
requires its use to:
(a) Promote the reestablishment of vegetation in areas for aesthetic, health, and wildlife
reasons.
(b) Establish and enhance a pleasant visual character which recognizes aesthetics and
safety issues.
(c) Promote compatibility between land uses by reducing the visual, noise, and lighting
impacts of specific development on users of the site and abutting uses.
(d) Unify development, and enhance and define public and private spaces.
(e) Promote the retention and use of existing vegetation.
(f) Aid in energy conservation by providing shade from the sun and shelter from the
wind.
(g) Restore natural communities through re-establishment of native plants.
(h) Mitigate for loss of natural resource values.
(2) This chapter consists of a set of landscaping, screening and buffer standards and regulations
for use throughout the Town. The regulations address materials, placement, layout, and timing
of installation.
B. Landscaping and Screening Standards:
(1) Subsections (a) through (e) state the different levels of landscaping and screening standards
to be applied throughout the Town depending upon which zone the property is located in and
which zone it abuts. The locations where the landscaping or screening is required are stated in
various places throughout this ordinance. All landscaping and screening required by this
ordinance must comply with all of the provisions of this Article, unless specifically superceded.
The landscaping standards are minimums; higher standards can be substituted as long as all
fence or vegetation height limitations are met. Crime prevention and safety should be
remembered when exceeding the landscaping standards (height and amount of vegetation may
be an issue). (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(a) General Landscaping 1 for Open Areas or in the Interior Sections of Industrial Areas
where industry abuts industry.
[1] Intent. The General Landscaping standard is a landscape treatment for open areas
and the interior sections of industrial areas. It is intended to be applied in
situations where distance is used as the principal means of separating uses or
development, and landscaping is required to enhance the area in-between. While
primarily consisting of ground cover plants, it also includes a mixture of trees,
high shrubs, and low shrubs.
[2] Required materials. The General Landscaping standard has two (2) different
requirements for trees and shrubs. Where the area to be landscaped is less than
thirty (30 feet deep, the standard is one tree per thirty (30) linear feet. Where the
area is thirty (30) feet deep) or greater, the requirement is one (1) tree per eight
hundred (800) square feet and either two (2) high shrubs or three (3) low shrubs
per four hundred (400) square feet of landscaped area. The shrubs and trees may
be grouped. Ground cover plants must fully cover the remainder of the landscaped
area.
(b) General Landscaping 2 for Business abutting Business.
[1] Intent. The General Landscaping 2 standard is a landscape treatment which uses a
combination of distance and low level screening to separate uses or development.
The standard is applied where a low level of screening is adequate to soften the
impact of the use or development, or where visibility between areas is more
important than a total visual screen. It is usually applied along street lot lines and
in between similar business uses.
[2] Required materials. The General Landscaping 2 standard requires enough low
shrubs to form a continuous screen three (3) feet high and ninety-five (95) percent
opaque year around. In addition, one tree is required per thirty (30) lineal feet of
landscaped area or as appropriate to provide a tree canopy over the landscaped
area. Ground cover plants must fully cover the remainder of the landscaped area.
A three (30) foot high masonry wall or a berm may be substituted for the shrubs,
but the trees and ground cover plants are still required. When applied along street
lot lines, the screen or wall is to be placed along the interior side of the landscaped
area.
(c) General Landscaping 3 for Business abutting Residential Areas.
[1] Intent. The General Landscaping 3 standard is a landscape treatment which uses
screening to provide the physical and visual separation between uses or
development. It is used in those instances where visual separation is required.
[2] Required materials. The General Landscaping 3 standard requires enough high
shrubs to form a screen six (6) feet high and ninety-five (95) percent opaque year
around. In addition, one (1) tree is required per thirty (30) lineal feet of landscaped
area or as appropriate to provide a tree canopy over the landscaped area. Ground
cover plants must fully cover the remainder of the landscaped area. A six (6) foot
high masonry wall (or other wall as approved by the Board) may be substituted for
the shrubs, but the trees and ground cover plants are still required. When applied
along street lot lines, the screen or wall is to be placed along the interior side of
the landscaped area.
(d) General Landscaping 4, for Industrial abutting Residence where space is limited.
[1] Intent. The General Landscaping 4 standard is intended to be used in special
instances where extensive screening of both visual and noise impacts is needed to
protect abutting sensitive areas and where there is little space for separation.
[2] Required materials. The General Landscaping 4 standard requires a six (6) foot
high solid fence, masonry wall (or alternative as approved by the Planning Board)
along the interior side of the landscaped area. One (1) tree is required per thirty
(30) lineal feet of wall or as appropriate to provide a tree canopy over the
landscaped area. In addition, four high shrubs are required per thirty (30) lineal
feet of wall. Ground cover plants must fully cover the remainder of the landscaped
area.
(e) General Landscaping 5, for Industrial abutting Residence in less dense areas.
[1] Intent. The General Landscaping 5 standard is intended to be used in special
instances where extensive screening of both visual and noise impacts is needed to
protect abutting sensitive uses, and where it is desirable and practical to separate a
use by distance as well as sight-obscuring materials.
[2] Required materials. The General Landscaping 5 standard requires a berm between
four (4) and six (6) feet high. If the berm is less than six (6) feet high, low shrubs
that meet the General Landscaping 2 standard must be planted on top of the berm
to assure that the overall screen height is six (6) feet. In addition, one tree is
required per thirty (30) lineal feet of berm or as appropriate to provide a tree
canopy over the landscaped area. Ground cover plants must fully cover the
remainder of the landscaped area.
C. Plant Materials.
(1) Shrubs and ground cover. All required ground cover plants and shrubs must be of sufficient
size and number to meet the required standards within three (3) years of planting. Mulch (as a
ground cover) must be confined to areas underneath plants and is not a substitute for ground
cover plants.
(2) Trees. Trees may be deciduous or evergreen. Deciduous trees at the time of planting must
be fully branched, have a minimum diameter of one and three quarters (1¾) inches, measured
four and one half (4½) feet above the ground, and have a minimum height of eight (8) feet.
Evergreen trees at the time of planting must be fully branched and a minimum of six (6) feet in
height.
(3) Plant material choices.
(a) Existing vegetation. Existing landscaping or natural vegetation may be used to meet
the standards, if protected and maintained during the construction phase of the
development. When the existing trees are at least twelve (12) inches in diameter,
measured four and one half (4½) feet above the ground, they may count triple towards
meeting the tree requirements of a landscaping standard.
(b) Selection of materials. Landscape materials should be selected and sited to produce a
hardy and drought-resistant landscape area. Selection should include consideration of
soil type and depth, the amount of maintenance required, spacing, exposure to sun and
wind, the slope and contours of the site, and compatibility with existing native
vegetation preserved on the site.
(4) Exceeding standards. Landscaping materials that exceed the standards may be substituted
for the minimums so long as all fence or vegetation does not obstruct vision of pedestrian or
automobile traffic.
(5) Complying with the standards. It is the applicant's responsibility to show that the
landscaping materials proposed will comply with the regulations of this chapter.
(6) Varying from set standards. In certain situations the landscaping requirements outlined
here may be impractical or impossible to achieve due to size or location of the parcel or
topography. In these circumstances the applicant/developer may present a plan to the Planning
Board showing a combination of the above listed options that will be compatible with
surrounding areas and achieve the desired buffer results. It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant/developer to show why they cannot comply with the standards and the Planning
Board shall have the final discretion on approval or disapproval of the landscaping plan.
D. Installation and Maintenance:
(1) Installation. Plant materials must be installed to current nursery industry standards. Plant
materials must be properly supported to ensure survival.
(2) Maintenance. Maintenance of landscaped areas is the ongoing responsibility of the
property owner. Required landscaping must be continuously maintained in a healthy manner.
Plants that die must be replaced in kind. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may seek revocation
of permit, court orders, and/or fines if the landscaping has not been maintained in an
appropriate manner.
Article XVII
Signs
§171-94. Signs.
A. Applicability.
All signs (accessory and non-accessory) shall comply with the regulations for the erection and
construction of signs contained in this ordinance and all other applicable regulations. In addition to the
provisions of this ordinance, all non-accessory signs, including the typical billboard signs, shall be
required to have the appropriate annual permit from the Massachusetts Outdoor Advertising Board for
any non-accessory sign which is not in conformity with applicable ordinances of the Town of Palmer
enacted in accordance with §29 of Chapter 93 of the General Laws. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM
3/7/07)
B. General Sign Regulations.
(1) Any traffic, informational or directional sign owned and installed by a governmental agency
shall be permitted with the approval of the Town Manager. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM
3/7/07)
(2) A sign (including temporary interior window displays) or its illuminator shall not by reason of
its location, shape, size, or color interfere with traffic or be confused with or obstruct the view or
effectiveness of any official traffic sign, traffic signal, or traffic marking. A sign or any part
thereof which moves or flashes, all signs of the traveling light or animated type, and all beacons
and flashing devices are prohibited except such portions of a sign as consists solely of indicators of
time and/or temperature or automatically changing message shall be permitted by the Building
Inspector who shall seek the advice of the Planning Board, and Chief of Police to determine that
the sign is not a hazard to traffic and pedestrian safety. All illumination of signs must be so
arranged as to prevent glare onto any portion of any public way or into any residential area.
(3) No more than one sign shall be allowed for any one establishment in the "R" District.
(4) The limitations as to the number of signs permitted does not apply to traffic or directional signs
which are necessary for the safety and directions of residents, employees, customers and visitors,
(whether in a vehicle or on foot) of the business, industry, or residence. Such signs may carry the
name of the business or project provided that said name:
(a) Is clearly secondary in nature to the primary directional function of the sign,
(b) Is no greater than 1/2 the size of the directional message
(c) May not exceed a maximum size of six (6) square feet,
(d) May not be any higher (top of sign) than four (4) feet from the ground.
(e) Shall be limited to one such directional sign per curb cut.
(f) If lighted, shall be illuminated internally, or by indirect method with white light only.
(5) No sign, together with any supporting framework, shall extend to a height above the maximum
building height allowed in the district in which the sign is located. The top of a sign, together with
any supporting framework, shall not extend above the roofline. In the case of a building with a
pitched roof, the eaves line of the building shall be considered the roofline.
(6) The supporting members for any pole sign, projecting sign or any other sign shall be in
acceptable proportion to the size of the sign.
(7) No sign shall be erected so as to obstruct any door, window or fire escape on a building.
(8) At each boundary line of the Town and within a street right-of-way, not more than one (1) sign
not exceeding twenty-five (25) square feet in area indicating the meetings of any Palmer civic
organization may be erected subject to the approval of the Commonwealth if such street is owned
and maintained by the Commonwealth.
(9) No sign, except for a traffic regulatory or informational sign, shall be erected which uses the
words "stop", "caution", or "danger", or other similar words in such a manner as to present or
imply the need or requirement of stopping or caution or the existence of danger, or which, for any
reason, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, is likely to be confused with any traffic regulatory or
informational sign.
(10) If lighting is provided, the source of light shall be either from within the sign or shall be
exterior to the sign and shielded so as to prevent direct glare from the light source onto any public
street or onto any adjacent property.
(11) In any district, one unlighted temporary sign offering premises for sale or lease for each
parcel in one ownership shall be permitted provided: it shall not exceed six (6) square feet in
surface area; and it shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the street lot line or one-half (½) of
the building setback distance whichever is less.
(12) In any district, one unlighted temporary sign for an architect, engineer or contractor, erected
during the period such person is performing work on the premises on which such sign is erected,
shall be permitted provided: it shall not exceed four (4) square feet in surface area; and it shall be
set back at least ten (10) feet from the street lot line, or one-half (½) of the building setback
distance, whichever is less.
(13) In particular instances the Planning Board may issue a Special Permit allowing more than the
number of signs herein permitted, or for signs of a larger size or height than herein permitted (but
not in a location not ordinarily permitted by the Zoning Ordinance), if it determines that the
architecture of the building, the location of the building or the land or nature of the use being made
of the building or land is such that additional signs or signs of a larger size would not detract from
the character of the neighborhood and should be permitted in the public interest. In the granting of
such approval, the Planning Board shall specify in the permit; the exact sign permitted, the size and
location of the sign or signs, and impose such other terms and restrictions as it may deem to be in
the public interest and in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Article. Special
Permits granted under this Section are non-transferable (i.e. that any change in said signs will
require a new or revised Special Permit). (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(14) The Building Inspector is authorized to order the repair or removal of any sign and its
supporting structure which, in his judgment, is dangerous, or in disrepair or which is erected or
maintained contrary to the zoning ordinance.
(15) Signs painted or placed on the inside of the window shall be permitted, provided that the
aggregate area of such signs does not exceed twenty (20) percent of the area of the window glass.
(16) For approved residential subdivisions, townhouse, multi-family, and open space
developments: (Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29)
(a) One (1) ground sign identifying the development, provided:
[1] It shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in surface area, on any one side.
[2] It shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from any street lot line.
[3] It shall be located on private property and not within any city street right-of-way.
[4] It shall not rise (top of sign) to more than five (5) feet from the ground or sidewalk.
[5] If lighted, it shall be illuminated internally, or by indirect method with white light
only.
[6] Such a sign shall only be permitted so long as the approved access within the
development is not a town accepted public way. Once said access has been accepted
by Town Council as a town right-of-way said sign shall be removed and a standard
town street sign shall be installed. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(17) Moving or portable signs, such as those commonly used in conjunction with gasoline or
filling station operations and automobile dealers and garage activities, including banners and flags
and any sign displayed on a vehicle when such vehicle is being used primarily for the purpose of
such display, are prohibited. (Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29)
(18) Blimps, hot air balloons and like devices for advertising are prohibited.
(19) All signs shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the date from which they no longer
serve their intended function (i.e. no longer provide the service, establishment or product being
advertised).
(20) Signs on public property are prohibited with the exception of street and highway
signs or as may be permitted by the Town Manager. (Amended Special Town Meeting, June 24,
2002, Article 2, Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
C. Signs Permitted in Any "R" District.
(1) In all "R" Districts, the following exterior accessory signs and no others are permitted:
(a) One identification sign for each dwelling unit, provided: such sign shall not exceed two
(2) square feet in surface area; if lighted, it shall be illuminated internally or by indirect
method with white light only; and it shall not be used other than for identifying the
occupancy.
(b) Each membership club, funeral establishment, hospital, place of public assembly,
community facility or public utility may have one identification sign (not to exceed ten
(10) square feet in surface area). Churches, community facilities that are not places of
public assembly may have one (1) additional sign (not to exceed forty (40) square feet in
surface area), provided that such sign(s), if lighted, shall be illuminated internally or by
indirect method with white light only, and such signs shall be set back at least one-half
(½) the required depth of the front yard setback.
(c) Tourist home/bed and breakfast facilities may have one (1) identification sign (not to
exceed four (4) square feet in surface area) provided that such sign, if lighted, shall be
illuminated by indirect method with white light only.
D. Signs permitted in any "B" or “V” District.
In all "B" and “V” Districts, the following exterior accessory signs and no others are permitted:
(Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29)
(1) Signs permitted in Section C ("R" Districts) subject to the same regulations.
(2) Business signs shall be permitted as follows:
(a) Wall Signs.
[1] Main (frontage) Wall – one (1) Wall Sign for each establishment in the structure,
provided:
[2] It shall be attached and parallel to the main (frontage) wall of the building;
[3] It shall not project horizontally more than twelve (12) inches therefrom;
[4] The surface area shall not be larger than ten percent (10%) of the total wall area of
the facade of one (1) story which is occupied by the establishment or one hundred
(100) square feet, whichever is less and said sign must be displayed on said wall
area;
[5] If lighted, it shall be illuminated internally, or by indirect method with white light
only;
[6] When an establishment is located on a lot with more than one frontage (i.e. a corner
or through lot) a Main (frontage) wall sign may only be displayed on one of the
frontages. The other frontage(s) may display a Side Wall sign.
(b) Side Wall(s). One Side Wall sign for each establishment in the structure for each
side-wall (that wall facing a non rear-lot line) provided: (Amended Special Town
Meeting, June 24, 2002, Article 2)
[1] It shall be attached and parallel to the side wall of the building;
[2] It shall not project horizontally more than twelve (12) inches therefrom;
[3] The surface area shall not be larger than twenty-five (25) square feet;
[4] If lighted, it shall be illuminated internally, or by indirect method with white light
only;
[5] Side wall signs are not permitted on side walls which face or abut (within one
hundred (100) feet) a residential zoning district.
[6] Awning/Canopy - the wall sign permitted under this Section may be placed on an
awning/canopy attached to the building instead of being placed on the building wall
itself. Such sign must conform to all of the requirements for a wall sign. Said
awning/canopy may also display the street address for the building and may also
have either: a) one additional sign along the bottom of the front of the
awning/canopy; of b) an additional sign along the bottom of each side of the
awning/canopy, identifying the establishment located therein, provided the letters,
numbers, characters, logos, etc. of such signs do not exceed a height of three inches.
The purpose of said additional awning/canopy, signage is for the visibility of
pedestrian traffic. The DPW Director must also approve awnings/ canopies
overhanging a public right-of-way. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(c) Ground Signs
[1] "HB" District - one ground sign for each lot street frontage of a business
establishment in the "HB" District, provided:
a. It shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in surface area, on any one side.
b. It shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from any street lot line.
c. It shall not rise to more than twenty-five (25) feet from the ground or
sidewalk.
d. If lighted, it shall be illuminated internally, or by indirect method with
white light only.
e. Where a single lot is occupied by more than one business, whether in the
same structure or not, there shall not be more than one (1) ground sign per
lot.
[2] In particular instances the Planning Board may issue a Special Permit for one
ground sign, in addition to wall sign(s) permitted in the Sections above, for each
lot frontage of each lot in the Neighborhood Business (NB), General Business
(GB) Districts, and any (V) Village Center District provided that:
a. There must be unique features to the structure, the orientation of the
structure, the location or setback of the structure, or the location of
establishments in the structure, especially affecting such structure or
establishment, but not generally affecting the zoning district in which it is
located, which restrict the visibility of wall sign(s) otherwise allowed by
this ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
b. Said ground sign shall be located in the same lot as the structure or
establishment being advertised.
c. Said ground sign shall not exceed a height of ten (10) feet, nor have a
surface area greater than twenty-five (25) square feet in the GB District or
greater that twenty (20) square feet in the NB District or the V District,
though the Planning Board may require a lesser height or size. (Amended
ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29)
E. Signs Permitted in the "I" District.
(1) In all "I" Districts, the following exterior signs, and no others, are permitted:
(a) Business signs shall be permitted as follows:
[1] In all I Districts not more than two (2) wall signs for each building, provided each
sign shall not project horizontally more than twelve (12) inches therefrom; the
surface area of each sign shall not aggregate more than seven and one half (7 1/2%)
percent of the area of the wall on which it is displayed; and if lighted, each sign shall
be illuminated internally or by indirect method with white light only. Not more than
one (1) sign shall be attached to any wall.
[2] One ground sign for each establishment, provided: it shall not exceed fifty (50)
square feet in surface area; it shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from any street
lot line; it shall not be erected so that any portion of it is over fifteen (15) feet above
the ground or sidewalk; and if lighted, it shall be illuminated internally or by indirect
method with white light only.
[3] One (1) freestanding general identification sign at the entrance to each industrial
park in the I District shall be allowed provided that it does not exceed fifty (50
square feet and shall be in a location as approved by the SPGA.)
F. Signs in URIP District.
All signs in the URIP District must conform to the regulations as stated in Article XI – Urban
Renewal Industrial Park District.
G. Nonconformance of Accessory Signs.
Pre-existing nonconforming accessory signs may not be changed, extended or altered except so as to
be in conformity with the provisions of Article XVII of this ordinance, except that for pre-existing
nonconforming Retail/Service/Commercial and Wholesale/Transportation/ Industrial uses located in
Residential Districts: (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(1) A pre-existing nonconforming accessory sign may be changed, extended or altered if there is a
Finding by the Planning Board that such change, extension or alteration will not be substantially
more detrimental than the existing nonconforming sign to the neighborhood, and provided that
such change, extension or alteration will not make the sign any more nonconforming than it now is
(i.e. higher, taller, bigger, closer, etc.).
H. Nonconforming, Non-Accessory (General Advertising) Signs.
All nonconforming, non-accessory signs in existence and lawfully erected before the adoption of this
ordinance may continue to be maintained, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Article XVII,
provided, however, that no proposed new non-accessory sign shall be permitted in any District from and
after the adoption of this ordinance and furthermore, no existing nonconforming signage shall be
enlarged or expanded in any way. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
I. Permit and Fees.
No sign shall be erected, altered or enlarged until a permit has been issued by the Building Inspector.
Such permit shall be issued only if the sign complies or will comply with all applicable provisions of this
ordinance. A schedule of fees for such permits may be determined from time to time by the Town
Manager. A permit must be obtained for signs permitted in residential areas and for temporary signs as
allowed under the provisions of Section B, however, a fee will not be charged. (Amended Ord 2007- 07,
RTCM 3/7/07)
Article XVIII
Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
§171-95.
A. General Off-Street Parking Requirements.
(1) For all zoning districts, except the Village Center Districts (VC), off-street parking spaces shall
be provided for every new structure, the enlargement of an existing structure, or the development
of a new land use in accordance with the TABLE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS
and other requirements contained herein.
a. Computation of Spaces. When the computation of required parking or loading spaces
results in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of one-half (½) or more shall
require one (1) space. An existing structure which is enlarged or an existing use which is
extended or expanded after the effective date of this ordinance shall be required to
provide off street parking and loading spaces in accordance with the TABLE OF OFFSTREET
PARKING REGULATIONS, unless the increase in units or measurements
amounts to less than twenty five (25) percent, whether such increase occurs at one time
or in successive stages. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
b. Continuance. Required off-street parking or loading spaces, which, after development,
are later designated as, and accepted by the Town for, off-street parking or loading purposes,
shall continue to serve the uses or structures to meet these requirements so long as
said use or structure remains.
(2) For all zoning districts, except the Village Center Districts (VC), in cases of a change in use
where the existing use (or in cases of vacancy, the next previous use) did not provide for the
number of off-street parking spaces required under this Ordinance. In situations where the
proposed use would require a larger number of off-street parking spaces, the proposed use shall
only have to provide an additional number of off-street parking spaces equal to the difference
between the number required under this ordinance for the proposed use and the number required
under this ordinance for the previous use. Under no circumstances shall this §171-.95. (2) be
interpreted to allow a reduction in parking when the required amount of parking spaces for the
proposed use would be available on the site. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(3) For Village Center Districts (VC) only, no additional off-street parking is required for the
continued use or reuse of existing buildings, as long as that use or reuse does not increase the total
floor area within the building. However, off-street parking shall be provided for any new structure,
for an enlargement or addition to an existing building, in accordance with the following Table of
Off-Street
(4) Parking Regulations. For purposes of this ordinance, the replacement of an amount of floor
space equal to that in existence at the time of enactment of this ordinance is not considered to be an
addition of new space, and is, therefore, exempt from these parking requirements. Also, the
addition of a second floor to one-story buildings existing in the VC Districts at the time of the
enactment of this ordinance shall be exempt from these parking requirements so as to encourage
the restoration of building heights in the District which are more uniform and consistent with the
scale of development which has historically existed. However, the addition of third, fourth and
fifth floors to said one-story buildings in the VC District in existence at the time of adoption of this
ordinance shall be subject to the parking requirements as set forth in the Table of Off-Street
Parking Regulations. The Planning Board may waive parking requirements when it can be
demonstrated that sufficient public parking is available in the immediate vicinity of the proposed
use. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(5) The number of off-street parking spaces required to serve added floor space in the Village
Center Districts (VC) is shown in parenthesis. Where no parenthesized number appears, the
parking requirement for added floor space in the VC District is the same as that which applies in
all other zoning districts.
(6) Parking shall be provided to serve the parking needs which are generated by a particular use or
structure.
B. General Lot Design.
(1) Existing Spaces. Parking or loading spaces being maintained in any district in connection with
any existing use on the effective date of this ordinance, or any spaces subsequently provided in
accordance with this ordinance, shall not be decreased or any way removed from service to the use
originally intended to be served, so long as said use remains, unless a number of parking or loading
spaces is constructed elsewhere, such that the total number of spaces conforms to the requirements
of the Tables of this Article, provided this regulation shall not require the maintenance of more
parking or loading spaces than is required according to the Tables. (Amended Ord 2007- 07,
RTCM 3/7/07)
(2) Location of Loading Spaces. The loading spaces required for the uses listed in the Table of
Off-Street Loading Requirements shall in all cases be on the same lot as the use they are intended
to serve. In no case shall the required loading spaces be part of the area used to satisfy the parking
requirements of this ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(3) Location of Parking Spaces. Required off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the same
lot as the principal use they are required to serve. When practical difficulties exist which prevent
their establishment of the same lot, the Planning Board may grant a Special Permit to allow spaces
to be on a non-municipal lot, the closest point of which is no further than three hundred (300) feet
from the premises to which they are appurtenant. A Special Permit issued under this provision
shall be coterminous with the length of the lease and shall expire if and when the lease for said
parking expires.
(a) Whenever feasible, parking areas shall be located to the side or rear of the structure,
and not within the front yard of a structure.
(b) Whenever feasible, parking areas shall be shared with adjacent businesses.
[1] An agreement, lease, deed, contract or easement establishing shared use of a
parking facility shall be submitted to, and approved by, the Planning Board. The
approved agreement shall be recorded in the Registry of Deeds prior to the
issuance of an occupancy permit for the project.
[2] In the event that a shared parking agreement is terminated, those uses with less than
the required number of spaces shall notify the Planning Board within fourteen (14)
days and do one of the following:
a. Provide at least fifty (50) percent of the required parking within one hundred
twenty (120) days and provide the remaining required parking within one (1) year
following termination of the shared use agreement; or
b. Demonstrate to the Planning Board, using a study deemed reliable by the Board,
that the available parking is sufficient to accommodate the use’s peak parking
demand; or
c. Apply for and receive a variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals for less than
the required number of spaces.
(c) Whenever feasible, parking areas shall not be located within twenty (20) feet of the
street line of any lot. (Amended ATM June 11, 2003, Article 11)
(d) Parking areas shall be designed so that vehicular lights shall be screened or directed
away from oncoming traffic.
(e) Porous pavement may be used on up to twenty (20) percent of the required number of
spaces to decrease the amount of impervious surface in the parking area. No landscaping
is required in the porous paving area.
C. Specific Requirements for Parking Spaces.
(1) Parking spaces must be at least nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet in size, exclusive of
maneuvering area and reasonable access.
(2) All off-street spaces shall have bumper and wheel guards where needed to protect abutting
structures, properties or plantings. Parking areas shall be designed so that parked vehicles do not
extend over pedestrian walkways or sidewalks.
(3) Interior drive widths within parking lots shall be as follows:
(a) For ninety (90) degree parking – twenty four (24) feet
(b) For sixty (60) degree parking – eighteen (18) feet
(c) For forty-five (45) degree parking – thirteen (13) feet
(d) For thirty (30) degree parking - eleven (11) feet
(4) It is the obligation of the owner of the property upon which a building or use is located to
provide and maintain all required parking and loading spaces as long as such building or use is in
existence.
D. Additional Parking and Loading Space Standards.
(1) All parking and loading areas shall comply with the following:
(a) The layout of the parking area shall allow sufficient space for the storage of plowed
snow without reducing the number of required parking spaces, unless removal by some
other means is provided.
(b) Any fixture used to illuminate any parking area shall be so arranged as to direct the light
away from the street and away from adjoining premises used for residential purposes.
(c) Parking and loading spaces shall be so arranged as to prohibit backing of vehicles onto
any street.
(d) No portion of a driveways entrance or exit shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to the curb
line of an intersecting street nor shall it be closer than fifty (50) feet to any portion of an
existing driveway located in a Business or Industrial District.
(e) Any two driveways leading to or from the same street and from the same lot shall not be
within thirty (30) feet of each other at their intersection with the front lot line.
(f) A driveway's entrance or exit shall not exceed, at its intersection with the front lot line, a
width of fifteen (15) feet for single, two and three-family uses; and thirty (30) feet for all
other uses.
(g) The parking area and access driveways thereto shall be graded and drained so as to
dispose of all surface water accumulation in accordance with acceptable engineering
practices and in accordance with the Town of Palmer street entrance permit standards.
(h) Except on a farm, not more than one (1) commercial vehicle, and said vehicle shall not
exceed a weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross weight, shall be parked or in any
way stored on any lot in any Residential (R) District (that is used for residential
purposes). This shall not pertain to a vehicle housed within the confines of a garage or
accessory building.
(i) No private access street or driveway serving a parking lot for nonresidential use shall
cross property in a residential district except with a Special Permit granted by the
Planning Board under the provisions of Article V.
(j) No more than one (1) unregistered motor vehicle or trailer, or one (1) registered motor
vehicle or trailer not in operating condition (any vehicle that does not have a valid
registration legally issued by a governmental authority), and no motor vehicle
accessories which are not parts of said one vehicles, may be parked, stored or otherwise
placed on a parcel of land in the Town of Palmer without a Special Permit from the
Town Manager or Chief of Police. This section shall not apply to the parking, storage or
otherwise placing of unregistered motor vehicles and/or motor vehicle accessories where
such parking, storage or placement is in connection with a legally established business
selling new and/or used automobiles and trucks, or automotive repair or automobile service
stations. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
[1] All permitted unregistered motor vehicles and/or motor vehicle accessories shall be
screened from the view of the public and from abutting public ways and from abutting
properties by being enclosed within a structure or sight impervious fencing or
screening.
(k) A Driveway Permit shall be obtained from the Town Manager, for all new or
relocated driveways or parking lots. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(l) Any use (drive-ins, etc.), which requires the 'stacking' of vehicles waiting in line, must
conform to the standards outlined in Article XV, §171-91.
(m) There shall not be any business operation for vehicle repair for profit or gasoline or oil
service facilities or any repair made to any motor vehicles, except on a lot occupied by
a permitted automotive use. Any gasoline or oil facilities shall be at least twenty-five
(25) feet from any lot line.
(n) There shall not be any storage of materials or equipment or display of merchandise
within parking areas except as part of approved building operations.
(2) In addition to the above, all parking and loading areas containing over five (5) spaces,
including automotive and drive-in establishments of all types shall either be contained within
structures or shall also comply with the following:
(a) The area shall be effectively screened with suitable planting or sight impervious fencing
on each side which adjoins or faces the side or rear lot line of a lot situated in any
Residential "R" District or any lot containing a residential use.
(b) The area and access driveways thereto shall be surfaced with bituminous concrete or
cement concrete material. The Planning Board may allow construction of an alternative
all-weather surface if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Board that such
surface will be durable, dustless and continuously maintained. However, bituminous or
cement concrete must be used in all areas of a ten (10%) percent slope or greater. The
location of spaces shall be suitably marked by painted lines or other appropriate
markings.
(c) A substantial bumper of masonry, steel, or heavy timber, or a concrete curb or berm
curb which is backed, shall be placed at the edge of surfaced areas except driveways
in order to protect abutting structures, properties and sidewalks and screening materials.
In addition, a minimum four (4) foot wide sidewalk is required to separate
spaces from the building that they serve.
(d) In all Zoning Districts except the General Business (GB), the Planning Board may
grant a Special Permit to allow the reduction of the parking space requirements to eighty
(80) percent of that required in the Table of Off-Street Parking Regulations where
conditions unique to the use will reasonably justify such a reduction, provided that a
greater percentage reduction may be allowed where joint use of the same spaces by two
or more uses or establishments is justifiable by virtue of the fact that the uses or
establishments generate peak demand at substantially different time periods.
(e) In the design of parking lots serving uses located in Business or Industrial Districts
which provide more than seventy-five (75) parking spaces, the expanse of pavement
shall be interrupted by separating rows of parking spaces from each other and from
driveways by using planting strips which may also contain pedestrian sidewalks at
least six (6) feet in width combined. Provision of these required planting strips shall
take into account the need to store snow, the need to locate light poles, the need to
allow safe pedestrian movement, the need to maximize emergency access, and the
need to separate different traffic movements. Any modification to a particular parking
lot which caused the lot to exceed the seventy-five (75) car standard shall cause the
provision of planting strips to be required in the entire lot. All proposals to construct
or modify such parking lots shall be reviewed by the Planning Board in light of the
requirements of this Section.
(f) Fire lanes or emergency access points required for buildings or other structures shall be
protected from unauthorized parking through the provision of curbs, mountable barriers,
landscaped areas or such other improvements subject to the approval of the Fire Chief
and Chief of Police, which in turn meets the objective of precluding parking in the
restricted area.
§171-96. TABLE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS
Section 171-96: Table of Off Street Parking Requirements
Use Number of Off Street Parking Spaces
(When it is deemed that additional parking spaces are
required in a VC District, the number in parentheses
(xx) shall be used)
Dwelling, one, two, and three family
units and Townhouses and
condominiums
Two per unit (1.0 per unit)
Dwelling, multi-family Two per dwelling unit, except housing for the
elderly, in which case, it shall be one for each two
dwelling units (1.0 per two units)
Lodging house, and similar type of
group activities.
One per rental or sleeping unit. Any bedroom or
group of two beds in a single room constitutes a
sleeping unit. For lodging houses only, the Planning
Board may issue a Special Permit to allow a
reduction in the required number of parking spaces to
one per every two rental or sleeping units.
Theater, gymnasium, auditorium,
church or similar place of public
assembly, with seating facilities
One for each three seats of total seating capacity (one
for each six seats)
Automobile retail and ser vice
establishment, and other retail and
service establishment utilizing either
indoor or outdoor display areas, which
are unusually extensive in relation to
customer traffic
One per 500 square feet of gross floor space. In the
case of outdoor display areas, one for each vehicle
allowed by the license for the site
Hotel, motel, tourist court One for each sleeping room plus one for each 400 sq.
ft. of public meeting area and restaurant space
Drive-in eating establishment One per 30 square feet of gross floor area
Drive-in establishment One per 100 square feet of gross floor area
Tourist home/bed and breakfast Two spaces, plus one additional space for each
rooming unit.
Establishments selling foods prepared
on premises, where consumption is
primarily off the premises
Three for each four seats of seating capacity, plus
one for each 100 square feet of kitchen area and
waiting area
Sit-down restaurants, lounges, bars,
and nightclubs breakfast facility
One for each four seats of total seating capacity, plus
one per each 300 square feet of gross kitchen area
(one for each four seats of total seating capacity, plus
one per each 500 square feet of gross kitchen area)
Commercial, retail and personal
service establishments (excluding
convenience stores)
One per each 200 square feet of gross floor area (1.0
per 500 square feet) Excluding all areas used for
storage and/or utility uses. Except this may be
reduced by Planning Board to one per 250 square
feet for businesses with over 20,000 square foot floor
areas.
Convenience Stores One per 150 square feet.
Miscellaneous professional and
business offices, including banks,
insurance and real estate
establishments
One per each 200 square feet of gross floor area (1.0
per 500 square feet) Excluding all areas used for
storage and/or utility uses.
Medical/dentist office building One per each 200 square feet of gross floor area (1.0
per 400 square feet) Excluding all areas used for
storage and/or utility uses.
Wholesale establishment One per each 1,000 square feet gross floor space
Warehouse or storage establishment One per two employees on the two largest shifts
combined
Manufacturing or industrial
establishment
One per each 800 square feet of gross floor space OR
.75 per each employee of the combined employment
of the two largest successive shifts, whichever is the
larger
Hospital One and one-half spaces per bed at design capacity
Business, trade, or industrial school or
college
One for each 200 square feet of gross floor area in
classrooms, including space for the gymnasium or
the auditorium whichever has the larger capacity at
one space per (3) three seats.
Country club One for each four regular club members, plus one
space for each employee
YMCA, community facility (Town
building, recreation, etc.)
One per each 400 square feet of gross floor space
(none)
Libraries and museums One per each 750 square feet of gross floor space
(none)
Transportation terminal One for each 500 square feet of gross floor area
Public utility 1. One for each 300 square feet of gross floor area
devoted to office use.
2. One for each 800 square feet of gross floor area
per other use
Funeral parlors One for each four seats of seating capacity.
Car washing facility (automatic or
conveyor)
One per employee plus stacking spaces equivalent to
5 times the maximum capacity of the facility
Mixed use Sum of various uses computed separately
Elementary and Junior High School One space for each teacher and employee, including
space for the gymnasium or the auditorium
whichever has the larger capacity at one space per
three (3) seats.
High School One space for each teacher and employee, plus one
space per each four students, including space for the
gymnasium or the auditorium, whichever has the
larger capacity at one space per three (3) seats.
Large scale conference and
Entertainment centers
1 per three (3) seats or 1 per three (3) persons
attending during peak hours.
Flea Market Four (4) spaces per vendor
Outdoor recreational use 1 per three (3) persons attending during peak hours.
(Added ATM – June 16, 2003 – Article 11)
Any use permitted by this ordinance
not interpreted to be covered by this
schedule
Closest similar use as shall be determined by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer
§171-97. Handicap Parking.
A. All parking areas shall be provide handicapped accessible parking spaces, as required by the
federal American with Disabilities Act (ADA), and as specified in the table below, except for the
following uses which are specifically exempted in ADA requirements:
(1) Owner occupied buildings with no more than four (4) units.
(2) Single family homes, not owner occupied, sold or rented without the use of a broker.
(3) Housing operated by religious organizations and private clubs that limit occupancy to
members.
B. Parking for the handicapped shall be provided at the rate specified in the table below:
Total Spaces in Lot 1-
25
26-
50
51-
75
76-
100
101-
150
151-
200
201-
300
301-
400
401-
500
501-
1000
1000 &
Over
Minimum Number
of Accessible spaces
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
2%
of
total
20 plus 1 for
each 100
over 1000
C. One (1) van accessible handicap space is required for each eight (8) standard handicap spaces
required. At least one (1) van accessible space is required for each use.
D. Accessible spaces shall be eight feet (8’-0”) wide, with an adjacent access aisle five feet (5’-0”)
wide, and shall be marked with signs and pavement paint. One (1) in every eight (8) accessible
spaces shall have an access aisle eight feet (8’-0”) (rather than five feet (5’-0”)) and shall be signed
“Van Accessible”.
§171-.98. Off-Street Loading and Unloading Requirements.
A. For every building hereafter erected for Retail and Service Commercial, Wholesale, Transportation
and Industrial, and Community Facility use as specified in the Table of Use Regulations and for every
such use hereinafter established in an existing building or area, the off-street loading and unloading requirements
presented in the Table of Off-Street Loading Regulations shall apply.
§ 171-99. Table of Off Street Loading Regulations.
Type of Use First Loading
Space
Second Loading
Space Each Additional Space
Retail Trade 20,000 sq. ft. 60,000 sq. ft. One for 60,000 sq. ft. of GFA
Wholesale Distribution 20,000 sq. ft. 60,000 sq. ft. One for 60,000 sq. ft. of GFA
Hotels and Motels 20,000 sq. ft. 100,000 sq. ft. One for each 100,000 sq. ft.
of GFA
Business Services 75,000 sq. ft. 200,000 sq. ft. One for each 250,000 sq. ft.
of GFA
Other Services 75,000 sq. ft. 200,000 sq. ft. One for each 250,000 sq. ft.
of GFA
*Hospital 20,000 sq. ft. 100,000 sq. ft. One for each 100,000 sq. ft.
of GFA
Manufacturing 15,000 sq. ft. 40,000 sq. ft. One for each 60,000 sq. ft.
Motor Freight Terminal
and Warehousing 15,000 sq. ft. 40,000 sq. ft. One for each 60,000 sq. ft.
Community Facility,
School, Church, Town
Building, Recreation
Area, etc.
75,000 sq. ft. 150,000 sq. ft. One for each 200,000 sq. ft.
Public Utility
Establishment with over
5,000 sq. ft. of GFA
75,000 sq. ft. 150,000 sq. ft. One for each 200,000 sq. ft.
*Space used for ambulance receiving at a hospital is not used to meet these loading requirements.
Chapter XIX Amendment
Validity and Effective Date.
§171-100. Amendment. This ordinance may be amended from time to time in accordance with §5 of
the Zoning Act. During the amendment procedure, subdivision plans in process or review by the
Planning Board under the Subdivision Control Law shall be subject to the provisions of the Zoning Act
(Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29, Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-101. Validity. The invalidity, unconstitutionality, or illegality of any provision of this ordinance
or boundary shown on the Zoning Map shall not have any effect upon the validity, constitutionality, or
legality of any other provision or boundary. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-102. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect upon its enactment. (Amended Ord 2007-
07, RTCM 3/7/07)
Chapter XX
Transfer of Development Rights
§171-103. Reserved
§171-104. Reserved
§171-105. Transfer of Development Rights.
A. Purpose – The purposes of the Ordinance are:
(1) To protect scenic and rural areas of the Town of Palmer;
(2) To protect property values and provide a fair economic return to property owners;
(3) To foster compact development in areas served by public services and
infrastructure.
(4) To promote compact development, both residential and commercial, in areas that have been
identified as potential suitable sites for both future development and infrastructure
improvements;
(5) To promote the creation of traditional neighborhood developments with compact,
pedestrian-friendly, predominantly residential areas on gridded streets;
(6) To preserve the rural, historic, and agricultural character of the community by directing
compact new development, both residential and commercial, to appropriate locations adjacent
to existing urbanized centers.
(7) To preserve the rural, historic, and agricultural character of the community by directing
compact new commercial development to appropriate locations adjacent to major transit routes.
§171-106. Definitions.
Sending District: The section of Palmer in which willing sellers will be able to sell the development
rights to their land, while retaining all other rights, for a fair-market value.
Receiving District: A section of Palmer in which a purchased development right can be transferred,
allowing for a greater density than what would normally be allowed through the underlying zoning.
Development Right: The legal ability to develop a parcel of land, a legal right that is distinguishable
from the other rights of property ownership.
Conservation Restriction: A voluntary agreement between a private landowner and a municipal
agency or qualified not-for-profit corporation to restrict development. A restriction is deeded to a
qualified third party, which permanently limits certain activities on real property, in order to protect
conservation values such as biodiversity, water quality, wildlife habitat or carbon sequestration. The
restriction stays with the property through all successive owners.
Agricultural Preservation Restriction: A voluntary agreement between an agricultural land owner
and a municipality, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or a not-for-profit entity to maintain land in
agriculture. Landowners receive a payment for the difference between the agricultural value of their
land and the full-market value, in exchange for which the land remains in agriculture in perpetuity.
§171-107. Transfer of Development Rights.
Transfer of Development Rights provides for increased density of residential and
commercial development in the designated Receiving Area, when suitable open space
land in the Sending Area is permanently preserved from development. The transfer of
development rights is accomplished by the execution of a permanent Conservation
Restriction/Agricultural Preservation Restriction, and the increased density is permitted by
the issuance of a Special Permit, both as hereinafter provided.
§171-108. Eligibility.
All lots shown on a plan, or described in a deed, recorded at the Registry of Deeds in the Sending
Area are eligible to apply for a Special Permit from the Planning Board to transfer all or part of the
development rights on the lot to a lot in the Receiving Area.
§171-109. Establishment of Sending Area and Receiving Area.
A. The following districts are hereby established:
(1) Sending Area; Lands bounded by the following constraints: North of I-90, east of the
eastern boundary of Stimson Street, river Street and State Route 32, south of the Ware Town
Line, West of the Warren Town Line.
(2) Receiving Areas; 1,500 foot buffer around the Depot Village (VCI), excluding DEP Zone II
boundary; 1,500 foot buffer around the Three Rivers Village (VCII), excluding DEP Zone II
boundary; 1,500 foot buffer zone around Bondsville Village (VCIII), including the adjacent
Industrial B Zone, which is bounded on the North and West by the Belchertown town line;
1,500 foot buffer around Thorndike Village (VC IV), excluding the DEP Zone II boundary for
Palmer’s water resources; Highway Business Zones west of Calkins Road and south of I-90, in
the region located in Palmer’s southwestern corner; parcels in the southeastern section of
Palmer with Mason street as the eastern border, the Monson town line as the southern boundary.
B. These districts are delineated on the Transfer of Development Rights Map of the Town of
Palmer, which is incorporated by reference as part of the Zoning Bylaw.
§171-110. Special Permit Process for Transfer of Development Rights.
A. The applicant proposing to develop specified land in the Receiving Area at a density allowed by
this bylaw with transfer of development rights shall make an application to the Planning Board for a
Special Permit. The application shall clearly illustrate a land parcel or parcels in the Sending Area
and a parcel or parcels in the Receiving Area proposed for transfer of development rights, and the
number of development rights proposed for transfer.
B. As part of the Special Permit application, the applicant shall determine the number of lots
eligible for transfer from the parcel in the Sending Area, using the following process:
(1) After conferring with the Conservation Commission, subtracting all acreage which is identified
as wetlands, 100-year floodplain, or riverfront area under the Massachusetts Rivers Protection Act.
The Conservation Commission may require the applicant to complete wetlands delineation;
(2) Subtracting 5% of the total remaining parcel acreage, to account for land which would be
used for roads if the parcel had been developed;
(3) After determining the remaining land area, determining the number of lots allowable in the
Sending Area based on a conceptual development plan.
C. The Planning Board shall review the applicant’s assessment of acreage eligible for transfer, and
shall make a final determination of such acreage eligible for transfer.
D. The applicant shall also file with the Planning Board a preliminary development plan for the
parcel in the Receiving Area, illustrating lots created using the transferred development rights, and
illustrating all wetland and floodplain areas.
E. Approval of a Special Permit shall require the applicant to tender to the Planning Board a valid
instrument granting to the Town a Conservation Restriction/Agricultural Preservation Restriction
for eligible land in the Sending Area. The applicant shall furnish to the Planning Board a certificate
of title by a duly licensed attorney and such other evidence or assurance of title as may be
satisfactory to the Town Counsel.
F. Upon advice of the Town Counsel that a Conservation Restriction/Agricultural Preservation
Restriction is valid and sufficient, there must be a vote by the Town Council authorizing
Conservation Commission acceptance of the Conservation Restriction/Agricultural Preservation
Restriction. If the Special Permit application is valid and sufficient, the Conservation Commission,
acting on behalf of the Town, may exercise its right of first refusal and should the town decide to
accept the conservation restriction, the Conservation Commission shall accept the Conservation
Restriction/Agricultural Preservation Restriction, for signature of the Massachusetts Commissioner
of Agriculture in the same manner as other APRs or the Commissioner of the Executive Office of
Environmental Affairs in the same manner as other conservation restrictions, and for recording in
the County Registry of Deeds. If the Town does not decide to accept the Conservation
Restriction/Agricultural Preservation Restriction, the easement may be transferred to a qualified
not-for-profit organization, and such an organization shall maintain, monitor and enforce the terms
of the Conservation Restriction / Agricultural Preservation Restriction.
G. Upon final approval of site plans, the Planning Board shall make a decision to grant, deny, or
grant with conditions, the Special Permit to increase the number and density of units in the
Receiving Area, based on the table in Section X.8.
§171-111. Dimensional and Density Regulations Allowed By the Transfer of Development Rights.
A. Each residential building lot within the Sending Area is equivalent to one of the development
rights in the Receiving Area shown in the Table of Exchange Standards for Transfer of
Development Rights found below.
Table 1 - Exchange Standards for Transfer of Development Rights
Sending Area Receiving Area Notes
1 residential
building lot equals
2000 s.f. of additional
commercial or industrial
floor area, plus a 5%
increase in building
coverage for a single
1) “Additional commercial or industrial floor
area” shall be defined as floor area above that
which would normally be permitted in the
underlying district, under Section 171.35 -
Table of Dimensional and Density Regulations
commercial or industrial
lot, or
of the Palmer Zoning Bylaw. The Planning
Board may allow an increase in building
coverage from the maximum building coverage
required under Section 171.35, up to a
maximum 75% building coverage for
commercial or industrial uses.
1.2 residential building
units, plus a 5% increase
in building coverage, or
2) Fractions of building lots cannot be rounded
up to the next whole number.
1 neighborhood
commercial building lot
3) See Section X.14.2 for commercial uses
allowed on a neighborhood building lot within a
Traditional Neighborhood Development. Only
one “neighborhood commercial building lot”
may be approved per ten residential building
lots within a TND.
B. For development rights purchased for every one (1) lot meeting minimum dimensional
requirements for the underlying district within the Sending Area, the developer can add one and
two tenths (1.2) residential lots or one (1) neighborhood commercial lot in a Traditional
Neighborhood Development in the Receiving Area above what could normally be built under
zoning standards of the underlying district, provided the dimensional requirements indicated in
Section X.7, Table 2, of this bylaw and other requirements of the bylaw are met. Fractions of
building lots cannot be rounded up to the next whole number.
(1) For example, if a developer buys the development rights to fourteen (14) buildable lots in
the Sending Area, the developer is entitled to: 14 lots x 1.2 = 16.8 lots in addition to the
underlying density in the Receiving Area. However, since fractional lots cannot be built on, the
developer can construct only sixteen (16) units (above what could normally be built under
zoning standards of the underlying district).
C. When a landowner wishes to sell less than the total number of development rights available to a
tax parcel, the landowner may do so provided that the tax parcel is subdivided.
D. The maximum limits on density, building coverage, and parking reductions permitted to be
developed by Special Permit in the Receiving Area shall be determined by reference to the Table of
TDR Dimensional Standards for Receiving Areas found below.
Table 2 - TDR Dimensional Standards for Receiving Areas
Underlying Zoning
District
Dimensional Requirements in
Underlying Zone
Dimensional Requirements in
Receiving Area (with TDR)
Town Residential
(With Town Water &
Sewer)
Lot Size: 20,000 s.f.
Frontage: 100 ft.
Front Setback: 30 ft.
Side Setback: 15 ft.
Rear Setback: 15ft.
Building coverage: 50%
Height: 2 ½ stories
Maximum multi-family units in
Lot Size: 10,000 s.f.
Frontage: 60 ft.
Front Setback: 15 ft.
Side Setback: 10 ft.
Rear Setback: 10 ft.
Building coverage: 60%
Height: 2 ½ stories
Maximum multi-family units in
building: 6 building: 9
Neighborhood Business Lot Size: 40,000 s.f.
Frontage: 200 ft.
Front Setback: 50 ft.
Side Setback: 30 ft.
Rear Setback: 30 ft.
Building coverage: 50%
Height: 50 ft.
Lot Size: 15,000 s.f.
Frontage: 80 ft.
Front Setback: 25 ft.
Side Setback: 15 ft.
Rear Setback: 15 ft.
Building coverage: 75%
Height: 50 ft.
Industrial A Lot Size: 43,560 s.f.
Frontage: 200 ft.
Front Setback: 50 ft.
Side Setback: 50 ft.
Rear Setback: 50 ft.
Building coverage: 50%
Height: 50 ft.
Lot Size: 15,000 s.f.
Frontage: 100 ft.
Front Setback: 25 ft.
Side Setback: 25 ft.
Rear Setback: 25 ft.
Building coverage: 75%
Height: 50 ft.
Industrial B Lot Size: 43,560 s.f.
Frontage: None
Front Setback: 50 ft.
Side Setback: 50 ft.
Rear Setback: 50 ft.
Building coverage: 50%
Height: 50 ft.
Lot Size: 15,000 s.f.
Frontage: 100 ft.
Front Setback: 25 ft.
Side Setback: 25 ft.
Rear Setback: 25 ft.
Building coverage: 75%
Height: 50 ft.
Rural Residential Lot Size: 60,000 s.f.
Frontage: 150 ft.
Front Setback: 50 ft
Side Setback: 30 ft
Rear Setback: 30 ft
Building Coverage: 50 %
Height 35 ft
Lot Size: 30,000 s.f.
Frontage: 75 ft
Front Setback: 25 ft
Side Setback: 15 ft
Rear Setback: 15 ft
Building coverage: 75 %
Height: 35 ft
Suburban Residential Lot: 30,000 s.f.
Frontage: 150
Front Setback: 30 ft
Side Setback: 30 ft
Rear Setback: 30 ft
Building Coverage: 50 %
Height: 35 ft
Lot Size: 15,000 s.f.
Frontage: 75 ft
Front Setback: 15 ft
Side Setback: 15 ft
Rear Setback: 15 ft
Building coverage: 75 %
Height: 35 ft
General Business Lot: 40,000 s.f.
Frontage: 200 ft
Front Setback: 50 ft
Side Setback: 30 ft
Rear Setback: 30 ft
Building Coverage: 50 %
Height: 50 ft
Lot Size: 15,000 s.f.
Frontage: 100 ft.
Front Setback: 25 ft.
Side Setback: 15 ft.
Rear Setback: 15 ft.
Building coverage: 75%
Height: 50 ft
Highway Business Lot: 40,000 s.f.
Frontage: 200 ft
Front Setback: 50 ft
Side Setback: 30 ft
Rear Setback: 30 ft
Building Coverage: 50 %
Lot Size: 20,000 s.f.
Frontage: 100 ft
Front Setback: 25 ft
Side Setback: 15 ft
Rear Setback: 15 ft
Building coverage: 75 %
Height 50 Height: 50
§171-12. Design Standards for Business and Industrial Receiving Areas.
A. All business and industrial uses developed under this Bylaw must meet the following standards:
(1) The height of buildings shall not exceed the maximum height allowed in the underlying
district;
(2) To the extent feasible, adjacent uses shall utilize shared parking areas and shared curb cuts
to minimize vehicular safety impacts on roads;
(3) Pedestrian and bicycle amenities, such as sidewalks, shall be provided.
B. The Planning Board may consider, in making its Special Permit decision,
whether the project meets the following design standards:
(1) Architectural design shall be compatible with the historic character and scale of buildings in
the neighborhood and the Town through the use of appropriate building materials, screening,
breaks in roof and wall lines, windows and other architectural techniques. Variation in detail,
form and siting shall be used to provide visual interest and avoid monotony. Proposed
buildings shall relate harmoniously to each other with adequate light, air circulation, and
separation between buildings where appropriate.
§171-13. Special Permit Criteria.
A. In addition to the Special Permit criteria under Article XV of the Palmer Zoning Bylaw, the
Planning Board shall grant a special permit for transfer of development rights if it finds the
following criteria are met:
(1) The proposed use is in harmony with the purposes of this Bylaw:
(2) The proposed use meets all of the procedural, dimensional and density requirements, and
design standards of this Bylaw.
(3) All residential uses in the Receiving Area must meet the TND Design Standards in §171-
118.
(4) All business and industrial uses in the Receiving Area must meet the Design Standards for
Business and Industrial Receiving Areas in §171-112.
§171-114. Reporting of TDR Transactions.
Buyers and sellers must report all TDR transactions (options, sales, gifts, donations) to the Planning
Board within ten business days of a transaction’s completion.
§171-115. Release of Agricultural Preservation Restriction or Conservation Restriction.
A. No Conservation Restriction/Agricultural Preservation Restriction, which has been conveyed
under this bylaw, may be released unless the provisions for release in M.G.L. Chapter184, §32 have
been met, which include:
(1) The restriction must be repurchased from the Town by the land owner at its then fair market
value, and funds returned to the Town bank for development rights;
(2) The restriction shall only be released by its holder only if the land is no longer deemed
suitable for agricultural or horticultural purposes and unless approved by a two-thirds (2/3) vote
of both branches of the Massachusetts general court.
§171-116. Alternate Method for TDR Transactions.
A. In lieu of transferring development rights using the process described §§171-110 – 171-112
above, an applicant for a Special Permit in §171-110. may make a cash contribution to the Town of
Palmer to be used for the purpose of purchasing a Conservation Restriction/Agricultural
Preservation Restriction. The contribution shall be of a value equal to the value of the required
development rights, as determined in the Table of Exchange Standards for Transfer of Development
Rights. This value shall be determined by multiplying the number of acres of developable land
required by the average cost of a Conservation Restriction/Agricultural Preservation Restriction in
the Town of Palmer over the past three years, as determined by the Conservation Commission.
B. The maximum number of development rights which may be purchased through a cash
contribution to the Town of Palmer shall be one hundred (100) development rights in any calendar
year.
§171-117. Registry of Willing Sellers.
The Town shall maintain a registry of landowners in the Sending Area that have
expressed interest in selling development rights under this bylaw. Applicants for TDR
must seek development rights from this registry first, before considering making a cash
payment in lieu of transferring development rights, as permitted under §171-116.
§171-118. Traditional Neighborhood Development Regulations.
A. Minimum Standards Required for a Traditional Neighborhood Development
(1) Traditional Neighborhood Development permits greater densities than allowed in the Town
Residential District, Neighborhood Business District, and Industrial A and B Districts. This
greater density is only permitted when development rights from the Sending Area are
transferred to the Receiving Area as described in this bylaw. The following standards are
required for the approval of a Traditional Neighborhood Development:
(a) All utility lines such as telephone, cable television, and electric are to be located
underground.
(b) The tract of land to be developed shall be in single ownership, or shall be the subject
of an application filed jointly in accordance with an approved plan.
B. Uses Allowed by Special Permit in a Traditional Neighborhood Development
(1) Within a Traditional Neighborhood Development, the Planning Board may approve the
following uses as part of the Special Permit:
(a) Single family dwelling;
(b) Neighborhood commercial uses, which may include: service oriented business,
including bank, barber shop, beauty salon, medical or dental clinic, and automatic
self-serving laundry;
(c) Retail service store or custom store such as a bakery or confectionery, florist, food
store (no booth or restaurant facilities) or grocery designed primarily to provide daily
service to the residents of the immediately surrounding neighborhood, provided that
the gross floor area of the store does not exceed seven hundred and fifty (750) square
feet, and provided that only one neighborhood commercial lot shall be approved for
every ten residential lots within a TND;
(d) Home office;
(e) Accessory uses, buildings, and structures customarily incidental to any primary use
located on the same lot.
B. TND Design Standards
(1) Porches are encouraged for residential uses. Stoops, open colonnades, and open porches
may encroach not more than ten feet into front setbacks as indicated in this bylaw, but not
closer than ten (10) feet from the street right of way.
(2) Street and pedestrian way design shall minimize pedestrian crossings at through streets.
(3) Advance tactile warning of pedestrian street crossings shall be given to motorists by placing
cobblestone or other similar materials across the street in a band of at least six (6) feet wide at
the same surface elevation as the adjacent pavement. The warning bands shall be located
between twenty (20) and sixty (60) feet from a pedestrian crossing.
(4) Streetlights shall be provided along all active pedestrian ways. Such streetlights shall
consist of a pole or pedestal mounted luminary, ten (10) to twelve (12) feet in height, having a
full-spectrum bulb of not more than one hundred seventy-five (175) watts.
(5) Architectural design shall be compatible with the historic character and scale of buildings in
the neighborhood and the Town through the use of appropriate building materials, screening,
breaks in roof and wall lines, windows and other architectural techniques. Variation in detail,
form and siting shall be used to provide visual interest and avoid monotony. Proposed
buildings shall relate harmoniously to each other with adequate light, air circulation, and
separation between buildings where appropriate.
(6) All lots shall have an uninterrupted sidewalk at least five (5) feet wide the entire width of
the lot frontage.
(7) The front of an attached garage shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the front facade
of the principal building of which the garage is a part.
C. TND Open Space and Landscape Standards
(1) All TNDs must include dedicated park or town common land, totaling a minimum of
twenty percent (20%) of the total parcel to be subdivided, to provide centrally located park and
common space which is readily accessible to all residences.
(2) Street trees shall be planted within the right-of-ways parallel to the street along all streets.
(3) Trees shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet and a minimum caliper of two and one
half (2.5) inches at the time of planting. Where possible, a minimum of six (6) feet wide
landscaped belt will be created to plant the street trees.
(4) Tree spacing shall be determined by species type. Large maturing trees shall be planted a
minimum of forty (40) feet and a maximum of fifty (50) feet on center. Small and medium
maturing trees shall be planted a minimum of ten (10) feet and a maximum of thirty (30) feet on
center.
D. Parking Standards
(1) Parking for residential uses shall be provided in individual lots or in combined parking lots,
provided each dwelling unit has at least one off-street parking space within five hundred (500)
feet from its property boundary. Additional parking may be provided on streets or off-street.
(2) Parking lots for any uses shall generally be located at the rear of or at the side of buildings,
and shall be no closer than six (6) feet from a building.
(3) When two (2) adjacent lots contain parking areas it is encouraged to develop them as one
(1) parking area.
(4) Parking lot layout, landscaping, buffering, and screening shall prevent direct views of
parked vehicles from streets and sidewalks, avoid spill-over light, glare, noise, or exhaust fumes
onto adjacent properties. In order to achieve these objectives, parking lots exposed to view
shall be surrounded by a minimum of a five (5) foot-high screen, hedge, or wall visually
impervious year-round.
(5) The interior of all parking lots shall be landscaped to provide shade and visual relief. This
is best achieved by protected planting islands or peninsulas within the perimeter of the parking
lot. A minimum of one (1) deciduous shade tree shall be planted for every six (6) parking
spaces. A six (6) foot planting diamond or equivalent planter is required.
(6) Parking lot layout shall take into consideration pedestrian circulation. Pedestrian
crosswalks shall be provided, where necessary and appropriate, shall be distinguished by
textured paving, and shall be integrated into the wider network of pedestrian walkways.
Table 3 - Parking Requirements in the Traditional Neighborhood Development
Use Minimum Parking Spaces Required
a) Residential
b) Other Uses
One (1) space per dwelling unit
As per Article XVIII of the Zoning Bylaw
§171-119. Conflict with Other Laws.
All development activities with the TND shall comply with applicable laws, regulations, and
standards of the Town of Palmer, except that in the event of a conflict between this TND Bylaw and
any such laws and regulations, the provisions of this TND shall control, provided that they are
consistent with state and federal law.

Chapter XXI
Open Space Residential Development
§171-120. Reserved
§171-121. Reserved
§171-122. Open Space Residential Development
A. Intent
Open Space Residential Development (OSRD) in accordance with this ordinance shall be allowed
by right in the Rural Residential, Suburban Residential, and Town Residential Districts except not
in the Floodplain District. Open Space Residential Development shall mean a residential
development in which a variety of housing types are clustered together, adjacent to permanently
preserved open space. Open Space Residential Development shall be encouraged within the town,
and shall be the preferred method of subdivision development wherever the following purposes
would be served.
B. Purposes
(1) The purposes of Open Space Residential Development are:
(a) To allow for greater flexibility and creativity in the design of residential
developments, provided that the overall density of the development is no greater than
what is normally allowed in the district;
(b) To encourage the permanent preservation of open space, agricultural lands, forest
lands and other natural resources including aquifers, water bodies and wetlands, and
historical and archaeological resources;
(c) To encourage a less sprawling and more efficient form of development that consumes
less open land and conforms to existing topography and natural features;
(d) To maintain the traditional New England rural character and land use pattern in which
small villages contrast with open space and farmlands;
(e) To facilitate the construction of streets, utilities and public services in a more
economical and efficient manner;
(f) To ensure that residential developments respect the natural features of the land,
including wetlands, watercourses, forests, prime agricultural land, steep slopes, plants,
wildlife, historic sites, scenic views, and rural character;
(g) To encourage development out of view from the road, and promote alternatives to
strip residential development lining roadsides in the town;
(h) To provide wildlife corridors connecting open spaces, needed by wildlife to ensure its
survival.
C. Definitions
Common Area: Any land area, other than Open Space, set aside for common ownership as a
result of an OSRD, including areas for Common Facilities.
Common Driveway: Vehicular access, which is not a street, but extending from a street, serving
as a common vehicular access to more than one (1) but not more than six (6) residential lots built in
accordance with the standards set forth in this ordinance. The driveway will lie entirely within the
lots being served.
Common Facilities: Built facilities that are commonly owned by the property owners within an
OSRD. Common Facilities may be proposed but are not required. They may include streets, rights
of way, common buildings, wells, water and waste treatment systems, and recreation facilities.
Conventional Lot: A lot in a standard subdivision based upon the minimum dimensional
requirements of the underlying zoning district in which the subject property lies, and the minimum
requirements of the Subdivision Regulations.
Conventional Plan: A plan showing the division of property into lots based upon the minimum
requirements of the underlying zoning district in which the subject property lies, and the minimum
requirements of the Subdivision Regulations.
Existing Resources / Site Analysis Map: A map which identifies, locates, and describes
noteworthy features to be designed around through sensitive subdivision layouts, such as
vegetation, wetlands, steep slopes, farmland soils, historic or cultural features, threatened or
endangered species, unusual geological formations, and scenic views or viewsheds.
Homeowners’ Association: A private non-profit organization (corporation, association, or other
legal entity) established by the developer to manage, maintain, support, and finance the common
facilities and common open space of an OSRD, and to enforce certain covenants and restrictions.
Open Space: Undeveloped land set aside for common or individual ownership as a result of an
OSRD, with conservation easements and other deeded restrictions to ensure that the land will
remain permanently open and undeveloped. A condition of OSRD approval is that open space may
not be further subdivided.
Open Space Residential Development (OSRD): A form of residential development where the
density of the dwelling units is no greater than would be permitted in the district in where the
OSRD is located, but where the lot size and other dimensional standards may be reduced in
exchange for the preservation of permanently protected open space, recreational land, forests, or
other farmland.
Prime Agricultural Soils: Agricultural land with soils designated as prime or of statewide
significance by the U.S. Natural Resources Soil Service soil surveys.
Title V Regulations: 310 CMR 15.000
Wetlands: Areas characterized by vegetation described in Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter
131, Section 40, and the Town of Palmer Wetland Ordinance.
Yield Plan: A conceptual plan showing how the parcel could be subdivided in a conventional
manner. Determination of the possible number of conventional lots shall be determined by Title V
regulations, 310 CMR 15.000, as well as the Palmer Board of Health regulations. For purposes of
determining the number of OSRD dwelling units, each conceptual conventional lot must meet the
requirements of a buildable lot for a single family dwelling unit as defined in the zoning district in
which the OSRD is located and meet all other applicable requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and
Subdivision Regulations. In no case shall the number of OSRD dwelling units exceed the number
of units that would be allowed under a conventional subdivision.
D. Applicability
(1) Five (5) Acre Minimum. In any residential development consisting of five (5) contiguous
acres or more in single or consolidated ownership, an applicant may apply for an OSRD under
this ordinance. The minimum acreage may be waived by the Planning Board in instances
where an applicant demonstrates that the criteria in §171-122.B. are met.
(2) Uses Permitted. The following uses shall be permitted in an OSRD, provided they are
allowed in the zoning district within which an OSRD has been proposed:
(a) Single Family Detached Dwelling Units;
(b) Duplex or Two-Family Dwelling Units;
(c) Agricultural uses including horticultural, raising of crops, livestock, poultry, nurseries,
orchards, hay, and building related to the same;
(d) Public park or recreation area;
(e) Woodlots, arboreta, and other similar silvicultural uses;
(f) Woodland preserve, game preserve, wildlife sanctuary, or other similar conservation
use;
(g) Accessory uses customarily incidental to any permitted use.
(3) Required for Special Land Features. The Planning Board may require an applicant to use
an OSRD subdivision design if the property possesses one or more of the following special
features:
(a) Unfragmented open land as identified as a priority for protection in the Town’s Open
Space and Recreation Plan, Master Plan or the Community Development Plan;
(b) Agricultural land with soils designated as prime or of statewide significance by the
U.S. Natural Resource Conservation Service soil surveys;
(c) Rare, threatened, or endangered species or exemplary natural communities according
to the Massachusetts BioMap Project developed by the Massachusetts Natural
Heritage & Endangered Species Program;
(d) Unique natural, cultural, and/or historical features as identified in the Master Plan or
Community Development Plan.
E. Increases in Permissible Density.
(1) The Planning Board may award a density bonus to increase the number of dwelling units
beyond the Basic Maximum Number for an OSRD Plan. The density bonus for the OSRD shall
not, in the aggregate, exceed twenty percent (20%) of the Basic Maximum Number.
Computations shall be rounded down to the next whole number. A density bonus may be
awarded in the following circumstances:
(a) For each additional ten percent (10%) of the site (over and above the required fifty
percent 50%) set aside as open space, a bonus of five percent (5%) of the Basic
Maximum Number may be awarded. Calculations shall be rounded down to the
nearest integer when determining this bonus.
(b) For every historic structure preserved and subject to a historic preservation
restriction, one (1) dwelling unit may be added to the Basic Maximum Number.
F. Application Requirements
(1) Pre-application Review
(a) The applicant is very strongly encouraged to request a pre-application review at a
regular business meeting of the Planning Board. If one is requested, the Planning
Board shall invite the Conservation Commission, Board of Health, Historical
Commission, and any other relevant board. The purpose of a pre-application review is
to minimize the applicant’s costs of engineering and other technical experts, and to
commence discussions with the Planning Board at the earliest possible stage in the
development. At the pre-application review, the applicant may outline the proposed
development including both conventional and OSRD models, seek preliminary
feedback from the Planning Board and/or its technical experts, and set a timetable for
submittal of a formal application.
(2) Site Visit
(a) Applicants are encouraged to request a site visit by the Planning Board and/or its
agents in order to facilitate pre-application review of the Special Permit. If one is
requested, the Planning Board may invite other relevant boards.
(3) Existing Resources / Site Analysis Map
(a) The following shall be submitted / presented to the Planning Board during the preapplication
review at a regularly scheduled meeting for the purpose of assessing the
impacts or implications of the development and shall be used in the preparation of a
preliminary design plan.
[1] Boundaries of wetlands defined by Massachusetts Wetlands Law CMR-140 and
certified by a licensed wetlands professional engineer;
[2] Location and limits of soils types, particularly Prime Agricultural Soils, consistent
with the soils classification maps prepared by the US Department of Agriculture
Natural Resource Conservation Service;
[3] Areas where the depth of natural soil to bedrock is four (4) feet or less;
[4] The extent of any Interim Wellhead Protection Areas and Recharge Areas;
[5] Topographic contours at intervals of ten (10) feet or less;
[6] Delineation of slopes of twenty-five percent (25%) or greater;
[7] The location of cultural and historic features including, but not limited to,
stonewalls, archaeological and historic sites and structures, and significant and rare
vegetation;
[8] Areas delineated as “BioMap Core Habitat” or “Supporting Natural Landscape” on
the Massachusetts BioMap Project developed by the Massachusetts Natural
Heritage & Endangered Species Program;
(4) Preliminary Development Plan Submission
(a) A Preliminary Development Plan shall be submitted in conformance with the Town of
Palmer Subdivision Regulations. Applicants shall submit both a conventional plan
and an OSRD plan in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
Applicants shall submit the preliminary design to the Planning Board for review prior
to development of a Definitive Plan. Approval of the Preliminary Plan by the
Planning Board will be based on the review criteria standards set forth in Section 5.00
of the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in the Town of
Palmer.
(b) Review of Preliminary Plan. The Planning Board shall review the Preliminary
Development Plan in accordance with the criteria contained in this Ordinance and with
other applicable regulations of the Town of Palmer. The review shall informally
advise the applicant to the extent to which the proposed subdivision or land
development conforms to the relevant standards of this Ordinance and may suggest
possible plan modifications that would increase its degree of conformance. The review
shall include, but is not limited to:
[1] The location of all areas proposed for land disturbance (streets, foundations, yards,
septic disposal systems, storm water management areas, etc.) with respect to
notable features of natural or culturally significance as identified on the applicants
Existing Resources / Site Analysis Map;
[2] The potential for street connections with existing streets, other proposed streets, or
potential developments of adjoining parcels;
[3] The location of proposed access points along existing road networks;
[4] The proposed building density and areas of impervious surface
(5) Definitive Development Plan Submission
(a) A final Definitive Development Plan shall be submitted in conformance with this
section and the Town of Palmer Subdivision Regulations as applicable. Such Plans
shall adequately address standards delineated in this ordinance. In addition, the
Definitive Development Plan shall address issues that have been previously discussed
in the Existing Resources / Site Analysis Map.
G. Subdivision Approval Procedures
(1) Applicants for Open Space development projects shall follow all procedures specified in the
Town of Palmer Subdivision Regulations.
(2) The Planning Board shall submit copies of the preliminary and final subdivision plans to
the Board of Health, Conservation Commission, Department of Public Works, Department of
Public Safety, Fire Chief, and Water Districts who shall review the application and submit their
recommendations and comments to the Planning Board concerning :
(a) The completeness and adequacy of the data and methodology used by the applicant to
determine the impacts of the proposed development;
(b) The effects of the projected impacts of the proposed development; and
(c) Recommended conditions or remedial measures to accommodate or mitigate the
expected impacts of the proposed development.
(3) Failure of Boards to make recommendations within thirty (30) days of the referral of the
application shall be deemed to be lack of opposition.
H. Design Process
(1) At the time of the application for an OSRD, applicants are required to demonstrate to the
Planning Board that the following Design Process was performed and considered in
determining the layout of proposed streets, house lots, unit placement if treated as a
condominium, including designation of all common areas and open space.
(a) Identifying Conservation Areas - Identify preservation land by two steps. First,
Primary Conservation Areas (such as wetlands, riverfront areas, and floodplains
regulated by state or federal law) and Secondary Conservation Areas (including
unprotected elements of the natural landscape such as steep slopes, mature woodlands,
prime farmland, meadows, wildlife habitats and cultural features such as historic and
archaeological sites and scenic views) shall be identified and delineated. Second, the
Potentially Developable Area shall consist of land outside identified Primary and
Secondary Conservation Areas.
(b) Locating House Sites - Locate the approximate sites of individual houses within the
Potentially Developable Area and include the delineation of private yards and shared
amenities, so as to reflect an integrated community.
(c) Aligning the Streets and Trails - Align streets in order to access the house lots or units.
Additionally, new trails should be laid out to create internal and external connections
to existing and/or potential future streets, sidewalks, and trails.
(d) Lot Lines - Draw in the lot lines using assumed lot lines if the ownership is in
condominium, cooperative or other similar form of common ownership.
I. Design Standards
1. No approval for an OSRD shall be given unless the application complies substantially with
the following standards:
(a) The compatibility of the proposal with respect to the objectives and policy
recommendations of the Open Space and Recreation Plan and Community
Development Plan or Master Plan;
(b) Consistency with the Town of Palmer’s Zoning Ordinance;
(c) All dwellings shall, to the greatest extent possible, be located out of view from any
road unless valuable natural resources or farmland located to the rear of the property
render building in view of the road more desirable;
(d) The portion of a parcel placed in open space shall, to the greatest extent possible, be
that which is most valuable or productive as a natural resource, wildlife habitat,
farmland, or forestry land;
(e) The OSRD shall result in the creation of less curb cuts or vehicular access points to a
public way than would reasonably be expected to occur under Standard ANR or
Subdivision Development.
(f) Streets shall be designed and located in such a manner as to maintain and preserve
natural topography, significant landmarks, and trees; to minimize cut and fill; and to
preserve and enhance views and vistas on or off the subject parcel.
J. Dimensional Standards
1. Allowed Density
(a) The maximum number of dwelling units for an OSRD shall be determined by use of a
yield plan, which is a conceptual plan showing how the parcel could be subdivided in
a conventional manner. Determination of the possible number of conventional lots
shall be determined by Title V regulations, 310 CMR 15.000, as well as the Palmer
Board of Health regulations. For purposes of determining the number of OSRD
dwelling units, each conceptual conventional lot must meet the requirements of a
buildable lot for a single family dwelling unit as defined in the zoning district in which
the OSRD is located and meet all other applicable requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations. In no case shall the number of OSRD
dwelling units exceed the number of units that would be allowed under a conventional
subdivision.
(b) There shall be no further subdivision of an approved OSRD.
2. Flexible Dimensional Controls
(a) Frontage
[1] The minimum frontage for a tract on which an OSRD is proposed shall be a
contiguous one hundred (100) feet and provide safe access for a right-of-way of at
least fifty (50) feet.
[2] In the interest of flexibility and creative site designs, there shall be no minimum
frontage requirement for individual lots on new subdivision streets within an
OSRD, with the exception described in Section 1.10.2(c) below.
[3] For each lot developed along a public street existing at the time of the application,
the minimum frontage, minimum lot size and all other dimensional controls shall
be those which are required in the underlying zoning district in which the OSRD
is located.
(b) Lot Size
[1] The minimum lot size for individual lots without town water and sewer within an
OSRD shall be 30,000 square feet.
[2] The minimum lot size for individual lots with town water and sewer within an
OSRD shall be 15,000 square feet.
(c) Setbacks
[1] There shall be a minimum setback of twenty-five (25) feet along all property
boundaries of the overall tract for all structures, including accessory structures,
parking areas, driveways and internal streets. Entrance streets connecting the
OSRD to the external street system may cross the setback area.
[2] There shall be no minimum front yard, side yard, or rear yard setback
requirements for individual lots within an OSRD.
[3] There shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet between buildings in an OSRD.
(d) Required Open Space
[1] The minimum open space requirement for an OSRD shall be fifty (50) percent of
the total tract area.
TABLE 1 - TABLE OF CREATIVE DEVELOPMENT DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Development
Type
Zoning District Minimum
Lot Size in
Sq. Ft.
(per
Dwelling
Unit)
Minimum
Required
Open
Space
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(continuo
us in ft.)
Minimum
Frontage
for Total
Dev.
Parcel
(ft.)
Minimum
Front
Yard (ft.)
Minimu
m Side
Yard (ft.)
Minimu
m Rear
Yard (ft.)
Minimum
Distance
Between
Buildings
(ft.)
Maximum %
Building
Coverage of
Land
including
Accessory
Buildings
Maximum
Building
Height
(ft.)
Rural Residential
- Town
Water/Sewer
- Individual
Systems
60,000
60,000 None 150 N/A 50 30 30 60 50% 35
Suburban
Residential
- Town
Water/Sewer
- Individual
Systems
30,000
30,000 None 150 N/A 50 30 30 60 50% 35
Standard
Subdivision
or ANR
Development
In Town
Residential
- Town
Water/Sewer
- Individual
Systems
20,000
30,000
None
100
150
N/A 30 15 15 30 50% 35
Rural Residential
- Town
Water/Sewer
- Individual
Systems
15,000
30,000 50% None 100 None None None 20 50% 35
Suburban
Residential
- Town
Water/Sewer
- Individual
Systems
15,000
30,000
50% None 100 None None None 20 50% 35
OSRD
Development
In Town
Residential
- Town
Water/Sewer
- Individual
Systems
15,000
30,000
50% None 100 None None None 20 50% 35
Landscaped Buffers
(a) A landscaped buffer no less than fifty (50) feet deep shall be provided where
appropriate to screen the development from public streets and adjacent properties.
Entrance streets connecting the OSRD to the external street system may cross the
buffer area. The natural vegetation shall be retained whenever possible. If the
natural vegetation is not sufficient to serve as an effective visual screen,
landscaping shall be required to provide such a screen. Landscaping may include
berms and/or decorative fencing of an appropriate height, and shall be installed
under the conditions set forth in the Palmer Subdivision Regulations.
(b) This buffer area shall be part of the common area, and shall be subject to the same
restrictions that apply to that area.
(c) Frontage lands on streets existing at the time of application shall be preserved as
buffers to the maximum extent possible in addition to all required setbacks.
4. Common Driveways
(a) The Planning Board may authorize the use of common driveways to provide
access to no more than six (6) individual lots of land provided that the following
conditions are met:
[1] A common driveway shall have a minimum roadway width of sixteen (16)
feet to a maximum of twenty (20) feet, in addition to an easement of
sufficient width to assure proper drainage and maintenance.
[2] A common driveway shall not exceed 600 feet in length.
[3] The slope or grade of a common drive shall in no place exceed 10% if
unpaved or 12% if paved.
[4] The common drive shall intersect a public way at an angle of not less than 80
degrees.
[5] Alignment and sight distances should be sufficient to support a design speed
of 15 mph.
[6] The common driveway shall be capable of providing access for emergency
vehicles (WB 50) with either a "hammer head", "T" or "Y" configuration in
lieu of a cul-de-sac for reverse direction in a single movement.
[7] The common driveway shall lie entirely within the lots being served.
[8] The common driveway, at its intersection with the street, must provide a
leveling-off area with a slope no greater than 1% for the first 20 feet and a
slope no greater than 5% for the next 30 feet.
[9] There shall be a minimum of 500 feet between the entrances of any two
common driveways onto any road.
[10] A common driveway shall have adequate sight distance at its intersection
with a public or private road, and shall not create traffic safety hazards to its
users or the public.
[11] The common driveway shall access the property over the frontage of at
least one of the lots being served by the driveway.
I - 137
[12] The common driveway shall provide the only vehicular egress/access to
the lots being serviced by it, and this shall be so stated in the deeds to the
subject lots.
[13] Permanent signs, sufficiently readable from the road to serve the purpose
of emergency identification, indicating the street number address assigned to
each lot served by the common driveway shall be installed within ten (10)
feet of the intersection of the common driveway with the street, as well as
within ten (10) feet of the intersection of an individual lot driveway with the
common driveway. This requirement is in addition to those for individual
homes.
[14] Common driveway design shall to the greatest extent possible minimize
adverse impact to wetlands, farmland, or other natural resources; allow
reasonable, safe, and less environmentally damaging access to lots
characterized by slopes or ledges; and result in the preservation of rural
character through reduction of number of access ways; and retention of
existing vegetation and topography.
[15] The common driveway shall not be used for legal frontage requirements.
(b) These standards may be waived when, in the opinion of the Planning Board, such
action is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of
the Zoning Ordinance.
K. Utility Requirements
1. On-site Sewage Disposal: The following standards shall apply to developments
requiring on-site sewage disposal:
(a) The applicant shall either submit a septic system design prepared by a certified
engineer and approved by the Board of Health and a plan illustrating the location
of water supply wells with the application, or;
(b) Submit a common waste disposal system design prepared by a certified engineer
and approved by the Board of Health and a plan illustrating the location of water
supply wells with the application. Such common waste disposal system shall treat
the waste from each lot on the subdivision, and shall be owned and maintained by
the homeowners’ association.
(c) Such common waste disposal system may be located in common open
space.
(d) All Open Space Residential Developments must meet the minimum state
Environmental Code (Title V) requirements for minimum setbacks between
private water supply wells and septic tanks or soil absorption systems (310 CMR
15.211).
(e) All Open Space Residential Developments must meet the minimum state
Environmental Code (Title V) requirements for nitrogen loading limitations (310
CMR 15.214-15.217). For OSRDs with individual lot sizes less than 40,000
square feet, applicants must meet the following standards:
[1] Applicants must designate, on a plan, specific areas of common open space
as "nitrogen credit land", based on the following equation:
I - 138
i. (40,000 square feet x number of lots) – (total square feet in proposed
Open Space lots) = square feet of required nitrogen credit land in
common open space
[2] Nitrogen credit land must meet DEP qualifications contained in "Guidelines
for Title 5 Aggregation of Flows and Nitrogen Loading 310CMR15.216"
including, but not limited, to the following qualifications:
i. Must be restricted to prohibit man-made sources of nitrogen, including
sewage discharge, nitrogen-based fertilizer or raising and grazing of
livestock;
ii. Must be restricted to prohibit artificially rendered imperviousness (i.e.
paved streets, paved parking lots, buildings, structures, etc.);
iii. Not within a Velocity Zone or Regulatory Floodway identified by FEMA;
iv. Not under surface water;
v. Not already being used as nitrogen credit land.
[3] All designated nitrogen credit land must be permanently restricted from
further development under a "Grant of Title 5 Nitrogen Loading Restriction
and Easement on Nitrogen Credit Land".
i. After approval of the Flexible Residential Open Space Final
Subdivision Plan, applicants must apply to the Board of Health and the
Mass. Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) for an aggregate
determination of nitrogen loading under 310 CMR 15.216.
(f) It is required that septic tanks be installed on individually-owned lots. Nitrogen
Credit Land must be at least 100 feet from all private wells.
(2) Water Supply
(a) In order to meet state Title V requirements for separation distances between
drinking water wells and septic systems, private drinking water supply wells may
be located in the common open space for an Open Space Residential Development,
provided that the provisions of Section 1.13 for a homeowners’ association are
met.
(3) Stormwater Management
(a) The Planning Board shall encourage the use of non-structural stormwater
management techniques and other drainage systems that reduce impervious
surfaces and enable infiltration where appropriate.
(b) Stormwater management systems serving the OSRD subdivision may be located
within the required common open space. Surface systems, such as retention and
detention ponds, shall not qualify towards the minimum open space requirement.
L. Common Open Space
(1) Common Open Space Requirements
(a) A minimum of 50% of the total development parcel must be permanently
protected as common open space. At least 70% of the common open space shall
be retained in contiguous areas, unless approved by the Planning Board.
I - 139
(b) Watercourses, lakes, ponds, wetlands and steep slopes over 25% may not be
included in common open space calculations.
(c) The Planning Board may permit up to three (3) percent of the open space area to
be paved or built upon for structures accessory to the dedicated use of open space
(i.e. pedestrian walks, bicycle paths, playgrounds, farm-related structures).
(d) All recreational facilities, common areas, and common open space shall be
reasonably accessible to all residents of the development.
(2) Land Protection Methods for Common Open Space
(a) All land not devoted to buildings, lots, roads and other development shall be
permanently protected as common open space for recreation, conservation,
forestry or agricultural uses which preserve the land in its natural condition.
(b) The land shall be owned by a non-profit land trust or conservation organization,
homeowners’ association, or individual, and a permanent conservation easement
or deed restriction must be conveyed to the Town, with Town approval, or to a
non-profit trust or conservation organization whose principal purpose is to
conserve farmland or open space.
(c) Further subdivision of common open land or its use other than recreation,
conservation, forest or agriculture, except for easements for underground utilities
or drinking water supply wells, shall be prohibited.
M. Additional Requirements
(1) Trails. Where there is an existing local or regional trail network on land adjacent to a
proposed OSRD, the developer of the OSRD may be required to connect to the existing
trail network with trail corridors through the site, and shall grant the general public access
to these trails in perpetuity. The minimum nature of public access required is pedestrian
traffic. The instrument granting access, acceptable to the planning board, shall restrict the
use of motorized vehicles where appropriate.
(2) Open Space. Where there is an existing network of open space or large tracts of
unfragmented open space on land adjacent to a proposed OSRD, the developer of the
OSRD may be required to connect to the existing open space where feasible with the
required open space set-aside, and shall grant the general public access to this open space
in perpetuity. The minimum nature of public access required is pedestrian traffic. The
instrument granting access, acceptable to the planning board, shall restrict the use of
motorized vehicles where appropriate.
(3) Forest Management. On sites where the open space to be preserved is mostly mature
forest (70% or greater), the developer of an OSRD may be required to submit a Forest
Management Plan developed by a Massachusetts Licensed Forester and approved by the
Planning Board.
(4) View Shed and Viewpoints. The development may protect in perpetuity view sheds
and associated viewpoints, which are lands or corridors of land that contribute to the visual
landscape of the Town, including items such as open fields containing stonewalls. View
sheds and viewpoints include, but are not limited to, those identified in the most current
version of the Palmer Community Development Plan. The Planning Board may make use
of a site visit to determine potential view sheds and viewpoints to be preserved.
I - 140
(5) Historic Features. The development may protect in perpetuity historically significant
buildings and landscapes, identified as such in the Community Development Plan, that
include buildings and associated uses that are maintained and visually separated from the
developed portion of the OSRD. Structures or landscapes not identified as such through
the Community Development Plan may be determined by sufficient evidence presented to
the Planning Board during review of the development. Such evidence may include
comment from the Palmer Historical Society, listing or eligibility for listing on the National
Register of Historic Landmarks, or other qualified statements of historic value.
N. Homeowners’ Association
(1) In the event that ownership of the land will remain with the homeowners in the Open
Space Residential Development, a non-profit, homeowners’ association shall be
established, requiring membership of each lot owner in the Open Space Residential
Development.
(2) The association shall be responsible for the permanent maintenance of all common
lands, common open space, recreational and thoroughfare facilities (not including drinking
water wells), except where such responsibility is assumed by another owner of the common
land (land trust or conservation organization). If any drinking water well is located on
common open space, the homeowner/s shall own the well and be responsible for any
maintenance or related costs associated with their well.
(3) A homeowners' association agreement or covenant will guarantee continuing
maintenance of such common utilities, land and facilities. Each lot shall be assessed a share
of the maintenance expenses, and a copy of said document shall be submitted with the final
subdivision application. Where no homeowners’ association is proposed, an alternative
plan shall be submitted with the final subdivision application.
(4) Such agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of Town Counsel and the
Planning Board, and shall be recorded in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds. Such
agreements or covenants shall provide that in the event that the association fails to maintain
the common open land in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the agreement,
the town may, after notice to the association and public hearing, enter upon such land and
maintain it in order to preserve taxable values of the properties within the development and
to prevent the common land from becoming a public nuisance. The covenants shall also
provide that the cost of such maintenance by the town shall be assessed equally against
each of the properties within the development.
O. Conflict with Other Laws
(1) The provisions of this ordinance shall be considered a supplement to the existing
zoning ordinances. To the extent that a conflict exists between this ordinance and others,
the more restrictive ordinance, or provisions therein, shall apply.
P. Severability
(1) If any provision of this ordinance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remainder of the ordinance shall not be affected thereby. The invalidity of any section
or sections or parts of any section or sections of this ordinance shall not affect the validity
of the remainder of the Town’s Zoning Ordinance.
I - 141
Article XXII
Seasonal Cottage Resorts
§ 171-123. Reserved
§ 171-124 Reserved
§ 171-125. Seasonal Cottage Resort
A. Intent.
A Seasonal Cottage Resort (SCR), in accordance with this ordinance, shall be allowed by
Special Permit and Site Plan Review in all parts of the Rural Residential District except the
Flood Plain District. Seasonal Cottage Resort shall mean a comprehensively planned, seasonal
residential development in which housing types, called seasonal cottages, and other community
amenities including recreational and/or commercial uses and activities, allowed under the permit,
are clustered together in a pattern of aesthetically integrated, accessible open space.
Seasonal Cottage Resort (SCR) development standards are designed to support the town's goals
of preserving its open space and traditional New England rural character. Open space is created
by requiring units to be clustered in efforts to protect existing natural and historical features of
the site, to minimize the impact of the development on the Town’s resources and to minimize the
area of impervious surfaces. The more compact development results in less infrastructure to be
constructed and reduces site disturbance as a whole. Similarly, higher densities permitted with
this type of compact development preserves open space and maximizes the use of the
infrastructure. These features localize growth and preserve the town's rural character.
An SCR may be allowed by special permit in the Rural Residential District, except in those areas
located in the Flood Plain District as designated on the FEMA Q3 Flood Pain Overlay Map, if
the Planning Board determines that it meets the standards of this section and the zoning
ordinance.
B. Purposes.
The purposes of the Seasonal Cottage Resort are:
1) To allow for greater flexibility and creativity in the design of residential development;
2) To insure that, to the greatest extent possible, residential developments leave
untouched and undisturbed the natural and historic features of the land, including but
not limited to, wetlands, watercourses, forests, prime agricultural land, steep slopes,
plants, wildlife, historic sites, stone walls, scenic views and rural character;
3) To encourage the permanent preservation of open space as defined in section 171-
5 of the Zoning Ordinance and natural resources including aquifers, water bodies and
wetlands, and historical and archaeological resources;
4) To encourage more compact and efficient forms of residential
development
that minimizes site disturbance and impervious surfaces and that conforms to existing
topography and natural and historic features;
5) To maintain the town's traditional New England rural character and land use
pattern in which small villages contrast with open space and farmlands;
I - 142
6) To facilitate the construction of streets, utilities and management of town services
in an efficient manner and to encourage connection to town water and sewer services;
7) To provide wildlife corridors connecting open spaces;
8) To encourage development of seasonal residential properties to enhance
recreational and other appropriate land uses;
C. Definitions.
In addition to the definitions elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, the following definitions
apply:
Accessways: Shall mean privately traversed ways, inclusive of driveways, for vehicular use
within a Seasonal Cottage Resort; and for the purposes of this ordinance shall include both paved
and gravel travel surfaces of varying widths and construction buildup. Final width and
construction standards of accessways shall be determined with input from the Planning Board
and Public Safety departments.
Base Maximum Density: Shall mean the maximum number of allowed seasonal cottage units
(“unit”) for a Seasonal Cottage Resort before accounting for any density bonuses as described in
section I of this ordnance. This number shall be equal to 5 units per each Net Developable Acre
(or one Seasonal Cottage Unit per 8712 s.f. of Net Developable Acreage expressed in square
feet).
Commercial: Shall mean those accessory uses subordinate to the Seasonal Cottage Units and
which are in keeping with a resort development and are operated by the SCR management
agency for public or private use including but not limited to a restaurant, beach house or
maintenance facility.
Common Open Space: Shall mean the space within a SCR which is not occupied by seasonal
cottages or associated private patios, walks, or gardens for the residents, and not occupied by roadways,
access ways, driveways, off-street parking or loading areas, community room or center or other
facilities which are not for common recreational use; but which may include common walkways, green
spaces (natural or landscaped), gazebos, swimming pool or beach facilities, tennis, basketball or other
“hard court” areas, common buildings such as fitness or recreation centers, common garden, recreation
field or similar areas.
Community Amenities: Shall mean attractions and elements proposed or constructed as part of a
SCR which are open to or accessible to the members of the SCR and which generally enhance the
experience of the SCR including but not limited to ponds, common gardens, swimming pool and beach
facilities, recreation fields and courts, walking paths and gazebos.
Development: Shall mean a Seasonal Cottage Resort project inclusive of all facilities, seasonal
cottage units, common open space, access ways and all other amenities proposed for the project.
Facility or Facilities: Shall mean built portions of a Seasonal Cottage Resort exclusive of
individual Seasonal Cottage Units.
Gross Land Area: Shall mean the total acreage of a Seasonal Cottage Resort lot inclusive of
existing private rights of ways or easements expressed in acres.
I - 143
Net Developable Acreage: Shall be used in the computation of Base Maximum Density. The
Net Developable Acreage shall equal the Gross Land Area less the following (in acres):
1) The area of natural slopes greater than 25%.
2) Area of wetlands as defined in this ordinance and delineated as such by the Palmer
Conservation Commission under G. L. c. 131 the Town of Palmer ordinances.
3) Area equaling five percent (5%) of the Gross Land Area.
Net Developable Acre: Shall be used to describe the Net Developable Acreage on a “per acre”
basis.
Historic Structure: Shall mean a structure or other historic resource as defined in MG.L c. 44B
§ 2, listed on the National Register of Historic Places or as identified by the Palmer Historic
Commission as locally architecturally or historically significant.
Recreation or Recreational Use: Shall mean the performance of such activities as typically related
to leisure time, social or athletic events or functions or a use promoting such activities.
Seasonal Cottage: Shall mean: A one-family efficiency dwelling located within a Seasonal Cottage
Resort, which shall be occupied only from March 1st to November 30th of each year. Seasonal
Cottages shall have a building footprint between 500 and 1,200 square feet.
D. Use Regulations.
Only the following uses will be allowed in a Seasonal Cottage Resort:
1) Seasonal Cottages;
2) A single dwelling unit designed for year-round use and occupied on a year
round basis by an on-site residential manager;
3) Recreational uses and/ or a community facility or facilities which are integral
to and serve the residents of the seasonal cottages including but not limited to
facilities such as tennis courts, swimming pools, gardens, community buildings and
clubhouse;
4) Commercial uses specifically allowed during the hearing process and by the
SCR Special Permit so long as they are directly accessory to the proposed
development.
E. Restrictions.
The above uses shall also abide by the following:
1) Occupancy of the development is limited to the dates March 1st to
November 30th' inclusive. A year-round, on-site resident, live-in manager is required
to oversee the maintenance and security of the development.
I - 144
2) The applicant and the association of residents must guarantee reasonable and safe
access to the development throughout the year to ensure access for fire and police
vehicles and apparatus.
3) Domestic water services to the cottages shall be suspended between
December 1st and February 28th of each year but provided year round to the on-site
manager’s house. Water supply systems for fire protection shall remain active yearround.
4) Each cottage unit shall have a required minimum size of 500 square feet and a
maximum size of 1,200 square feet.
F. Applicability.
1) Fifty (50) Acre Minimum. A person may apply for an SCR for land in the Rural
Residential District other than any part thereof within the Flood Plain District for a
parcel of at least fifty (50) contiguous acres of gross land area.
G. Base Maximum Density.
1) One seasonal cottage will be allowed for every 8,712 square feet of Net Developable
Acreage. The Planning Board will not allow more than a Base Maximum Density of
5 units per net developable acre.
2) One on-site residential manager “one-family dwelling” shall be permitted per project in
addition to the Base Maximum Density established under171-125 (G) (1).
H. Net Developable Acreage.
1) Net Developable Acreage shall be used in the computation of Base Maximum
Density as defined herein in Section 171-125 (C).
I. Increase in Permissible Density.
1) The Planning Board may award a density bonus to allow an increase in the
number of seasonal cottages beyond the Base Maximum Density. The density
bonus for the SCR shall not, in the aggregate, exceed 75% of the Base Maximum
Density. Calculations shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number when
applying this bonus. A density bonus may be awarded for each of the following
circumstances:
(a) Minimizing environmental impacts: for SCR developments connected to
public sewer system, a bonus of 10% of the Base Maximum Density may
be awarded.
(b) Minimizing environmental impacts: for SCR developments connected to
public water service, a bonus of 10% of the Base Maximum Density may
be awarded.
I - 145
(c) Preserving open space: For each additional ten percent (10%) of the Gross
Land Area (over and above the required 30% per Section 171-125 (L).) set
aside as common open space; a bonus of 10% of the Base Maximum
Density may be awarded.
(d) Preserving historic community character: For every historic structure or
other historic feature preserved and made subject to a historic preservation
restriction, a bonus of 10% of the Base Maximum Density may be
awarded.
(e) Provisions for creation or extension of public trail network (public access
to privately owned trails): A SCR agreeing to allow public access, limited
to pedestrian use only, to trails on the property, a bonus of 10% of the
Base Maximum Density may be awarded. In determining this increase in
density the Planning Board will look at the overall linear feet devoted to
such trails, their location in a wooded area or other area of scenic beauty
and such factors, which relate to the overall quality of the public trail
network.
(f) Provisions for public access to recreational open space amenities and
public access to recreational amenities on property owned by the
Association: An SCR agreeing, as a condition of the Special Permit, to
allow free public access to recreational open space and recreational
amenities may be awarded a bonus of 10% of the Base Maximum
Density.
(g) Provisions for reduced impacts upon community recreational amenities:
Developers/Owners of an SCR agreeing to contribute a one time fee of
$500.00 per each seasonal cottage proposed within the development, as
allowed and calculated under Section G of this Ordinance, may be
awarded a bonus of 5% of the Base Maximum Density.
J. Dimensional Requirements.
The dimensional requirements applicable to a Seasonal Cottage Resort are as follows:
1) The parcel must have a minimum of one hundred (100) feet of frontage on
a public way. Parcels within the SCR have no minimum frontage requirement.
2) The minimum front yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet. Side and rear yard
setbacks
shall be thirty (30) feet. These setbacks apply only to and are measured from the
perimeter of the property. There are no internal setback requirements for the
individual structures within the Seasonal Cottage Resort, other than as may be
required by other fire protection or governing building codes.
3) The plan must show and the applicant must maintain a buffer strip suitable
and sufficient to provide a visual barrier between adjoining properties in
conformance with Section 171-93.
I - 146
4) The Planning Board may modify or waive the buffer requirement in cases
where topography or other circumstances prove to provide a sufficient visual
buffer.
5) The Planning board shall allow a reduction in the side or
rear yard setbacks when such property line is defined by a waterbody.
K. Parking and Circulation Requirements.
All Seasonal Cottage Complex Resorts shall provide for the following:
1) An adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of pedestrian circulation,
roadways, driveways and parking.
2) Vehicular access from an existing public way, which in the opinion of the
Planning Board is adequate to serve the proposed development. The board may,
after review by the police and fire departments require, in its sole discretion, an
alternative or additional access for emergency use.
3) Accessways and walkways within the Seasonal Cottage Resort shall
be privately owned and maintained by the association of owners and shall be
designed in accordance with sound engineering practices and shall be designed with
sufficient width, suitable grade and adequate construction to safely provide for the
needs of vehicular and pedestrian traffic generated by the development.
4) At least one (1) parking space shall be provided for each seasonal cottage unit.
Parking shall be provided for guests and shall not be less than one (1) additional
space per every two seasonal cottage units. Overall, one and one-half (1.5) parking
spaces per each seasonal cottage unit shall be provided in aggregate for the project.
L. Common Open Space Requirements.
All Seasonal Cottage (SCR) shall provide the following:
1) The area of the Common Open Space shall equal at least thirty (30%)
percent of the Net Developable Acreage of the site. Such land shall have a shape,
dimension, character and location suitable to assure its use for gardens, park,
recreation, or conservation purposes by all the residents of the development.
Stormwater management facilities may be included within Common Open Space
areas calculations. Waters of the Commonwealth, as defined in Section 4.02 of
CMR 4.00, and wetlands, as defined in Section 171-5 on the Town of Palmer’s
Zoning Ordinance, may not be included in Common Open Space calculations.
2) Suitable and usable outdoor recreational area or areas shall be provided for the
use of the development residents and their guests. The area required for
Common Open Space may include land reserved for passive or active
recreational uses, trails or paths, buffers, as well as land set aside as protected
wildlife habitat or other conservation purposes. The Planning Board may permit up to three
I - 147
(3) percent of the Common Open Space area to be paved or built upon for structures accessory to
the dedicated use of open space as stated in Section 171-125 L. (1).
3) Further subdivision of Common Open Space, or its use for other than
recreation or conservation, except for easements for underground utilities or
stormwater management, shall be prohibited. Provision shall be made so that the
Common Open Space shall be owned in common and accessible to the owners
and residents of all seasonal cottage units in the development, or by membership,
corporation, trust or association whose members are the owners and residents of the
units.
(a) M. Community Facility
1) Unless waived by the Planning Board, a community room or facility must be
established for use by the residents. There shall also be room for meetings and other
functions held by the residents. The community building shall not be calculated
into the Common Open Space.
N. Homeowner’s Association.
1) A homeowner’s association shall be established, requiring membership of each
unit or seasonal cottage owner, in the Seasonal Cottage Resort. The association
shall be responsible for the permanent maintenance of communal water, sewage,
and other common utilities, recreational, common open space and common access
ways, and said agreement shall include language guaranteeing the continued
maintenance of such common utilities, land and facilities, assessing each unit
or cottage a share of maintenance expenses. As a condition of the Special
Permit, the association agreement or covenants shall be submitted to the Planning
Board and such agreement shall be forwarded to the town attorney for
his/her comments to assist in the Planning Board’s final approval of the
document(s).
2) The Homeowner’s Association agreement, owner’s covenant, and any other
recordable documents, once executed, shall be recorded in the Hampden County
Registry of Deeds, and proof of said recording shall be provided to the Palmer
Planning Board.
O. Application Requirements
1) Application requirements are as specified in the Special Permit Application and
Site Plan Review sections of this ordinance (Sections 171.28 and 171.29),
respectively and the Rules and Regulations of the Town of Palmer Planning
Board, Article 9.
I - 148
ARTICLE XXIII
LARGE SCALE GROUND MOUNTED SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATIONS
§171-126. Large-scale ground-mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations
1.0 Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to promote the creation of new large-scale ground-mounted
solar photovoltaic installations by providing standards for the placement, design, construction,
operation, monitoring, modification and removal of such installations that address public safety,
minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources and to provide adequate financial
assurance for the eventual decommissioning of such installations.
The provisions set forth in this section shall apply to the construction, operation, and/or repair of
large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations.
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations shall be subject to site plan review
as specified in section 171.29 of the Town of Palmer Zoning Ordinance, and in accordance with
the additional requirements specified herein.
1.1 Applicability
This section applies to large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations
constructed after the effective date of this section. This section also pertains to
physical modifications that materially alter the type, configuration, or size of these
installations or related equipment throughout the useful life of the system or where
alterations may impact abutters.
2.0 Definitions
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation: A solar photovoltaic
system that is structurally mounted on the ground and is not roof-mounted, and has a
minimum nameplate capacity of 250 kW DC.
On-Site Solar Photovoltaic Installation: A solar photovoltaic installation that is constructed
at a location where other uses of the underlying property occur.
Rated Nameplate Capacity: The maximum rated output of electric power production of the
Photovoltaic system in Direct Current (DC).
Solar Photovoltaic Array: an arrangement of solar photovoltaic panels.
3.0 General Siting Standards
3.1 Lot Requirements
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations shall be permitted on parcels
larger than 2 acres located within the Rural Residential, Industrial A, B, Urban Renewal
I - 149
Industrial Park District, within the General Business District on parcels larger than 30 acres and
within the Highway Business district as ancillary to an allowable use.
3.2 Site Control
The project proponent shall submit documentation of actual or prospective access and control of
the project site sufficient to allow for construction and operation of the proposed solar
photovoltaic installation.
3.3 Setbacks
For large-scale, ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations the setbacks shall be the
same for all districts and are as follows: Front yard 50’, Side yard 30’, Rear yard 50’. In an
Industrial District there shall be no yard setback when abutting railroad tracks.
All appurtenant structures shall abide by setbacks as stated with in Section 171-35 of the Town
of Palmer’s Zoning Ordinance.
4.0 Permit Process, Requirements & Enforcement
4.1 Site Plan Review
Ground-mounted large scale solar photovoltaic installations with 250 kW or larger of rated
nameplate capacity shall undergo site plan review by the Planning Board prior to construction,
installation or modification as provided in this section.
4.2.1 Required Documents
Pursuant to the site plan review process, the project proponent shall provide the following
documents:
(a) A site plan prepared, stamped and signed by a Professional Engineer licensed to
practice in Massachusetts showing the following:
i. Property lines and physical features, including roads, for the project site;
ii. Proposed changes to the landscape of the site, grading, vegetation clearing
and planting, exterior lighting, screening vegetation or structures;
iii. Blueprints or drawings of the solar photovoltaic installation signed by a
Professional Engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts showing the proposed layout of the system and any potential
shading from nearby structures
iv. One or three line electrical diagram detailing the solar photovoltaic
installation, associated components, and electrical interconnection methods,
with all National Electrical Code compliant disconnects and overcurrent
devices;
v. Documentation of the major system components to be used, including the
PV panels, mounting system, and inverter;
vi. Name, address, and contact information for proposed system installer;
vii. Name, address, phone number and signature of the project proponent, as
well as all co-proponents or property owners, if any;
I - 150
viii. The name, contact information and signature of any agents representing the
project proponent; and
(b) Documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the project site;
(c) An operation and maintenance plan (see also Section 6.6);
(d) Zoning district designation for the parcel(s) of land comprising the project site;
(e) Proof of liability insurance;
(f) Description of financial surety that satisfies Section 6.3
(g) Any portion of section 4.0 may be waived, if in the opinion of the Planning Board
the materials submitted are sufficient for the Board to make a decision.
(h) All material modifications to a solar photovoltaic installation made after final
approval shall require approval by the Planning Board.
5.0 Design Standards
5.1 Lighting
Lighting of solar photovoltaic installations shall be consistent with local, state and federal law.
Lighting of other parts of the installation, such as appurtenant structures, shall be limited to that
required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting
properties. Where feasible, lighting of the solar photovoltaic installation shall be directed
downward and shall incorporate full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution.
5.2 Signs and Advertising
Signs on large-scale, ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall comply with Article
XVII, § 171.94 of the Town of Palmer’s Zoning Ordinance. A sign consistent with this section
shall be required to identify the owner and provide a 24-hour emergency contact phone number.
Solar photovoltaic installations shall not be used for displaying any advertising except for
reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the solar photovoltaic installation.
5.3 Utility Connections
Reasonable efforts, as determined by the Planning Board, shall be made to place all utility
connections from the solar photovoltaic installation underground, depending on appropriate soil
conditions, shape, and topography of the site and any requirements of the utility provider.
Electrical transformers for utility interconnections may be above ground if required by the utility
provider.
5.4 Land Clearing, Soil Erosion and Habitat Impacts
Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the
construction, operation and maintenance of the large-scale, ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and
bylaws.
5.5 Facility Access and Conditions
The large-scale, ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall maintain
the facility in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting,
structural repairs, and integrity of security measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level
I - 151
acceptable to the local Fire Chief and Emergency Medical Services. The owner or operator shall
be responsible for the cost of maintaining the solar photovoltaic installation and any access
road(s), unless accepted as a public way.
5.6 Appurtenant Structures
All appurtenant structures to large-scale, ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations shall be subject to reasonable regulations concerning the bulk and height
of structures, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking and building coverage
requirements. All such appurtenant structures, including but not limited to,
equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and substations, shall be
architecturally compatible with each other. Whenever reasonable, structures should
be shaded from view by vegetation and/or joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual
impacts.
6.0 Additional Provisions
6.1 Abandonment
Absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning or written notice of
extenuating circumstances, the solar photovoltaic installation shall be considered
abandoned when it fails to operate for more than one year without the written consent
of the Planning Board. If the owner or operator of the large-scale, ground-mounted
solar photovoltaic installation fails to remove the installation in accordance with the
requirements of this section within 150 days of abandonment or the proposed date of
decommissioning, the town may enter the property and physically remove the
installation.
6.2 Removal Requirements
Any large-scale, ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation, which has reached the end of its
useful life or has been abandoned consistent with Section 6.1 of this ordinance, shall be removed.
The owner or operator shall physically remove the installation no more than 150 days after the
date of discontinued operations. The owner or operator shall notify the Planning Board by
certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for removal.
Decommissioning shall consist of:
(a) Physical removal of all large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations, structures, equipment, security barriers and transmission lines from
the site.
(b) Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local, state, and
federal waste disposal regulations.
(c) Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion. The
Planning Board may allow the owner or operator to leave landscaping or
designated below-grade foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption
to vegetation.
I - 152
6.3 Financial Surety
Proponents of large-scale, ground-mounted solar photovoltaic projects shall provide a form of
surety, either through escrow account, bond or otherwise, to cover the cost of removal in the
event the town must remove the installation and remediate the landscape, in an amount and form
determined to be reasonable by the Planning Board, but in no event to exceed more than 125
percent of the cost of removal and compliance with the additional requirements set forth herein,
as determined by the project proponent. Such surety will not be required for municipally- or
state-owned facilities. The project proponent shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs
associated with removal, prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount shall include a
mechanism for calculating increased removal costs due to inflation.
6.4 Compliance with Laws, Ordinances and Regulations
The construction and operation of all large-scale solar photovoltaic installations shall be
consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including but not limited to
all applicable safety, construction, electrical, and communications requirements. All buildings
and fixtures forming part of a solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed in accordance
with the State Building Code.
6.5 Building Permit and Building Inspection
No large scale solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed, installed or modified as
provided in this section without first obtaining a building permit.
6.6 Operation & Maintenance Plan
The project proponent shall submit a plan for the operation and maintenance of the
large- scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation, which shall include
measures for maintaining safe access to the installation, storm water controls, as well
as general procedures for operational maintenance of the installation.
6.7 Utility Notification
No large-scale, ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed
until evidence has been given to the Planning Board that the utility company that
operates the electrical grid where the installation is to be located has been informed
of the solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator’s intent to install an
interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from
this requirement.
6.8 Emergency Services
I - 153
The large-scale solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall provide a copy of the
project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the local fire chief. Upon request the
owner or operator shall cooperate with local emergency services in developing an emergency
response plan. All means of shutting down the solar photovoltaic installation shall be clearly
marked. The owner or operator shall identify a responsible person for public inquiries
throughout the life of the installation.

RULES AND REGULATIONS
GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
IN THE
TOWN OF PALMER, MASSACHUSETTS
Approved by the Planning Board
of the Town of Palmer
on
March 29, 1993
Revised:
April 14, 2003
(Adopted under the Subdivision Control Law Sections 81-K to 81-GG inclusive, Chapter 41, G.L.)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION
PAGE NO.
1.00
TITLE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
1-1
2.00
DEFINITIONS
2-1
3.00
GENERAL
3-1
.01
One Dwelling/Lot Limitation
3-1
.02
Waiver of Compliance
3-1
.03
Amendments
3-1
.04
Validity
3-1
.05
Coordination
3-1
.06
Forming a Subdivision
3-2
.07
Prior Recording
3-2
.08
Zoning Compliance
3-2
.09
Required Standards
3-2
.10
Engineering
3-3
4.00
PROCEDURES FOR NON-SUBDIVISON (ANR) PLANS
4-1
.01
General
4-1
.02
Submission
4-1
.03
Approval/Disapproval
4-1
5.00
PROCEDURES FOR PRELIMINARY PLANS
5-1
.01
General
5-1
.02
Submission
5-1
.03
Contents
5-2
.04
Board Action
5-4
6.00
PROCEDURES FOR DEFINITIVE PLANS
6-1
.01
General
6-1
.02
Submission
6-1
.03
Contents
6-3
.04
Additional Requirements
6-7
.05
Board Action
6-11
.06
Release of Performance Guarantee
6-16
.07
Deviation from Approved Plan
6-19
.08
Submission of Revised Plan/Additional Materials
6-20
7.00
DESIGN STANDARDS
7-1
.01
Streets and Ways
7-1
.02
Easements
7-4
.03
Open Space
7-5
.04
Fencing
7-5
.05
Natural Features
7-6
.06
Guard Rails
7-6
.07
Sidewalks/Bicycle Paths
7-6
.08
Wheelchair Ramps
7-6
.09
Relationship to Town Plans
7-6
.10
Access Through Another Municipality
7-7
.11
Conservation Restrictions
7-7
.12
Access From Public Way
7-7
.13
Septic Disposal Systems
7-8
.14
Water Wells
7-8
.15
Solar Energy
7-8
.16
Driveways
7-9
8.00
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
8-1
.01
Borings
8-1
.02
Construction Staking
8-2
.03
Site and Earthwork
8-3
.04
Pavement Structure
8-3
.05
Shoulders
8-4
.06
Curbs
8-4
.07
Driveways
8-5
.08
Grass Strips
8-5
.09
Side Slopes
8-6
.10
Street Signs
8-6
.11
Monuments and Markers
8-6
.12
Bridges
8-7
.13
Fire Alarms
8-7
.14
Plantings
8-7
.15
Trenches
8-10
.16
Drainage
8-11
.17
Groundwater
8-13
.18
Sewage Disposal
8-13
.19
Water
8-14
.20
Other Utilities
8-14
.21
Retaining Walls
8-14
.22
Cleaning Up
8-15
.23
Sanitary Sewer
8-15
9.00
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
9-1
10.00
ADMINISTRATION
10-1
.01
Inspection and Control
10-1
.02
Interpretation
10-3
.03
Enforcement
10-3
.04
Material Testing
10-3
11.00
EFFECTIVE DATE AND REPEALER
11-1
APPENDIX A
APPENDIX A
FORMS
A
A--11
FORM A
ANR Plan Application
A-2
FORM B
Preliminary Plan Application
A-3
FORM C
Definitive Plan Application
A-4
FORM D
Certified List of Abutters
A-6
FORM E
Departmental Review
A-7
FORM F-1
Preliminary Plan Approval/Disapproval
A-8
FORM F-2
Definitive Plan Approval/Disapproval
A-9
FORM G
Request Release of Bonds/Surety/Conditions
A-10
FORM H
Notice of Release of Bonds/Surety
A-11
FORM I
Covenant
A-12
FORM J
Release of Conditions/Certificate of Performance
A-14
FORM K
Applications for Submission/Resubmission of Additional
Materials/Time Extension
A-15
FORM L
Development Impact Statement
A-17
APPENDIX B
FEES
A-23
APPENDIX C
Typical Cross Section
A-26
APPENDIX D
Cul-De-Sacs
A-29
APPENDIX E
Design Criteria
A-31
APPENDIX F
Roadway Width
A-32
APPENDIX G
Record Plans
A-33
APPENDIX H
Street Acceptance Plans
A-36
APPENDIX I
Street Sign Installation
A-38
APPENDIX J
Additional References
A-39
SECTION 1.00
SECTION 1.00
TITLE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
TITLE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
1.01 Title
These rules and regulations of the Palmer Planning Board shall be known and may be cited as the “Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land, Town of Palmer,
Massachusetts”, which herein are called “These Rules and Regulations”.
1.02 Purpose
The Rules and Regulations governing the subdivision of land, Town of Palmer, Massachusetts, have been enacted for the purpose of protecting the safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of Palmer by regulating the laying out and construction of ways in subdivisions providing access to the several lots therein, but which have not become public ways, and ensuring sanitary conditions in subdivisions, and in proper cases, parks and open areas. The powers of the Planning Board and the Board of Appeals under these Rules and Regulations shall be exercised with due regard for the provision of adequate access to all of the lots in a subdivision by ways that will be safe and convenient for travel; for lessening congestion in such ways and in the adjacent public ways; for reducing danger to life and limb in the operation of motor vehicles; for securing safety in the case of fire, flood, panic, and other emergencies; for ensuring compliance with the Palmer Zoning By-Law(s); for securing adequate provision for water, sewerage, drainage, underground utility services, fire, police, street lighting and other similar municipal equipment, and other requirements where necessary in a subdivision; and for coordinating the ways in a subdivision with each other and with the public ways in the Town and with the ways in neighboring subdivisions. It is the intent of these Rules and Regulations that any subdivision plan filed with the Planning Board shall receive the approval of such Board if said plan conforms to the recommendation of the Board of Health and to these Rules and Regulations: provided, however that the Planning Board may, when appropriate, waive, as provided for in Section 3.02, such portions of these Rules and Regulations as is deemed advisable.
1.03 Authority
Under the authority vested in the Planning Board of the Town of Palmer by Section 81-Q of Chapter 41 of the General Laws of Massachusetts, said Board hereby adopts these Rules and Regulations governing the subdivision of land in the Town of Palmer.
SECTION 2.00
SECTION 2.00
DEFINITIONS
In construing these Rules and Regulations, the definitions in Section 81-L of Chapter 41 of the General Laws shall apply (unless a contrary intention clearly appears). In addition, the following words shall have the following meanings:
2.01 Applicant, Developer, Subdivider
The person who applies for the approval of a Plan of a proposed subdivision. The applicant or applicants must be the owner or owners of all the land included in the proposed subdivision. An agent, representative or his/her assigns may act for an owner, provided a properly executed power of attorney (or other written evidence acceptable to the Board) is submitted. In the case of a general or limited partnership, all general partners must join in the application and must submit documentation of the legal existence of the partnership and/or
real estate trust and its authority to do business in Massachusetts. An attorney acting on behalf of an applicant shall be licensed to practice law in Massachusetts and shall submit a written statement of representation.
2.02 Board or Planning Board
The Planning Board of the Town of Palmer, Massachusetts.
2.03 Building
A dwelling, shed, garage, or other structure, not to be interpreted as a sewer, water or other utility line.
2.04 Certified by (or Endorsed by) a Planning Board
As applied to a plan or other instrument required or authorized by the Subdivision Control Law to be recorded shall mean bearing a certification or endorsement, following approval at a legal Board meeting, signed by a majority of the members of the Planning Board or any other person authorized by the Board to certify or endorse its approval or other action and amend in a written statement to the Register of Deeds and Recorder of the Land Court.
2.05 Collector Street
Street which receives and distributes traffic from and to various sub-areas within a given region, and receives traffic from a given residential neighborhood or industrial area and carries it to an arterial highway. These roads run through developed areas or connect concentrations of development and carry significant volumes of traffic.
2.06 Consultants or Consulting Services
Includes, but is not limited to, architects, biologists and other environmental experts, chemists, engineers, geologists, landscape architects, planners, lawyers, sanitarians, and surveyors.
2.07 Definitive Plan
A map of a proposed subdivision, three acetate overlays, a Development Impact Statement, together with all other forms, documents, drawings, information filing fees, and reimbursement payments required by these Rules and Regulations, submitted to the Planning Board for its approval.
2.08 Development Impact Statement (DIS)
A documented, written analysis of a proposed subdivision which contains all information provided by Section 8.00 of these Rules and Regulations, and which provides the Planning Board and its agents or consultants with information necessary for plan review. The DIS is prepared by the applicant.
2.09 Engineer
Any person who is registered or otherwise legally authorized by the State of Massachusetts to perform professional civil engineering services.
2.10 Local Street
Street which primarily provides access to adjacent land uses.
2.11 Owner
The owner of record as shown by the records in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds or Land Court.
2.12 Preliminary Plan
A plan of a subdivision submitted by the applicant showing sufficient information to form a clear basis for discussion and clarification of its general contents and for the preparation of a definitive plan.
2.13 Streets
1. Major Street - a street which, in the opinion of the Board, is likely to carry substantial volumes of through traffic.
2. Secondary Street - a street other than a major street which, in the opinion of the Board, is likely to carry traffic other than just to or from lots on that street.
3. Minor Street - a street which, in the opinion of the Board, is likely to be used only by vehicles traveling to or from lots on that street.
4. Dead End Street/Cul-de Sac - a public or private vehicular right of way which affords the principal means of access to abutting property and which joins another thoroughfare at only one end. Any such thoroughfare, which joins or intersects a dead end street/cul-de-sac, shall have adequate access at both ends from a Town, County, or State public way adjacent to the subdivision.
2.14 State Construction Standards, Massachusetts DPW Construction Standards
These specifications are published by the Massachusetts Department of Public Works. They are entitled Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges, and include all supplements, updates, revisions or future editions covering substantially the same subject matter. All matters left open or undetermined by these specifications shall be specified by the Board on a case-by-case basis.
2.15 Subdivision
“Subdivision” shall mean the division of a tract of land into two or more lots and shall include re-subdivision, and when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdivision of the land or territory subdivided.
The division of a tract of land into two or more lots shall not be deemed to constitute a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision Control Law under any of the following conditions:
1. At the time the subdivision is made, every lot within the tract so divided has frontage on:
a. a public way or a way which the Clerk of the Town of Palmer certifies is maintained and used as a public way; or
b. a way shown on a plan previously approved and endorsed in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law; or
c. a way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became effective, in the Town of Palmer having, in the opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land abutting thereon or served thereby, and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon. Such frontage shall be of at least such distance as is then required by the Zoning Ordinances of the Town of Palmer for erection of a building on such lot, and if no distance is so required, such frontage shall be of at least fifty (50) feet.
2. Conveyances or other instrument adding to, taking away from, or changing the size and shape of, lots in such a manner as not to leave any lot so affected without the frontage above set forth.
3. The division of a tract of land on which two or more buildings were standing when the Subdivision Control Law went into effect in the Town of Palmer in which land lies, into separate lots on each of which one of such buildings remains standing.
2.16 Subdivision, Type I.
A subdivision for residential purposes other than apartments or condominium developments.
2.17 Subdivision, Type II.
A subdivision for apartments, condominiums, business or industrial purposes.
2.18 Subdivision Control Law
Refer’s to Sections 81-K to 81-GG, inclusive of Chapter 41, of the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts entitled “Subdivision Control”, as last amended.
2.19 Surveyor
Any person who is registered or otherwise legally authorized by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to perform land-surveying services.
2.20 Way
A right of way or means of access to a lot. A public way is a way which has been accepted by, and the land owned by, the Town of Palmer or by other means created as a public street. Any other way (private way) is a way over land which is owned by a private party, but which is set forth by deed covenant, deed description, or other means as a private way.
SECTION 3.00
SECTION 3.00
GENERAL
3.01 Limitation of One-Dwelling on Any Lot
Not more than one building designed or available for use for dwelling purposes shall be erected or placed or converted to use as such on any lot in a subdivision, or elsewhere in the Town of Palmer without the consent of the Board. Such consent may be conditional upon the providing of adequate ways of furnishing access to each site for 3.02 Waiver of Compliance
The Planning Board may, in special and appropriate cases, waive strict compliance with such portions of these Rules and Regulations, as provided for in Section 81-R, Chapter 41, of the General Laws, where such section is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of the Subdivision Control Law.
A request, with justification, for a waiver of a requirement, rule, or regulation shall be made in writing by the applicant at the time of first submission.
If the Planning Board approves the request for a waiver, it shall endorse conditions of such waiver (if any) on the plan or set them forth in a separate instrument attached conditions.
3.03 Amendments
These Rules and Regulations or any portion thereof may be amended from time to time in accordance with Section 81-Q of the Subdivision Control Law.
3.04 Validity
The invalidity of any section, paragraph, clause or provision of these Rules and Regulations shall not invalidate any other section, paragraph, clause or provision therein.
3.05 Coordination with Municipal Departments and Other Agencies
In the Town of Palmer certain services are provided to subdivisions under the jurisdiction of various Town departments and other quasi-public agencies. Compliance with the applicable regulations and requirements of these agencies and departments shall be required before a Definitive Plan is approved by the Planning Board, at a regularly scheduled meeting, and
certification and installation of respective utilities shall be required before the performance guarantee can be reduced or released.
3.06 Forming a Subdivision
No person shall make a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision Control Law of any land within the Town, or proceed with the improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision, or the construction of ways, or the installation of municipal services therein, unless and until a Definitive Plan of such subdivision has been submitted to, approved and endorsed by, the Board as hereinafter provided, and recorded at the Hampden County Registry of Deeds.
3.07 Effect of Prior Recording of Subdivision of Land
The recording of a plan of land within the Town in the Registry of Deeds of Hampden County prior to the effective date of the Subdivision Control Law in the Town of Palmer, showing the division thereof into existing or proposed lots, sites or other divisions and ways furnishing access thereto, shall not exempt such land from the application and operation of these Rules and Regulations, except as specifically exempt by Section 81-FF of the Subdivision Control Law.
3.08 Compliance with Zoning Ordinance
No plan of a subdivision shall be approved unless all of the building lots shown on the plan comply with the Zoning By-Laws of the Town of Palmer, Massachusetts.
3.09 Requirements for More Stringent Standards
The Planning Board may, in special and appropriate cases, require the developer to follow more stringent standards than the ones mentioned in these Rules and Regulations. In doing so, the Board shall notify the developer in writing of said standards and the reason they are required.
3.10 Engineering
The Preliminary and Definitive Plans shall be prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor and construction details shall be designed by a Registered Professional Engineer.
SECTION 4.00
SECTION 4.00
PROCEDURE FOR SUBMISSION AND ENDORSEMENT OF NON-SUBDIVISION PLANS (PLANS BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE APPROVAL)
4.01 General
Any person who wishes to cause to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds or to be filed with the Land Court a plan of land in the Town of Palmer, who believes that his plan does not require approval under the Subdivision Control Law, may submit his plan as hereinafter provided, to the Planning Board for such determination.
4.02 Submission
The applicant shall submit to the Planning Board the original drawing and four (4) prints of the plans accompanied by four (4) copies of a completed application Form A (see Appendix A, Forms), together with any necessary evidence to show that the plan does not require approval, and required filing fee (see Appendix B).
Said plan shall also include a location plan, at the scale of the Palmer Assessor’s Maps, of the parcels shown on said plan, accurately showing their relation to one or more existing town streets.
The applicant, may submit a non-subdivision plan to the Planning Board, or by registered mail, postage paid, with the Town Clerk, stating the date of submission for such determination.
In addition, the applicant shall provide written notice to the Town Clerk by personal delivery in hand or by registered mail, of submission to the Planning Board of the items specified above. If the notice is given by delivery, the Clerk shall, if requested, give a written receipt therefore to the person who delivered such notice.
Receipt by the Planning Board, or date of mailing of such notice, plans and necessary documentation as may be required in these Rules and Regulations shall constitute the effective date of submission.
4.03 Approval/Disapproval
If the Board determines that the plan does not require approval, it shall within twenty-one (21) days and without public hearing endorse on the plan the words “Planning Board Approval under the Subdivision Control Law Not Required”. Said endorsement shall be signed by a majority of the Planning Board. If the Board determines that the plan does require approval under the Subdivision Control Law, it shall within twenty-one (21) days of submission of said plan so inform the applicant and return the reproducible original of the plan. The Board shall give written notice of its determination to the Town Clerk.
Before the Board makes its determination, it shall review or have a consultant review the correctness of all street information and compliance with the Palmer Zoning By-Laws. If, in the judgment of the Board, consulting services are necessary or appropriate, the applicant
shall reimburse the Town for the full cost of such services prior to the endorsement of the plan. Where the physical condition or width of a public way, from which the lots shown on the plan have their access, is considered by the Board to be inadequate either to provide for emergency services or to carry the traffic which is expected, in the opinion of the Board, to be generated by such lots, the Board shall determine that the plan does require approval under the Subdivision Control Law.
If the Board fails to act upon a plan submitted under this section or fails to notify the Town Clerk and the applicant of its action within twenty-one (21) days after its submission, it shall be deemed to have determined that approval under the Subdivision Control Law is not required.
SECTION 5.00
SECTION 5.00
PROCEDURES FOR THE SUBMISSION OF PRELIMINARY PLANS
5.01 General
A Preliminary Plan of a subdivision may be submitted by the applicant to the Planning Board for discussion and approval by the Board. The submission of such a Preliminary Plan will enable the subdivider, the board, and other municipal agencies to discuss and clarify the problems of such subdivision before a Definitive Plan is prepared. The degree of review and effectiveness of the Board’s comments shall be in direct proportion to the accuracy and amount of information provided by the applicant on the Preliminary Plan.
Prior to submission of the Preliminary Plan to the Planning Board for approval, the subdivider should discuss the Plan with the Board of Health, Board of Selectmen, Conservation Commission, School Committee, Fire Department, Police Department, and Highway Department to obtain their recommendations. These recommendations should be transmitted to the Board by the respective agencies. These recommendations may be incorporated in the Preliminary Plan with any changes and additions suggested by the Board.
The centerline of proposed roadway and all property lot lines shall be adequately and accurately staked or flagged on the site sufficient for identification by the Board members and Town officials, when site visits are made.
5.02 Submission
The plan shall be submitted by delivery at a regular or special meeting of the Board, or by delivery by registered mail to the Board in care of the Town Clerk. If so mailed, the date of mailing (postmark) shall be the date of submission of the plan. In addition, written notice (see Appendix A, Form B) shall be filed by delivery or registered mail with the Town Clerk stating the date of submission of the plan. The Town Clerk shall give a written receipt, if requested, to the person who delivered such notice. The applicant shall submit ten (10) prints (dark line on white background) of the Preliminary Plan and a Form B to the Board, together with all other information and documentation, as required in these Rules and Regulations. The Board shall file one (1) print with the Board of Health, one (1) print with the Chief of the Fire Department, one (1) print with the Conservation Commission, one (1) print with the Water
Supply Protection Committee, one (1) print with the Police Chief, and one (1) print with the Highway Department. The Board may decide to forward said plans to other Town agencies and/or departments for their review, thus additional prints may be requested from the applicant. At least three (3) of these copies shall have the significant features illustrated according to the following color scheme:
Roads - dark gray;
Streams and waterbodies - blue;
Wetlands - solid red;
Wetlands 100’ buffer zone - dotted red;
One hundred year flood plains - orange;
Open space and recreation areas - green;
Pedestrian and bicycle paths - brown;
Subdivision boundaries - black;
The applicant shall also file:
a. ten (10) copies of a draft Development Impact Statement (see Section 6.04, number 6, and Appendix A, Form L); and
b. the required filing fee (see Appendix B)
c. the required Review Fee (see Appendix B)
Said fee shall be used by the Town to pay for any additional consultants which it finds necessary to hire in order to carry out an effective review of the proposed subdivision.
5.03 Contents
The Preliminary Plan submission shall include at least three (3) alternative concepts for developing the parcel.
The Preliminary Plan shall be drawn at a scale of 1” = 100’ on 24” by 36” sheets. Said plan shall show sufficient information about the subdivision to form a clear basis for discussion of its problems and for the preparation of the Definitive Plan. In addition, the plan shall show at least the following information:
1. The subdivision name, boundaries, true north arrow, date of submission, scale, legend and title “Preliminary Plan”.
2. The names and addresses of the owners of record, the applicant and the registered Civil Engineer and Land Surveyor.
3. The names of all abutters and those owners of land separated from the subdivision only by a street, as determined from the most recent tax list.
4. Existing and proposed lines of street, proposed names of the latter, right-of-way, easements, and any public or common areas within the subdivision. Purpose of easements shall be indicated.
5. Location, names and present widths of streets bounding, approaching, or within reasonable proximity of the subdivision.
6. Location of natural waterways and waterbodies within and adjacent to the subdivision.
7. Boundary lines of all proposed lots with approximate dimensions and lot areas in square feet.
8. The existing and proposed topography at a five (5) foot contour interval or better.
Datum must be U.S.G.S. Mean Sea Level. Major site features, such as existing stone walls, fences, buildings, large trees (12” or greater in diameter), rock ridges and out-croppings, swamps, historic features and wooded areas.
9. Whenever applicable and in a general manner, the proposed and existing storm drainage, sanitary sewer and water systems.
10. A sketch of the applicant’s contiguous un-subdivided land, showing possible or contemplated development and street layout, if applicable.
11. When multiple sheets are necessary, match lines shall be used and referenced. An index plan graphically indicating the arrangement of said standard (24” x 36”) sheets at a suitable scale shall be provided.
12. During discussion of the Preliminary Plan, the complete information required by the Definitive Plan, Section 6.00 may be developed.
13. A locus or location plan at U.S.G.S. scale showing the subdivision location to the surrounding roadways and physical features.
14. The applicant shall request, in writing to the Planning Board, any proposed waivers, with justification, of a requirement, rule, or regulation he/she/they may require.
5.04 Action by the Board
After submission, the Preliminary Plan will be reviewed by the Planning Board, Board of Health, Chief of Police, Chief of the Fire Department, Conservation Commission, Highway Department, Tree Warden, and other municipal agencies and departments to determine whether it is in compliance with the design standards as set forth in these Rules and Regulations and with any additional requirements of the above-mentioned Boards, municipal agencies and departments.
Within thirty (30) days after the date of submission, the Board of Health, the Chief of Police, the Chief of the Fire Department, Conservation Commission, Department of Public Works, the Town Engineering Consultant, and other municipal agencies shall notify the Planning Board of their respective approval or disapproval of the Preliminary Plan, and if disapproved, shall list their reasons in writing.
Within forty-five (45) days after submission of the Preliminary Plan, the Planning Board shall approve, or approve with modifications, or disapprove said Preliminary Plan, and in the case of disapproval, the Board shall state in detail the reasons for its disapproval.
The Planning Board shall file its decision with the Town Clerk, and shall send a copy of said decision by registered mail to the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to file its decision upon a Preliminary Plan within forty-five (45) days after submission shall be deemed to constitute approval of such a plan.
Approval of the Preliminary Plan by the Planning Board does not constitute approval of a subdivision, but does facilitate the procedure in securing approval of the Definitive Plan. In addition, such approval does not in any way authorize the owner to proceed with construction of roadways and/or other work in the subdivision.
SECTION 6.00
SECTION 6.00
PROCEDUR
PROCEDURES FOR THE SUBMISSION OF DEFINITIVE PLANSES FOR THE SUBMISSION OF DEFINITIVE PLANS
6.01 General
A Definitive Plan, hereinafter referred to as the Plan, of a subdivision must be submitted to the Planning Board. Said plan shall be governed by the Subdivision Regulations in effect at the time of submission of such plan, or in effect at the time of submission of a Preliminary Plan, provided that a Definitive Plan evolved therefrom shall have been submitted to the Planning Board within seven (7) months from the date of submission of the Preliminary Plan.
A Definitive Plan shall also be governed by the zoning in effect at the time of submission of a Preliminary Plan from which a Definitive Plan is evolved, in accordance with the appropriate provisions of Chapter 40A of the General Laws, as amended.
The centerline of proposed roadway and all property lot lines shall be adequately and accurately staked or flagged on the site sufficient for identification by the board members and Town officials, when site visits are made.
6.02 Submission
The plan shall be submitted by delivery at a regular or special meeting of the Board, or by delivery or registered mail to the Board in care of the Town Clerk. If so mailed, the date of mailing (postmark) shall be the date of submission of the plan. In addition, written notice (a copy of Form C in Appendix A) shall be filed by delivery or registered mail with the Town Clerk stating the date of submission of the plan. The Town Clerk shall give a written receipt, if requested, to the person who delivers such notice.
The full submission shall consist of:
1. A properly executed application (see Appendix A., Form C).
2. Ten (10) prints (dark line on white background) of the Definitive Plan (including all plans, maps and cross sections, and documents required in Sections 6.03 and 6.04), together with all other information and documentation, as required in these Rules and Regulations. The Board shall file one (1) print with the Board of Health, one (1) print with the Chief of the Fire Department, one (1) print with the Conservation Commission, one (1) print with the Water Supply Protection Committee, one (1) print with the Highway Department, and one (1) print to the Police Chief. At least three (3) of these prints shall have the significant features illustrated according to the following color scheme:
Roads - dark gray;
Streams and waterbodies - blue
Wetlands - solid red;
Wetlands 100’ buffer zone - dotted red;
One hundred year flood plains - orange;
Open space and recreation areas - green;
Pedestrian and bicycle paths - brown;
Subdivision boundaries - black;
The Board may request additional copies of the above to be forwarded to other Town agencies and departments for their review and comments.
3. a. The required Filing Fee (see Fee Schedule, Appendix B).
b. The required Review Fee (see Fee Schedule, Appendix B).
Said fee shall be used by the Town to pay for any additional consultants which it finds necessary to hire in order to carry out an effective review of the proposed subdivision.
4. List of abutters (see Appendix A, Form D). Name and mailing address of all abutters as they appear in the most recent tax list, including owners of land separated from subdivision only by a street. The applicant shall obtain a certificate of the Board of Assessors, which must be attached to this application, that all abutters are listed.
5. A sketch plan showing a possible or prospective street layout for any adjacent unsubdivided land owned or controlled by the owner or applicant of the subdivision and also showing topography, unless such a plan has already been submitted to the Board.
6. One set of three overlays shall be prepared on acetate at the same scale as the Definitive Plan Map; these overlays shall illustrate the following features of the undeveloped site:
Overlay #1 - One hundred year flood plains, wetlands, aquifer recharge areas;
Overlay #2 - Soils (including all soil types), and slopes greater than 25%;
Overlay #3 - Vegetation types;
7. Ten (10) copies of all additional information required in Section 6.04.
6.03 Contents
The Definitive Plan shall bear the seal of a Massachusetts Land Surveyor and a Registered Professional Engineer. The plan shall be at a scale of one (1) inch equal to forty (40) feet, unless otherwise specified by the Planning Board, and of a sheet size 24 inches by 36 inches outside dimensions. If multiple sheets are used, they shall be accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision.
All surveys must tie to the Massachusetts State Plane Coordinate System (1927 datum) (MSPCS). At least two bench marks must be placed on site and shown on the plans prior to construction. Said bench marks shall be tied to, and employ, U.S.G.S. 1988 Vertical Datum recommended, and the M.S.P.C.S. Every plan sheet should have at least four points tied into the M.S.P.C.S. using the following, or equivalent:
a. the Global Positioning System (GPS); or
b. the United State Geological Survey (U.S.G.S.) Horizontal Datum.
Whenever possible, a 3.5” or 5.25” DOS compatible computer disk containing the property boundary lines should be provided using Drawing Interchange Files (AutoCAD Compatible DXF files), in either ASCII or binary format.
The Definitive Plan shall contain the following information:
1. A location plan of the subdivision at a scale of 1” = 200’, showing the proposed lot lines, the right-of-way lines of all proposed streets in the subdivision and their location in relation to one or more existing streets of portions thereof, shown and readily identifiable as to locus on the Town Assessors’ and Topographic Maps and to such accuracy that the latter may be placed over the location plan for purposes of actual transfer to said maps. Whenever applicable, if the development falls within the limits of existing 1” = 500’ scale Assessor’s Maps, an additional location plan at 1” = 100’ scale with all the above information shall be provided. An inset at a scale of 1” = 1,200’ shall be included on the location plan showing the location of the subdivision within the Town.
2. The subdivision name, boundaries, the coordinate north arrow, date, scale, legend and title, Definitive Plan”.
3. The names of owners of record, the applicant and the Registered Land Surveyor and Registered Professional Engineer, and official seals. Certification by the Surveyor that all surveying conforms to the technical standards for property surveyors of the American Congress on Surveying and Mapping shall appear on the plan.
4. Names and plan location of all abutters indicating limits of contiguous boundaries of the parcel/lots (within 200 feet of the boundary of the subdivision) and those owners of land separated from the subdivision only by a street. This must agree with Form D (Appendix A).
5. Existing and proposed lines of streets, lots, right-of-way, easements, and any public or common areas within the subdivision. (The proposed name of proposed streets shall be shown in pencil until they have been approved by the Board). Purpose of easement shall be indicated.
6. Location, name and present widths of streets bounding, approaching, or within 200 feet of the limits of the subdivision.
7. Location of natural waterways and water bodies within and adjacent to the subdivision.
8. Major site features, such as existing stone walls, fences, buildings, large trees (12” or greater in diameter), rock ridges and out-croppings, swamps, wetlands, flood plains, historic features, and wooded areas. The plan shall identify which of the above shall remain undisturbed.
9. Sufficient data, including lengths, bearings, radii, tangent distances, and central angles to determine the exact location, direction and length of every street and way line, lot line, and boundary line, and to establish these lines on the ground.
10. Location of all permanent monuments and bench marks identified as to whether existing or proposed, and whenever possible, identified according to the Town of Palmer survey control system. Bounds are required at all intersections of street lines, angle points and changes of curvature of street lines. All benchmarks shall be tied to and employ U.S.G.S. (United States Geological Survey) datum system or the Town control datum.
11. Boundary lines, areas in square feet, and dimensions of all proposed lots, with all lots designated numerically and in sequence.
12. Suitable space to record the action of the Board and the signatures of the members of the Planning Board on each sheet of the Definitive Plan. Where the applicant elects to secure completion of required improvements by covenant (rather than bonds or surety), there shall be a notation above such space as follows:
Approved ____________________________, subject to covenant conditions set forth in a covenant executed by __________________________, dated ______________________, and recorded in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds, Book No. _________, Page No. ____________, or Document No. ___________.
The remaining items shall be submitted on separate sheets.
13. Existing and proposed topography (sufficiently differentiated) with two (2) foot contour intervals for the entire parcel, unless the Board agrees that the natural surface of the ground may be adequately represented by contours with larger intervals or by figures of elevation.
Datum to be U.S.G.S. Mean Sea Level.
14. Where storm drainage line discharges into a brook, stream, or drainage area, to determine condition, and proposed method of stabilization.
15. A street layout plan on a separate 24” x 36” sheet, horizontal scale 1” = 40’, for each street in the subdivision showing exterior lines, roadway lines, partial lot lines, curb lines, intersection angles, points of tangency, and radii of curves. Also included on the street layout plan shall be location, size, and type of construction, elevations and invert, whenever applicable, of all pipes and conduits of the:
a. Water Supply System, including pumps, valves, stubs, gates, hydrants, and similar equipment;
b. Storm Drainage System, including manholes, pipes, culverts, catch basins and appurtenant structures;
c. Sanitary Sewerage System, including piping, manholes, pumps, community septic tanks, and appurtenant equipment;
d. Natural Gas Supply System, including pipes, pumps, valves, gates, and similar equipment;
e. Electrical, Telephone and Cable TV Supply System, including piping, handholes, transformer padmounts, and similar equipment, all transmission lines to shown as underground installation;
f. Lighting System, including location of street light poles.
16. A Profile Plan on the same sheet located directly below and coordinated with the street layout plan, indicating existing profiles on the exterior and center lines (using light-weight lines) and proposed profile on the center line (using heavy-weight lines) of each proposed street, at a horizontal scale of 1”= 4’. All elevations shall refer to U.S.G.S. Mean Sea Level datum. Profiles shall show existing and proposed street grades, rate of gradient on percentages, ground and proposed elevations at center line of each fifty (50) foot station, and grades of intersecting streets and ways shall be clearly indicated.
17. The Profile Plan shall show location of existing and proposed water drainage and sanitary sewer lines, invert, rim elevations and station of each manhole or catch basin.
18. A typical cross section for the full width of the proposed right-of-way shall be shown in accordance with the “Typical Cross Section” illustrated in Appendix C showing foundation material, wearing surface, crown and width of traveled way, curbing, grass strips, sidewalks, utility locations, etc. For a non-typical cross section, see Section 7.01(6).
19. Construction details for catch basins, manholes, endwalls, headwalls, rip-rap, energy dissipators, etc.
20. Proposed layout and design of any and all parks, pools, or similarly community improvements, including all water, drainage, and electrical layouts, if any, designed to service such community improvements.
21. Locations of borings shall be shown on the plan with a numbering system corresponding to boring logs which will be submitted as part of the application (see Section 6.04.1)
22. Subsurface conditions on the tract, location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and ground water conditions, depth to ground water, and on a separate sheet, location and results of soil percolation tests if individual sewage disposal systems are proposed. These percolation tests shall be: (a) made on each lot within the subdivision; (b) made by and at the expense of the applicant; and (c) shall be in accordance with the Board of Health regulations and the State Sanitary Codes as Applicable.
23. Size and location of existing and proposed water supply facilities.
24. Size and location of all fire hydrants, pump, water lines between hydrants and pump, and source(s) of water for fire fighting.
25. Legend denoting any signs and symbols used on the plan and not otherwise explained.
26. Any other pertinent information which the Planning Board may request.
6.04 Additional Requirements
1. Borings
The purpose of borings is to assist the developer and the project’s engineer in designing, and the Board n evaluating, an appropriate roadway and related utilities based on existing water table and subsurface soil conditions (i.e., a clay subsurface might necessitate extra excavation and extra depth for gravel base; a water table near ground surface might necessitate the installation of subdrains along the edge of the road, etc.). In case of a development located within the limits of the aquifer recharging the Towns wells, borings should provide enough information to facilitate the Town’s determining the development’s impact on subsurface water quality. The actual location at which each boring is made shall be shown on the plans. The borings shall be certified by a Massachusetts Professional Engineer. Borings must be taken at the proposed roadway centerline at each 50’ station unless otherwise specified by the Board.
2. Easements
All easements to be granted by the developer to the Town of Palmer shall be shown on the subdivision plans with bearings and distances, and their purpose clearly stated. In addition, the applicant shall submit, as part of his application, easement documents, suitable for recording, deeding said easements to the Town. The easements shall be submitted by the Board to the Highway Department and the Town Counsel, and their response shall be given in writing within thirty (30) days of the date of submittal.
3. Restrictive Covenants
The applicant shall submit, whenever applicable, as part of his/her/their application any and all documents, such as, but not limited to, master deeds, restrictive covenants, deed restrictions, home owner’s association rules and regulations of any commonly owned/shared land, detention pond, open space, recreation area, etc. Said documents shall be submitted by the Board to the Highway Department and the Town Counsel, and their response shall be given in writing within thirty (30) days of the date of submittal.
4. Construction Quantities
The applicant shall submit a detailed estimate for all construction within the proposed roadway layout and/or public utility easements, certified by the project’s Registered Professional Engineer. Said estimate shall be based on the “Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges”, 1973 Edition, as amended, of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and shall include:
a. quantity, unit price, and total amount for each construction item; and
b. total amount for cost of completion of project, including prevailing wage rates.
5. Lighting System
The applicant shall include a complete street lighting system for the proposed street in the Definitive Plans. Said system shall compatible with existing systems in town and be in conformance with current utility standards, as supplied by the local electric company. In addition, the applicant shall petition the Board of Selectman to accept said system. A copy of the petition shall be included in the Definitive submission.
6. Development Impact Statement
A Development Impact Statement (DIS) is a documented, written analysis of a proposed
development which provides the Planning Board and Town officials with information necessary for plan review.
It is a developer’s responsibility to submit a DIS, that is prepared by a qualified
professional acceptable to the Board, documented in sufficient detail to permit an
adequate evaluation by the Planning Board; however, additional data may be requested in
writing by the Board. This is one reason why it is to the advantage of the developer to
prepare and submit to the board a Preliminary Plan including a draft DIS. It is necessary
to respond to all sections of the DIS form, except when a written exemption is granted
by the Planning Board. (see Appendix A, Form L)
7. Review by the Board of Health as to Suitability of the Land
The Board of Health shall within forty-five (45) days after the filing of the Plan, report to the Planning Board in writing its approval or disapproval of said Plan. A copy of such report shall be sent to the applicant. If the Board of Health disapproves said Plan, it shall make specific findings as to which if any, of the lots shown on such Plan cannot be used for building sites without injury to the public health, and include such specific findings and
reasons therefore in such report, and, where possible, shall make recommendations for the adjustment thereof. Failure of the Board of Health to report shall be deemed approval by the Board of Health. Any approval of the Plan by the Planning Board shall then only be given on condition that the designated lots or land shall not be built upon or served with any utilities (including cesspools, septic tanks, and drainage) without prior consent of the Board of Health. The Planning Board shall endorse on the Plan which condition, specifying the lots or land to which such condition applies.
8. Wetlands Protection
In accordance with Chapter 131, Section 40, of the Massachusetts General Laws, no person shall remove, fill, dredge, or alter any bank, beach, dune, flat, marsh, or swamp bordering on any existing creek, river, stream, pond, lake, or any land under said waters or subject to flooding without receiving a negative determination of applicability or an order of conditions from the local Conservation Commission and/or Department of Environmental Quality Engineering.
9. Water Supply Protection District
Any portion of a proposed subdivision which lies within the limits of the Town’s Water Supply Protection District shall conform to the requirements of said District as stated in the appropriate sections of the Palmer Zoning By-Laws.
10. Hydrology Study and Drainage Calculations
The applicant shall submit, as part of his/her/their application, calculations showing (a) that
Any proposed drainage system has been designed according to the standards set forth in
Section 8.16; and (b) any impact said drainage system would have on existing drainage systems downstream from the former’s point of discharge.
11. Sanitary Sewer Study
The applicant shall submit, as part of his/her/their application, calculations showing (a) that any proposed sanitary sewer system has been designed according to the standards set forth in Section 8.23; and (b) any impact said sanitary sewer system would have on existing sanitary sewer systems downflow from the former’s point of discharge.
12. On-Lot Sewage Disposal System
Where sewage disposal is to be by individual on-lot sewage disposal system, the Definitive Plan shall be accompanied by a report, prepared by a Registered Civil Engineer, which includes the following:
a. the results of percolation and deep hole soil tests performed on each lot, in accordance with Title 5 of the State Environmental Code.
b. a map which locates the soil test sites on each lot,
c. other data, including topographic conditions, natural drainage patterns, soil characteristics, maximum ground water elevations,
d. when on-site water supplies are to be used, the location of those supplies must be shown on a map along with proposed or existing on-site sewage disposal systems on or within 100 feet of any property line.
e. a statement by a Registered Civil Engineer as to the suitability of the area for the installation of subsurface sewage disposal systems of the general type and size as indicated in the Massachusetts Environmental Code 314 CMR Title 5, Department of Environmental Protection.
13. Water Study
The applicant shall submit, as part of his/her/their application, a study, certified by the District’s current water consultant, showing that the proposed water system will provide
the development with adequate fire flows, as determined by the Fire District. The study shall also show the impact of the development on the water pressures in the surrounding area.
14. Erosion/Sedimentation Control Plan
In order to ensure, mitigate and prevent erosion/siltation of disturbed areas during and after construction activities, the developer shall submit a plan showing, in detail, what and when such measures will be implemented, on both a temporary and permanent basis.
6.05 Action on a Definitive Plan
1. Public Hearing
Before approval, modification and approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval of a Definitive Plan is given, a public hearing shall be held by the Planning Board. Notice of the time and place of the hearing, and of the subject matter, sufficient for identification, shall be given by the Board at the expense of the applicant by advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Palmer once in each of two successive weeks, the first publication being not less than fourteen (14) days before the day of such hearing. A copy of said notice shall be mailed by registered mail to the applicant and to all owners of land abutting upon the subdivision or separated from such land only by a street (see Appendix A, Form D). The applicant or his/her/their representative should be present at the hearing.
2. Approval, Modification, or Disapproval
After the required hearing, but within the period specified in the Subdivision Control Law for the submission of the Definitive Plan, the Board shall take action thereon. It may approve, modify and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove said Plan, as provided by statute. Any approval of the Plan by the Planning board shall only be given on condition that the designated lots or land shall not be built upon or served with any utilities, such as septic tanks or cesspools, and drainage without prior consent of the Board of Health.
The Planning Board shall endorse on the Plan such conditions as set forth by the Board of Health and the lots and land affected by such conditions. The action of the Board with respect to such Plan shall be certified and filed with the Town Clerk and sent by registered mail, postage prepaid, to the applicant at his address as stated on the application (see Appendix A, Form F). Favorable action shall require a majority vote of the full Board in rendering its decision, the Board shall take into consideration:
a. Completeness and technical adequacy of all submissions;
b. Determination that development at this location, as proposed in the Definitive Plan, does not entail unwarranted hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of future residents of the subdivision or to others because of possible natural disasters, traffic hazard, or environmental degradation;
c. Conformity with the Design Standards included in or cited by these Regulations;
If the Board modifies and disapproves such Plan, it shall state with its vote the reasons for its action. Final approval, if granted, shall be endorsed on the reproducible drawing of the Definitive
Plan by the signatures of the majority of the full Board, but not until the statutory twenty (20) day appeal period has elapsed following the filing of the certificate of the action of the Board with the Town Clerk and said Clerk has notified the Board that no appeal has been filed, or if appeal has been taken, not until the entry of a final decree of the court sustaining the approval of such Plan.
Final approval of the Definitive Plan does not constitute the laying out or acceptance by the Town of streets within a subdivision. Such laying out or acceptance shall be by action of the Town Meeting upon recommendation of the Planning Board and the Highway Department.
In the event of disapproval, the Planning Board shall state in detail wherein the plan does not conform to these Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board or the recommendations of the Health Board or officer and shall revoke its disapproval and approve of a plan which, as amended, conforms to these Rules and Regulations or recommendations. Any amended plans which are re-submitted for approval shall follow the same procedures as the original submission (Filing Fee, Public Hearing, etc.). Any amended plans submitted later than nine (9) months following the date of the expiration of the appeal period or appeal(s) on the disapproval of the originally submitted plan must conform to the Subdivision Rules and Regulations and procedures (Filing Fee, Public Hearing, etc.) that are in effect at the time of the amended plan’s filing.
3. Endorsement
A Plan that has been approved, approved with modifications, or approved with conditions, shall not be endorsed until after the mandatory twenty (20) day appeal period has elapsed and not until the applicant has:
a. Posted the necessary performance guarantee. The monetary value of said guarantee, when using any method other than a covenant, shall be based on a revised construction quantity estimate (see Section 6.04(4)) if conditional approval of the subdivision was given and if said approval changed the original quantities. In addition, the monetary value of the performance guarantee shall reflect projected construction costs of completing the project at the end of the expiration of said guarantee.
b. Made the necessary corrections, whenever applicable, on the Plan, easements, master deeds, restrictive covenants, etc., if conditional approval was given to the satisfaction of the Board.
c. Presented to the Board, and the Board has subsequently approved, any additional information requested as part of a conditional approval.
d. Paid the necessary 1) inspection fee; 2) and registration fee (Registry of Deeds, Land Court); and 3) restoration guarantee.
e. Delivered to the Board two (2) sets of reproducible (Mylar) drawings of the Definitive Plan with the necessary corrections. After endorsement by the Board, the applicant shall deliver to the Board, twelve (12) sets of copies of the endorsed Definitive Plan.
Failure of the applicant to meet the above requirements shall be full and sufficient reason to withhold endorsement.
If the applicant fails to submit the required Performance Guarantees, easements, and other documentations and the endorsement of the Plan by the Planning Board is delayed more than six
(6) months after the expiration of the twenty (20) day appeal period, the Planning Board, on its own motion, shall exercise its power to modify, amend, or rescind its approval of the subdivision plan or to require a change in the Plan as a condition of said Plan retaining the status of an approved Plan.
4. Performance Guarantee
In accepting the Board’s approval of a Definitive Plan of a subdivision, the applicant agrees to complete the required improvements specified in Section 7.00 and 8.00 for all lots in the subdivision, such construction and installation to be secured in accordance with Section 81U of the Subdivision Control Law by one, or in part by the other, of the following methods which may from time to time be varied by the applicant:
a. Approval with Bonds or Surety. The applicant shall either file a surety company performance bond or provide a deposit of money or negotiable securities in an amount determined by the Board, which may consult with the appropriate Town departments, to be sufficient to cover the cost of all or any part of the improvements specified in Sections 7.00 and 8.00 not covered by a covenant under “b” below. Such bond, deposit of money or negotiable securities, shall be approved as to form and manner of execution by the Board.
b. Approval with Covenant. Instead of filing a bond or depositing money, the applicant may fulfill a covenant executed and duly recorded by the owner of record, running with the land, that no lot in the subdivision
shall be sold and no building erected thereon until such ways, services, and, whenever applicable, temporary turnarounds are constructed and installed, in accordance with these Rules and Regulations so as to adequately serve the lots.
Such covenant shall be inscribed on the Definitive Plan or on a separate document referred to on the Plan and delivered to the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall turn over the covenant agreement to the Town Counsel, who shall review its contents and forward his comments in writing to the Board. Upon approval of the covenant by the Board, the applicant shall note the Board’s action on the Definitive Plan and the Board shall record the covenant, endorsed Definitive Plan, and other appropriate documents at the Hampden County Registry of Deeds.
5. Completion Time Schedule
The Performance Guarantee, whether by bond, deposit of money, or covenant, as previously described herein, shall be contingent upon the completion of such improvements as required in these Rules and Regulations within a period of two (2) years of the date of such bond, deposit of money, or covenant. There shall be at least a nine (9) month period between completion date of all improvements and the expiration date of any bond or deposit of money. Said nine (9) month period shall give the Town the opportunity to complete necessary improvements in case
a) the developer is unable to do so; and/or
b) the Board denies any requests for an extension of time.
Upon written request from the applicant, the Planning Board may at its discretion, grant an extension of time, and such agreement shall be executed and affixed to the bond or covenant.
In the case of a surety company bond, such an agreement for an extension shall not be effective until the surety delivers to the Board a written statement that the surety agrees to the proposed alteration of the completion schedule and that such alteration shall not relieve or affect the liability of the surety company.
Failure to complete all improvements as required by these Rules and Regulations within the time allotted shall cause the Board
a) to draw upon the performance guarantee (surety bond or deposit of money) in order to complete said improvements; and/or
b) schedule a public hearing in order to rescind approval of the subdivision in accordance with appropriate sections of Chapter 41, Section 81 of Massachusetts General Law.
6. Recording of Plan
The Board, within ten (10) days after the Definitive Plan has been endorsed, shall record said Plan, Form F and, whenever applicable, the Board’s order of conditions, public easements (plans and documents), restrictive covenants, master deeds, etc., at the Hampden County Registry of Deeds, and in the case of registered land, with the recorder of the Land Court. The cost of said recording shall be borne by the developer. Subsequent to said recording, the Board shall file within seven (7) calendar days one (1) print of the Definitive Plan with the Building Inspector. Unless the Building Inspector has received such print, he shall issue no permit for a building on any lot within the subdivision. Further, in accordance with the statute, where approval with covenant is noted thereon, he shall issue no permit for the construction of a building on any lot within the subdivision, except upon receipt from the Board of a copy of the Certificate of Performance releasing the lot in question.
6.06 Release of Performance Guarantee
1. Procedures for Partial Release
The subdivider may, upon partial completion and installation of required improvements in a subdivision, as specified in Sections 7.00 and 8.00 of these Rules and Regulations, the security for the performance of which was given by bond, deposit of money, or covenant, make formal application, in writing, to the Planning Board for partial release of his Performance Guarantee, in accordance with the procedures set forth herein:
a. Bond or Deposit of Money. The penal sum of any such bond, or the amount of any deposit held may, from time to time, be reduced by the Planning Board, upon formal application in the manner prescribed herein, and the obligations of the parties thereto released by said Board in part. The applicant shall present to the board a list of all construction items performed and/or completed, said list to be based on Section 6.04(4), as well as a list of all construction items still to be performed, and the estimated costs of completing such items. The amount to be reduced by the Board, after consultation with the Highway Department, shall be
based upon prevailing construction costs for the work remaining to be completed at the time of application for reduction is made. In addition, the Board shall withhold a 10% retainage on any reduction it approves, said retainage to be released under Section 6.06(2).
b. Covenant. The subdivider may request a Release of Conditions for designated lots where the required improvements have been completed for that section of roadway beginning at any intersection with a Town road and abutting lots up through the last lot to be released. Lots may only be released if they abut the completed portion of the road. No partial release from the covenants will be approved if the total length of roadway, including a temporary turnaround, abutting said designated lots, exceeds the Town’s maximum allowable length for dead-end streets, as mentioned in Section 7.01(5), unless the Board has already approved within the limits of the development a dead-end street exceeding said limits.
2. Procedures for Full Release
The subdivider may make formal application, in writing (see Appendix A, Form G), to the Planning Board for full release of his/her/their performance guarantee upon completion and installation of required improvements in a subdivision, as specified in Sections 7.00 and 8.00 of these Rules and Regulations, when the performance guarantee was given by bond, deposit of money, or covenant. Before the Planning Board releases the full interest of the Town in said performance guarantee, the Planning Board shall:
a. Obtain in writing from the Town engineering consultant or from a registered professional engineer chosen by the Board, a certificate or statement that all work required by these Rules and Regulations has been constructed in conformance with the approved construction plans. In cases where roadways will remain under private ownership, the above-mentioned certificate or statement shall be supplied by the project’s registered professional engineer.
b. Obtain from the applicant a set of record construction plans. Said plans shall include, but not be limited to, all the information requested in Appendix G, Record Plans. Approval of said plans by the Board shall take place after review of the former by the Town Engineer.
c. Receive from the applicant street acceptance Plan or Plans and necessary documents, as stated in Appendix H, Acceptance Plans. Said plans and documents after approval by the Board and the Town Engineer, shall be presented by the Planning Board to the Town Meeting for a formal street acceptance.
d. The applicant may be required to execute an instrument, in a form approved by the Board, transferring to the Town or to an approved public utility company, without cost, valid unencumbered title to all sanitary sewers, water mains, and appurtenances thereto, and other utilities constructed and installed in the subdivision or approved portion thereof, and conveying to the Town or to an approved public utility company without cost and free of all liens and encumbrances, perpetual rights and easements to construct, inspect, repair, renew, replace, operate, and forever maintain such sanitary
sewers, water mains and other utilities, with any manholes, conduits, and other appurtenances, and to do all acts incidental thereto, in, through, and under the whole of all streets in the subdivision or approved portion thereof, and if any such sewers or water mains have been constructed and installed in land not within such streets, then in, through, and under a strip of land extending fifteen (15) feet in width on each side of the center line where it deems necessary.
e. If the Planning Board determines that all improvements as shown on the endorsed Definitive Plan have been completed satisfactorily, it shall release the interest of the Town in such performance guarantee and return the bond or deposit, including the 10% retainage to the person who furnished the same, or release the covenant, by appropriate instrument, duly acknowledged, which may be recorded.
f. If the Planning Board determines after inspection that said construction or installation has not been completed, or wherein said construction or
installation fails to comply with these Rules and Regulations, the Planning Board shall send by registered mail to the applicant and deliver to the Town Clerk the details wherein said construction or installation fails to comply with its rules.
g. The applicant shall have thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice to correct all problems mentioned in the above. Failure of the applicant to finish all the necessary work within said thirty (30) days shall cause the Board to draw upon the bond or deposit of money as mentioned below.
h. Any such bond may be enforced and any such deposit may be applied by the Planning Board for the benefit of the Town of Palmer, as provided in Chapter 41, Section 81 of the Massachusetts General Law upon failure of the performance for which any bond or deposit was given to the extent of the reasonable cost to the Town of completing such construction and installation.
3. Release of Lots from Covenant in Exchange for Bond or Deposit of Money
The subdivider may request a Release of Lots from Covenant in exchange for a bond or deposit of money provided that:
a. The lots run consecutively and are released on both sides of the road simultaneously, beginning with the lots nearest any intersection of the subdivision road and a Town road; lots across the road from each other must be released together.
b. The amount of the surety of bond shall be determined by the Planning Board, based on regulations as set in Sections 6.04(4) and 6.05(3a). The amount of the surety of bond shall be determined on a request basis, and each request shall be judged on its own merits.
6.07 Deviation from Approved Plan
1. After approval of any Definitive Plan, the location and width of ways shown thereon, or any street or way subject to the Subdivision Control Law, shall not be changed unless the Plan is amended in accordance with the provisions set
forth in Section 81W, Chapter 41,as amended, of the General Laws, and approved by the Planning Board.
2. In the event the applicant desires to alter or change the grade of a street or the size, location, or layout of a storm sanitary or water line or appurtenant structure, he shall:
a. Provide the Planning Board with a written statement requesting such alteration or change.
b. Provide the Board with three (3) prints of the original Definitive Plan with the proposed changes drawn on said prints in red.
c. No change or alteration shall be permitted unless such change or alteration has been approved by the Planning Board.
d. After approval of a change or alteration, the applicant shall cause such approved changes to be shown on the record plans.
e. Deviations from material and construction specifications shall not be allowed, except as specifically authorized by the Planning Board, upon consultation with the Town’s engineering consultant.
f. The Board shall have forty-five (45) days to respond to the applicant’s request for said change or alteration.
6.08 Submission of Revised Plans, Additional Materials, etc.
Any revised plans and other additional materials submitted by the applicant after the original submission, must be accompanied by a FORM K and the required $500 Filing Fee.
The Planning Board may elect not to consider such revised plans or other additional materials if such plans/materials are not filed with the Planning Board at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the date of the Public Hearing or meeting at which the develop wishes them to be considered. This is to ensure that the town departments, consultants and the public have adequate time to review and comment on said materials.
SECTION 7.00
SECTION 7.00
DESIGN STANDARDS
The subdivider shall observe all design standards for land division as hereinafter provided. These standards shall be considered minimum standards and shall be varied from or waived only as provided in Section 3.02. State Construction Standards shall be followed, and all matters left open or undefined in those Standards shall be specified by the Board on a case-by-case basis. Specification of matters not covered by the State Construction Standards shall be made by the Board or its engineering consultant on a case by case basis, based wherever possible on the publications of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) or other publications cited in Appendix J to these regulations.
7.01 Streets and Ways
Streets and ways shown on the subdivision plan, or on a plan for more than one dwelling building per lot when in conformance with Zoning, must comply with the following requirements:
1. Location
a. All streets and ways shall be designed so that in the opinion of the Planning Board, they will provide safe vehicular travel. Due consideration shall also be given by the subdivider to the attractiveness and design of the street layout in order to obtain the maximum livability and amenity of the subdivision. As far as practicable, streets should also follow natural contours.
b. The proposed streets shall conform, so far as practicable, to any Master Plan, as adopted in whole or in part by the Planning Board.
c. Streets and ways shall be continuous and in alignment with existing streets, as far as practicable, to insure free and safe movement of vehicular traffic.
d. Temporary dead-end or cul-de-sac streets shall conform to the provisions of alignment, width, and grade that would be applicable to such streets if extended.
e. The developer shall make every effort to avoid the creation of dead-end streets.
2. Alignment
Horizontal and vertical alignment shall be in accordance with the standards as shown in Appendix E.
3. Grade
Grades shall be in accordance with the standards as shown in Appendix E.
4. Intersections
Streets and ways shall be laid out so as to intersect in accordance with the standards as
shown in Appendix E and the following:
a. Street and way lines at all intersections, between proposed streets or between, whenever applicable, a proposed and/or existing street, shall be rounded with a curve at each corner that has a property line radius of not less than forty (40) feet.
b. The center line of all intersecting streets or ways shall be a straight line from the point of intersection of said center line for a distance of no less than one hundred (100) feet.
c. On any street where the grade exceeds two (2) percent on the approach of the intersection, a leveling area, with a maximum slope of two (2) percent shall be provided for a distance of not less than thirty (30) feet measured from the nearest gutter line of the intersecting street.
d. Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out either directly opposite each other or with a minimum offset of three hundred (300) feet between their centerlines. This minimum offset shall be observed whenever one or more streets entering opposite sides of another street are existing, whether located within or outside the boundary of the proposed subdivision.
e. Streets entering the same side of another street shall be laid out with a minimum offset of three hundred (300) feet between their centerlines. This minimum offset shall be observed whenever one or more streets entering the same side of another street are existing, whether located within or outside the boundary of the proposed subdivision.
5. Cul-de-Sac or Dead-End Street
a. No street in the proposed subdivision shall be laid out in such a manner that an obstruction at point on this street or any street with which it intersects (proposed or existing) would isolate without another point of exit to an existing public street more than a cumulative total of five hundred (500) feet of roadway as measured along the centerline of construction of the road(s).
b. Permanent cul-de-sac streets shall be provided with a turn around at the end of the street having a minimum outside roadway radius of seventy (70) feet and a property line radius of at least eighty (80) feet (see Appendix D). The center of the cul-de-sac shall be on the center-line of construction.
c. A permanent cul-de-sac turnaround (island) shall be constructed in lieu of paving the entire area of the cul-de-sac (see Appendix D). The roadway pavement shall have the same width beginning at the exterior radius of the turnaround, with the inner circle graded, seeded and/or appropriately planted with acceptable trees or shrubs, or left with natural tree growth. The maintenance of said inner circle shall be the responsibility of the developer, his
successors and assigns (excluding the Town of Palmer), or a homeowner’s association. The inside radius of the cul-de-sac pavement shall be constructed with granite edging type SA (see Section 8.06).
d. A temporary cul-de-sac shall be allowed only where it is part of a street or way that eventually will be extended into adjoining property. The design of a temporary
turnaround shall be satisfactory to the Planning Board, and clearly shown on the Plan as temporary in nature, and such property lines shall be those which would normally have been required or used without the turnaround.
Regardless of the above, no temporary cul-de-sac shall be allowed if the street length exceeds the limit set in these Rules and Regulations.
Layout of the turnaround beyond the normal street right-of-way lines shall be in the
form of an easement to the Town of Palmer covering said premises included in the
turnaround. When the street is extended into adjoining property, the
easement shall become null and void.
6. Cross Sections
a. Cross sections shall be in accordance with the standards as shown in Appendix C.
b. Only one typical cross section need be shown on the Definitive Plan if the former conforms to the standard shown in Appendix C. Any variation from the typical standard should be shown on the construction plans at fifty (50) foot intervals.
7. Right-of-Way Width
The right-of-way shall be in accordance with the standards as shown in Appendix C.
8. Paved Roadway Width
The roadway width shall be based on the following criteria:
a. Projected traffic volume generated by the development, based on ten (10) average daily trips (ADT) per dwelling unit. (i.e., a two-family house will generate 20 ADT)
b. The maximum number of vehicles, based on the above-mentioned ADT per dwelling unit, whether generated within the development (as in the case of a dead-end street) or outside of said development (as in the case of a through street) and passing any section of a roadway will determine the width of the entire length of said roadway, based on standards as shown in Appendix F.
c. In establishing the proposed road width, the developer shall also consider the future growth of the surrounding area.
d. The center-line of the roadway shall coincide with the center line of the right-of-way, unless otherwise approved by the Board.
e. Greater widths may be required by the Planning Board when deemed necessary for present and future vehicular traffic. This may include widening and upgrading existing streets, the expense of which shall be borne by the applicant.
7.02 Easements
For municipal utilities, easements shall be thirty (30) feet in width, except that wider easements may be required by the Board where necessary. Utilities shall be located as close as possible to the center line of the easement.
7.03 Open Space
1. Before approval of a Plan, the Board shall also require the plan to show a park or parks suitably located for playground or recreation purposes. The park or parks shall be of reasonable size, but not less than five (5) percent of the area of the land to be subdivided. The Board shall, by appropriate endorsement on the Plan, require that no building may be erected on such park or parks without its approval for a period of not more than three (3) years after the approval of the Definitive Plan. If this land is not conveyed to the Town of Palmer by sale or gift within three (3) years after the approval of the Definitive Plan, then such land may be incorporated into a subsequent subdivision.
2. Land designated for open space or park purposes shall not include wetlands, ledge, or other land unsuitable for playground or recreation use.
3. Any open space, park or playground shall be provided with a minimum of one hundred feet (100’) continuous frontage on a street. Pedestrian ways will be required to provide access from each of the surrounding streets, if any, on which the open space, park or playground has no frontage. Further, maintenance provided for by covenants and agreements acceptable to the Board, until such time (if any) as public acquisition may be accomplished by the community, but in no case longer than three (3) years.
7.04 Fencing
Fencing and/or screening shall be required in subdivisions abutting limited or controlled
access highways or expressways, other limited or controlled access roads, or any other
collector streets. Fencing may be required in other areas where the physical features require
such safety.
7.05 Protection of Natural Features
All natural features such as trees over sixteen (16) inch diameter, water courses, one hundred year flood plains, wetlands, ponds and other water bodies, marshes, stone walls, scenic points, and historic sites shall be preserved.
7.06 Guard Rails
Guard rails shall be provided at points of hazard along the roadway, such as fixed objects along the pavement edge, high fills, fills on sharp curvature, along water courses, steep cliffs, along deep ditches in cuts and similar locations as required by the Planning Board. Type and installation of guard rails shall be approved by the Town’s engineering consultant.
7.07 Sidewalks and Bicycle Paths
Unless the Board determines that pedestrian movement is otherwise provided for, sidewalks having a width of not less than five (5) feet shall be constructed between the roadway and the
right-of-way line, as close to said line as practicable, and generally parallel with the roadway. All streets shall be provided with sidewalks on both sides. Pedestrian access other than by routes parallel with roadways may be permitted, provided easements are established.
The Planning Board may require bicycle paths from four (4) to eight (8) feet in width within a subdivision. In certain cases, at the discretion of the Planning Board, all or part of the sidewalk requirement may be waived where bicycle paths are provided.
7.08 Wheelchair Ramps
All sidewalks shall be accessible to the handicapped from the roadway at all intersections. Wheelchair ramps to accomplish the above shall be designed and constructed according to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Public Works, “Construction Standards”, 1977 Edition, as amended.
7.09 Relationship to Town Plans
The design and layout of a proposed subdivision should be guided by the goals and objectives of any existing master plans, strategic plans, village plans, or statements of goals and objectives for the Town of Palmer.
7.10 Access Through Another Municipality
In case access to a subdivision crosses land in another municipality, the Board may require certification, from appropriate authorities, that such access is in accordance with the Master Plan and subdivision requirements of such municipality and that a legally adequate performance bond has been duly posted or that such access is adequately improved to handle prospective traffic.
7.11 Conservation Restrictions
1. Water courses, drainage ways, channels, or streams shall be located within easements conforming substantially with the lines of their courses, whose width shall not be less than twenty (20) feet and whose boundaries shall not be closer than seven (7) feet horizontally from the one hundred year flood plain. Wetlands shall be located within easements whose boundaries shall not be closer than one hundred (100) feet from the boundaries of the wetlands. No building shall be constructed and no paving or other activity shall be permitted within such easement except as permitted under the Zoning By-Laws and under the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act (Sections 40 and 40A of Chapter 131 of the General Laws), and the Town of Palmer General Wetlands Bylaw.
2. In any subdivision, the developer may grant to the Town a conservation restriction over any portion of the subdivision providing the area subject to the restriction has the approval of the Conservation Commission and the Board of Selectmen.
7.12 Adequate Access from Public Way
1. Where the street system within a subdivision does not connect with or have, in the opinion of the Board, adequate access from a Town, County, or State public
way, the board may require, as a condition of approval of a plan, that such adequate access be provided by the subdivider, and/or that the subdivider make physical improvement of access to and within such a way, in boundary of the subdivision to a Town, County or State public way, or along such public way for a distance which, in the opinion of the Board, is sufficient to provide adequate access to the subdivision.
2. Where the physical condition or width of a public way from which a subdivision has its access is considered by the Board to be inadequate to either provide for emergency services or carry the traffic which is expected, in the opinion of the Board, to be generated by such subdivision, and to make physical improvements to and within such public way to the same standards required within the subdivision. Any such dedication of land for the purpose of way and any such work performed within such public way shall be made only with permission of the governmental agency having jurisdiction over such way, and all costs of any such widening or construction shall be born by the subdivider.
7.13 Septic Disposal Systems
No lot shall be built upon without the provision of on-lot sewage disposal facilities specifically approved by the Board of Health.
7.14 Water Wells
No lot shall be built upon without the provision of on-lot water facilities specifically approved by the Board of Health.
7.15 Solar Energy
The purpose of the Section 7.15 is advisory and is intended to encourage the use of solar energy systems and to protect to the extent feasible the access to direct sunlight of solar energy systems. The applicant should utilize passive solar energy techniques that maximize solar heat gain, minimize heat loss during the heating season, and minimize heat gain and provide for natural ventilation during the cooling season. These passive solar techniques could include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. The street and layout plan should, as far as practicable, provide for east-west street orientations to facilitate the development of this regulation an east-west street refers to any street with its axis within thirty (30) degrees of true east.
2. In so far as practicable, side lot lines should be perpendicular to the street line unless that purpose of the lot line orientation is to provide greater solar access protection.
3. The proposed principal building should be located and oriented so that the longest side of the building faces within thirty (30) degrees of true south.
4. Proposed buildings should be located to avoid shadows cast by other buildings, vegetation and natural and man-made topographical features whenever practicable.
5. Provided soil and topographic conditions permit, primary and reserve leaching fields should be planned and located to the south of a proposed house location whenever such location enhances solar access to the south wall due to and regarding tree removal associated with the installation of the sewage disposal system.
6. At the discretion of the Board, taking into consideration the need for solar access
protection, the applicant shall be required to include solar easements or restrictive covenants with the deeds of each lot.
7.16 Driveways
In particular instances, including but not limited to slopes and site distances, the Planning Board may require that the developer show curb-cuts and driveways on the Definitive Subdivision Plan, and construct said curb-cuts and driveways in conjunction with the construction of the subdivision road.
SECTION 8.00
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
Basic Requirements
The subdivider shall provide all of the improvements required herein and installed at his/her own expense. All work done under this section shall be done under the direction of the Board, including registered engineer(s) and any other consultants appointed by the Board.
No performance guarantee under Section 6.05(4) shall be released in its entirety until:
1. all streets and all other improvements, except the topcoat, shall have been in place over at least one (1) winter (December 1, through April 15);
2. said topcoat has been laid after over-wintering of the base and other improvements;
3. full approval in writing of all work done under this section as received from the Board’s engineering consultant, or other consultants; and
All construction shall follow the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Department of Public Works’
1 “Standard Specification for Highways, Bridges and Waterways”, 1973 edition, as amended (to be referred hereto as the “Standard Specification’s),
2 “Construction Standards”, 1977, as amended (to be referred hereto as the “Construction Standards”) and the following:
8.01 Borings
The work shall consist of making soil-test borings, obtaining and preserving acceptable samples, preparing a report of the results obtained and delivery of the report and samples in conformance with appropriate provisions of the Standard Specifications and these Rules and Regulations.
8.02 Construction (Stakes) Staking
The developer shall employ, at his own expense, a professional engineer or a registered land surveyor to set all lines and grades in a manner satisfactory to the Town’s engineering consultant and in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the Standard Specifications.
8.03 Site and Earthwork
1. All materials and construction methods used for roadway excavation and embankments shall conform to appropriate provisions of the Standard Specifications.
2. All natural features, such as large trees, water courses, scenic points, historic plots, and similar community assets shall be preserved. It is the opinion of the Board that this protection and preservation will add to the attractiveness and value of the subdivision.
3. The entire area within the right-of-way liens, except for trees and other vegetation intended to be preserved, shall be cleared and grubbed of all stumps, brush, roots, and like material. All rock or masonry with a maximum dimension over three inches and within six inches of the top of subgrade shall be removed. Trees intended to be preserved shall be protected by suitable boxes, fenders, or wells as appropriate.
4. In a cut area all material shall be removed to subgrade. All unsuitable material, such as peat, highly organic silt or clay, or any other material that, in the opinion of the Town’s engineering consultant, is considered to be detrimental to the subgrade, shall be removed and shall be replaced by
bank-run gravel, and be brought to proper compaction with a ten-ton roller.
5. Topsoil, defined as fertile, friable, natural material which has demonstrated vegetative growth, and found on the site, can be used within the right of way, provided it conforms with the relative provisions of the Standard Specifications.
6. In fill areas the embankment shall be ordinary borrow specified and placed, as in the relevant provisions of the Standard Specifications.
7. Before the ground base course is spread, the subgrade shall be shaped to a true surface conforming to the proposed cross section of the road. Where fill is required, it shall be placed in layers not deeper than twelve (12) inches loose, except the last layer which shall not exceed four (4) inches in depth. The fill shall be ordinary borrow specified and placed as in the relevant provisions of the Standard Specifications. A tolerance of one-half (1/2) inch above or below finished subgrade will be permitted, provided this difference is not maintained over fifty (50) feet and the required cross section is maintained.
8. The subgrade shall be classified as follows:
a. Poor - Subgrade soils which become quite soft and plastic when wet. Included in these are soils having an appreciable amount of clay, silt, and fine sand.
b. Medium - Subgrade soils which retain a moderate degree of firmness when saturated. Included in these are such soils as fine sands, silty sands, and sandy gravels with some silts and clays.
c. Good to Excellent - Subgrade soils which retain a substantial amount of their load-supporting capacity when saturated shall be classified as good. Included are clean sands and gravels free of detrimental amounts of plastic silts and clays. Subgrade soils unaffected by moisture shall be classified as excellent. Included are clean and sharp sands and
gravels, particularly those that are well graded.
9. Inspections shall be required upon completion of the subgrade by the Town’s engineering consultant or similarly appointed agent.
8.04 Pavement Structure
1. The Pavement structure shall be constructed in accordance with applicable provisions of the Standard Specifications and the following:
a. Sub-Base - The sub-base shall be gravel borrow meeting M1.03.0 Type a specifications, except that the top four (4) inches shall be gravel borrow meeting M1.03.01 specifications. A tolerance of one-half (1/2) inch above or below finished sub-grade will be permitted, provided this difference is not maintained over fifty (50) feet and the required cross section is maintained. The gravel borrow shall be laid to a depth indicated in Appendix D.
b. Binder Course - The binder course shall be asphalt concrete, in accordance with Section 420, Class I Bituminous Concrete Pavement Type I-1 (Binder Course Mix). It shall be laid to a depth indicated in Appendix E.
c. Surface Course - The surface course shall be asphalt concrete, in accordance with Section 460, Class I Bituminous Concrete Pavement Type I-1 (Top Course Mix). It shall be laid to a depth indicated in Appendix E.
2. Inspections shall be required by the Town’s engineering consultant upon completion of each layer of sub-base and the binder and surface courses.
8.05 Shoulders
Shoulders shall not be allowed in place of sidewalks, curbs and grass strips, as shown in the typical cross section (Appendix C) unless permission is specifically granted by the Planning Board.
8.06 Curbs
1. For all non-residential subdivision, all curbing shall be granite Type VB. Granite curb corners Type A shall be installed at all driveways.
2. In all residential subdivision, curbing shall be bituminous concrete curb Type 2 (6” reveal), except that all street intersections radii and the outside radius of cul-de-sacs shall be constructed with granite curb type VB. The outside radius of the island in all cul-de-sacs shall be constructed with granite edging Type SB having a minimum thickness of four (4) inches.
3. Granite curb corners, wherever required, shall be Type A (see Section 8.07).
4. Granite curb inlets (Type VB) shall be built against all catch basin frames and shall be installed true to the horizontal and vertical alignment as shown on the plans.
5. All bituminous berms shall be placed on the bituminous binder.
6. The type and method of installation of bituminous berm, granite curb, granite edging and granite curb corners shall conform to the relevant provisions of the Standard Specifications.
7. Under special conditions, specially constructed berms or gutters may be required by the Planning Board.
8.07 Driveway Approach Areas and Aprons
1. Driveway approach areas from the edge of the public roadway to the edge of the public right-of-way shall be constructed in accordance with standards and permits set by the Town’s Department of Public Works.
2. The nearest line of any driveway shall not be closer than fifty (50) feet from the intersection of any two (2) or more streets.
3. The Planning Board may require the developer to construct certain driveway approach areas during the construction of the subdivision, in order to insure that certain physical characteristics, such as swales, steep side slopes, etc., do not get disturbed after the end of construction.
In addition, the developer shall make provisions for driveway openings in all cases where granite curb had been used, (e.g. around all cul-de-sacs). Granite curb corners Type A shall be used at all driveway openings. The developer shall follow the regulations as stated in #1 and #2 above in constructing said driveways.
4. Driveways of Type II subdivisions shall be shown on the Definitive Plans.
8.08 Grass Strips
1. Grass strips shall be provided on each side of the roadway, between the curb and the sidewalk, where sidewalks are required.
2. The finished grade of such grass strips shall have a slope of one-half (1/2) inch per foot toward the roadway. Where unusual physical land characteristics or topographic conditions exist, and where no sidewalk is to be constructed, the Board may approve the construction of a grass strip of a greater slope with the finished slope not projecting above a plane sloped four (4) horizontal to one (1) (vertical) from the back of the curb.
3. No trees or other obstruction shall be placed or retained within the grass strip, except those approved by the Planning Board.
4. See Section 8.15(G) for planting instructions.
5. The minimum width of any grass strip shall be ten (10) feet.
6. The applicant, his successors or assigns, shall mow and maintain the grass.
8.09 Side Slopes
1. The area in back of the required strip, or behind the sidewalk when one is required, shall be graded to a point where it coincides with the finished grade of abutting lots in such a manner that no portion thereof within the right-of-way lines of the street will project above a plane sloped four (4) horizontal to one (1) vertical.
2. See section 8.15(G) for planting instructions.
3. The applicant, his successors, or assigns, shall mow and maintain the grass.
8.10 Street Name Signs
Street name signs shall be provided to the applicant by the Highway Department. The applicant shall pay a fee per sign to the Department of Public Works (see Appendix B, Fee Schedule). The applicant shall provide the posts and erect them at each intersection near the inside curb edge, at locations to be approved by the Town’s engineering consultant. The installation shall be done in accordance with the sketch shown in Appendix I.
8.11 Monuments and Markers
1. Granite or reinforced concrete monuments six (6) feet in length, dressed to six (6) inches at the top with a three-eigths (3/8) inch drill hole in the center, and not less than six (6) inches square at the bottom shall be set to finish grade as shown on plans.
2. No permanent monuments shall be installed until all construction which could destroy or disturb the monuments is completed.
3. Monuments shall be installed at all street intersections, at all points of change in direction, or curvature of streets, and at other points as shown in the Definitive Plan and where in the opinion of the Board, permanent monuments are necessary. All monuments shall be installed under the direction of a Massachusetts registered land surveyor.
4. All monuments shall be installed prior to any release of the performance guarantee and will be inspected by the Town’s engineering consultant.
5. All monuments shall be set flush with the ground.
8.12 Bridges
Bridges shall be designed in accordance with the Standards of the Massachusetts Department of Public Works.
8.13 Fire Alarms
Fire alarm boxes must be provided, whenever applicable, on light standard or separate poles, placed, installed, and wired under the direct supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department, at the expense of the applicant who must make all necessary arrangements with the Fire Department for this installation.
8.14 Plantings
1. Existing Trees
Trees on the site, especially those over twelve (12) inches in diameter should be preserved. Following is a list of recommended measures for the protection of trees:
a. There should be no operation of heavy equipment or storage of any materials under said tree within its natural drip line.
b. Wherever possible no grading or filling should be done within the drip line.
c. Supplemental irrigation should be provided to all trees as needed during the summer months to insure healthy maintenance.
d. No black top paving or vehicle parking should be located under evergreen trees. No more than twenty (20) percent of the area under any deciduous tree’s natural dip line may be so paved.
e. All drainage from paved areas should be directed away from root zones.
2. Additional Trees
a. The subdivider is required to plant suitable broad leaved deciduous shade trees along roads or ways unless specifically exempted by the Board. All trees shall be well-rooted nursery-grown stock free of injury, harmful insects, and diseases. They shall be well-branched, and the branching structure should be sound.
b. Acceptable types of street trees may be selected from those recommended by the Associated Landscape Contractors of Massachusetts and approved by the Town of Palmer, which includes large-growing, medium-growing, and small-growing deciduous trees.
c. Large growing trees shall be spaced at intervals of forty-five (45) to fifty-five (55) feet, medium growing trees at intervals of thirty (30) to forty (40) feet, and small growing trees at intervals of twenty (20) to thirty (30) feet.
Trees on one side of the street may be set either opposite or diagonally to trees on the opposite side. If overhead wires are present, large or medium growing trees to be planted along the same side as such wires should be planted within the front yard set-back area in all cases.
d. Minimum acceptable sizes of trees to be planted shall be as follows:
Large-Growing - 2 ½” trunk diameter caliper at 1’ above the ground.
Medium-Growing - 2 ½” trunk diameter, caliper at 1’ above the ground.
Small-Growing - 9’ crown height, 5’ spread.
e. Planting operations shall be as specified in the appropriate sections of the Recommended Standard Specifications for Planting Trees, Shrubs, and Vines—Associated Landscape Contractors of Massachusetts.
f. Requirements for support stakes, guy wire and cable, ground anchors, hose, and wrapping material shall be those contained in Section 6 of the Recommended Standard Specifications for Planting Trees, Shrubs, and Vines, compiled and issued by the Associated Landscape Contractors of Massachusetts, Inc.
g. The applicant, his successor or assigns shall be responsible for maintenance of planted trees and replacement of those which have died or become diseased from the time of planting through one full growing season.
3. Bank Plantings
a. All cut or fill bankings that tend to wash or erode shall be planted with suitable, well- rotted, and low-growing plantings. All plants shall be nursery grown stock in good health, free from injury, harmful
insects, and diseases.
b. Acceptable planting types may be selected from those recommended by the Associated Landscape Contractors of Massachusetts and approved by the Town of Palmer which includes very low-growing (4” - 12”), low-growing (12” - 30”), and herbaceous plantings. Perennial grass turf installed as sod is an acceptable alternative for the planting banks.
c. If bank plantings are of a type which are properly spaced at close intervals, 8” to 12” of loam shall be spread over the entire bank. If the plantings are to be widely spaced they may be planted in loam pits.
d. Landscape fabric shall be laid and mulch (wood chips or equal) shall be spread heavily among plantings for weed and erosion control.
e. The applicant, his successors or assigns, shall be responsible for maintenance of bank planting and replacement of those which have died or become diseased from the time of planting through one (1) full growing season.
4. Corner Plantings
Requirements for plantings adjacent to street intersections shall be the same as those for Bank Plantings with the following exceptions:
a. Turf may be provided by seeding as well as by planting sod.
b. Bushy shrubs and herbaceous plantings that would tend to obscure visibility are not permitted within one hundred (100) feet of the point of intersection of the curbs adjacent to the corner lot.
No small trees, shrubs or herbaceous plants that tend to obstruct visibility at street intersections shall be permitted in the right-of- way within fifty (50) feet of the point of intersection of the edge of the pavement along both sides of the corner lot.
5. Cul-de-Sac Plantings
The central portion of a permanent dead-end street should be landscaped with low-maintenance/no - maintenance plantings of the following options:
a. Planting with ground cover recommended by the Associated Landscape Contractors of Massachusetts and approved by the Town of Palmer using an 8” to 12” base of loam, and spreading mulch between plants for weed control.
b. Planting perennial grass by either sod or seed.
c. Planting ornamental shrubs of a type acceptable to the Board.
d. Retaining existing vegetation, with the approval of the Board.
e. Standards and Specifications.
8.15 Trenches
1. Sheeting shall be used, whenever necessary, upon the direction of the Town’s engineering consultant and in conformance with relevant provisions of the Standard Specifications.
2. Pipe and conduits shall be surrounded by six (6) inches of compacted screened
gravel if set in earth, and twelve (12) inches if set in rock. In rock, clay, or peat excavation, trenches shall be excavated to a depth of twelve (12) inches or more below the bottom of any water pipe, storm drain, or sewer and filled with bank-run or select gravel, whichever is approved by the Town’s engineering consultant.
3. Backfill shall be compacted to ninety (90) percent of the maximum dry density of the material as determined by the American Association of State Highway Officials, Designation T-180D.
4. The water and sanitary sewer systems shall be tested and approved prior to installation of base course(s) and pavement.
5. All lot connections shall be installed to the right- of-way line, and marked or surveyed so as to be easily located in the future.
8.16 Drainage
1. The construction of the drainage system, including methods of construction and quality of materials used, shall be in conformity with the Definitive Plan and appropriate sections of the Standard Specifications.
2. The design capacity of the drains shall be determined by the “rational method”, unless the engineer exhibits satisfactory evidence that another approach is more appropriate for the specific case. The engineer shall design the drainage system in accordance with natural drainage boundaries of the total contributing drainage area, using a minimum of a ten (10) year design frequency storm. Where, in the opinion of the Board, flooding would produce property damage or a safety hazard, the design frequency storm shall be increased to twenty-five (25) years. A one hundred (100) year design frequency storm shall be used for all bridge openings, major culverts, and detention areas. Drainage calculation shall be submitted with the Definitive Plan.
3. Pipe drains, where used, shall have a minimum diameter of twelve (12) inches, and shall be laid in true line. All drainage pipe shall be reinforced concrete pipe, ACCM pipe (14 gauge), or other approved pipe of equal strength. Rubber gaskets (“O” rings), or other suitable seals shall be used for all pipe joints of the pipe mentioned above. The rubber gaskets (“O” rings), or other suitable seals shall be of approved composition, size, and shape to provide for a proper joint.
4. Where feasible, stormwater should be directed toward the nearest open stream channel. Stormwater shall not be permitted to cross any roadway upon the surface but must be piped underground. Stormwater runoff shall not be permitted to flow upon the road surface for a longer distance than three hundred (300) feet before it enters the underground system. Catch basins shall be located on both sides of the roadway on continuous grades at intervals of not more than three hundred (300) feet, at all sags in the roadway, and near the corners of the roadway at intersecting streets.
5. Proper connections shall be made with any existing public drainage system within four hundred (400) feet of the subdivision, if that system has the capacity to absorb the flows from the project area. Where no public drain is available within four hundred (400) feet, adequate provisions shall be made for the detention of surface drainage within the boundaries of the subdivision and
for its proper dispersal onto adjacent property. The rate of run-off from the completed subdivision shall not exceed the rate that existed prior to development.
6. No open water body or pond shall be filled in and no wet or swampy area shall be filled in unless it can be shown to the board that provision has been made in the lower drainage system to account for the removal of the storage area represented by the former wet or swampy area. In addition, permits and approval must be secured from the appropriate Town, State and/or Federal authorities.
7. Where open stream channels exist within a subdivision, adequate provision shall be made for properly maintaining them or for properly enclosing them, if absolutely necessary. It is the Town’s intent to preserve and maintain the natural features of such streams and any development should be planned accordingly.
8. Manholes and catch basins shall be pre-cast, cast in place or block, and a typical detail of such, noting materials, dimensions, and construction details, shall be part of the Definitive Plan.
9. Iron castings for manhole frames and covers and catch basin frames and grates shall be in accordance with Massachusetts Department of Public Works Standards.
a. Manhole covers shall have three (3) inch lettering to read, “DRAIN”. In addition, manhole covers shall be 26” in diameter.
b. Catch basin grates shall be square, type F, as manufactured by LeBaron Foundry Company, Box 746, Brockton, MA 02403, or other approved equal.
10. Drain manholes shall be located at every change in grade, or direction of the drainage line, at catch basin connections, and shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet apart in a continuous system.
11. All catch basins shall connect directly to drain manholes.
12. All catch basins shall have two and one-half (2 ½) foot sumps.
13. If roadway sub-drainage is required, rigid perforated PVC or ACCM pipe of appropriate size shall be used. Installation and materials shall conform to the appropriate provisions of the Standard Specifications and the sketch shown in Appendix C.
14. The maximum allowable slope on a drainage system for reinforced concrete pipe shall be seven (7) percent. The maximum allowable difference in elevation between inlet and outlet pipes in a drain manhole shall be one (1) foot. If greater slopes than seven (7) percent are necessary, ACCM pipe of appropriate size shall be used.
15. The maximum depth of any portion of the storm system shall be ten (10) feet.
16. The responsibility for adequate drainage shall rest with the developer. This shall include the risk involved in connecting with the existing drainage facilities (if any) provided by the Town.
Where property adjacent to the subdivision, but within the same watershed, is not subdivided, provision shall be made for proper projection of the drainage systems by continuing appropriate drains and easements to the exterior boundaries of the subdivision at such size and grade as will allow for such projection. Drainage rights which are
appropriate, sufficient, and necessary to handle drainage from the subdivision and adjacent areas shall be secured for the Town.
8.17 Unforeseen Groundwater Conditions
As construction progresses, unforeseen groundwater conditions may be encountered which require additional subdrains or curtain drains. These conditions include potential problems if construction is in progress at a time of low water table or other dry conditions. The Board reserves the right to require appropriate systems to accommodate the problem.
8.18 Sewage Disposal
A Definitive Plan may be approved without provision of sanitary sewers, provided that no lot shall be built upon without the provision of on-lot sewage disposal facilities specifically approved by the Board of Health in conformity with the regulations of said Board as promulgated and amended from time to time.
8.19 Water for Other than Fire Fighting Purposes
A Definitive Plan may be approved without provision of water lines (except required lines to fire hydrants) provided that no lot shall be built upon without the provision of on-lot facilities specifically approved by the Board of Health in conformity with the regulations of said Board a promulgated and amended from time to time.
Any public water lines must meet the specification and the approval of the water district within which it falls.
8.20 Other Utilities
Materials and construction methods shall be in accordance with the requirements of the involved utility company after said requirements have been approved by the Town’s engineering consultant and other appropriate Town Boards.
a. Fire Hydrants
1. Maximum distance between hydrants shall be eight hundred (800) feet measured along the access route, provided however, that at least one (1) hydrant shall be located on each street.
2. Minimum size of hydrant branch is six (6) inches ID (inside diameter), or as required by the water district.
3. Hydrants shall be supplied with water by a well or other water source (such as a pond within the subdivision with an all-weather way for access) provided by the subdivider, with pipes between hydrants and a pump capable of supplying to the hydrants one thousand six hundred (1600) gallons per minute for a period of at least twenty-four (24) hours. The pump and associated equipment shall be housed in a pump house with insulation and heating sufficient to protect the pump from freezing at temperatures down to -25 degrees Fahrenheit (-31.6 degrees Celsius). One (1) hydrant shall be located at the pump house.
4. Maximum distance from any structure to a hydrant shall be five hundred
(500) feet measured along the street.
8.21 Retaining Walls
Retaining walls shall not be permitted in the right-of- way. Retaining walls shall be and remain the responsibility of the private property owner. Retaining walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Public Works Bridge Manual, including all amendments, and shall conform to the applicable sections of the Standard Specifications. All deeds to said lots shall include wording that it is the property owner’s responsibility to maintain said retaining walls.
8.22 Cleaning Up
Upon completion of the work, the subdivider shall remove from the highway and adjoining property all temporary structures, surplus material, and rubbish which may have accumulated during the execution of the work, and shall leave the subdivision area in a neat and orderly condition. Burning or burying of the rubbish and waste material is prohibited.
The entire area must be cleaned up within thirty (30) days of completed construction so as to leave a neat and orderly appearance free from debris and other objectionable materials. All catch basins shall be properly cleaned out.
Existing streets, and sections of the subdivision streets upon which dwellings exist, shall be cleaned up at the end of each working day.
8.23 Sanitary Sewer
1. The construction of the sanitary system, including methods of construction and quality of materials used, shall be in conformity with the Definitive Plan, Section 230 of the Standard Specifications and the specifications of the Department of Public Works.
2. If a public sewerage system is located within four hundred (400) feet of the subdivision, the applicant shall connect all lots to the public sewerage system.
3. If a planned public sewerage system has not yet been installed to within four hundred (400) feet of the proposed subdivision, the applicant shall install private on-lot sewerage systems. The latter shall be installed in conformity with applicable codes, rules and regulations of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the town’s Board of Health.
4. Sanitary sewer mains shall have a minimum diameter of eight (8) inches and shall be PVC, bedded in ¾” stone to spring line of pipe, or other approved equal.
5. Sanitary sewer services shall be six (6) inch PVC, bedded in ¾” stone to spring line of pipe, or other approved equal, and shall be extended to the edge of the right-of-way.
6. The minimum slope for sanitary sewer pipes shall be such that a minimum flow velocity of two and one-half (2 ½) feet per second is achieved.
7. The maximum slope for sanitary sewer pipes shall be seven (7) percent. Drop sanitary sewer manholes shall be allowed only with outside “chimneys”.
8. Manhole cover shall have three (3) inch lettering to read “SEWER”. In addition, manhole covers shall be 26” in diameter.
9. The following requirements shall be met for the design and construction of sewerage systems in relation to water systems:
a. Horizontal Separation: Whenever possible, sewers shall be constructed in the center of the street. A lateral separation of ten (10) feet between the sewer and water mains shall be maintained and the elevation of the top (crown) of the sewer shall be at least eighteen (18) inches below the bottom (invert) of the water main.
b. Vertical Separation: Whenever sewers must cross under water mains, the sewer shall be laid at such an elevation that the top of the sewer is at least eighteen (18) inches below the bottom of the water main. When the elevation of the sewer cannot be varied to meet the above requirement, the water main shall be relocated to provide this separation or reconstructed with mechanical-joint pipe for a distance of ten (10) feet on each side of the sewer. One full length of water main should be centered over the sewer so that both joints will be as far from the sewer as possible.
c. When it is impossible to obtain proper horizontal or vertical separation as stipulated above, both the water main and sewer shall be constructed of mechanical-joint cast-iron pipe and shall be pressure tested to assure water-tightness.
10. Leakage Test
a. The sewer shall be made as nearly watertight as practicable and leakage measurements shall be made as directed and under the supervision of the town’s authorized representative.
b. Whenever possible, the leakage tests shall be made at a time when the ground water is at least one (1) foot above the top of the pipe of the highest section of work being tested.
c. Leakage into the sewer shall not exceed five hundred (500) gallons per inch diameter in twenty-four (24) hours per mile of sewer.
d. Where the ground water level is less than one (1) foot above the top of the pipe, the sewer shall be subjected to an internal pressure by plugging the pipe at the lower end and then filling the sewers and the higher
manhole with clean water to a height of two (2) feet above the top of the pipe. The leakage out of the sewer will be measured by the volume of water necessary to maintain the water level in the higher manhole. Leakage out of the sewer shall not exceed five hundred (500) gallons per inch diameter per twenty-four (24) hours per mile of pipeline.
e. Should the sections under test fail to meet the requirements, the contractor shall do all the work of locating and repairing leaks and retesting as the town’s authorized representative may require.
f. The contractor shall furnish suitable test plugs, water, pumps, and any appurtenances, and all labor required to conduct the tests properly on the sewer.
g. Maximum depth of any portion of the sanitary system shall be ten (10) feet.
SECTION 9.00
SECTION 9.00
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS FOR AN APPROVED SUBDIVISION
All streets, underground utilities, shoulders, curbing, sidewalks, planting strips, side slopes, street name signs, monuments and markers, drainage systems, water systems, sewage systems, and easements shall be obtained and installed by the subdivider. The obtaining and installing of these improvements shall be in accordance with Section 8.00 of these Regulations.
SECTION 10.00
SECTION 10.00
ADMINISTRATION
10.01 Inspection and Control
1. Inspection shall be made and the project shall be certified in writing to the Planning Board by the project developer's registered professional engineer at each of the phases outlined in Section 10.01(4). The Town's Highway Superintendent and/or any other authorized representative of the Planning Board shall also make inspections and issue a written report to the Planning Board periodically and at each of the above referred to phases.
2. CONSTRUCTION SHALL NOT COMMENCE ON ANY PORTION OF THE SUBDIVISION UNTIL ALL OF THE FOLLOWING HAVE BEEN
COMPLETED:
a. the Board's decision of Approval has been filed with the Town Clerk,
b. all of the necessary approved/endorsed plans and documents have been recorded at the Hampden County Registry of Deeds (by the Planning Board),
c. the developer, the project's engineer/surveyor, the project's designated contractor, the Town's Highway Superintendent and Engineering Consultant have attended a pre-construction conference to be arranged by the Planning Board.
3. The developer shall notify, in writing, the Highway Department, Planning Board and the Board's authorized representative three (3) days (excluding 4. At the phases hereinafter indicated, the construction of required streets and other improvements shall be inspected (see Section 10.01(1)).:
a. The installation of underground utilities and services shall be inspected before the backfilling of trenches or other covering of structures.
b. The roadway shall be inspected upon the completion of each of the following: (1) subgrade; (2) gravel base source; (3) binder; and (4) surface course prior to each required construction step.
c. The curbing shall be inspected upon the completion of each of the following: (1) subgrade; (2) gravel base course; (3) binder; and (4) surface course prior to each construction step.
d. Following the completion of all the improvements required by Sections 7.00 and 8.00, the subdivision shall be inspected by the developer’s project engineer who shall submit a certified statement that all work and improvements have been completed in conformance with the approved plans.
5. Unless each phase of the work, including the materials used on the project, have been approved by the Town's Highway Superintendent and/or any other authorized representative of the Planning Board, no further work shall be done on any other phase of construction.
6. Inspections shall be requested by the applicant three (3) working days in advance in written notice to the Town’s Highway Superintendent, Planning Board and the Board's authorized representative.
7. The cost of inspections shall be paid by the applicant according to the fee schedule shown in Appendix B, Fees.
8. If the Town personnel cannot perform the inspections due to the size or complexity of the project or the unavailability of personnel, the Town may retain the services of a private engineer or consultant to perform such inspection service. The total cost of such services, plus ten (10) percent to pay the Town's administrative costs, shall be paid by the applicant.
9. Inspections by the Town's Highway Superintendent and/or any other authorized representative of the Planning Board will in no way relieve the developer, contractor or project engineer of responsibility in insuring that all materials and all construction meet all standards as stated in these Rules and Regulations.
10.02 Interpretation
Whenever these Rules and Regulations made under the authority hereof differ from those prescribed by any local Ordinance or other local regulations, the provision which imposes the greater restriction or the higher standard shall govern.
10.03 Enforcement by Denial of Building Permits
1. The Building Inspector of the Town of Palmer shall issue no building permits for any of the lots of any subdivision unless notified in writing by the Chair of the Planning Board that the approved subdivision plans and documents have been recorded at the Hampden County Registry of Deeds. Said notice shall be sent to the Building Inspector within seven (7) calendar days after the date of said recording.
2. The Building Inspector of the Town of Palmer shall issue no occupancy permits for any of the lots of any subdivision unless notified, in writing, by the Chair of the Planning Board that the following have been installed/constructed by the developer and approved by the Town's Superintendent of the Department of Public Works and/or other authorized representative of the Planning Board:
a. all utilities to said lot (including payment of all necessary "entry" fees);
b. a driveway meeting Department of Public Works Standards; and
c. at least the binder course on the proposed roadway from an existing Town roadway, up to at least the driveway mentioned above.
10.04 Material Testing
The developer shall test, upon the request of the Town's Highway Superintendent and/or other authorized representative of the Planning Board, at his own expense, all materials to be used in the construction of the public ways. The tests shall be conducted by qualified firms/individuals which have to be approved by the Town's Highway Superintendent and/or other authorized representative of the Planning Board.
SECTION 11.00
SECTION 11.00
EFFECTIVE DATE AND REPEALER
11.01 Effective Date
These Rules and Regulations shall be effective on and after April 8, 1993.
A copy of these Rules and Regulations as adopted by the Planning Board and certified by the Town Clerk shall be recorded with both the Registrar of Deeds of Hampden County and the Recorder of the Land Court.
APPENDIX A
FORMS
Form A
Palmer, MA
_________________
Date
APPLICATION FOR ENDORSEMENT
OF PLAN BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE APPROVAL
File one completed form with the Planning Board
and one copy with the Town Clerk in accordance with
the requirements of Section 4.02.
To the Planning Board:
The undersigned, believing that the accompanying plan of his/her property in the Town of Palmer does not constitute division within the meaning of the Subdivision Control Law, herewith submits said plan for a determination and endorsement that Planning Board approval under the Subdivision Control Law is not required.
1. Applicant _______________________ ________________________
Print or type name Signature
_____________________________________________________________
Address Phone
2. Owner __________________________ ________________________
Print or type name Signature
_____________________________________________________________
Address Phone
3. Surveyor _______________________ ________________________
Print or type name Signature
__________________ __________________________________________
Address Phone
4. Deed or property recorded in ______________________________________
Registry, Book _________________ Page ____________________
5. Location and Description of Property:
Date of Submission:___________
Town Clerk: __________________
Signature
Form B
Palmer, MA
_________________
Date
APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL
OF PRELIMINARY PLAN
File one completed from with the Planning Board
and one copy with the Town Clerk in accordance with
the requirements of Section 5.00.
To the Planning Board:
The undersigned herewith submits the accompanying Preliminary Plan of Property located in the Town of Palmer for approval as allowed under the Subdivision Control Law and the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land of the Planning Board in the Town of Palmer.
1. Applicant _______________________ ___________________________
Print or type name Signature
_____________________________________________________________
Address
Phone
2. Owner __________________________ ___________________________
Print or type name Signature
______________________________________________________________
Address Phone
3. Engineer _______________________ ____________________________
Print or type name Signature
_____________________________________________________________
Address Phone
4. Surveyor _______________________ _____________________________
Print or type name Signature
_______________________________________________________________
Address Phone
5. Deed or property recorded in _______________________________________
Registry, Book _________________ Page _____________________.
6. Location and Description of Property:
Date of Submission:__________
Town Clerk: ________________
Signature
Form C
1 of 2
Palmer, MA
_________________
Date
APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL
OF DEFINITIVE PLAN
File one completed form with the Planning Board
and one copy with the Town Clerk in accordance with
the requirements of Section 6.00.
To the Planning Board:
The undersigned herewith submits the accompanying Definitive Plan of Property located in the Town of Palmer for approval as a subdivision under the requirements of the Subdivision Control Law and the Rules and Regulations are included with this submission.
1. Applicant ___________________________ ______________________________
Print or type name Signature
_____________________________________________________________________
Address Phone
2.Owner __________________________ ____________________________________
Print or type name Signature
______________________________________________________________________
Address Phone
3. Engineer _______________________ ___________________________________
Print or type name Signature
_____________________________________________________________________
Address Phone
4. Surveyor _______________________ ___________________________________
Print or type name Signature
____________________________________________________________________
Address Phone
5. Deed or property recorded in ________________________________
Registry, Book _________________ Page _____________________.
6 . Location and Description of Property:
Form C
2 of 2
Palmer, MA
_________________
Date
The following are all the mortgages and other liens or encumbrances on the whole or any part of the above described property:
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
The undersigned hereby covenants and agrees with the Town of Palmer upon approval of the Definitive Plan:
1. To construct the ways and install the municipal services as finally approved by the Planning Board.
2. To design and construct the ways and design and install the municipal services in accordance with the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land, Town of Palmer, Massachusetts, with the rules appropriate department heads, and with the Definitive Plan and its accompanying material as finally approved by the Planning Board.
3. At the laying out and acceptance of said ways all municipal services within the ways will become the property of the Town of Palmer at no cost to said Town, unless otherwise agreed upon.
This agreement shall be binding upon the heirs, executors, administrators, successors, and assigns of the undersigned.
Owner of Record _____________________ ______________________________________
Print or Type Name Signature
_________________________________________________________________________
Address Phone
Before me appeared ___________________________________, Owner of Record, and made oath that the above statements are true.
______________________________
Notary Public
Comm. Expires: ________________
Note: Complete Form D and attach.
Date of Submission ___________
Town Clerk ____________________
Signature
Form D
Palmer, MA
_________________
Date
CERTIFIED LIST OF ABUTTERS
The applicant must fill in this space with a rough sketch of land described in this petition; write against boundary lines the name and mailing address of adjoining owners in their relative positions (include owners of land separated from the subdivision only by a street); obtain the Assessor's verification prior to submittal of a definitive plan.
Planning Board
Palmer, Massachusetts
This is to certify that at the time of the last assessment for taxation made by the Town of Palmer, the names and addresses of the parties assessed as adjoining owners to the parcel of land shown above were as above written, except as follows:
Date of Verification: __________________________
Assessor: ______________________________________
Authorized Signature
Form E
Palmer, MA
_________________
Date
DEPARTMENTAL REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION PLAN
To: Board of Health Building Inspector
Highway Department Conservation Commission
Board of Selectmen Town Counsel
Fire Department Police Department
Town Engineering Consultant
From: Planning Board
Subject: ___________________________________________________________
(description of plan, date, etc.)
1. The subject named plan herewith attached has been submitted to the Planning Board for approval as a subdivision.
For the guidance of the Planning Board will you please note any appropriate comment or approval on the blank below and/or on the plan itself and return to the Planning Board as soon as possible.
2. Under the requirements of Section 81-U of Chapter 41 of the General Laws the Board of Health must notify the Planning Board within thirty (30) days for Preliminary Plans and within forty- five (45) days for Definitive Plans (all other thirty (30) days) of the date of this notice if the Board of Health is in doubt as to whether any of the land in the subdivision can be used as building sites without injury to the public health.
------------------------------(do not detach)------------------------------------------------------------------------
To: Planning Board
Date: ______________________
Subject: ______________________________________________________________
(description of plan, date, etc.)
1. The undersigned APPROVES/DISAPPROVES (cross out one) of the subject named subdivision plan insofar as its requirements are affected.
2. The following comments are offered for the guidance of the Planning Board:
3. Bond requirements: $____________________________________________
Department: ____________________________________________________
Signed: ________________________________________________________
Form F-1
Palmer, MA
_________________
Date
NOTICE OF PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL
To: Town Clerk
The Planning Board on _______________________ by _______________
vote DISAPPROVE/APPROVED (cross out one) the following preliminary subdivision plan:
Name or description of plan: _________________________________________
Date of plan: ______________________________________________________
New street names: __________________________________________________
Submitted by: ______________________________________________________
Address: ___________________________________________________________
On: _______________________________________________________________
(Date)
Signed: _______________________________________________________________
Chairman, Palmer Planning Board
This vote of the Planning Board is duly recorded in the minutes of
their _____________________ meeting.
(date)
c.c. Applicant (by registered mail) Board of Assessors
Police Department Registrar of Voters
Building Inspector File
Highway Department Conservation Commission
Fire Department Board of Health
Form F-2
Palmer, MA
________________
Date
NOTICE OF DEFINITIVE SUBDIVISION APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL
To: Town Clerk
The Planning Board on ___________________________ by _______________
vote DISAPPROVED/APPROVED (cross out one) the following subdivision plan:
Name or description of plan: ________________________________________
Date of plan: _______________________________________________________
New street names: ___________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________
Submitted by: _______________________________________________________
Address: ____________________________________________________________
On: _________________________________________________________________
(Date)
pending termination of the statutory twenty day appeal period.
Signed: _____________________________________________________________
Chairman, Palmer Planning Board
This vote of the Planning Board is duly recorded in the minutes of their
____________________ meeting.
(date)
c.c. Applicant (by registered mail) Board of Assessors
Police Department Registrar of Voters
Building Inspector File
Highway Department Conservation Commission
Fire Department Board of Health
If approved, after twenty (20) days without notice of appeal, endorsed blueprints, if approved, will be transmitted to:
1 Mylar to: Applicant
and 1 print to: Assessors Registrar of Voters
Building Inspector Police Department
File Fire Department
Highway Department Building Inspector
Form G
Palmer, MA
______________
Date
REQUEST FOR RELEASE OF BONDS, SURETY OR CONDITIONS
To: Highway Department
From: Palmer Planning Board
Subject: ___________________________________________________________
(description and name, if any)
Submitted by: _______________________________________________________
Address: ____________________________________________________________
The improvements specified in Section 6.00 of the Planning Board Rules and Regulations are believed to have been completed on the above described subdivision. Please indicate your approval or disapproval of release of bonds, surety, or conditions insofar as the requirements of your department only are concerned. If release of conditions is indicated, specify for which lot(s) you approve release.
Signed: _________________________________
Chairman Palmer Planning Board
__________________________(do not detach)_____________________________
To: Planning Board
Date: _________________________________________________________________
Subject: _______________________________________________________________
(description and name, if any)
Insofar as the requirements of this department are concerned, the release of bonds, surety or conditions for the above described subdivision is: APPROVED/DISAPPROVED (cross out one)
If disapproved, state reason: _________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Department: _________________________________
Signed: _____________________________________
Form H
Palmer, MA
_______________
Date
NOTICE OF RELEASE OF BONDS OR SURETY
To: Town Treasurer
From: Planning Board
Subject: _____________________________________________________________
(description and name, if any)
Submitted by: ________________________________________________________
Address: _____________________________________________________________
The improvements required by Planning Board Rules and Regulations have been completed on the above described subdivision. You are requested to release any bonds or surety filed for said subdivision.
Signed: ___________________________________
Chairman, Palmer Planning Board
c.c. File
Form I
1 of 2
Palmer, MA
_______________
Date
COVENANT
The undersigned _______________________________________________ of
Print or type name(s)
____________________________________, ___________________________,
No. and street City/Town
___________________ hereinafter called the "Covenanter" having submitted State
to the Palmer Planning Board the Definitive Plan of a subdivision,
____________________________________ _____________________________
Name of Subdivision Dated
does hereby covenant and agree with said Planning Board and the successors in office of said Board, pursuant to General Laws (Tercentenary Edition), Chapter 41, Section 81 U, as amended, that:
1. The Covenanter is the owner of record of the premise shown on said plan;
2. This covenant shall run with the land __________________________
(list specific lots)
and be binding upon the executors, administrators, heirs, assigns of the covenanter, and their successors in title to the premises shown on said plan.
3. The construction of ways and the installation of municipal services shall be provided to serve such lot.
4. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit a conveyance subject to this covenant by a single deed of the entire parcel of land shown on the subdivision plan or of all lots not previously released by the Planning Board without first providing such ways and services;
5. This covenant shall take effect upon approval of said plan;
6. Reference to this covenant shall be entered upon said plan and this covenant shall be entered when said plan is recorded.
Form I
2 of 2
Palmer, MA
________________Date
The undersigned __________________________________ (wife, husband) of the covenanter hereby agrees that such interest as (I, We) may have in said premises shall be subject to the provisions of this covenant and insofar as is necessary release all rights of tenancy by the courtesy, dower, homestead, and other interest therein:
EXECUTED as a sealed instrument this _____________________ day of
_____________________________ 20___________.
_________________________________ __________________________________
Witness Signature
_________________________________ __________________________________
Witness Signature
_________________________________ __________________________________
Witness Signature
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
------------------------------------, ss. ______________________ 20____
Then personally appeared ____________________________ and acknowledged
the foregoing instrument to be ______________________ free act and deed,
(his, her, their)
before me.
_____________________________________
Notary Public
Commission Expires: _____________________________________
Form J
Palmer, MA
_________________
Date
RELEASE OF CONDITIONS
or
CERTIFICATE OF PERFORMANCE
Certification is herewith given that ______________________________
has complied with the conditions imposed by the Planning Board of the Town of Palmer under the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land on Lot No. _________________, or Lots No. ____________________,
as shown on the plan entitled ________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________
and recorded in Hampden County Registry of Deeds Plan Book __________
_________________, Page _________________________.
By: __________________________________
Chairman Palmer Planning Board
Palmer, MASSACHUSETTS ________________________________________________
Date
Before me appeared _________________________________________, Chairman, Palmer Planning Board, and made oath that the above statement subscribed to by him/her is true.
_____________________________________
Notary Public
Commission Expires: _____________________________________
c.c. File
Form K
1 of 2
Palmer, MA
_________________
Date
APPLICATION FOR SUBMISSION/RESUBMISSION
OF ADDITIONAL PLAN, MATERIALS,
INFORMATION, ETC.
AND
FOR EXTENSION OF TIME PERIOD
File one completed form with the Planning Board (with fee) and a copy with the Town Clerk in accordance with the requirements of Section 6.00.
To the Planning Board:
The undersigned herewith submits/resubmits the accompanying additional plan, materials, information, etc., relative to the previously filed Definitive Subdivision Plan entitled ______________________________ ______________________ and originally filed on ____________________,
for approval under the requirements of the Subdivision Control Law and the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land of the Planning Board in the Town of Palmer.
Submitted/Resubmitted Plans:
______________________________ _____________ ____________
(Title) (Sheet(s)) (Dated)
______________________________ _____________ ____________
(Title) (Sheet(s)) (Dated)
______________________________ _____________ ____________
(Title) (Sheet(s)) (Dated)
Other Submitted/Resubmitted Materials, Information, Etc.:
__________________________________________________ ____________
(Document) (Dated)
__________________________________________________ ____________
(Document) (Dated)
__________________________________________________ ____________
(Document) (Dated)
Form K
2 of 2
Palmer, MA
________________
Date
With this Submission/Resubmission of the above listed additional plans, materials, information, etc. I am also hereby requesting a sixty (60) day extension, from the date of this filing, to the Planning Board's Decision Deadline Date for the Approval or Disapproval of this Definitive Subdivision Plan.
Applicant ________________________ _____________________________
(Print or Type Name) (Signature)
Before me appeared __________________________________, the Applicant, and made oath that the above subscribed to be him/her are true.
____________________________________
Notary Public
Commission Expires:___________________________________
Date of Submission: ______________________________
Town Clerk ______________________________________
(Signature)
FORM L
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT STATEMENT
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT STATEMENT (DIS)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Name of Project: Acreage:
Type of Project: Owner(s):
Location: Planner:
Parcel Number(s): Engineer:
Zoning District(s): Architect:
I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
A. Number of Units:
Total ______ Low Income ______ Single Family _______
Two Family _____ Other _____
B. Type of Ownership (list number of units for each):
Condominium _____ Rental _____ Private _____
C. Approximate Price per Lot/Unit:
Private _____ Condominium _____ Rental _____
II. CIRCULATION SYSTEMS
A. Street Design - Explain reasons for location of streets, stubs, and intersections.
B. Street Classification - Classify the streets and stubs within the development according to the street classification set forth in Section 2.13 of these Regulations. Project the number of motor vehicles to enter or depart the site per average day and peak hour. Also state the number of motor vehicles actually to pass by streets adjacent to the proposed subdivision per average day or peak hour. Such data shall be sufficient to enable the Board to evaluate (1) existing traffic on streets adjacent to the proposed project, (2) traffic generated or resulting from the proposed project, and (3) the impact of such additional traffic on all ways within and adjacent to the proposed project.
C. Parking and Bus Stops - Describe the number, opportunities for multiple use, and screening of parking spaces. With respect to bus stops (if any), explain the location, shelter design, and orientation to path systems.
D. Pedestrian and Bicycle Circulation - Describe the orientation of the pedestrian and bicycle system to activity centers, location of bike racks (if any) and any bike path plans.
III. SUPPORT SYSTEMS
A. Water Distribution - Describe the types of wells proposed for the project, means for providing fire supply, and any special problems which might arise.
B. On-Lot Sewage Disposal System - Where sewage disposal is to be by individual on-lot sewage disposal system, the Definitive Plan shall be accompanied by a report, prepared by a Registered Civil Engineer, which includes the following:
1. The results of percolation and deep hole soil tests performed on each lot, in accordance with Title 5 of the State Environmental Code.
2. A map which locates the soil test sites on each lot.
3. Other data, including topographic conditions, natural drainage patterns, soil characteristics, maximum ground water elevations.
4. When on-site water supplies are to be used, the location of those supplies must be shown on a map along with proposed on-site sewage disposal systems within 100 feet of the property line.
5. A statement by a Registered Civil Engineer as to the suitability of the area for the installation of subsurface sewage disposal systems of the general type and size as indicated in the Massachusetts Environmental Code 314CMR Title 5 - Department of Environmental Quality Engineering.
C. Storm Drainage - Describe the storm drainage system including the projected flow from a 50 year storm, name of the receptor stream, and flow constrictions between the site and the receptor stream.
D. Refuse Disposal - Describe the location and type of facilities, hazardous materials requiring special precautions, and screening.
E. Lighting - Describe the location and size of lights, and methods used to screen adjoining properties from glare.
F. Fire Precaution - Describe the type and capacity of fuel storage facilities, location of storage areas for hazardous substances, special requirements, and distance to the fire station.
G. Recreation - Indicate the distance to, and type of, any public facilities. Describe the type of private recreation facilities to be provided with the development.
H. Schools - Project the student population for the nursery, Elementary School, Junior High School and Senior High School levels and indicate the distance, capacity and present enrollment of the nearest elementary and secondary schools. Describe the basis or methodology for all projections of student population.
IV. NATURAL CONDITIONS - Describe the following elements of natural conditions, identifying short-term (those occurring primarily during project construction) and long-term (those remaining after the completion of project construction) impacts on each:
A. Topography - Indicate datum, source, date, slopes greater than 15%; provide contours at two foot intervals, with graphic drainage analysis showing annual high-water mark; show location of existing structures, including fences and walls.
B. Soils - Indicate soils and land types, utilizing all government soil surveys covering the project area, including but not limited to prime agricultural land, depth to bedrock, and extent of land which has been filled.
C. Mineral Resources - Indicate extent and economic importance of mineral resources, extent and means of proposed extraction, and rehabilitation measures.
D. Surface Geology
E. Depth to Water Table - (ground water level) - Show location and provide test results of soil percolation or other subsurface tests for each lot in a proposed subdivision.
F. Aquifer Recharge Areas
G. Wetlands
H. Watercourses
I. One Hundred Year Flood Plains
J. Wildlife - Describe species present and estimate numbers of each; identify endangered species.
K. Vegetative Cover - Provide an analysis of vegetative cover, including identification of general cover type (including but not limited to wooded, open areas, cropland, wetlands, etc.); show location of all tree groupings and identify such grouping by major or dominant species; show location of and describe wildlife habitats; identify endangered species; identify unusual habitats, meaning those not commonly found in the Connecticut River Valley in Franklin County, Massachusetts.
V. DESIGN FACTORS - Describe briefly the following features. Photographs are helpful.
A. Present visual quality of the area.
B. Location of significant viewpoints.
C. Historic structures.
D. Architecturally significant structures.
E. Type of architecture for development.
VI. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT - This section shall deal separately with both short term and long term impacts. A narrative statement shall be submitted, documenting all mitigative measures taken to:
A. Prevent surface water contamination, changes in surface water level, or both.
B. Prevent ground water contamination, changes in ground water level, or both.
Note: As part of items A and B above, estimate phosphate and nitrate loading on ground water and surface water from septic tanks, lawn fertilizer, household gardens, landscaping and other activities within the development.
C. Maximize ground water recharge.
D. Prevent air pollution.
E. Prevent erosion, sedimentation, or other instability in soils or vegetative cover.
F. Maintain slope stability.
G. Reduce noise levels.
H. Preserve significant views.
I. Preserve wildlife habitats, botanical features, scenic or historic features.
J. Design project to conserve energy.
K. Ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses.
L. Protect wetlands and floodplains, and ensure compliance with the Wetlands Protection Act (Sections 40 and 40A of Chapter 131 of the General Laws) and the Town of Palmer General Wetlands Bylaw.
M. Promote lot layout and house sitting for potential solar energy capabilities.
N. Minimize or avoid all short term and long-term impacts identified in Section IV. of the DIS (Natural Conditions) and not otherwise covered in this section.
VII. PLANS - Describe how the project relates to the following:
A. Village concept and any village plans.
B. Any conservation, Town master plan or strategic plan.
C. Any regional plans prepared by county or regional planning agencies.
VIII. PHASING - If the development of the site will take place over more than one year, supply a schedule showing how the development will be phased. A flow chart is helpful. This timetable shall include the following elements:
A. Stripping or clearing site, or both.
B. Rough grading and construction.
C. Construction of grade stabilization and sedimentation control structures.
D. Final grading and vegetative establishment.
E. Landscaping.
F. The construction of any public improvements shall be specified explaining how these improvements are to be integrated with the development.
G. The number of housing units and the square footage of nonresidential uses to be constructed each year.
IX. Attach to this DIS the results of all studies conducted to develop these data, plus a description of the study methodology, and the name, address, telephone number, and qualifications of the person(s) responsible for carrying out the study and qualifications.
X. ATTESTATION - The DIS must contain the following statement, signed and notarized by the applicant: "I, (applicant's name), hereby attest that the statements and information contained in this Development Impact Statement are true and accurate."
APPENDIX B
FEES
Form A Subdivision Approval Not Required Plan $75.00/lot (Amended 1/3/2011)
Form B Preliminary Subdivision Plan (Amended 3/24/97)
Filing Fee
- Up to 1000 linear feet of road* 300.00
- Plus, for each linear foot of road beyond 1000'* .50
Consultant "Review Fee"** - for subdivisions comprising of:
1-5 Lots
$1,000.00
6-15 Lots
$2,000.00
16-25 Lots
$3,500.00
26-50 Lots
$5,000.00
51 or more lots
$7,500.00
Form C Definitive Subdivision Plan:
Filing Fee
- Up to 1000 linear feet of road* 700.00
- Plus, for each linear foot of road beyond 1000'* .50
Consultant "Review Fee"** - for subdivisions comprising of:
1-5 Lots
$2,000.00
6-15 Lots
$4,000.00
16-25 Lots
$7,000.00
26-50 Lots
$10,000.00
51 or more Lots
$15,000.00
Form D Certified List of Abutters 3.00/abutter
(to be submitted with Form C)
Form K Submission/Resubmission of Additional Materials
(This Applicant shall pay this fee each time additional
material necessitating review by the Town, is
submitted between the time of the original submission
of the Definitive Plan (see Sections 6.02, 6.03, and
6.04) and the Board's decision (see Form F2). Said fee
shall be waived when the material requested by the
Board is in the form of additional information not
included in Sections 6.02, 6.03, and 6.04. All
additional submissions shall be accompanied by an
endorsed Form K. 500.00
Construction/Inspection
Up to 1000 linear feet of road* 2,500.00
For every linear foot beyond 1000'* 5.00
Restoration Guarantee
(Deposit/bond for the restoration/repair of
existing public streets, bridges, utilities and
systems disturbed or damaged as a result of
construction activities, as determined by the
Planning Board.)
Street Signs
Including but not limited to street names,
speed limits, and other signs required by
the Town. 150.00/sign
Subdivision Rules and Regulations 35.00
* to be measured along the center line of the road. For cul-de-sacs, measurement shall follow around full length of cul-de-sac.
** Consultant "Review Fee" shall be used by the Board to pay for the reasonable costs incurred by the Board for the employment of outside professional consultant's (including but not limited to engineers, hydrologists, geologists, planners, lawyers, urban designers, regional planning agencies, etc.) whose expertise, due to the size, scale or complexity of the project, is required by the Board to assist in the review of an application. The Board's selection of any consultants/experts shall be filed with the Office of the Town Clerk, and mailed (certified return receipt) to the applicant, within five (5) business days of the Board's final selection(s).
The Consultant "Review Fee", upon receipt, shall be deposited by the Board with the municipal treasurer who shall establish a special account for this purpose/project.
The "Review Fee" may only be spent for services rendered in connection with the specific project for which they are collected. these services shall include, but not limited to, project reviews, document reviews, and project related inspections. Accrued interest from this fee may also be spent for this purpose.
At the completion of the Board's review of a submitted project, or at a time determined at the submission of the application, any excess amount in that account, including interest, attributable to a specific project, shall be repaid to the applicant or the applicant's successor in interest.
A final report of the status of said account shall be made available to the applicant or the applicant's successor in interest.
An applicant may make an administrative appeal from the selection of an outside professional expert/consultant to the Town Board of Selectmen.
The grounds for such an appeal shall be limited to claims that the consultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum required qualifications, namely:
a. an educational degree in, or related to the field at issue, from a recognized public or private college or university, or
b. three or more years of practice in the field at issue or related field.
An applicant aggrieved by a selection of an outside consultant may appeal to the Board of selectmen provided that such appeal is entered within seven (7) days after such selection has been made as recorded in the Office of the Town Clerk. An appeal will not be considered valid unless it is formally filed with the Office of the Town Clerk and, at the same time, a copy given to the Board of Selectmen and the Planning Board.
The Applicant shall notify the Board of it's intention to seek a waiver at the earliest possible time in the review and consultant selection process. If the applicant fails to sign and/or file a formal waiver of appeal, this action will then be viewed as an intention to appeal on the part of the project applicants. Failure to inform the Board of such interest of appeal may result in the delay of start-up of the Town outside review services.
In acting on an administrative appeal, the Board of Selectmen may determine that:
a. a conflict of interest does exist, and/or the consultant does not meet the minimum qualifications, therefore the Board must select another consultant, or
b. a conflict of interest does not exist, and/or the consultant does meet the minimum qualifications, therefore the selection made by the Board stands.
The required time limit for action upon an application by the Board shall be extended by the duration of the administrative appeal, beginning from the date of filing of such appeal.
In the event that no decision is made by the Board of Selectmen within thirty (30) days following the filing of the appeal, the selection made by the Board shall stand.
If the outside consultant review begins and expenses are generated prior to the filing of an administrative appeal, all such expenses, up to the time of appeal, shall be paid out of the special account for that particular project.
APPENDIX C
TYPICAL CROSS SECTION
APPENDIX D
CUL-DE-SAC
APPENDIX E
DESIGN CRITERIA
Collector Streets Local Streets
Right-of-Way Width (feet) 60 60
Horizontal Alignments
Minimum radius of center line
(feet). See also Section 7.01(4b) 500 270
Vertical Alignment
Minimum stopping sight distance at
three and one-half (3.5) feet above
pavement (feet). 275 200
Grade
Maximum (percent) 5 8
Intersection
Intersection angles (degrees) 90 90
Minimum sight distances (feet) 550 300
Minimum radius at edge of roadway
(feet) 50 25
Required Depth of Pavement Sections
Subgrade Support
Classification*
Poor Medium Good - Exec.
Surface Course 2" 2" 2"
Binder Course 2" 2" 2"
Sub-base 18 - 24" 12 - 18" 12"
* See Section 8.03(8)
APPENDIX F
WIDTH OF ROADWAY IN LOCAL STREET
(TYPE I SUBDIVISION)
Maximum Development Traffic Volume Potential (MDTVP): The maximum traffic volume generated from the maximum potential number of dwelling units (1 dwelling unit = 10 ADT) capable of being developed on a proposed roadway (using the minimum lot frontage requirements) as well as other traffic expected to use the proposed roadway generated from intersecting streets.
Pavement Width
(face to face of berm)
Type A: Proposed street with
MDTVP of not greater
than 200 ADT 24'
Type B: Proposed street with
MDTVP of not greater
than 500 ADT 26'
Type C Proposed street with
MDTVP of not greater
than 2,000 ADT 28'
Type D Proposed street with
MDTVP exceeding
2,000 ADT 32'
APPENDIX G
RECORD PLANS
The function of the record plan is to facilitate the Town in locating all components of the underground utilities within a street and/or public easements, so that the municipal utilities can be maintained, repaired, and reconstructed in the future
In preparing said plans, the project's professional engineer can make certain assumptions, such as, but not limited to: a sewer main was laid in a straight line between successive manholes, all materials (e.g., size and type of waterpipe) are the same as what was shown on the approved construction plans unless otherwise notified by the Town's engineering consultant, etc.
All surveys must tie to the Massachusetts State Plane Coordinate System (1927 Datum)(MSPCS). At least two bench marks must be placed on site and shown on the plans prior to construction. Said bench marks shall be tied to, and employ, U.S.G.S. 1988 Vertical Datum recommended, and the M.S.P.C.S. Every plan sheet should have at least four points tied into the M.S.P.C.S. using the following, or equivalent:
a. the Global Positioning System (GPS); or
b. the United State Geological Survey (U.S.G.S.) Horizontal Datum.
Whenever possible, a 3.5" or 5.25" DOS compatible computer disk containing the property boundary lines should be provided using Drawing Interchange Files (AutoCAD Compatible DXF files), in either ASCII or binary format.
The Developer shall submit one set of originals and two sets of prints of the record plan which shall include the following:
A. Stamped by project's registered professional engineer.
B. Same scale and size as originals.
C. Plans to show:
1. Edge of road, type of curbing, driveways in existence at date of preparation of plan.
2. Right-of-way sidelines and lot property lines shown at least 100' from frontage (metes and bounds not necessary).
3. Sanitary Sewer
a. Each component of sanitary sewer system to be clearly identified and marked.
b. Stationing of manholes based on center-to-center distances between successive ones with lowest/beginning manholes being 0+00 station.
c. Type, size, and class of pipe between each manhole.
d. Location of sanitary sewer ways with distances from the center of downstream manhole.
e. Location of end of sanitary sewer service stubs at property lines. Each location, ties to fixed and easily identifiable objects and elevation of end of pipe (Town datum) to be placed on a 4" x 6" card and submitted with record plans.
f. Type, size and class of sanitary sewer service pipe.
g. Location of pumping stations, siphons, etc.
4. Storm Sewer
a. Each component of storm sewer system to be clearly identified and marked.
b. Stationing of manholes based on center-to-center between successive ones with the lowest/beginning manhole having a 0+00 station.
c. Type, size and class of pipe between each successive manhole and between manholes and catch basins.
d. Location of individual house/lot subdrains, if any, within the proposed road layout. Location of connections of said subdrains to storm system (i.e., distance from center of downstream manhole to connection, etc.). Location, ties to easily identifiable objects and elevation (Town datum) of end of subdrains at property line. Each location ties and elevation to be placed on a 4" x 6" card and submitted with record plans. Type, size and class of subdrains.
e. Location, size, and class of roadway curtain drains, if any, within proposed layout.
5. Water System
a. Each component of water system to be clearly identifiable and marked.
b. Location, ties to fixed and easily identifiable objects, of all water gates, water service boxes, corporations, bends, reducers, T.S. & V., etc. Each location and ties for each of the above to be placed on a 4" x 6" card and submitted with record plans.
c. Location, type and class of water main, hydrant branches, water services, etc.
6. Public Utilities
It shall be the responsibility of the developer to insure that each public utility (gas, electric, telephone, cable TV) provides all the necessary information to the person preparing the record plan. Components of said systems which can be identified on the ground such as gates, manholes, transformers, etc. shall be verified by project's professional engineer.
7. Profile showing centerline of roadway and complete profile of storm and sanitary systems. Elevations to be Town datum.
APPENDIX H
STREET ACCEPTANCE PLANS
The developer shall submit to the Planning Board the following:
A. A petition to the Palmer Board of Selectmen that a particular street be accepted as a "Town Street". Each street shall have its own petition and each petition shall be signed by at least six (6) residents of the Town of Palmer.
B. Plans and documents which shall include the following:
1. Two (2) sets of originals and three (3) sets of prints.
2. Plan(s) to be prepared by a registered land surveyor.
3. Size 24" x 36".
4. Rules of Registry of Deeds to be followed (borders, size lettering, scale, reserved boxes, etc.)
5. Only one proposed street to be shown per sheet.
6. Match lines to be used if a street is to be shown on more than one sheet.
7. Title block to be: THE COMMONWEALTH OF
MASSACHUSETTS STREET
ACCEPTANCE PLAN
OF ________________ IN
THE TOWN OF PALMER
HAMPDEN COUNTY
8. Date plan was prepared.
9. Reserved spaces for:
a. Town Clerk's endorsements
_____________________________ accepted by vote of
(Name of Street)
Town of Palmer Selectmen; passed ________________,
(Date)
Attest: __________________________, Town Clerk.
b. Statement that:
_______________________________ is part of the
(Name of Street)
_____________ Subdivision approved by the Palmer
(name)
Planning Board, filed with the Town Clerk,
________________ and recorded at the Hampden
(Date)
County Registry of Deeds (book and page no.)
c. Planning Board's endorsement that "Approval is not Required".
10. Street line to be shown in metes and bounds. Tie courses so that street can be mathematically closed. Chord bearings and distances for all curves to be shown.
11. Street to be tied to Town control system, if possible.
12. All street line monumentation to be shown and identified.
13. At least 100' of lot property lines shown with metes and bounds.
14. Ownership of lots (including Registry Book and Page) at the time subdivision was approved by Planning Board.
15. Land court case numbers, whenever appropriate, must appear on plans.
16. Full legal document (including complete descriptions) suitable for recording at the Registry of Deeds, deeding each proposed street to the Town.
17. All surveys must tie to the Massachusetts State Plane Coordinate System (1927 Datum)(MSPCS). At least two benchmarks must be placed on site and shown on the plans prior to construction. Said bench marks shall be tied to, and employ, U.S.G.S. 1988 Vertical Datum recommended, and the M.S.P.C.S. Every plan sheet should have at least four points tied into the M.S.P.C.S. using the following, or equivalent:
a. the Global Positioning System (GPS); or
b. the United State Geological Survey (U.S.G.S.) Horizontal Datum.
Whenever possible, a 3.5" or 5.25" DOS compatible computer disk containing the property boundary lines should be provided using Drawing Interchange Files (AutoCAD Compatible DXF files), in either ASCII or binary format.
APPENDIX J
ADDITIONAL REFERENCES


Article VI
Dimensional and Density Regulations
§171-34.  Applicability of Dimensional and Density Regula¬tions.
  The regulations for each district pertaining to minimum lot area, minimum lot width, minimum lot depth, minimum front yard depth, minimum side yard width, minimum rear yard depth, maximum height of buildings, and maximum building area be as specified in this Article and as set forth in the Table of Dimensional and Density Regulations, and subject to the further provisions of this ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
§171-35.  Table of Dimensional and Density Regulations. 
NOTE:  The following table of Dimensional and Density Regulations shall apply to all development within the Town of Palmer, except as these standards may be varied elsewhere in this ordinance. (Added ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29, Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)

Residential Uses:	RR	SR	TR
Single Family Home With Public Water & Sewer 			
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet)	60,000	30,000	20,000
Minimum Lot Frontage & Minimum Lot 
Width  (Feet)	150’	150’	100’
Minimum Lot Depth (Feet)	200’	200’	200’
Minimum Front Yard (Feet)	50’	50’	30’
Minimum Side Yard (Feet)	30’	30’	15’
Minimum Rear Yard (Feet)	30’	30’	15’
Maximum Building Coverage
(Percentage)	50%	50%	50%
Maximum Building Height (Feet)	35’	35’	35’
Single Family Home Without Public Water & Sewer 			
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet)	60,000	30,000	30,000
Minimum Lot Frontage & Minimum Lot 
Width  (Feet)	150’	150’	150’
Minimum Lot Depth (Feet)	200’	200’	200’
Minimum Front Yard (Feet)	50’	50’	30’
Minimum Side Yard (Feet)	30’	30’	15’
Minimum Rear Yard (Feet)	30’	30’	15’
Maximum Building Coverage
(Percentage)	50%	50%	50%
Maximum Building Height (Feet)	35’	35’	35’
Two Family Home			
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet)	Not
Permitted	Not
Permitted	30,000
Minimum Lot Frontage & Minimum Lot 
Width  (Feet)	NA	NA	150’
Residential Uses: 	RR	SR	TR
Minimum Lot Depth (Feet)	NA	NA	200’
Minimum Front Yard (Feet)	NA	NA	50’
Minimum Side Yard (Feet)	NA	NA	30’
Minimum Rear Yard (Feet)	NA	NA	30’
Maximum Building Coverage
(Percentage)	NA	NA	50%
Maximum Building Height (Feet)	NA	NA	35’
Three or Four Family Home			
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet)	Not
Permitted	Not
Permitted	60,000
Minimum Lot Frontage & Minimum Lot 
Width (Feet)	NA	NA	200’
Minimum Lot Depth (Feet)	NA	NA	300’
Minimum Front Yard (Feet)	NA	NA	75’
Minimum Side Yard (Feet)	NA	NA	50’
Minimum Rear Yard (Feet)	NA	NA	75’
Maximum Building Coverage
(Percentage)	NA	NA	50%
Maximum Building Height (Feet)	NA	NA	35’
Townhouse or Condominium Or multi-family units (Allowed in the RR District only for elderly housing – Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29)			
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet)	20,000 per unit or family.	20,000 per unit or
family	20,000 per unit or
family
Minimum Lot Frontage & Minimum Lot Width  (Feet)	400’	400	400
Minimum Lot Depth (Feet)	500’	500’	500’
Minimum Front Yard (Feet)	50’	50’	50’
Minimum Side Yard (Feet)	75’	75’	75’
Minimum Rear Yard (Feet)	75’	75’	75’
Maximum Building Coverage
(Percentage)	50%	50%	50%
Residential Uses: 	RR	SR	TR
Maximum Building Height (Feet)	NA	35’	35’
              Residential Accessory Building			
Attached:			
Minimum Front Yard	50’	50’	30’
Minimum Side Yard	30’	30’	15’
Minimum Rear Yard	30’	30’	15’
Detached:			
Minimum Front Yard	50’	50’	30’
Minimum Side Yard	10’	10’	10’
Minimum Rear Yard	10’	10’	10’
Swimming Pools			
Minimum Front Yard	50’	50’	30’
Minimum Side Yard	15’	15’	15’
Minimum Rear Yard	15’	15’	15’
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS	URIP	IA	IB
MAIN BUILDING & ACCESSORY STRUCTURES			
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet)	None	43,560	43,560
Minimum Lot Frontage & Minimum Lot Width  (Feet)	None	200	None
Minimum Lot Depth (Feet)	None	200	None
Minimum Front Yard (Feet)	50’	50’	50’
Minimum Side Yard (Feet) 
*None if abutting railroad tracks	50’*	50’*	50’*
Minimum Rear Yard (Feet) 
*None if abutting railroad tracks	50’*	50’*	50’*
Maximum Building Coverage
(Percentage)	40%	50%	50%
Maximum Building Height (Feet)	40’	50’	50’
BUSINESS DISTRICTS	HB	GB	NB*
MAIN BUILDING & ACCESSORY 
STRUCTURES			
Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet)	40,000	40,000	40,000
Minimum Lot Frontage & Minimum Lot Width  (Feet)	200’	200’	200’
Minimum Lot Depth (Feet)	200’	200’	200’
Minimum Front Yard (Feet)	50’	50’	50’
Minimum Side Yard (Feet)	30’	30’	30’
Minimum Rear Yard (Feet)	30’	30’	30’
Maximum Building Coverage
(Percentage)	50%	50%	50%
Maximum Building Height (Feet)	50’	50’	50’
VILLAGE CENTER DISTRICTS			
See Village Center Zoning Sheets for
Requirements for the VC Districts			

 NOTE:  NB* Any lot in the NB zone that is being utilized for residential use shall conform to the lot size requirements and setback requirements as specified for the zoning district of the surrounding residential neighborhood. (Note added ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29)


 §171-39.  Floodway. 
  No encroachments (including fill), new construction, substantial improvements, or any other development shall be permitted within the regulatory floodway, as designated on the FEMA Map(s), unless certification by a registered pro¬fes¬sion¬al engineer or architect is provided, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the appropriate town authority that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the one hundred (100) year flood.

§171-40.  Accessory Structures.
  In residential and business districts, accessory structures shall conform to the provisions set forth in the Table of Dimensional and Density Regulations, §171-35. (Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29)   They must be located on the lot so as not to violate the minimum front yard, height restrictions. 
  Any accessory below-ground swimming pool shall be completely enclosed by a fence at least four (4) feet in height, having a self-closing gate with a latch. 
  In all districts, an accessory structure attached to the principal building shall be considered as an integral part thereof and shall be subject to front, side, and rear yard requirements applicable to the princi¬pal building.  Where the Building Inspector finds:
A.  That a lot is to be used for residential purpose.
B.  That such lot was created before the date of adoption of this ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
C.  That such lot contains a principal structure. 
D.  That such lot more closely conforms to the lot dimensions of the next less restric¬tive zone than the one in which it is located, the required set¬backs of that zone may be applied in lieu of the setbacks re¬quired under Article VI Dimensional and Density Regulations. 
§171-41.  Other General Dimensional and Density Provisions.  
  In addition to the regulations in this section above, the following regulations shall apply:
A.  Existing residential uses in business or industrial districts shall be subject to the regulations for the particular type of dwelling in the TR district.
B.  Pre-existing nonconforming Residential Uses which are now pro¬hib¬ited in the Zoning District in which they are located shall con¬form to the provisions of §171-83 Pre-Existing Non-Conforming Uses, Structures and Lots.
C.  In the case of one-family, two-family, and three-family dwell¬ings, no more than one principal building may be built on any single lot.  In all other cases (such as with condominiums or townhouses), more than one prin¬cipal struc¬ture may occupy the same lot, provided that if they aggre¬gate they do not represent a more intensive use of land than would be allowed if all uses were contained within a single structure.
D.  (Amended ATM, June 16, 2003, Article 11, item 4 deleted)
E.  Projections into required yards or other required open spac¬es are permitted subject to the following:
(1)  Balcony or bay window may project up to two (2) feet into a required yard or other open space and provided it is limited in total length to no more than one-half (½) the length of the building face.
(2)  Open terrace or steps or stoop, under four (4) feet in height may project into a required yard or open space up to one-half (½)  the required setback.
(3)  Steps or stoop over four (4) feet in height, windowsill, chim¬ney, roof eave, fire escape, fire tower, awnings, storm en¬clo¬sure, or similar architectural features may project not more than three (3) feet into a required yard open space.
(4)  Generators, air-conditioner units and like equipment may be located within the set-back provided that such equipment is adequately shielded to comply with noise and other regulations as specified in this ordinance or other regulations and state statutes. (Amended, Special Town Meeting, June 24, 2002, Article 2, (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
F.  The provisions of this ordinance governing the height of build¬ings shall not apply to chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulk¬heads, skylights, ventilators, electronic equipment, elevator shafts, and other necessary appurtenances usually carried above the roof, nor to domes, towers, stacks, or spires, if not used for human occupancy and if not occupying more than twenty (20) percent of the ground floor area of the build¬ing; nor to ornamental towers, observation towers, radio broadcasting towers, telecommunication towers (Added ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29), television and radio antennae and other like structures, which do not occupy more than ten (10) per¬cent of the lot area; nor to public, agricultur¬al or institutional buildings, or buildings or private schools not conducted for profit that are primarily used for school purposes, provided the expected appurtenances are not located within the flight paths of an airport or heliport as defined by FAA regula¬tions, and approved by the FAA, and further provided that no tower or similar structure may be located closer to a property line than the distance equal to its height. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
G.  The maximum gross floor area for any single business estab¬lish¬ment in a NB District shall not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet.
H.	At no street intersection in any district shall any obstruc¬tion to vision exceeding three (3) feet in height above the plane established by the intersecting streets be placed or permitted to grow, on any lot within the triangle formed by the lot lines abutting the intersection and a line connect¬ing points on these lot lines at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from the point of intersection of the lot lines.  This re¬striction shall also apply to the intersection of a street and a driveway in a "B" or "I" District.

I.	A fence, hedge, wall, or other structure or vegetation may be maintained on any lot provided that in the front yard area, no such structure or vegetation shall be over three (3) feet in height above the adjacent ground within five (5) feet of the front lot line unless it can be shown that such vegetation will not restrict visibility in such a way as to hinder the safe entry of a vehicle from any driveway to the street. 
J.  	Within the SR, TR, NB, and GB districts, the Planning Board may allow, by special permit, a different front yard set back than that otherwise currently allowed within the district under the following conditions: 

1. The land for which the special permit is sought is, at the time of application, an unimproved, vacant lot and the applicant is seeking to construct a primary building for a use allowed in the district by right or special permit;
2.  At least one lot, within two hundred fifty (250) feet of either side of the applicant's parcel, and having frontage on the same street, on the same block and lying within the same district, has a structure built before the current front yard set back was required but with less front yard set back than that currently required;
3. The proposed set back is not closer to the front line than the set back of a building within two hundred fifty (250) feet of either side of the applicant's parcel.

§171-42.  Reserved.
§171-43.  Reserved. 
§171-44.  Dimensional and Density Regulations for Lots Lo¬cated in More Than One Zoning District. 
  Where a lot is located in more than one zoning district, the following dimensional and density regulations shall apply:
A.  Frontage - The frontage requirement for the district in which a majority of the frontage is located shall apply.  In cases where the frontage is of equal length in all districts, then the most restrictive shall apply.
B.  Lot Area - The lot area requirement for the district in which a majority of the lot area is located shall apply.  In cases where the lot area is of equal area in all districts, then the most restrictive shall apply.
C.  All Other Dimensional and Density Regulations - Those dimen¬sion¬al and density regulations required in a particular district shall apply to that portion of the lot, or struc¬ture, located in said dis¬trict.
§171-45.  Vehicular Egress/Access to a Lot and Common Drive¬ways.
  Vehicular egress/access to a lot must be across the front lot line of the lot meeting the minimum frontage require¬ments, except that in particular instances, the Planning Board may issue a Special Permit permitting vehicular egress/access to a lot over a front lot line having less than the required minimum frontage, or over any side lot line or rear lot line.
A.  Common Driveways may be allowed by special permit in accordance with the provisions of §171-28 and subject to the following:
(1)  A common driveway in any “R” District shall serve no more than two lots.  The driveway shall lie entirely within the lots being served.  In the “I” Districts, or in the “GB” or “HB” Districts, the Planning Board may grant a special permit to allow a common driveway to serve more than two lots when it can be shown that the sharing of a driveway will result in a benefit to the neighborhood due to decreased curb cuts and traffic flow. (Amended ATM, May 14, 2001, Article 29)
(2)  Frontage along a common driveway shall not constitute frontage.  The only area to be counted as frontage is that land which meets the requirements as specified in the definition of frontage in the Zoning Ordinance; furthermore, no common driveway shall be accepted as a public way; nor shall the Town of Palmer under any circumstances be held liable for construction, reconstruction, maintenance, or snow removal on any common driveway. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(3)  Under no circumstances shall the Town of Palmer be held liable in the event that emergency vehicles cannot get to their destination because of improper construction or maintenance of a common driveway.  It shall be the owner’s responsibility to be sure that the driveway is passable for emergency vehicles at all times.
(4)  Each landowner served by the common driveway shall be jointly and severally responsible and liable for the repair and maintenance of all portions of the common driveway to which more than one landowner holds a right-of-way.
B.  Driveway Standards.
 (1)  Alignment and Dimensions.
(a)	The width of the right of way shall be forty (40) feet.
(b)	The minimum width of a common driveway surface shall be eighteen (18) feet.
(c)	The common driveway shall have three (3) foot gravel shoulders on each side.
(d)	The slope or grade of a common drive shall in no place exceed eight percent (8%) if unpaved or twelve percent (12%) if paved.
(e)	The common drive shall intersect a public way at an angle of not less than eighty (80) degrees.
(f)	The minimum curvature of a common driveway shall be sufficient for a fire engine to negotiate, generally no less than a radius of fifty (50) feet.
(g)	There shall be a turnaround area at the resident end of the driveway.  Such turnaround shall accommodate safe and convenient turning by fire trucks and other emergency vehicles.
(h)	The maximum length of a common driveway shall be fifteen hundred (1,500) feet.
(i)	Other standards may be set based on site configurations, including requirements for drainage.
(j)	These standards may be waived when, the Planning Board finds that such action is not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of the Zoning Ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(2)  Construction.
(a)	The common driveway shall be constructed of a minimum fifteen (15) inches gravel base with an oil and stone top layer of one half (½) inch consisting of three (3) successive layers of three quarter (¾) inch crushed trap rock stone, one half (½) inch crushed trap rock stone and one quarter  (¼) inch crushed trap rock stone, with a crown sufficient for drainage.
(b)	Drainage shall be adequate to dispose of surface runoff.  Culverts shall be installed if deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
(c)	These standards may be waived when, the Planning Board finds that such action is not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of the Zoning Ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(3)  Alignment and Dimensions.
(a)	The common driveway, at its intersection with the street, must provide a leveling off area with a slope no greater than one percent (1%) for the first twenty (20) feet and a slope no greater than five percent (5%) for the next thirty (30) feet.
(b)	Minimum safe sight distance must be provided at the intersection of a common driveway with a street.
(c)	These standards may be waived when the Planning Board finds that such action is not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of the Zoning Ordinance. (Amended Ord 2007- 07, RTCM 3/7/07)
(4)  Street Numbers and Identification.
(a)	Each common driveway shall be assigned one street number; each residence served by the common driveway shall be assigned a letter to use together with the common driveway number for purposes of address and identification.  All common driveways shall be clearly marked at the intersection of the driveway and the frontage road by a sign stating the driveway number and house letters, sufficiently readable from the road to serve the purpose of emergency identification.  All other house numbering standards of the Town of Palmer shall be adhered to.
§171-46.  Reserved.


RULES AND
REGULATIONS
OF THE
TOWN OF PALMER
PLANNING BOARD
Adopted 8-27-01
Revision dates: 5-19-03, 09-15-08, 01-3-11
2
Table of Contents
Introduction
Article 1. Planning Board Membership
Section 1.1 Absences without informing The Chair
Section 1.2 Appointment Procedures for Ad-Hoc Committee Members and
Employees
Section 1.3 Reappointment
Section 1.4 Resignation
Section 1.5 Termination
Section 1.6 Vacancy
Article 2. Officers
Section 2.1 Election of Officers
Section 2.2 Chair
Section 2.3 Vice-Chair
Section 2.4 Clerk
Article 3. Pre-meeting Requirements
Section 3.1 Posting Public Meeting Notice & Reserving a Meeting Room Spaces
Section 3.2 Available Meeting Rooms
Article 4. Conducting A Meeting
Section 4.1 Open Meeting Law
Section 4.2 Basic Requirements of the Open Meeting Law
Section 4.3 Executive Session
Section 4.4 Minutes and Records of the Planning Board
Section 4.5 Tape Recording by Observers
Article 5. Voting and Quorum
Section 5.1 Special Permit and Site Plan Approval
Section 5.2 Zoning Amendments
Section 5.3 Subdivision Approval
Section 5.4 Regular Meeting
Section 5.5 Rule of Necessity
3
Article 6. Public Hearing
Section 6.1 Public Hearing on Proposed Rules and Regulations
Section 6.2 Public Hearing on Proposed Zoning Ordinance, By-law or
Amendment
Section 6.3 Public Hearing for Special Permit and Site Plan Approval
Section 6.4 Public Hearing for a Definitive Subdivision Plan
Section 6.5 Suggested Public Hearing Procedures
Article 7. Reports
Section 7.1 Annual Report
Article 8. Official Files & Records
Section 8.1 Planning Board Records
Section 8.2 Access to Public Records
Section 8.3 Public Records of the Planning Board
Section 8.4 “Active” Public Records of the Planning Board
Section 8.5 List of Public Records Maintained by the Planning Board Office
Section 8.6 Requirements and Summary of the Public Records Law
Section 8.7 Requesting a Public Record
Section 8.8 Responding to a Public Record Request
Section 8.9 Exemptions from the Public Record Law Requirements
Article 9. Special Permit and Site Plan Approval
Section 9.1 Special Permit
Section 9.2 Application for Special Permit
Section 9.3 Receipt of Application for Special Permit
Section 9.4 Site Plan Approval
Section 9.5 Application for Site Plan Approval
Section 9.6 Contents of Plan
Section 9.7 Requests for Waivers
Section 9.8 Receipt of Application for Site Plan Approval
Section 9.9 Who May File and Application for Special Permit and/or Site Plan
Approval
Section 9.10 Withdrawal of Application
Section 9.11 Repetitive Petitions
Section 9.12 Lapse of Special Permit
Article 10. Rules and Regulations
Section 10.1 Adoption and Amendment
4
Article 11. Earth Removal Regulations
Section 11.1 Definitions
Section 11.2 Purpose
Section 11.3 Application and Fees
Section 11.4 Permit
Section 11.5 Notice of Application for Special Permit; Notice of Special Permit
Issuance
Section 11.6 Failure of Permitee to Conform with Approved Operating Plan
Section 11.7 Operating Plan Requirements
Section 11.8 Special Conditions
Section 11.9 Recommended Bond Form
Section 11.10 Hold Harmless Agreement
Article 12. Application Review Fee
Section 12.1 Intent
Section 12.2 Professional Expertise/Consultants
Section 12.3 Establishment of Special Account
Section 12.4 Option I
Section 12.5 Option II
Section 12.6 Use of Funds
Section 12.7 Method of Appeal
5
Planning Board Rules and Regulations
Introduction
The purpose of this set of Rules and Regulations is to assist Board and Committee members
and members of the public to better understand the procedures and requirements of the
Palmer Planning Board. These Rules and Regulations blend the directions and requirements
that are found in state and local laws, town charter and the zoning ordinance of the Town of
Palmer. In cases where the Massachusetts General Laws are cited, the reader may want to
refer to the Massachusetts General Laws to determine if any changes have been made. The
Planning Board will be diligent in keeping these regulations revised and up to date, but
changes in the Massachusetts General Laws will supercede these regulations.
These Rules and Regulations are adopted by the Palmer Planning Board under the authority
of and in compliance with the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and
the zoning ordinance of the Town of Palmer.
6
Article 1. Planning Board Membership
Planning Board members are elected officers. The Planning Board consists of five board
members who are elected to serve three-year terms. Any registered voter who qualifies
under the General Laws may obtain nomination papers from the Town Clerk if he/she
desires to enter an election for town office (c. § C10-2). The annual town elections are held
on the second Tuesday in June, unless that day is a legal holiday, in which case the elections
shall be held the following day (c. § C10-1).
Section 1.1 Absences Without Informing The Chair
A member of the Planning Board must inform the Planning Board chair and/or the
Planning Board office if they will be absent from a Planning Board meeting.
Section 1.2 Appointment Procedures for Ad-Hoc Committee Members and
Employees
Once the Planning Board has made a decision to appoint a member to an ad-hoc committee
or to appoint an individual as an employee to the department, the Town Council shall be
notified in writing. The Planning Board makes recommendations for appointments, but the
Town Council must make these appointments. Persons appointed to any position in town
government may be removed for cause before their terms expire by the appointing officer or
board (c. § C12-1). All appointees shall be notified in writing once appointed.
If an Appointee accepts the offer to participate on a Town board, the appointee shall be
responsible to:
Appear at the office of the Town Clerk as soon as practicable after receiving notification
appointment to a Town board and be sworn to the faithful performance of his/her duties.
Section 1.3 Reappointment
Reappointments are not automatically issued. An ad-hoc committee member must reapply
at the end of his/her term if he/she desires and is eligible to serve again.
Section 1.4 Resignation
An ad-hoc or advisory committee member who is no longer able to serve should resign
promptly so that the vacancy may be filled. A written resignation needs to be submitted to
the chair of the board and to the appointing authority. The resignation letter shall then be
filed with the Town Clerk.
Section 1.5 Termination
Any non-elected member of an ad-hoc or advisory committee to the Planning Board may be
removed by a recommendation of the Planning Board to the appointing authority (Town
Council) for good cause, in accordance with the following:
7
Procedure:
A written notice of the intent to remove and a statement of the reasons therefore shall be
delivered by registered mail to the last known address of the member sought to be removed
and a copy shall be delivered to the office of the Town Council.
Within fourteen days of delivery of the notice, the member may request a public hearing
before the Planning Board.
If the member fails to request a public hearing, then he/she shall be discharged forthwith.
Such member may be represented by counsel at the hearing, and shall be entitled to present
evidence, to call witnesses, and to examine any witness appearing at such hearing.
Within ten days after the public hearing is adjourned, the Planning Board may, by a majority
vote, submit a letter to the Town Council recommending that they remove the member for
good cause.
Nothing in this section shall be constructed as granting a right to such a hearing when a
member who has been appointed to a fixed term is not reappointed when his or her original
term expires.
Section 1.6 Vacancy
The Chair of the Planning Board shall notify the Town Council in writing when a vacancy
occurs on the Town board. The Planning Board and the Town Council shall try to find a
replacement as soon as possible for the vacancy.
Article 2. Officers
Section 2.1 Election of Officers
The Planning Board shall annually elect a Chair and other necessary officers.
Section 2.2 Chair
The Chair presides at all meetings, decides questions of order, calls special meetings, and
signs official documents that require the Chair’s signature. The Chair has the same rights as
other members to offer resolutions, make or second motions, discuss questions, and vote
thereon. The Chair is also responsible for ensuring that the provisions of the open meeting
law are met. A Town board, through a vote of the majority, may extend additional authority
to the Chair.
8
Section 2.3 Vice-Chair
The Vice-Chair acts for the Chair whenever the latter is absent from meetings and performs
other necessary duties.
Section 2.4 Clerk
The Clerk is responsible for the following duties of the Town board:
? Signing the Planning Board minutes once approved.
? Endorsing any Subdivision Approval Not Required Plans (SANR) that have been
approved by the Planning Board.
The Clerk’s signature shall be affixed to all permits approved by the Planning Board. A
stamp bearing the signature of the Clerk shall be kept in a secure location in the Planning
Board office for this purpose. Whenever the stamp is used, the employee utilizing the stamp
shall initial next to the stamped signature.
Article 3. Pre-Meeting Requirements
Unless otherwise stated, the requirements and procedures identified in this handbook apply
to all types of Planning Board meetings including: special meetings, workshops, emergency
meetings, ad-hoc and advisory committee meetings, and public hearings. A public meeting
occurs at any time a quorum of the Planning Board (or ad-hoc or advisory committee)
members get together to discuss or consider any public business or policy over which the
board or committee has some jurisdiction or advisory power.
Section 3.1 Posting Public Meeting Notice & Reserving Meeting Room Space
At least forty-eight hours before any meeting of the Planning Board is to be held the meeting
shall be posted with the Town Clerk. (MGL.c30A§18-25) (Amended 1-3-11)
Section 3.2 Available Meeting Rooms
Meetings must be held in approved meeting rooms within the Town-owned buildings. This
provision shall not prohibit on-site inspection when necessary for the proper conduct of
Town business. The employee or Board member posting the meeting shall be responsible
for reserving a meeting room in the Town Administration Building through the office of the
Town Council. If a larger meeting space is required or if a Town Administration Building
Meeting Room is not available that employee or Board member may secure a meeting room
in the Library, School or other appropriate town building.
9
Article 4. Conducting A Meeting
Section 4.1 Open Meeting Law
The Massachusetts Open Meeting Law requires that all meetings of elected or appointed
boards, committees or subcommittees be open to the public except for the nine specific
situations (listed below) where Executive Session is required. The law does not apply to
chance meetings or social occasions; however, such meetings cannot be used to circumvent
the requirement of discussing and deliberating at public meetings. The law does not apply to
administrative meetings or to advise on administrative matters.
Section 4.2 Basic Requirements of the Open Meeting Law
All meetings of a governmental body shall be open to the public and any person shall be
permitted to attend any meeting except under those circumstances listed below.
(MGL.c30A§18-25) (Amended 1-3-11)
No quorum of a governmental body shall meet in private for the purpose of deciding on or
deliberating toward a decision on any matter except as provided by the circumstances listed
below. (MGL.c30A§18-25) (Amended 1-3-11))
No votes taken in open session shall be by secret ballot. (MGL.c30A§18-25) (Amended 1-3-
11)
Except in emergency, a notice of every meeting of any governmental body shall be filed with
the Town Clerk at least forty-eight hours excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays,
prior to such meetings (MGL.c30A§18-25) (Amended 1-3-11)
The notice shall be printed in easily readable type and shall contain the date, time, and place
of such meeting.
Section 4.3 Executive Session
Executive Session is a meeting that is closed to the public for one of the nine purposes listed
below:
(1) To discuss the reputation, character, physical condition or mental health rather than the
professional competence of an individual, provided that the individual involved in such
executive session has been notified in writing by the governmental body, at least forty-eight
hours prior to the proposed executive session. Notification may be waived upon agreement
of the parties. A governmental body shall hold an open meeting if the individual involved
requests that the meeting be open. If an executive session is held, such individual shall have
the following rights:
(a) to be present at such executive session during discussions or considerations which
involve that individual.
10
(b) to have counsel or a representative of his own choosing present and attending for the
purpose of advising said individual and not for the purpose of active participation in said
executive session.
(c) to speak in his own behalf.
(2) To consider the discipline or dismissal of, or to hear complaints or charges brought
against, a public officer, employee, staff member, or individual, provided that the individual
involved in such executive session pursuant to this clause has been notified in writing by the
governmental body at least forty-eight hours prior to the proposed executive session.
Notification may be waived upon agreement of the parties. A governmental body shall hold
an open meeting if the individual involved requests that the meeting be open. If an executive
session is held, such individual shall have the following rights:
(a) to be present at such executive session during discussions or considerations which
involve that individual.
(b) to have counsel or a representative of his own choosing present and attending for the
purpose of advising said individual and not for the purpose of active participation.
(c) to speak in his own behalf.
(3) To discuss strategy with respect to collective bargaining or litigation if an open meeting
may have a detrimental effect on the bargaining or litigating position of the governmental
body, to conduct strategy sessions in preparation for negotiations with nonunion personnel,
to conduct collective bargaining sessions or contract negotiations with nonunion personnel.
(4) To discuss the deployment of security personnel or devices.
(5) To investigate charges of criminal misconduct or to discuss the filing of criminal
complaints.
(6) To consider the purchase, exchange, lease or value of real property, if such discussions
may have a detrimental effect on the negotiating position of the governmental body and a
person, firm or corporation.
(7) To comply with the provisions of any general or special law or federal grant-in-aid
requirements.
(8) To consider and interview applicants for employment by a preliminary screening
committee or a subcommittee appointed by a governmental body if an open meeting will
have a detrimental effect in obtaining qualified applicants; provided, however, that this
clause shall not apply to any meeting, including meetings of a preliminary screening
committee or a subcommittee appointed by a governmental body, to consider and interview
applicants who have passed a prior preliminary screening.
(9) To meet or confer with a mediator, as defined in section twenty-three C of chapter two
hundred and thirty-three, with respect to any litigation or decision on any public business
within its jurisdiction involving another party, group or body, provided that: (a) any decision
to participate in mediation shall be made in open meeting session and the parties, issues
involved and purpose of the mediation shall be disclosed; and (b) no action shall be taken by
any governmental body with respect to those issues which are the subject of the mediation
without deliberation and approval for such action at an open meeting after such notice as
may be required in this section. (MGL.c30A§18-25) (Amended 1-3-11)
The following required procedures must be followed:
The Town board shall first convene in an open session for which an agenda has been
posted.
11
A motion is made to enter into an Executive Session and the Chair has cited the purpose for
an Executive Session.
A majority of members have voted to go into Executive Session and the vote of each
member is recorded on a roll call vote and entered into the minutes.
The Chair states before the Executive Session whether or not the governmental body will
reconvene after the Executive Session. (MGL.c30A§18-25) (Amended 1-3-11)
All votes taken in Executive Sessions shall be recorded roll call votes and shall become a part
of the record of said executive session.
Section 4.4 Minutes and Records of the Planning Board M.G.L. c.30A§22
The Planning Board is required to maintain accurate records of its meetings referred to as
“minutes”. All minutes shall be approved by a majority vote of the Planning Board. All
“original copies” minutes shall be signed by the Clerk of the Planning Board and shall be
promptly filed in the minute books in the Planning Board office.
Each set of minutes must include the following:
a) The date and time of the meeting.
b) The location of the meeting.
c) The names of members who are present.
d) Names of additional participants of the meeting.
e) An “exact record” of motions, votes and official actions taken.
f) The subjects that were discussed.
g) Summaries of discussion to aid in understanding decisions and/or providing factual
information that may be useful to the board or other persons reading the minutes.
Minutes may also include or have attached to:
a) Assignments
b) Supporting materials, letters, requests and reports.
The minutes need not be verbatim transcript of all that was said at the meeting. Tape
recordings may not be used as permanent record of meetings. Written minutes must be
prepared with the information outlined above.
Section 4.5 Tape Recording by Observers
A meeting of the Planning Board may be recorded by any person in attendance by means of
a tape recorder or any other means of sonic reproduction, or by means of videotape
equipment fixed in one or more designated locations determined by the Planning Board
except when a meeting is held in executive session, provided that in such recording there is
no active interference with the conduct of the meeting. (MGL.c30A§18-25) (Amended 1-3-
11)
12
Article 5. Voting and Quorum
Section 5.1 Special Permit and Site Plan Approval
In the Town of Palmer, the Planning Board is the Special Permit Granting Authority.
Action on a special permit shall require a vote to issue of at least four members of a five
member Planning Board. (MGL. c40A§9)
Section 5.2 Zoning Amendments
The majority of the entire membership of the Planning Board should concur on a report
regarding a proposed adoption or amendment of a zoning by-law or ordinance. No zoning
ordinance or by-law or amendment thereto shall be adopted or changed except by a twothirds
vote of a Town Council. (MGL c40A§5)
Section 5.3 Subdivision Approval
Subdivision Approval requires approval by the majority of the entire membership of the
Planning Board. (MGL c41§81)
Section 5.4 Regular Meeting
A quorum for a meeting of the Planning Board shall be a majority of the entire membership
or three of five members. No action of the Planning Board shall be valid and binding unless
taken or ratified by an affirmative vote of the majority of the members attending the
meeting.
Section 5.5 Rule of Necessity
If a member of a town or city board has a conflict of interest, that member will be
disqualified from acting on that board matter. Under certain circumstances, the members of
the Planning Board may invoke the “Rule of Necessity” to allow disqualified members to
act. The rule of Necessity provides that a board may invoke this rule for a member(s) who
would be disqualified from participation on a specific Town board action, (e.g. because of a
conflict of interest to participate because of lack of a quorum needed to take action).
The Rule of Necessity is not a law written and passed by the Legislature. Rather, the Rule of
Necessity was developed because judges applied it in their court decisions.
The Rule of Necessity works in the following way:
1. It can only be used if a board is unable to act on a matter because it lacks the number of
members required to take a valid official vote, solely because members are disqualified from
acting.
2. The Rule of Necessity should be invoked by one or more of the otherwise disqualified
members, upon advice from town or city counsel or the State Ethics Commission.
13
3. If it is proper for the Rule of Necessity to be used, it should be clearly indicated in the
minutes of the meeting that the board was unable to obtain a quorum due to disqualification
of members and, as a last resort, that all those disqualified may now participate under the
authority of the Rule of Necessity. Each disqualified member who wishes to participate
under the Rule of Necessity must first disclose publicly the facts that created the conflict.
It should be noted, however, that invoking the Rule of Necessity does not require all
previously disqualified members to participate; it merely permits their participation. The Rule
of Necessity may only be used as a last resort.
4. Every effort must be made to find another board capable under the law of acting in place
of the board that could not obtain a quorum. (State Ethics Commission Fact Sheet #5)
Article 6. Public Hearing
A Public Hearing is a process of collecting information that pertains to the pros and cons of
an idea, motion, or proposed action from individuals. It is a tradition that Public Hearings
provide each individual who desires to speak an opportunity to voice his/her opinions. It is
very important that the Chair of the Planning Board states clearly how the public hearing will
be conducted and stay with the described process. Also, the Planning Board shall not accept
as testimony, evidence or attestation, nor cause to be read into the public record or minutes
of any meeting, any correspondence in which an author fails to self-identify him/herself or
list his/her place of residence. This is not to exclude the right of the author to have the
board withhold the name and/or address upon request.
Section 6.1 Public Hearings on Proposed Rules and Regulations.
Procedural steps for a Public Hearing for Planning Board Rules and Regulations:
A Planning Board shall adopt and may amend from time to time, reasonable rules and
regulations relative to subdivision control or with any other provision of a statute ordinance
or bylaw within the town.
A Public Hearing must be held on the proposed rules and regulations.
The Notice of the Public Hearing shall include:
? Date, time and place of hearing; and
? The subject matter of the hearing.
The Notice of the Public Hearing shall be:
Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town once in each of two successive
weeks. The first publication shall not be less than fourteen (14) days before the day of the
hearing. The date of the public hearing should not be counted in the 14 days.
Posted in a conspicuous place in the Town Hall for a period of not less than fourteen (14)
days before the day of the hearing.
14
After the Public Hearing, the Planning Board shall by a majority vote of the entire
membership of the Board vote to approve, modify or disapprove such regulations.
If the Planning Board approves such regulations a true copy shall be filed with the office of
the Town Clerk and a true copy shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
The Planning Board shall transmit a certified copy of any rules and regulations and any
amendments thereto to the Register of Deeds and the Recorder of the Land Court. No rules
and regulations or amendments thereto shall become effective until certified copies have
been transmitted. (MGL c.81Q)
Section 6.2 Public Hearings on proposed zoning ordinance, bylaw or amendment
thereto.
Procedural Steps for the Adoption of Zoning Ordinance, Bylaw or Amendment thereto:
The proposed ordinance, bylaw or amendment is submitted to the Town Council. Such
proposal may be submitted by:
Town Council;
Board of Appeals;
Individual owning land to be affected by change or adoption;
Registered voters pursuant to Section 10 of Chapter 39 MGL;
Planning Board;
Regional Planning Agency;
Others, if so provided by the Palmer Municipal Charter.
Within fourteen (14) days of receipt, the Town Council shall submit the zoning proposal to
the Planning Board for review, public hearing thereon and report. (MGL c40A §5)
Notice of the public hearing shall be given and the notice of the public hearing shall be:
Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town once in each of two successive
weeks. The first publication shall not be less than fourteen (14) days before the day of the
hearing. The date of the public hearing should not be counted in the 14 days.
Posted in a conspicuous place in the Town Hall for a period of not less than fourteen (14)
days before the day of the hearing.
The notice shall be mailed to the Pioneer Valley Planning Commission, the Planning Boards
of all-abutting towns, and the Department of Housing and Community Development by
postage prepaid prior to the hearing.
The Notice of the Public Hearing shall include:
The time, date and place of the hearing;
The subject matter, sufficient for identification;
The place where text and maps may be inspected.
Within sixty-five (65) days after the zoning proposal is submitted to the Planning Board by
the Town Council, the Planning Board shall hold its Public Hearing.
15
Within twenty-one (21) days after the Public Hearing, the Planning Board shall submit its
final report with recommendations to the Town Council. The report may be written or oral.
A report is not legally required if 21 days has passed between the Planning Board Public
Hearing and the Town Council vote.
The Town Council shall take action on the zoning proposal within six (6) months of the
Planning Board Public Hearing. If more than six months have passed, the Planning Board
must hold a new Public Hearing before Town Council may lawfully vote on the proposal.
(MGL c40A§5)
Section 6.3 Public Hearing for Special Permit and Site Plan Approval.
Procedural steps for a Public Hearing for a Special Permit and/or Site Plan Approval:
Applicant files a special permit in accordance with the filing requirements specified in this
regulation and the Town of Palmer Zoning Ordinance.
A Special Permit and/or Site Plan Approval may not be issued until a Public Hearing is held.
The Public Hearing must be held within sixty-five (65) days from the date the application is
filed.
The Notice of the Public Hearing shall include:
The name of the applicant;
A description of the area or premises including street address, if any, or other adequate
identification of the location;
Date, time and place of hearing;
The subject matter of the hearing; and
The nature of the action requested.
The Notice of the Public Hearing shall be:
Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town once in each of two successive
weeks. The first publication shall not be less than fourteen (14) days before the day of the
hearing. The date of the public hearing should not be counted in the 14 days.
Posted in a conspicuous place in the Town Hall for a period of not less than fourteen (14)
days before the day of the hearing.
The notice shall be mailed postage pre-paid to the applicant, abutters within 300’ of the
property line including abutters in another town and across a public or private street or way,
and the Planning Board of all abutting towns. The notice shall also be mailed to other
individuals, boards or agencies for review if required by the zoning ordinance.
Within ninety-days (90) or any extended time following the date of the public hearing, the
Special Permit Granting Authority shall take final action.
If the Special Permit Granting Authority fails to take final action within the ninety-day (90)
or extended time limit, the special permit shall be deemed granted.
16
After the decision has been made the Special Permit Granting Authority and/or their
designee (employees) shall file a copy of the decision with the Town Clerk within fourteen
(14) days from the date of decision by the Special Permit Granting Authority.
A copy of the decision shall be maintained in the files of the office of the Planning Board
and a copy shall be mailed to the applicant and any other person that so requested a copy at
the Public Hearing. (MGL c. 40A§9)
Section 6.4 Public Hearing for a Definitive Subdivision Plan.
Procedural steps for a public hearing for a definitive subdivision plan.
Editors Note: This list is not an all-inclusive list of the steps involved in a subdivision approval. Be
sure to consult Chapter 233 – Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Palmer and MGL Chapter 81
for complete information.
Applicant submits a definitive subdivision plan in accordance with the filing requirements
specified in this regulation and the Town of Palmer Subdivision Regulation – Chapter 233.
Action may not be taken on a Definitive Subdivision Plan until a Public Hearing is held.
The Planning Board reviews the plans and submits the plans for review to other departments
as specified in the Town of Palmer Subdivision Regulation. The Planning Board also sends
notice of Public Hearing at the expense of the applicant. The Notice of the Public Hearing
shall include:
The name of the applicant;
A description of the area or premises including street address, if any, or other adequate
identification of the location;
Date, time and place of hearing;
The subject matter of the hearing; and
The nature of the action requested.
The Notice of the Public Hearing shall be:
Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town once in each of two successive
weeks. The first publication shall not be less than fourteen (14) days before the day of the
hearing. The date of the public hearing should not be counted in the 14 days.
Posted in a conspicuous place in the Town Hall for a period of not less than fourteen (14)
days before the day of the hearing.
The notice shall be mailed postage pre-paid to the applicant, abutters within 300’ of the
property line including abutters in another town and across a public or private street or way,
and the Planning Board of all abutting towns. The notice shall also be mailed to other
individuals, boards or agencies for review if required by the zoning ordinance.
Within the time periods specified in the Town of Palmer Subdivision Regulation, other
Town Departments must report to the Planning Board.
17
The Planning Board holds the Public Hearing on the Definitive Subdivision Plan. It is
preferable to have reports of the other departments prior to holding the Public Hearing,
however, the Planning Board will hold the Public Hearing in the time frames allowed by the
MGL.
After the Public Hearing the Planning Board will make their decision. This decision must be
made within ninety-days (90) in the case where a Preliminary Plan has been filed or within
one hundred thirty five (135) days where a Preliminary Plan has not been filed. The decision
of the Planning Board will be to:
Approve the plan if it complies with the subdivision control law, the rules and regulations of
the Planning Board and the recommendations of the Board of Health; or,
Modify and approve the plan if it does not so comply; or,
Disapprove the plan, stating in detail wherein the plan does not conform to the rules and
regulations of the Planning Board or the recommendations of the Board of Health. Such
disapproval shall be revoked if the plan is amended so that it conforms to the rules and
regulations or recommendations. After a Public Hearing the Planning Board shall approve
the amended plan.
If the Planning Board fails to take final action within the specified time periods, or further
time as mutually agreed upon, the plan shall be deemed approved.
After the decision has been made the Planning Board and/or their designee shall file a copy
of the decision with the Town Clerk within the specified time periods.
A copy of the decision shall be maintained in the files of the office of the Planning Board
and a copy shall be mailed to the applicant and any other person that so requested a copy at
the Public Hearing. (MGL c.81)
Section 6.5 Suggested Public Hearing Procedures
The Chair will open the hearing by identifying the purpose of the Hearing.
The Planning Board Principal Clerk or other designee will read the Public Hearing notice
aloud.
The Chair will explain the rules to be followed during the Hearing.
Hearing Format:
Proponents speak
Questions: Public
Questions: Members of the Planning Board
Opponents speak
Questions: Public
Questions: Members of the Planning Board
18
Recess will be considered if requested by the proponent of a project:
Proponents: Concluding Statements/Rebuttal
Opponents: Concluding Statements/Rebuttal
No questions will be permitted until after the speaker has finished the presentation.
Questions will be accepted first from the public and then from members of the Planning
Board. All public questions will be addressed through the Chair. All speakers will identify
themselves to the Chair, state their questions, and specify to whom they are addressed. Any
disagreement with answers is restricted to rebuttal statements.
Article 7. Reports
Section 7.1 Annual reports
The Planning Board shall submit to the Town Manager an annual report of activities for
inclusion in the Annual Reports of the Town. The report shall be submitted on or before a
date specified by the Town Manager.
Article 8. Official Files & Records
Section 8.1 Planning Board Records.
The Massachusetts Public Records Law (MGL.C4§7(26)) provides right of access to public
records, broadly defined to include all documentary materials except eleven specific
exemptions such as personnel and medical files, proposals and bids, and appraisals of
property. The minutes, informational data, memoranda and circulating materials of any
town board are mostly all public information. Appendix B of this handbook contains the
text of the Massachusetts Public Record Law. The Town board should consult with the
Town Clerk if questions arise or a request made under the freedom of information occurs.
Every person having custody of any public record shall at reasonable times and without
reasonable delay, permit the requested record to be inspected and examined by any person.
A custodian of a public record shall within 10 days following receipt of a request for
inspection or a copy of a public record shall comply with such request. Please know that the
law requires acting on a request within a reasonable time within a maximum of 10 days.
Section 8.2 Access to Public Records.
To meet the intent of the Public Records Law the following set of protocols are designed to
guide the Planning Board and staff in providing public access to municipal records.
Section 8.3 Public Records of the Planning Board.
19
The individual seeking a public record relating to the Planning Board shall make the request
to the Planning Board office.
The Planning Board staff will verify that the Planning Board is actually the custodian of the
record being requested.
The staff of the Planning Board office shall make arrangements with the requester for the
opportunity to inspect and/or receive copies of the requested materials.
Section 8.4 “Active” Public Records of the Planning Board.
The individual seeking a public record relating to the Planning Board shall phone or visit the
Planning Board office in person to request to review the public records.
The Planning Board staff shall make arrangements with the requestor for the opportunity to
inspect and/or receive copies of the requested materials.
Section 8.5 Public Records Maintained by the Planning Board office.
The following is a list of some of the Public Records kept by the Planning Board office.
? Special Permits
? Subdivision Plans
? Subdivision Approval Not Required Plans
? Planning Board Minutes
? Master Plan
? Official Map
? Zoning Map
? Overlay Maps
? GIS Data
? Rules and Regulations
? Zoning Ordinance
? Subdivision Regulations
? Earth Removal Regulations
? Zoning Amendments
Section 8.6 Requirements and Summary of the Public Records Law
Access to Public Records: The Massachusetts Public Records Law provides that any person
has an absolute right of access to public information. The right of access includes the right
to inspect, copy or have copies of records provided upon the payment of a reasonable fee.
Public Records Defined: The Massachusetts General Laws broadly define “public records”
to include all documentary materials or data, regardless of physical form or characteristics,
which are made or received by any officer or employee of any Massachusetts governmental
entity. As a result, all photographs, papers and electronic storage media of which a
governmental officer and employee is the “custodian” constitute “public record”. There are
eleven narrowly construed exceptions to this broad definition of “public record”, please
review the exemptions section.
20
Section 8.7 Requesting a Public Record
Requests for public records may be made oral or written and may be made in person or
through mail, FAX, E-mail, and other means of communication. A requester is not required
to specifically identify a particular record. Any request that provides the custodian with a
reasonable description of the desired information is sufficient. The custodians are expected
to use their superior knowledge of the records within their custody to assist the requester in
obtaining the desired information.
Section 8.8 Responding to a Public Record Request
All requests must receive a response as soon as practicable, without unreasonable delay and
always within ten days. The response must be either an offer to provide the requested
materials or a written denial. A denial must detail the specific legal basis for the withholding
of the requested materials. The legal basis must include a citation to the statutory exemption
upon which the custodian relies and must also explain why the exemption applies. A denial
must also advise the requester of their rights to seek redress through the administrative
process provided by the Office of the Supervisor of Public Records.
The Public Records Law only applies to information that is in the custody of a governmental
entity at the time the request is received. There is no obligation to create a record for a
requestor.
Inquiries into a requester’s status or motivation for seeking information are expressly
prohibited. Consequently, all requests for public records, even if made for a commercial
purpose or to assist the requester in a lawsuit against the holder of the records, must be
honored in accordance with the Public Records Law.
Section 8.9 Exemptions to the Public Record Law Requirements
Summary of “public records” that are exempted from the requirements of the Public
Records Law: Contact the Town Clerk for detailed description of each exemption.)
Withholding from disclosure those documents, which are specifically or by implication
exempted from disclosure by statute.
Related solely to internal personnel rules and practices of the government unit, provided,
however that such records shall be withheld only to the extent that the proper performance
of necessary governmental functions requires such withholding.
Personnel and medical files or information; also any other materials or data relating to a
specifically named individual, the disclosure of which may constitute an unwarranted
invasion of personal property.
Inter-agency or intra-agency memoranda or letters relating to policy positions being
developed by the agency; but this clause shall not apply to reasonably completed factual
studies or reports on which the development of such policy positions has been or may be
based.
Allows the withholding of “notebooks and other materials prepared by an employee of the
Commonwealth which are personal to him/her and not maintained as part of the files of the
21
government unit. (The application of this exemption is limited to records that are workrelated
but can be characterized as personal to an employee.)
Investigatory materials necessarily compiled out of the public view by law enforcement or
any other investigatory officials the disclosure of which materials would probably so
prejudice the possibility of effective law enforcement that such disclosure would not bee in
the public interest.
Trade secrets or commercial or financial information voluntarily provided to an agency for
use in developing government policy and upon a promise of confidentiality; but this clause
shall not apply to information submitted as required by law or as condition of receiving a
government contract or benefit.
Proposals and bids to enter into any contract or agreement until the time for the opening of
bids in the case of bids or proposals to be opened publicly, and until the time for the receipt
of bids or proposals has expired in all other cases; and inter-agency or intra-agency
communications made in connection with an evaluation process for reviewing bids or
proposals, prior to decision to enter into negotiations with or award contract to, a particular
person.
Appraisals of real property acquired or to be acquired until (1) a final agreement is entered
into; or (2) any litigation relative to such appraisals has been terminated; or (3) the time
within which to commence such litigation has expired.
The names and addresses of any persons contained in, or referred to in, any applications for
any licenses to carry or posses firearms issued pursuant to chapter on e hundred forty or any
firearms identification cards issued pursuant to said chapter and the names and addresses on
sales or transfers of any firearms, rifles, shotguns, or machine guns, or ammunition
therefore, as defined in said chapter one hundred and forty and the names and addresses on
said licenses or cards.
(This exemption was repealed by the legislature.)
Withholding from disclosure test questions and answers, scoring keys and sheets, and
examination data used to administer a licensing examination; provide, however, that such
materials are used to administer another examination.
Article 9. Special Permits and Site Plan Approval
Section 9.1 Special Permits.
Specific types of uses are only allowed in specific districts by Special Permit. Please refer to
the Palmer Zoning Ordinance to determine if a Special Permit is required for a proposed
use.
Section 9.2 Application.
An application for a Special Permit shall be made to the Town Clerk and the Planning Board
office on the official forms (as may be amended from time to time) of the Planning Board.
22
An application for a Special Permit must be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee and
any necessary application review fees required (see the fee schedule at the end of this
regulation and see the Application Review Fee section of these Rules and Regulations).
An application for a Special Permit must be accompanied by a certified list of abutters
obtained from the Palmer Board of Assessors office.
An application for a Special Permit must be accompanied by four sets of plans and all
supporting information.
An application for a Special Permit must be accompanied by appropriate documentation to
demonstrate the following:
The use requested is listed in the Table of Use Regulations as a special permit in the district
for which application is made or is so designated elsewhere in this ordinance.
The requested use will be harmonious with the appropriate and orderly development of the
zoning district in which it is proposed to be located and will be harmonious with the visual
character of the neighborhood in which it is proposed.
The requested use will not create undue traffic congestion or unduly impair pedestrian
safety.
The requested use will not overload any public water, drainage or sewer system or any other
municipal system to such an extent that the requested use or any developed use in the
immediate area or in any other area of the Town will be unduly subjected to hazards
affecting health, safety, or the general welfare.
Any special regulations for the use as set forth in Article XV – Special Permit and
Exceptions are fulfilled.
The requested use will not unduly impair the integrity or character of the district or adjoining
zones, nor be detrimental to the health, morals, aesthetic qualities of the adjacent area and
the neighborhood, or general welfare. The use shall be in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of the ordinance.
The suggested use shall not significantly deteriorate any natural resource or natural resource
area within the Town.
The application and proposed project shall employ adequate methods to protect adjacent
areas from detrimental of offensive uses on the site by provision of adequate surface water
drainage; buffers against light, sight, sound, dust and vibration; and preservation of light and
air.
The application and proposed project shall ensure that there will be protection of
environmental features on the site and in adjacent areas (Palmer Zoning Ordinance Article V
Section 171.28 Special Permits).
23
The application shall also include any other information as required by the appropriate
sections of these Rules and Regulations and the Town of Palmer Zoning Ordinance.
Applications for earth removal operations shall comply with the provisions of the Rules and
Regulations for the Development, Operation and Closeout of “Earth Removal” Operations
in addition to these requirements and the requirements of Site Plan Approval (Section 9.4).
Where Site Plan Approval is required for the proposed use, which forms the basis of the
Special Permit application, the applicant shall also file the appropriate information and meet
the requirements of Site Plan Approval (Section 9.4). These Public Hearings shall be held
concurrently, but separate decisions will be reached for each. Information from one hearing
or application may be used by the Planning Board to make its determination on any other
concurrently filed application.
Section 9.3 Receipt of Application. (Amended 5-19-03)
An application will not be considered filed unless the application or request, in the format
prescribed by the Planning Board, is (1) actually delivered by hand or by mail service to the
Planning Board at the Town Administration Building and (2) accompanied by all of the shall
be deemed received when an application or a request has been received in the format
prescribed by the Planning Board and is accompanied by all of the supporting materials or
documentation and fees required by statute, as detailed in these Rules and Regulations and in
the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Palmer. Upon receipt of an application the Planning
Board, staff of the Planning Board, or a designee will check it for completeness and
accuracy.
If an determination is made that an application is deemed incomplete it willshall be
returned to the applicant with a listing of missing information. If the application is returned
because it is incomplete, the applicant may either withdraw the application by notice to the
Board or resubmit the application with all of the required information. No additional filing
fee will be required for resubmitting the application with the complete information.
However, the filing fee is non-refundable if the application is withdrawn. If the application
is not resubmitted within 30 days, it will be deemed withdrawn for all purposes. If the
applicant does not choose to withdraw the application, but resubmits it without the
requested information or asks the Planning Board to process it on the information
submitted, the Planning Board may deny the application simply because of incomplete
information.
The applicant shall be given the opportunity to withdraw any incomplete application.
The filing fee is non-refundable. In the event the applicant does not choose to withdraw
the application, the Planning Board may deny the applicant for incomplete information.
The Planning Board may, in its discretion, waive any requirement that the applicant submit
information required by these Rules and Regulations and may waive a requirement to submit
information required by the zoning ordinance, where the ordinance gives the Board that
discretion. The Board’s decision to waive such a requirement will be based on its conclusion
that it does not need the information to determine compliance with the substantive
requirements of the applicable law. Conversely, the Planning Board may require other
24
information or documentation as it deems necessary to ensure that the proposal meets the
substantive requirements, purposes and intent of these Rules and Regulations, the Zoning
Ordinance, G.L. c 40A, G.L. c. 41, or any other applicable law or regulation of the
Commonwealth or the United States and/or other applicable ordinance or rules and
regulations of the Town of Palmer.
Section 9.4 Site Plan Approval.
Certain uses within the Town of Palmer require Site Plan Approval. Please refer to the
Palmer Zoning Ordinance to determine if Site Plan Approval is required for a proposed use.
Section 9.5 Application.
An application for a Site Plan Approval shall be made to the Town Clerk and the Planning
Board office on the official forms (as may be amended from time to time) of the Planning
Board.
An application for a Site Plan Approval must be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee
and any necessary application review fees required (see the fee schedule at the end of this
regulation and see the Application Review Fee section of these Rules and Regulations).
An application for Site Plan Approval must be accompanied by a certified list of abutters
obtained from the Palmer Board of Assessors office.
An application for a Site Plan Approval must be accompanied by four sets of plans, building
elevations and all supporting information.
All applications shall include plans of the property prepared by a land surveyor registered in
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
All plans shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a Massachusetts registered engineer,
architect or landscape architect, whichever is appropriate.
An application for a Site Plan Approval must be accompanied by appropriate documentation
to demonstrate the following:
That the subject and adjoining premises are protected against serious detriment by provision
for the safe carrying and discharge of surface water drainage, sound and sight buffers, and
that the development of the site will preserve sensitive environmental features such as steep
slopes, wetlands and large rock outcroppings and will attempt to preserve public scenic
views or historically significant features as well as preservation of light and air;
That there are provisions for convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement
within the site and on adjacent streets, the location of driveways openings in relation to
traffic, access by emergency vehicles, and to adjacent streets and, when necessary,
compliance with other regulations for the handicapped, minors and the elderly;
25
That all proposed pedestrian access ways do not create traffic hazards and are: adequate, but
not excessive in number; adequate in width, grade, alignment, and visibility; adequate
distance from street corners and other access ways; and are adequately designed for other
safety considerations;
That there is the provision of an adequate amount of, and safe arrangement of off-street
parking and loading spaces in relation to the proposed uses of the premises to prevent onstreet
and off-street traffic congestion;
That there is a relationship of structures and open spaces to the natural landscape, existing
buildings and other community assets in the area and will be in harmony with the
surrounding neighborhood; and that there is compliance with other requirements of the
ordinance; and that the general landscaping of the site complies with the purpose and intent
of this ordinance; that existing trees are preserved to the maximum extent possible; that
parking, storage, refuse and storage areas are suitably screened during all seasons from the
view of adjacent residential areas and public rights-of-way;
That lighting of the site shall be adequate at ground level for the protection and safety of the
public in regard to pedestrian and vehicular circulation; that the glare from the installation of
outdoor lights and illuminated signs is properly shielded from the view of adjacent property
and public rights-of-way;
That all utility systems are suitably located, adequately designed and properly installed to
serve the proposed uses, and to protect the property from adverse pollution;
Mitigation of adverse impacts on the Town's resources including the effect on the water
supply and distribution system, sewage collection and treatment systems, fire protection, and
streets.
i) General conformance with the intent of the ordinance as it pertains to the zoning district.
The Planning Board may require such appropriate conditions, limitations, and safeguards,
which it feels, are necessary to assure the project meets the criteria of the above.
Applications for earth removal operations shall comply with the provisions of the Rules and
Regulations for the Development, Operation and Closeout of “Earth Removal” Operations
in addition to these requirements and the Special Permit requirements (Section 9.1).
Where a Special Permit is required for the proposed use that forms the basis of the Site Plan
Approval application, the applicant shall also file the appropriate information and meet the
requirements of Special Permit (Section 9.1). These Public Hearings shall be held
concurrently, but separate decisions will be reached for each. Information from the hearing
or application may be used by the Planning Board to make its determination on any other
concurrently filed application.
Section 9.6 Contents of Plan.
All plans shall contain the following information:
26
General Information:
Name and address of applicant and owner of record as listed on the Town’s tax rolls.
If the applicant is not the owner of record, the latter shall also sign the application.
Date, north arrow, and numerical and graphical scale on map;
A written description of the proposed use or uses;
A table or chart indicating the proposed number or amount and types of uses, lot area lot
width, yards, building height, lot coverage, floor area, parking spaces, landscaping and open
spaces as they are required.
II. Location Map:
An accurate scale map at a scale of 1” = 1,000’ shall be submitted showing the subject
property and all property and streets within 1,000’.
Location, width and purpose of all existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way on
the property.
III. Buildings and Uses:
Location, dimensions, area, height and setbacks of all existing and proposed buildings, signs,
fences, and walls.
Location of all existing and proposed uses and facilities such as swimming pools, lighting,
tanks, refuse containers, etc.
Parking, Loading and Circulation:
Location, arrangement and dimensions of automobile parking spaces, aisles, vehicular drives,
fire lanes, entrances, exists and ramps.
Location, arrangement and dimensions of loading and unloading areas.
Location and dimensions of the pedestrian walkways, entrances and exits.
Estimated peak hour traffic volumes generated by the proposed use in relation to existing
volumes and projected future conditions.
Signs and Lighting:
Location, size, height, orientation and design of all signs.
Location, size, height, orientation and design of any outdoor lighting.
27
Utilities:
Location and design of all existing and proposed sanitary sewer, storm drainage, water
supply facilities and refuse collection areas as well as other underground and above ground
utilities. All utilities shall be placed underground unless the applicant can substantiate that
such underground placement is impractical.
All refuse containers shall be screened from view from the street, and wherever possible
shall be located at the rear of the property.
Topographic Map:
The site plan map shall illustrate the existing and proposed conditions of the property
including existing and proposed contours at intervals of five feet or at an interval as needed
to show detail as required by sound engineering practices, referred to USGS MSL datum,
and the location of all existing wooded area, watercourses, wetlands and other significant
features and, where appropriate, the boundary of the flood hazard area, water supply
protection area or other overlay district areas.
Landscaping Plan:
The landscaping plan shall illustrate the existing and proposed landscape development of the
property, including the location, general layout, type and size of buffer or landscape area,
plant material, fencing, screening devices, decorative paving or other materials proposed.
Other Information:
Other information as may be necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of the
zoning ordinance.
Any hazardous materials and wastes associated with the proposed use as listed by the US
Environmental Protection Agency.
All abutters shall be noted on the plan.
Section 9.7 Waivers.
Upon request, the Planning Board may, at its discretion, waive the submission by the applicant
of any of the required information. All waivers must be requested in writing at the time
of application; however, waivers will not be decided until the Public Hearing. If the waiver
is not granted then all parties will agree to continue the hearing to allow sufficient time for
the applicant to submit the required information (Palmer Zoning Ordinance, Article V,
Section 171.29).
Section 9.8 Receipt of Application. (Amended 5-19-03)
28
An application will not be considered filed unless the application or request, in the format
prescribed by the Planning Board, is (1) actually delivered by hand or by mail service to the
Planning Board at the Town Administration Building and (2) accompanied by all of the shall
be deemed received when an application or a request has been received in the format
prescribed by the Planning Board and is accompanied by all of the supporting materials or
documentation and fees required by statute, as detailed in these Rules and Regulations and in
the zoning ordinance of the Town of Palmer. Upon receipt of an application the Planning
Board, staff of the Planning Board, or a designee will check it for completeness and
accuracy.
If an determination is made that an application is deemed incomplete it willshall be
returned to the applicant with a listing of missing information. If the application is returned
because it is incomplete, the applicant may either withdraw the application by notice to the
Board or resubmit the application with all of the required information. No additional filing
fee will be required for resubmitting the application with the complete information.
However, the filing fee is non-refundable if the application is withdrawn. If the application
is not resubmitted within 30 days, it will be deemed withdrawn for all purposes. If the
applicant does not choose to withdraw the application, but resubmits it without the
requested information or asks the Planning Board to process it on the information
submitted, the Planning Board may deny the application simply because of incomplete
information.
The applicant shall be given the opportunity to withdraw any incomplete application. The
filing fee is non-refundable. In the event the applicant does not choose to withdraw the
application, the Planning Board may deny the applicant for incomplete information.
The Planning Board may, in its discretion, waive any requirement that the applicant submit
information required by these Rules and Regulations and may waive a requirement to submit
information required by the zoning ordinance, where the ordinance gives the Board that
discretion. The Board’s decision to waive such a requirement will be based on its conclusion
that it does not need the information to determine compliance with the substantive
requirements of the applicable law. Conversely, the Planning Board may require other
information or documentation as it deems necessary to ensure that the proposal meets the
substantive requirements, purposes and intent of these Rules and Regulations, the zoning
ordinance, G.L. c 40A, G.L. c. 41, or any other applicable law or regulation of the
Commonwealth or the United States and/or other applicable ordinance or rules and
regulations of the Town of Palmer.
Section 9.9 Who May File an Application for Special Permit and/or Site Plan
Approval.
If the applicant is a party other than the record owner, the application must be co-signed by
all of the record owners. An attorney may sign the application when acting as the agent for
the owner of the property.
Section 9.10 Withdrawal of Application.
29
An application may be withdrawn without prejudice when requested in writing by the
applicant prior to publication of the public hearing notice. Once the notice has been
published however, a withdrawal without prejudice may be permitted only with the approval
of the Planning Board. (M.G.L. c.40A §16)
Section 9.11 Repetitive Petitions.
No appeal, application or petition which has been unfavorably and finally acted upon by the
special permit granting authority shall be acted favorably upon within two years after the
date of final unfavorable action unless said special permit granting authority finds, by a
unanimous vote of a board of three members or by a vote of four members of a board of
five members or two-thirds vote of a board of more than five members, specific and
material changes in the conditions upon which the previous unfavorable action was based,
and describes such changes in the record of its proceedings, and unless all but one of the
members of the planning board consents thereto and after notice is given to parties in
interest of the time and place of the proceedings when the question of such consent will be
considered. (M.G.L. c.40A §16)
Section 9.12 Lapse of Special Permit
The Palmer Zoning Ordinance provides that a special permit granted shall lapse within one
year if a substantial use has not commenced in one year, or in the case of construction, if
construction has not begun. The Planning Board may make exception for good cause.
Article 10. Adoption of Rules and Regulations
The Planning Board shall adopt and from time to time amend rules relative to the issuance
of special permit and procedures and related matters, and shall file a copy of said rules in the
office of the city or town clerk. Such rules shall prescribe a size, form, contents, style and
number of copies of plans and specifications and the procedure for a submission and
approval of such permits. A copy of all rules and regulations adopted by the Planning Board
shall be filed in the Office of the Town Clerk and made available for review by any person
who requests such information.
30
APPLICATION FEE SHEDULE
Amended 1-3-11
Site Plan Review Application $150.00
Special Permit Application $150.00
Finding Application $150.00
Stormwater Permit Application $200.00
Earth Removal Application $150.00
Subdivision Approval Not Required (SANR) Plans $75.00/each new lot created
31
TOWN OF PALMER
PLANNING BOARD
RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT,
OPERATION AND CLOSEOUT OF “EARTH REMOVAL”
OPERATIONS
These Rules and Regulations were originally adopted by the Town of
Palmer Planning Board on September 15, 1980. These Rules and
Regulations were amended on the following dates:
February 24, 1997
August 27, 2001
September 15, 2008
January 3, 2011
Formatted
32
September 15, 1980
RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT, OPERATION
AND CLOSEOUT OF “EARTH REMOVAL” OPERATIONS
Section 11.1 Definitions:
“application” Shall mean written request filed with the Planning Board for
issuance of a special permit; it shall include the application fee, operating
plans and a list of abutters within 300 feet of any point on the perimeter of
the proposed site.
“earth removal” Shall mean the extraction or removal of sand, gravel,
loam, topsoil, stone, clay or shale from the deposits from any tract of land.
“earth products excavation operations” Earth products excavation
operations shall include the removal of sand, gravel, loam, sod or other earth
materials from the deposits from any tract of land. Rock quarry operations
shall be prohibited within the Town of Palmer (Amended 8-27-01).
“operating acreage” Shall mean the maximum number of acres which
have been or will be stripped of topsoil and/or vegetation and/or which
have not been graded and replanted in conjunction with the approved
closeout plan.
“operating plans” Shall mean a series of topographic plans showing the
existing, interim and close-out contours, drainage schemes, etc. as a defined
hereinafter.
“total acreage” Shall mean the total number of acres within the property
lines of the proposed site.
33
Section 11.2 Purpose:
These regulations were written with careful thought and reasonable consideration to the
character of this community. These regulations are adopted pursuant to the authority
granted by Chapter 40A of the M.G.L. These regulations are enacted for the purpose
of: lessening congestion in the streets; conserving health; securing safety from fire,
flood, panic, and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; conserving the value
of land and buildings, including the conservation of natural resources and the
prevention of blight and pollution of the environment; encouraging appropriate uses of
land throughout the Town; and preserving and increasing amenities by the
promulgation of regulations to fulfill said objectives. In addition to the above, these
regulations have been established for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and
overall aesthetic quality of life for the inhabitants of the Town by effecting uniform
regulations for all earth removal operations (Amended 8-27-01).
Section 11.3 Applications and Fees:
a.) All persons seeking approval for an earth removal operation shall file an
application in conformance with these Rules and Regulations as well as all other
applicable regulations and zoning ordinance. See Section 9 for information
regarding special permit and site plan approval applications.
b.) All applications for the issuance or re-issuance of a special permit shall be e
accompanied by a certified check in the amount of $150.00 to cover the Planning
Board’s preliminary expenses (Amended 8-27-01 and 1-3-11).
c.) The applicant will be responsible for payment of the advertising costs for all legal
notices published.
d.) A fee of $100.00 per operating acre (as defined in this regulation) must be paid at
the time of application. Also required will be a Twelve Hundred Dollar
($1200.00) annual inspection fee. The Annual Inspection fee shall include costs
related to the completion of a minimum of two interim reports and one year-end
inspection, or as may be required by the Planning Board and specified in the
conditions of the special permit (Amended 1-3-11).
c.)e.) Annual inspections and interim reports, as specified in section d.), shall be
conducted by the engineering firm performing the initial review of the
application, when practical (Amended 1-3-11).
d.)f.) The applicant shall pay an application review fee for review of the application
by a consulting firm chosen by the Planning Board. Further information
regarding these fees can be found in the “Application Review Fee” portion of
the Planning Board Rules and Regulations (Amended 1-3-11).
Formatted
Formatted
Formatted
Formatted
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
34
e.)g.) All fees shall be paid at time of application. No permit shall take effect until
all fees have been paid by the applicant (Amended 1-3-11).
f.)h.) All plans shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a Massachusetts registered
engineer. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to pay all fees and
expenses related to the development of the plans.
2. Purpose:
These regulations are adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter
40A of
the M.G.L. for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and overall
aesthetic
quality of life for the inhabitants of the Town by effecting uniform regulations
of
all earth removal operations
3.Section 11.4 Permit.
No earth removal operation shall be conducted without a covenant having been
consummated between the Town and the applicant and a special permit for the same
having been issued by the Planning Board. The special permit shall expire one year
from the date of issuance of the permit. All permits are subject to the exceptions,
enforcement and restrictions section of these Rules and Regulations. on December
31 of each year. The Planning Board reserves the right to deny the issuance of any
special permit if, in its judgment, the earth removal operator has not developed or
has failed to conform to the approved operating plan (Amended 8-27-01).
4.Permit Fee:
The permit fee shall be a certified check in the amount of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for
the application fee. The applicant will also be responsible for payment of the
advertising costs for all legal notices published, and a fee of $50.00 per operating
acre. Also required will be a Twelve Hundred Dollar ($1200.00) annual inspection
fee, and the applicant shall reimburse the Town for all other expenses caused by the
applicant prior to the issuance of the special permit. (amended 2-24-97)
6.Section 11.5 Notice of Application for Special Permit; Notice of Special
Permit Issuance.
Planning Board shall give fourteen (14) days prior notice to the applicant and
abutters within three hundred feet (300’) of any point of the perimeter property line
of any Public Hearing during which an application for an earth removal special
permit shall be considered and discussed. Said notice shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town (Amended 8-27-01).
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
35
7.Section 11.6 Failure of Permitee to Conform with Approved Operating Plan.
If a permittee fails to comply within thirty (30) days of written notice from the
Planning Board of any deviation from the approved operating plan, the Planning
Board may take such action as is necessary to utilize the bond posted by the
applicant to correct the deviations.
8.Section 11.7 Operating Plan Requirements. (Four (34) Sets of Plans are
Required)
The applicant may choose to submit a one-year, two-year, or three-year plan. A
multi-year plan must indicate all work (including removal and restoration work and
any other improvements or changes) and the year that work is to be accomplished.
Provided that work continues in the manner indicated on the plan submitted, no new
plan will be required until an applicant moves beyond the scope of work shown on
that plan. The time period of a multi-year plan may be changed by approval of the
Planning Board (i.e. work needs to progress faster or slower than indicated on the
plan submitted, provided that the scope of work does not change) (Amended 8-27-
01). All plans must include the following:
a.) A plan indicating the property line of the parcel or parcels under consideration
drawn on a scale of approximately 1” = 200’ or smaller as appropriate, which has
been prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor registered in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
b.) A topographic plan showing the contours of the overall site as they currently exist
upon phasing out operation of any portion of the site or upon ultimate closeout of
the site shall be furnished.
c.) An effort shall be made to identify and/or differentiate naturally wooded areas from
pasture or otherwise denuded land.
d.) All building structures, existing or proposed, as well as neighboring structures within
150’ of the proposed operating area, shall be shown and suitably differentiated.
e.) A sufficient number of “interim plans” showing the proposed work areas
throughout the life of the earth removal operation shall be developed. An effort
shall be made to project the approximate time frames when an area will be phased
out and the next one opened.
f.) The maximum slope on any operating phase shall not exceed 3:1; the maximum
slope on phase-out shall not exceed 4:1.
g.) Provisions shall be made to ensure that all run-off from the site is collected and
conveyed via drainage channels to a properly sized siltation pond. It is the intent of
this requirement to minimize siltation of natural waterways within the Town.
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
36
h.) The operation shall meet the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection Stormwater Management Policy. Retention ponds may be required by the
Board.
i.) Sub-surface borings or test pits to a depth of at least five (5) feet below the ultimately
anticipated operating level shall be made. Sub-surface borings shall be made during
the high ground water period of the year – April and May, unless monitoring wells
will be installed, in which case the borings may be performed at any time of the year.
If test pits will be done, they may be done at any time of the year provided they are
conducted in accordance with 310 CMR 15. Results of these tests, including a
detailed log of soil types, ground water, etc. shall be furnished. On large tracts of
land, a minimum of at least one test per acre will be required. In smaller tracts, the
Planning Board reserves the right to require more extensive subsurface exploration.
j.) No earth removal operation shall be conducted within a distance of fifty (50) feet of
the boundary of any tract of land upon which earth removal is to be carried out,
within fifty (50) feet of a public way, and not within one hundred fifty (150) feet of
any building.
k.) In residential areas, fencing, as may be required by the Planning Board shall be
furnished.
l.) All suitable topsoil that exists at the beginning of the earth removal operation shall
be held in reserve. At the time of phase-out a minimum thickness of 3” fertile
topsoil shall be placed over all faces to support growth of vegetation. Plantings of a
suitable type, as determined by the Planning Board and the Conservation
Commission, shall be furnished and maintained upon the phase out of any portion
of the site to effectively control wind and water erosion.
m.) Natural organic dust palliatives shall be applied to all non hardened surfaced roads
used for the vehicular ingress or egress to any tract of land upon which earth
removal is conducted and to all regularly traveled roads within any such tract of land.
Dust palliatives shall also be applied to temporary non-operational areas that are
stripped as well as completed areas not yet topsoiled (Amended 8-27-01).
Section 11.8 Special Conditions (This section added 8-27-01):
11.8.1 Noise Limitations:
a.) All earth removal operations in the Town of Palmer shall be subject to the
provisions of 310 CMR 7.10 – Noise Control Regulation and the Department of
Environmental Protection – Noise Level Policy for interpretation of this regulation.
11.8.2 Buffer Requirements:
Formatted
Formatted
37
a.) Intent. The buffer requirement is intended to be used to provide extensive screening
of both visual and noise impacts as needed to protect abutting sensitive uses, such as
residential uses, and where it is desirable and practical to separate a use by distance as
well as sight-obscuring materials.
b.) Requirements. Where sufficient (at least 50’ of undisturbed wooded area) natural
vegetation exists as determined by the Planning Board and/or a designated agent to
provide a dust, sight and sound barrier between earth removal operations and
neighboring properties, no additional plantings will be required. In cases where 50’ of
undisturbed wooded area does not exist, or in cases where the Planning Board
determines that the wooded area is not sufficient due to the sparse nature of the
vegetation to provide an adequate buffer, the following buffer requirements shall be
adhered to:
The applicant shall install an earthen berm at least fifty-feet from the property line and in
an area suitable to provide a buffer between the active operations and adjacent
properties. The berm shall be between 4 and 6 feet high. Shrubs and evergreen trees
shall be planted on top of the berm to assure an overall screen to protect adjacent
properties from dust, noise and visual pollution. In addition, one tree is required per 30
lineal feet of berm or as appropriate to provide a tree canopy over the landscaped area.
Ground cover plants must fully cover the remainder of the landscaped area.
c.) Plan Required. It is the applicant's responsibility to provide a landscaping plan to
show that the landscaping plan and materials proposed will comply with these
regulations and that they will serve the intended purpose.
d.) Alternate Plan. In certain situations the landscaping requirements outlined here may
be impractical or impossible to achieve due to size or location of the parcel or
topography. In these circumstances the applicant/developer may present a plan to the
Planning Board showing an alternate buffer plan that will be compatible with
surrounding areas and achieve the desired buffer results. It shall be the responsibility of
the applicant/developer to show why they cannot comply with the standards and the
Planning Board shall have the final discretion on approval or dis-approval of the
proposed buffer plan.
e.) Installation and Maintenance. All Plant materials must be installed to current nursery
industry standards. Plant materials must be properly supported to ensure survival. The
maintenance of the buffer area is the ongoing responsibility of the property owner.
Required buffers must be continuously maintained in a healthy manner. Plants that die
must be replaced in kind. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may seek revocation of
permit, court orders, and/or fines if the buffer has not been maintained in an
appropriate manner.
11.8.3 General.
a.) An earth products excavation operation will only be permitted on those lots considered
by the Planning Board to have suitable access onto roads of sufficient width and capacity to
support maximum projected loads.
38
b.) No permit for an earth products excavation operation shall be issued if such an operation
will, in the opinion of the Planning Board, cause any of the following: (1) endanger the
public health and safety, (2) constitute a nuisance, (3) result in clear detriment to the normal
use of adjacent property by reason of noise, dust or vibration, (4) result in traffic hazards in
residential areas or excessive congestion on, or physical damage to, public roads, and/or (5)
unacceptable depletion of natural resources other than the earth products proposed for
excavation. In addition, no such operation shall be permitted in the Water Supply Protection
District if such operation will lower the level of the water table, interfere with the natural
flow pattern of any watercourse, or reduce the flood storage capacity of any watercourse.
c.) Any earth products excavation operation is subject to special permit and site plan
approval as well as all requirements of the Palmer Zoning Ordinance and specifically Article
XV Special Permit and Exception Conditions, Section 171-73 –Earth Products Excavation
Operations as adopted and as may be amended from time to time.
11.8.4 Crushing.
a.) On site crushing will not be allowed in any residential district except under the following
circumstances, and only when all of the following can be met:
? Crushing will only be allowed as a use incidental to earth removal;
? Crushing will only be allowed at closeout where such activity is necessary to allow the
removal of material and or debris from the site;
? The Planning Board shall have the authority to place limits on the hours and days of
operation and duration of time such activity will be allowed;
? Crushing will only be allowed by special permit when the applicant can demonstrate that
there is a need for such activity in conjunction with closeout of the entire gravel
operation or a portion of the operation.
11.8.5 Screening.
a.) On site screening will not be allowed in any residential district except under the
following circumstances, and only when all of the following can be met:
? Screening will only be allowed as a use incidental to earth removal;
? The Planning Board shall have the authority to place limits on the hours and days of
operation and duration of time such activity will be allowed;
? Screening will only be allowed when it is requested and approved as part of the special
permit for earth removal and when the applicant can demonstrate that there is a need for
such activity in conjunction with the operation.
11.8.6 Operating Hours.
Earth removal operations may only be conducted during the following hours:
a.) Weekdays – Monday through Friday, 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.;
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
39
b.) Saturdays – 8:00a.m. to 12:00 Noon;
c.) No work is allowed on Sunday or the following holidays: Christmas, Thanksgiving,
New Years, Fourth of July, Labor Day and Memorial Day.
Earth removal operations during prohibited times or days may be authorized by the
issuance of a special exception by the Planning Board.
11.8.7 Duration of Permit (Section added 8-27-01).
a.) All earth removal permits are valid for one year from the date of issue unless
revoked sooner. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to apply for
renewal of the earth removal permit in advance of the expiration of the permit so
that the permit does not lapse. No operation of any kind shall take place on a
site where the permit has expired. The Planning Board shall hold a public
hearing for renewal of a permit within sixty-five days of receipt of a complete
application for renewal (For further information regarding receipt of an
application for special permit, please see Planning Board Rules and Regulations,
Section 9.3).
11.8.8 Right to Enter Property (Section added 8-27-01).
The applicant shall be offered a form to consent to inspections by the Planning Board
and/or their authorized agents to inspect the premises, review the site conditions, and/or to
investigate any complaints.
9.11.8.9 Penalties (Section added 8-27-01).
When a complaint is logged with the Planning Board Office, or when a violation of
conditions of the earth removal permit occurs, the Planning Board shall determine the
seriousness of the infraction and the penalty involved. Generally, a minor infraction such as
a one-time complaint about dust (for example) will involve a visit to the site by a Planning
Board member and/or their authorized agent to determine the validity of the complaint. If
the permit holder is found to be in non-compliance with a condition of the permit and/or
these rules and regulations, he/she will be asked to correct the situation immediately.
Failure/refusal to correct the situation will result in a meeting with the permit holder and the
Board to discuss the situation. Similarly, repeat violations will not be tolerated. Any more
than three (3) complaints in one thirty-day (30) period will result in the permit holder being
required to attend a meeting with the Planning Board and the complainant (if the
complainant is known and cares to participate in the process) to discuss the situation. If two
(2) such meetings are held within one (1) permit year, the Board will hold a Public Hearing
to consider revocation of the permit. Refusal to comply with conditions without good cause
will result in a Public Hearing to consider revocation of the permit after any one (1) such
refusal. All violations of conditions and/or earth removal regulations shall be subject to the
Violation and Prosecution of Violation sections of the Palmer Zoning Ordinance, as well as
any other processes, procedures and mechanisms that may be adopted and from time to
time amended by the Town of Palmer. All permits issued are revocable for violations of the
terms and conditions of the permit, these regulations or other applicable rules and
regulations, ordinances or bylaws.
Formatted
Formatted
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
40
11.8.10 Permit Revocation.
The Planning Board, may at its discretion hold a public hearing with notice to all interested
parties to consider revocation of a permit for violations of the conditions of the permit or
for violations of these rules and regulations and any other applicable rules and regulations or
bylaws. The Planning Board shall give the permitee fourteen (14) days written notice of any
hearing to consider revocation of a special permit.
10.11.8.11 Restraining Order:
The Planning Board may bring suit in the name of the Town of Palmer to restrain any
violation of or compliance with the provisions of these regulations.
11.11.8.12 Exceptions:
A. A. Basic
Exemptions. The removal of earth material in any of the following
operations shall be exempt from this section:
(a) The removal of less than five hundred (500) cubic yards of material in
the aggregate in any year from any one lot.
(b) The transfer of material from one part of a lot to another part of the
same lot.
(c) The removal of material necessarily excavated in connection with
lawful construction of a building, structure, street, driveway, sidewalk,
path or other appurtenance provided the quantity of material removed
does not exceed that actually displaced by the portion of such building,
structure, street, driveway, sidewalk, path or other appurtenances
below finished grade.
(a)(d) Non-Commercial earth products excavation as described in the Palmer
Zoning Ordinance Article XV, Section 171.73 (C) shall conform to the
requirements set forth in that section.
(e) Any project undertaken by the Town of Palmer either directly or by its
authorized agents.
(Amended 8-27-01)
These rules are not applicable to:
a.)Any project
undertaken by the
Town of Palmer
either directly or
Formatted
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
41
by its authorized
agents.
b.)Construction
of a single or
duplex residence
(s) on a lot with
an area of 43,560
sq. feet (1 acre) or
less.
B. Special
Upon special application and after showing that the
enforcement of
these regulations will create undue hardship, the Planning Board may grant
an exception to any provision of these regulations upon finding that such an
exception will not result in a depreciation of surrounding property or degradation of
the general aesthetic quality of the community.
12.11.8.13 Letter of Credit or Bond:
Prior to the issuance of an earth removal permit, the permitee shall issue an
irrevocable letter of credit from a bona fide bank or a performance bond (on a form
recommended by the *SPGA, a copy attached) to the Town from a surety company
licensed to operate in Massachusetts, in the amount of at least Five Thousand
Dollars ($5,000) for each operating acre of said portion of land which will be
operated or otherwise having open face during the succeeding year (Amended 8-27-
01 & 1-3-11).
*SPGA – Special Permit Granting Authority
13.11.8.14 Hold Harmless:
All applicants are required to provide the Town of Palmer with a Hold Harmless
Agreement along with a Certificate of Insurance, naming the Town of Palmer as an
additional insured, for bodily injury and property damage in an amount to be
specified in the covenant, subject to a minimum of $500,000 single limit.
14.11.8.15. Other Approvals:
Not withstanding any of the foregoing Rules & Regulations, the applicant shall
comply with all other applicable Local, State and Federal Laws, regulations, rules,
and guidelines.
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
42
RECOMMENDED BOND FORM
KNOW BY ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that________________________called
the Principal and the __________________________Company, a corporation organized
and existing under the laws of the State of______________________________, called the
Surety, are holden and stand firmly bound to the Town of Palmer, called the Obligee in the
full and just sum of __________________________Dollars for the payment whereof said
Principal and Surety bind themselves, their successors and their heirs, executors and
administrators, jointly and severally by these presents.
WHEREAS, the Special Permit Granting Authority of said Town has granted to the
Principal to remove gravel or fill from the property of _______________________ located
at _______________________________________________.
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CONDITION OF THIS OBLIGATION IS SUCH that, if
the said Principal shall faithfully observe the provisions of the Zoning By-Laws of the Town
of Palmer, Town Ordinances, the Special Permit Granting Authority Rules & Regulations
governing the issuance of this permit and the provisions of the covenant between the
Principal (applicant) and the Town of Palmer, then this obligation shall be null and void;
otherwise to remain in full force and effect.
Liability under this bond shall terminate as of the ______________________________, as
to any acts subsequent thereto, unless said bond is continued in force from year to year by
the issuance of a Continuation Certificate by the Surety.
The Surety may cancel this bond at any time by filing with the Obligee thirty (30) days
written notice sent by Certified Mail, Return Receipt Requested, addressed to the Secretary
of the Special Permit Granting Authority, of its desire to be relieved of liability. The Surety
shall not be discharged from any liability accrued under this bond, or which shall accrue
hereunder before the expiration of the thirty (30) day period.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the said Principal and Surety have caused these presents to be
signed and their seals to be affixed hereto this ____________day___________________.
_______________________________ _______________________________
43
APPENDIX II
HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT
This agreement made this _________________day of ___________________20
between ______________________________________, hereinafter referred to as the Applicant
and the Planning Board of the Town of Palmer, hereinafter referred to as the Board.
Now therefore in consideration of, and as an inducement for, the Board granting special
permit to ______________________________________________. The Applicant agrees as
follows:
In the event of any action, seeking any form of Judgment including money damages or
injunction relief, is commenced naming the Town of Palmer or any of its agents Boards,
Commissioners or Departments as defendant the Applicant shall at the Town’s option either assume
the defense of said action at the Applicant’s own expense or deposit with the Town a sum sufficient
in the Town’s opinion to cover the Town’s expense in defending said action.
In the event said action results in any order that the Town pay any sum as damages or
otherwise, the Applicant shall pay over to the Town said sum forthwith.
In the event said action results in the Town being required to take any action or perform any
work or incur any expense, the Applicant shall forthwith pay to the Town a sum sufficient to cover
the cost of said action, work or expense forthwith.
In the event the Applicant fails to pay any sum or take any action required of it under this
agreement, the special permit granted shall immediately terminate.
Witness our Hands and Seals the day and year first above written.
_________________________________
Witness:
___________________________________ By ______________________________
Witness:
___________________________________ THE PALMER PLANNING BOARD
By ______________________________
44
Article 12. Town of Palmer Regulation – Application
Review Fees – Special Municipal Account
Planning Board
(Subdivision Control – G.L., C. 41, S 81Q)
(Special Permit – G.L., C. 40A, S.9)
1. INTENT
2. PROFESSIONAL EXPERTISE/CONSULTANTS
3. ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIAL ACCOUNT
4. USE OF FUNDS
5. METHOD OF APPEAL
6. FEE STRUCTURE
REGULATION
Section 12.1 Intent.
When reviewing an application for a special permit or subdivision approval, the Board may
determine that the assistance of outside professional expertise and/or consultants is
warranted due to the size, scale, or complexity of a proposed project or because of a
project’s potential impacts.
The Board may require that applicant’s pay a “review fee” consisting of the reasonable costs
incurred by the Board for employment of outside professional expertise and/or consultants
engaged by the Board to assist in the review of an application.
Section 12.2 Professional Expertise/Consultants.
In hiring outside professional expertise and/or consultants, the Board may engage engineers,
planners, lawyers, urban designers, regional planning agencies or other appropriate
professionals who are qualified and capable of assisting the Board in analyzing a project to
ensure compliance with all relevant laws, ordinances, By-Laws and regulations.
All consultants selected by the Board must meet minimum qualifications consisting of:
a. an education degree in, or related to the field at issue, from a recognized
public or private college or university,
or
b. three or more years of practice in the field at issue or related field.
45
The selection made by the Board shall be recorded with the office of the Town Clerk within
five (5) days of the Board’s final selection (s).
Section 12.3 Establishment of Special Account.
Funds received by the Board pursuant to this section shall be deposited with the municipal
treasurer who shall establish a special account for this purpose.
The applicant shall follow one of the following two options with regard to payment of the
application fees:
Section 12.4 Option I
At the time of application submittal to the Town of Palmer, the applicant shall pay all
applicable filing fees plus a review fee, the amount of which shall be dependant upon the
type of development proposed. Such fees shall be as follows (amended 2-24-97):
PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLANS
a. 1-5 lots: $1,000.00
b. 6-15 lots: $2,000.00
c. 16-25 lots: $3,500.00
d. 26-50 lots: $5,000.00
e. 51 or more lots: $7,500.00
DEFINITIVE SUBDIVISION PLANS
a. 1-5 lots: $2,000.00
b. 6-15 lots: $4,000.00
c. 16-25 lots: $7,000.00
d. 26-50 lots: $10,000.00
e. 51 or more lots: $15,000.00
SPECIAL PERMIT AND OTHER APPLICATIONS
a. New applications for earth removal, auto junkyard, lumber yard and other
predominantly exterior operations: $5,000.00
b. Earth Removal only:
1. New Three-Year Plans addressing areas currently under operation: $2,500.00
2. Intermediate Plans (years 1-3 of a previously reviewed three-year plan): $1,200.00
(amended 09-15-08)
46
SPECIAL PERMIT AND OTHER APPLICATIONS
c. Others:
1) Enclosed gross floor area 5000 square feet or less: $1,500.00
2) Enclosed gross floor area 5001-15000 square feet: $3,000.00
3) Enclosed gross floor area 15001-30000 square feet: $6,000.00
4) Enclosed gross floor area 30001-50000 square feet: $10,000.00
5) Enclosed gross floor area 50001 square feet or more: $15,000.00
Section 12.5 Option II
The applicant shall pay all applicable filing fees at the time of submittal of the application to
the Town of Palmer. The town of Palmer shall then submit copies of the application, plans,
and all other supporting information to the consultant or consultants within three (3)
working days of receipt of such information from the applicant. The consultant or
consultants shall then calculate an additional fee known as the review fee, and submit such
fee in writing to the Town of Palmer within five (5) working days of receipt of all application
information. The Town of Palmer shall then inform the applicant of the review fee within
two (2) working days of receipt of fee in writing, and shall request payment in full. The
applicant shall be responsible for payment of $200.00 for the consultants initial review time
associated with determination of review fees, whether or not the applicant chooses to
continue with the application procedure. This fee is to be paid at the time of submittal of
the application. (amended 9-16-91)
If review funds charged are insufficient to cover the costs of outside professional expertise
and/or consultant review, the Board may require the applicant to pay an additional review
fee to cover these costs provided that these costs are reasonable and directly related to this
project undergoing review.
Expenditures from this special account may be made at the direction of the Planning Board
without further appropriation. Expenditures from this special account shall be made only in
connection with the review of a specific project or project’s for which a fee has been, or will
be, collected from the applicant.
Failure of an applicant to pay a review fee shall be considered as an incomplete application
and therefore not allow the application to go forward.
Section 12.6 Use of Funds
Review fees may only be spent for services rendered in connection with the specific project
for which they are collected. These services shall include but not necessarily be limited to:
project reviews, document reviews, and project related inspections. Accrued interest may
also be spent for this purpose.
47
If the outside consultant review begins and expenses are generated prior to the filing of an
administrative appeal, all such expenses, up to the time of appeal, shall be paid out of the
special account for that particular project.
At the completion of the Board’s review of the proposed project, or at a time determined at
the submission of the application, any excess amount in that account including interest
attributable to a specific project, shall be repaid to the applicant of the applicant’s successor
in interest.
A final report of the status of said account shall be made available to the applicant of the
applicant’s successor in interest.
For the purpose of this regulation, any person or entity claiming to be the applicant’s
successor in interest shall provide the Board with documentation that legally establishes this
succession in interest.
Section 12.7 Method of Appeal.
Any applicant may make an administrative appeal from the selection of the outside
professional expert and/or consultant to the Town Manager.
The grounds for such an appeal shall be limited to claims that the consultant selected has a
conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum required qualifications.
Any applicant aggrieved by a selection of an outside consultant may appeal to the Town
Manager provided that such appeal is entered within seven days after such selection has been
made as recorded in the office of the Town Clerk. An appeal will not be consigned valid
unless it is formally filed with the Office of the Town Clerk and a copy is given to the Town
Manager.
The applicant should notify the Board of its intentions to seek a waiver at the earliest
possible time in the review and consultant selection process. If the applicant fails to sign
and/or file a formal waiver of appeal, this action will then be viewed as an intention to
appeal on part of the project applicants. Failure to inform the Board of such intention of
appeal may result in the delay of the start-up of the Town outside review services.
In acting on an administrative appeal, the Town Manager may determine that:
a. a conflict of interest does exist, and/or the consultant does not meet the minimum
qualifications, therefore the Board must select another consultant.
b. a conflict of interest does not exist and/or the consultant does meet the minimum
qualifications, therefore the selection made by the Board stands.
The required time limit for action upon an application by the Board shall be extended by the
duration of the administrative appeal, beginning from the date of filing such appeal.
In the event that no decision is made within thirty (30) days following the filing of the
appeal, the selection made by the Board shall stand.
48
TOWN OF PALMER STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
LARGE DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
Chapter 145
Adopted August 11, 2008
§ 145-1 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
1. Purpose
A. The purpose of this Ordinance is to better manage land development in order to protect,
maintain, and enhance the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Palmer
by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse impacts
associated with stormwater runoff before, during, and after construction.
B. The proper management of stormwater runoff will meet the following objectives:
1. Reduce the adverse water quality impacts of stormwater discharges to rivers, lakes,
reservoirs and streams in order to attain federal water quality standards;
2. Prevent the discharge of pollutants, including hazardous chemicals, into stormwater
runoff;
3. Minimize the volume and rate of stormwater which is discharged, to rivers, streams,
reservoirs, lakes, and combined sewers that flows from any site during and following
development;
4. Prevent erosion and sedimentation from land development, and reduce stream channel
erosion caused by increased runoff;
5. Provide for the recharge of groundwater aquifers and maintain the base flow of streams;
6. Provide stormwater facilities that are attractive, maintain the natural integrity of the
environment, and are designed to protect public safety;
7. Maintain or reduce pre-development runoff characteristics after development to the
extent feasible;
8. Minimize damage to public and private property from flooding;
9. Ensure that these management controls are properly maintained;
10. Inform the public about the value and benefits of groundwater recharge and pollution
reduction and clean water.
C. As a means to the objectives described above, stormwater best management practices that
mimic natural hydrology (i.e., nonstructural and small-scale upland management approaches)
should be considered as first-line practices. Given appropriate soils and conditions, all
opportunities to use nonstructural and small-scale upland management designs must be
exhausted prior to exploring end-of-pipe stormwater management approaches.
D. It is the intent that upon having followed the guidance of the Ordinance that the applicant
will have done sufficient planning and documentation for Conservation Commission review
(where there is jurisdiction) and for U.S. Environmental Protection Agency review where a
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System construction general permit is required.
Stormwater Ordinance – Chapter 145
Large Development Projects 2
§ 145-2 APPLICABILITY
1. Applicability
This Ordinance shall be applicable to all land disturbance uses requiring Site Plan Approval, and
any residential uses, including residential additions that create land disturbances and result in
greater than a 25% increase in floor area, vehicle traffic, parking, number of tenants, and/or
number of employees.
Prior to the issuance of any site plan approval or building permit for any proposed development,
a stormwater management permit, or a determination of inapplicability of the requirement for a
stormwater management permit, must be approved by the applicable Permit Granting Authority.
No person shall, on or after the effective date of this Ordinance, initiate construction activity or
development activities without first complying with this Ordinance.
2. Exemptions
The following activities are exempt from the requirements for submittal and approval of an
erosion and sediment control plan and a stormwater management plan under § 145-4, but must
comply with the design requirements and performance standards in § 145-6 and 145-7:
A. Any agricultural activity which is consistent with an existing, approved soil conservation
plan prepared or approved by the Natural Resource Conservation Service;
B. Any logging which is consistent with a existing timber management plan approved under the
Forest Cutting Practices Act by Massachusetts Department of Environmental Management;
C. Repairs to any stormwater treatment system deemed necessary and ordered by the Palmer
Department of Public Works;
D. Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property
or the environment, as determined by the Department of Public Works.
2. Authority
The Town of Palmer’s Planning Board shall administer and implement this Ordinance. Any
powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Planning Board may be delegated in writing and
enforced by the Planning Board or its employees or agents.
§ 145-3 DEFINITIONS
The following definitions describe the meaning of the terms used in this Ordinance:
Adverse Impact means any effect on waters or wetlands, including their quality, quantity, surface
area, species composition, aesthetics or usefulness for human or natural uses which are or may
potentially be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or property, to biological
productivity, diversity, or stability or which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or
property, including outdoor recreation.
Best Management Practice (BMPs) are structural or biological devices that retain, temporarily
Stormwater Ordinance – Chapter 145
Large Development Projects 3
store, and/or treat stormwater runoff to reduce the quantity and/or improve the quality of
stormwater runoff. BMPs, as recognized by both the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
and the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Management, can also be non-structural
practices, such as a maintenance procedure, that reduce pollutants at their source. BMPs are
further described in a stormwater design manual, Stormwater Management, Volume Two:
Stormwater Technical Handbook (March, 1997, Mass. Department of Environmental Protection,
as may from time to time be updated or amended or by any similar descriptions for such
practices as may be adopted by the Mass. Department of Environmental Protection to replace or
supplement this guide).
Construction Activity is disturbance of the ground by removal or moving of vegetative surface
cover or topsoil, grading, excavation, clearing or filling.
Design Storm is a rainfall event of specified size and return frequency that is used to calculate
the runoff volume and peak discharge rate to a BMP.
Detention is the temporary storage of storm runoff in a BMP, which is used to control the" peak
discharge rates, and which provides gravity settling of pollutants.
Disturbance is any land clearing, grading, bulldozing, digging or similar activities.
Drainage Area means that area contributing runoff to a single point measured in a horizontal
plane, which is enclosed by a ridgeline.
Drywell is similar to an infiltration trench but smaller with inflow from a pipe; commonly
covered with soil and used for drainage areas of less than 1 acre such as roadside inlets and
rooftops runoff.
Easement means a grant or reservation by the owner of land for the use of such land by others for
a specific purpose or purposes, and which must be included in the conveyance of land affected
by such easement.
Flow Attenuation means prolonging the flow time of runoff to reduce the peak discharge.
Hydrology model may include one of the following:
? TR-20, a watershed hydrology model developed by the Natural Resources Conservation
Service act that is used to route a design storm hydrograph through a pond;
? TR 55, or Technical Release 55, "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds" is a publication
developed by the Natural Resources Conservation Service to calculate stormwater runoff and
an aid in designing detention basins;
? Hydrocad.
Impervious Surfaces are developed areas, such as pavement or rooftops that prevent the
infiltration of water into the soil.
Infiltration is the downward movement of water from the surface to the subsoil.
Stormwater Ordinance – Chapter 145
Large Development Projects 4
Infiltration Trench is a stormwater management excavation filled with aggregate that removes
both soluble and particulate pollutants. Trenches are not intended to trap coarse sediments.
Outfall is the terminus of a storm drain or other stormwater structure where the contents are
released.
Peak Discharge is the maximum instantaneous rate of flow during a storm, usually in reference
to a specific design storm event
Permeable Soils are soil materials with a sufficiently rapid infiltration rate so as to greatly reduce
or eliminate surface and stormwater runoff. These soils are generally classified as NRCS
hydrologic soil types A and B.
Permit Granting Authority is the Town of Palmer Planning Board for all land or building uses,
and additions that result in greater than 25% increase in floor area, vehicle traffic, parking,
number of tenants, and/or number of employees or when a project requires Site Plan approval.
Authorized Administrative Agency can include Department of Public Works, Planning Board, or
its employees or agents.
Person is any individual, association, partnership, corporation, company, business, organization,
trust, estate, administrative agency, public or quasi-public corporation or body, the
Commonwealth or political subdivision thereof.
Retention is the holding of runoff in a basin without release except by means of evaporation,
infiltration, or emergency bypass.
Start of Construction is the first land-disturbing activity associated with a development,
including land preparation such as: clearing and grubbing, grading and filling; installation of
streets and walkways; excavation for basements; footings, piers or foundations; erection of
temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages.
Swale is a natural depression or wide shallow ditch used to temporarily store, route, or filter
runoff.
§ 145-4 PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS
1. Permit Required
No land owner or land operator shall receive any of the building, grading, or other land
development permits required for land disturbance activities, and no land owner shall commence
land disturbance activities, without approval of a Stormwater Management Permit from the
Granting Authority and meeting the requirements of this Ordinance.
2. Application Requirements
Application for approval of a Stormwater Management Permit:
Stormwater Ordinance – Chapter 145
Large Development Projects 5
All plans shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a Massachusetts registered engineer or
landscape architect, whichever is appropriate. Submissions shall include four (4) sets of the
materials outlined below:
A. The Planning Board shall be the Stormwater Management Permit Granting Authority for
the following development projects:
i. All development and/or additions that result in greater than a 25% increase in
floor area, vehicle traffic, parking, number of tenants, and/or number of
employees.
ii. All subdivision lots and all lots adjacent and/or contiguous to land subject to
subdivision approval
B. All Stormwater Management permit applications requiring review by the Planning Board
shall consist of the following:
i. An existing conditions plan;
ii. An erosion and sediment control plan, which shall contain sufficient
information to describe the nature and purpose of the proposed development
(see §145-5 and §145-6);
iii. A stormwater management plan, which shall contain supporting computations,
drawings, and sufficient information describing the manner, location, and type
of measures in which stormwater runoff will be managed from the entire
development (see §145-5 and §145-7);
iv. An ongoing operation, maintenance, and inspection agreement (see §145-8);
v. A non-refundable stormwater management permit application fee of twohundred
dollars ($200.00);
vi. An application review fee (See §145-4.8 for information).
The erosion and sediment control plan and the stormwater management plan shall be
submitted, and clearly labeled, along with other documents required for site plan review.
The plans shall serve as the basis for all subsequent construction.
C. The applicant may request, and the appropriate Permit Granting Authority may grant a
waiver from any information requirements it judges to be unnecessary to the review of a
particular plan.
§ 145-5 PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL
A. The procedures for review and approval of stormwater management permits shall be
consistent with the review procedures of the appropriate Permit Granting Authority.
B. The appropriate Permit Granting Authority may refer copies of the stormwater management
application to a competent professional authority for review, and shall consider any
comments submitted by the competent professional authority during the review period.
C. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing for the stormwater permit concurrent with the
site plan and special permit hearing. This hearing will be conducted as prescribed by state
law MGL, Chapter 40A.
1. Criteria for Review of Stormwater Permits
Stormwater Ordinance – Chapter 145
Large Development Projects 6
In addition to other criteria used by the Permit Granting Authority in making permit decisions for
the uses specified in this Ordinance, the Permit Granting Authority must also find that the
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and the Stormwater Management Plan submitted with the
permit application meet the following criteria:
A. The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and the Stormwater Management Plan are consistent
with the Purposes and Objectives of this Ordinance in §145-1.
B. The Erosion and Sediment Control plan meets the Design Requirements in §145-6.
C. The Stormwater Management Plan meets the Performance Standards described in §145-7;
2. Planning Board Action
The Planning Board’s action, rendered in writing, shall consist of either:
A. Approval of the Stormwater Management Permit Application based upon determination that
the proposed plan meets the purposes in §145-1 and the requirements and standards in §145-
6 and §145-7, and will adequately protect the water resources of the community and is in
compliance with the requirements set forth in this ordinance;
B. Approval of the Stormwater Management Permit Application subject to any conditions,
modifications or restrictions required by the Permit Granting Authority which will ensure
that the project meets the purposes in §145-1 and the requirements and standards in §145-6
and §145-7, and adequately protects water resources, as set forth in this ordinance;
C. Disapproval of the Stormwater Management Permit Application based upon a determination
that the proposed plan, as submitted, does not meet the purposes in §145-1 and the
requirements and standards in §145-6 and §145-7, or adequately protect water resources, as
set forth in this ordinance.
3. Inspections
The applicant shall receive a written timeline for the following required inspections within the
Stormwater Management Permit’s Conditions of Approval. Note that the initial inspection will
occur concurrently with Planning Board site plan and/or special permit review and be included as
part of the normal review fees. The permits Conditions of Approval shall identify, but not be
limited to, the following inspections:
i. Erosion and Sediment Control Inspection, after site clearing, rough grading and final
grading to verify that erosion and sediment control practices are in accordance with the
plan;
ii. Bury Inspection, prior to backfilling of any underground drainage or stormwater
conveyance structures, and in coordination with the Department of Public Works;
iii. Final Inspection, when all work, including construction of stormwater management
facilities and landscaping have been completed. Final inspection shall include a full,
dated TV inspection of all stormwater pipes installed.
Inspections are to be conducted and reports are to be prepared by the applicant’s engineer
and submitted to the Planning Board for review. Inspection reports must be approved by the
Planning Board or its agent before the applicant proceeds to the next stage of construction.
Stormwater Ordinance – Chapter 145
Large Development Projects 7
4. Right-of-Entry for Inspection
When any new drainage control facility is installed on private property, or when any new
connection is made between private property and a public drainage control system or sanitary
sewer, the filing of an application shall be deemed as the property owner’s permission to the
Permit Granting Authority or Authorized Enforcement Agency for the right to enter the property
at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of the inspection. This includes
the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this
Ordinance is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public
nuisance or correction of a violation of this Ordinance.
5. Application Review Fees
Applicants must pay an “application review fee” consisting of the reasonable costs incurred by
the Permit Granting Authority for employment of outside professional expertise and/or
consultants engaged to assist in the review of an application in accordance with MGL Chapter
44, Section 53G. Review fees are based on a fee schedule as detailed in Article 12 of the Town of
Palmer Planning Board Rules and Regulations.
§ 145-6 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL AND STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT PLANS
The application for a stormwater management permit shall consist of submittal of an Erosion and
Sediment Control Plan and a Stormwater Management Plan, prepared by a professional engineer
licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, which meets the design requirements provided
by this Ordinance.
1. Contents of the Erosion and Sediment Control and Stormwater Management Plans
The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and Stormwater Management Plan shall include
sufficient information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the affected areas, the
potential impacts of the proposed development on water resources; and the effectiveness and
acceptability of measures proposed for managing stormwater runoff before, during, and after
construction. The plans must be designed to meet the Massachusetts Stormwater Management
Standards as set forth in Section 29-6 and 29-7 of this Ordinance and the DEP Stormwater
Management Handbook Volumes I and II. The applicant shall certify on the drawings that all
clearing, grading, drainage, construction, and development shall be conducted in strict
accordance with the plan. The minimum information submitted for support of these plans shall
be as follows:
A. Contact information
B. Locus map
C. The existing zoning, and land use at the site
D. The proposed land use
E. The location(s) of existing and proposed easements
F. The location of existing and proposed utilities
G. The site’s existing & proposed topography with contours at 2 foot intervals
H. The existing site hydrology
Stormwater Ordinance – Chapter 145
Large Development Projects 8
I. A description & delineation of existing stormwater conveyances, impoundments, and
wetlands on or adjacent to the site or into which stormwater flows
J. A delineation of 100-year flood plains, if applicable
K. Estimated seasonal high groundwater elevation (November to April) in areas to be used for
storm water retention, detention, or infiltration
L. The existing and proposed vegetation and ground surfaces with runoff coefficient for each
M. A drainage area map showing pre and post construction watershed boundaries, drainage area
and storm water flow paths
N. A description and drawings of all components of the proposed drainage system including:
(1) locations, cross sections, and profiles of all brooks, streams, drainage swales and
their method of stabilization
(2) all measures for the detention, retention or infiltration of water
(3) all measures for the protection of water quality
(4) the structural details for all components of the proposed drainage systems and
storm water management facilities
(5) notes on drawings specifying materials to be used, construction specifications,
and typicals
(6) expected hydrology with supporting calculations
(7) proposed improvements including location of buildings or other structures,
impervious surfaces, and drainage facilities, if applicable
(8) a description of construction and waste materials expected to be stored on-site,
and a description of controls to reduce pollutants from these materials including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to storm water, and spill
prevention and response
(9) timing, schedules, and sequence of development including clearing, stripping,
rough grading, construction, final grading, and vegetative stabilization
(10) a maintenance schedule for the period of construction.
§ 145-7 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN DESIGN
REQUIREMENTS
1. The design requirements of the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan are:
A. Minimize total area of disturbance.
B. Sequence activities to minimize simultaneous areas of disturbance.
C. Minimize peak rate of runoff in accordance with the MA DEP Stormwater Policy.
D. Minimize soil erosion and control sedimentation during construction. Prevention of
erosion is preferred over sedimentation control.
E. Divert uncontaminated water around disturbed areas.
F. Maximize groundwater recharge.
G. Install, and maintain all Erosion and Sediment Control measures in accordance with the
manufacturers specifications and good engineering practices.
H. Prevent off-site transport of sediment.
I. Protect and manage on and off-site material storage areas (overburden and stockpiles of dirt,
borrow areas, or other areas used solely by the permitted project are considered a part of the
project).
Stormwater Ordinance – Chapter 145
Large Development Projects 9
J. Comply with applicable Federal, State and local laws and regulations including waste
disposal, sanitary sewer or septic system regulations, and air quality requirements, including
dust control.
K. Prevent adverse impact from the proposed activities to habitats mapped by the Massachusetts
Natural Heritage & Endangered Species Program as Endangered, Threatened or of Special
concern, Estimated Habitats of Rare Wildlife and Certified Vernal Pools, and Priority
Habitats of Rare Species.
L. Institute interim and permanent stabilization measures. Stabilization measures shall be
instituted on a disturbed area of the site as soon as practicable but no more than 14 days after
construction activity has temporarily or permanently been completed on that portion of the
site.
M. Properly manage on-site construction and waste materials.
N. Prevent off-site vehicle tracking of sediments.
2. There are two general guides to conservation measures and erosion and sediment control
practices: 1. The Massachusetts Erosion and Sediment Control Guidelines for Urban and
Suburban Areas (May 2003, Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection, as
updated or amended); and 2. Chapter 6 of the Massachusetts Nonpoint Source Pollution
Management Manual located at http://projects.geosyntec.com/NPSManual/ (May 2006,
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection, as updated or amended). These
guides are hereby incorporated by reference as part of this Ordinance, and shall furnish
additional criteria and information.
§ 145-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS
1. Minimum Control Requirements
Projects must meet the Standards of the Massachusetts Stormwater Management Policy. These
Standards are:
A. No new stormwater conveyances (e.g. outfalls) may discharge untreated stormwater directly
to or cause erosion in wetlands or water of the Commonwealth.
B. Stormwater management systems must be designed so that post-development peak discharge
rates do not exceed pre-development peak discharge rates.
C. Loss of annual recharge to groundwater should be minimized through the use of infiltration
measures including environmentally sensitive design, stormwater best management practices,
and good operation and maintenance. The annual recharge from the post-development site
should approximate the annual recharge rate from the pre-development or existing site
conditions, based on soil types.
D. For new development, stormwater management systems must be designed to remove 80% of
the average annual load (post development conditions) of Total Suspended Solids (TSS). It
is presumed that this standard is met when:
i. Suitable practices for source control and pollution prevention are identified in a longterm
pollution prevention plan, and thereafter are implemented and maintained;;
ii. Structural stormwater management best management practices (BMPs) are sized to
capture the prescribed runoff volume; and
Stormwater Ordinance – Chapter 145
Large Development Projects 10
iii. Pretreatment is provided.
E. Stormwater discharges from areas with higher potential pollutant loads require the use of
specific stormwater management BMPs (see Stormwater Management Volume I: Stormwater
Policy Handbook). The use of infiltration practices without pretreatment is prohibited.
F. Stormwater discharges within the Zone II or Interim Wellhead Protection Area of a public
water supply and/or near to any other critical areas must utilize certain stormwater
management BMPs approved for critical areas. See Stormwater Management, Volume One:
Stormwater Policy Handbook (March, 1997, Mass. Department of Environmental Protection,
as updated or amended). Critical areas are Outstanding Resource Waters (ORWs), shellfish
beds, swimming beaches, cold water fisheries and recharge areas for public water supplies.
G. Redevelopment of previously developed sites must meet the Stormwater Management
Standards to the maximum extent practicable. However, if it is not practicable to meet all the
Standards, new (retrofitted or expanded) stormwater management systems must be designed
to improve existing conditions.
H. Erosion and sediment controls must be implemented to prevent impacts during disturbance
and construction activities.
I. All stormwater management systems must have a long-term operation and maintenance plan
to ensure that systems function as designed.
J. All illicit discharges to the stormwater management system are prohibited.
When the proposed stormwater discharge may have an impact upon a sensitive receptor,
including streams, storm sewers, and/or combined sewers, the DPW may require an increase in
these minimum requirements, based on existing stormwater system capacity.
2. Stormwater Design Manual
A stormwater design manual, Stormwater Management, Volume Two: Stormwater Technical
Handbook (March, 1997, Mass. Department of Environmental Protection, as updated or
amended) is hereby incorporated by reference as part of this Ordinance, and shall furnish
additional policy, criteria and information including specifications and standards, for the proper
implementation of the requirements of this Ordinance.
This manual includes a list of acceptable stormwater treatment practices, including the specific
design criteria for each stormwater practice. The manual may be updated and expanded from
time to time, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring and local maintenance
experience, at the discretion of Palmer’s Planning Board or the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection. Stormwater treatment practices that are designed and constructed in
accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water
quality performance standards.
3. Stormwater Management Measures
Stormwater Ordinance – Chapter 145
Large Development Projects 11
A. Stormwater management measures shall be required to satisfy the minimum control
requirements. Best Management Practices (BMPs) that mimic natural hydrology must be
used unless soil or site conditions make such measures impracticable. All opportunities to
use nonstructural and small-scale upland management practices must be exhausted prior to
exploring end-of-pipe stormwater management measures such as detention basins and
retention basins. Stormwater management measures shall be implemented in the following
order of preference:
i. Infiltration, flow attenuation, and pollutant removal of runoff on-site to existing areas
with grass, trees, and similar vegetation and through the use of open vegetated swales and
natural depressions;
ii. Use of stormwater on-site to replace water used in industrial processes or for irrigation;
iii. Stormwater detention structures for the temporary storage of runoff which is designed so
as not to create a permanent pool of water;
iv. Stormwater retention structures for the permanent storage of runoff by means of a
permanent pool of water; and
v. Retention and evaporation of stormwater on rooftops or in parking lots.
B. Infiltration practices shall be utilized to reduce runoff volume increases. A combination of
successive practices may be used to achieve the applicable minimum control requirements.
Justification shall be provided by the applicant for rejecting each practice based on site
conditions.
C. Best Management Practices shall be employed to minimize pollutants in stormwater runoff
prior to discharge into a separate storm drainage system or water body.
D. All stormwater management facilities shall be designed to provide an emergency overflow
system, and incorporate measures to provide a non-erosive velocity of flow along its length
and at any outfall.
E. The designed release rate of any stormwater structure shall be modified if any increase in
flooding or stream channel erosion would result at a downstream dam, highway, structure, or
normal point of restricted stream flow.
4. Specific Design Criteria
Additional policy, criteria, and information including specifications and design standards may be
found in the Stormwater Design Manual.
A. Infiltration systems
i. Infiltration systems shall be equipped with clean stone and or filter fabric adjacent to the
soil or other sediment removal mechanisms;
ii. Infiltration systems greater than 3 feet deep shall be located at least l0 feet from basement
walls;
iii. Due to the potential for groundwater contamination from dry wells, they shall not be an
acceptable method for management of runoff containing pollutants;
iv. Infiltration systems designed to handle runoff from commercial or industrial impervious
parking areas shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any drinking water supply well;
Stormwater Ordinance – Chapter 145
Large Development Projects 12
v. Infiltration systems shall not be used as sediment control basins during construction
unless specific plans are included to restore or improve the basin surface;
vi. Infiltration basins shall be constructed with a three foot minimum separation between the
bottom of the structure and the seasonal high groundwater elevation, as determined by a
certified soil evaluator; and
vii. Provisions shall be made for safe overflow passage, in the event of a storm which
exceeds the capacity of an infiltration system.
B. The applicant shall give consideration in any plan to incorporating the use of natural
topography and land cover such as natural swales, and depressions as they exist prior to
development to the degree that they can accommodate the additional flow of water.
C. The Planning Board shall give preference to the use of swales in place of the traditional use
of curbs and gutters based on a case by case review of stormwater management plans by the
Planning Board.
D. Retention and detention ponds shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
criteria of the Stormwater Management, Volume Two: Stormwater Technical Handbook
(March, 1997, Mass. Department of Environmental Protection, as updated or amended).
E. The applicant shall consider public safety in the design of any stormwater facilities. The
banks of detention, retention, and infiltration basins shall be sloped at a gentle grade into the
water as a safeguard against personal injury, to encourage the growth of vegetation and to
allow the alternate flooding and exposure of areas along the shore. Basins shall have a 4:1
slope to a depth two feet below the control elevation. Side slopes must be stabilized and
planted with vegetation to prevent erosion and provide pollutant removal The banks of
detention and retention areas shall be designed with sinuous rather than straight shorelines so
that the length of the shoreline is maximized, thus offering more space for the growth of
vegetation;
F. Where a stormwater management plan involves direction of some or all runoff off of the site,
it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain from adjacent property owners any
easements or other necessary property interests concerning flowage of water. Approval of a
stormwater management plan does not create or affect any such rights.
G. All applicants for projects which involve the storage or use of hazardous chemicals shall
incorporate handling and storage "best management practices" that prevent such chemicals
from contaminating runoff discharged from a site into infiltration systems, receiving water
bodies or storm drains, and shall include a list of such chemicals in the application.
H. Runoff from parking lots shall be treated by oil and water separators or other controls to
remove oil and sediment;
I. The basic design criteria methodologies, and construction specifications, subject to the
approval of the Department of Public Works and City Engineer, shall be those generally
found in the most current edition of the Stormwater Management, Volume Two: Stormwater
Technical Handbook (March, 1997, Mass. Department of Environmental Protection, as
updated or amended).
§ 145-9 MAINTENANCE
1. Operation, Maintenance and Inspection Agreement
Stormwater Ordinance – Chapter 145
Large Development Projects 13
A. Prior to issuance of any building permit for which stormwater management is required, the
Permit Granting Authority shall require the applicant or owner to execute an operation,
maintenance and inspection agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by
the private stormwater management facility. The agreement shall be designed to ensure that
water quality standards are met in all seasons and throughout the life of the system. Such
agreement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for regular inspections
by the Town or its authorized representative and for regular or special assessments of
property owners to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet
design standards and any provision established. The agreement shall include:
(1) The name(s) of the owner(s) for all components of the system.
(2) Maintenance agreements that specify:
(a) The names and addresses of the person(s) responsible for operation and
maintenance.
(b) The person(s) responsible for financing maintenance and emergency repairs.
(c) A Maintenance Schedule for all drainage structures, including swales and
ponds.
(d) A list of easements with references to books and pages of the recorded
documents with the purpose and location of each.
(e) The signature(s) of the owner(s).
(3) Stormwater management easements as necessary for:
(a) Access for facility inspections and maintenance.
(b) Preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and detention
areas and facilities, including flood routes for the 100-year storm event.
(c) Direct maintenance access by heavy equipment to structures requiring regular
cleanout.
(4) Stormwater management easement requirements:
(a) The purpose of each easement shall be specified in the maintenance
agreement signed by the property owner.
(b) Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for off-site
stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the Town.
(c) Easements shall be recorded with the Registry of Deeds prior to issuance of a
Certificate of Completion.
(5) Changes to Operation and Maintenance Plans
(a) The owner(s) of the stormwater management system must notify the
Authorized Administrative Agency of changes in ownership or assignment of
financial responsibility. The recorded agreement shall require any subsequent
owner of the property to report to the appropriate authorized agency and to
provide updated information expressing the changes resulting from the new
ownership.
(b) The maintenance schedule in the Maintenance Agreement may be amended to
achieve the purposes of this Ordinance by mutual agreement of the
Authorized Administrative Agency and the Responsible Parties. Amendments
must be in writing and signed by all Responsible Parties. Responsible Parties
must include owner(s), persons with financial responsibility, and persons with
operational responsibility.
B. The agreement shall be recorded by the applicant and/or owner in the land records of the
Registry of Deeds.
Stormwater Ordinance – Chapter 145
Large Development Projects 14
C. The agreement shall also provide that, if after notice by the Permit Granting Authority to
correct a violation requiring maintenance work, satisfactory corrections are not made by the
owner(s) within thirty days, the Town may perform all necessary work to place the facility in
proper working condition and place a municipal lien on the affected property as security for
all of the costs assumed by the town to perform the work. The owner(s) of the facility shall
be assessed the cost of the work and any penalties.
2. Maintenance Responsibility
A. The owner of the property on which work has been done pursuant to this Ordinance for
private stormwater management facilities, or any other person or agent in control of such
property, shall maintain in good condition and promptly repair and restore all grade surfaces,
walls, drains, dams and structures, vegetation, erosion and sediment control measures and
other protective devices. Such repairs or restoration and maintenance shall be in accordance
with approved plans.
B. A maintenance schedule shall be developed for the life of any stormwater management
facility and shall state: who shall be legally responsible to perform the maintenance,
maintenance to be completed, and the time period for completion. This maintenance
schedule shall be printed on the stormwater management plan.
C. A record of installation and a rolling log of operation and maintenance activities shall be
retained for a minimum of three years. The log shall be made available to the Authorized
Enforcement Agency upon request.
D. Failure to properly maintain practices during and post construction is considered a violation
of the stormwater permit.
§ 145-10 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
Prior to the issuance of any stormwater management permit, the Planning Board shall require
from the developer a surety or cash bond, or irrevocable letter of credit to ensure proper
construction of any stormwater management facility. The amount of the security shall not be
less than the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management facility.
In addition, the Planning Board shall require from the developer a surety or cash bond, or
irrevocable letter of credit to ensure proper execution of the operation, maintenance and
inspection agreement during the first 5 years. The amount of this security will be based on an
estimate of annual operation and maintenance costs as determined by the Planning Board’s
engineer.
The guarantees required in this section shall include provisions relative to forfeiture for failure to
complete work specified in the approved stormwater management plan, for failure to comply
with all of the provisions of this Ordinance and other applicable laws and regulations, and for
failure to comply with any time limitations. The guarantee for proper construction of any
stormwater management facility shall not be fully released without Planning Board review of the
final inspection of the completed work by the Applicant’s engineer, submission of "As-built"
plans, and certification of completion by the Applicant’s engineer of the stormwater management
facilities being in compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this Ordinance. The
guarantee for the proper execution of the operation, maintenance and inspection agreement shall
Stormwater Ordinance – Chapter 145
Large Development Projects 15
not be released until after 5 years from the date of completion, and the Planning Board is
satisfied that all work has been completed as described in the agreement.
§ 145-11 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
1. Enforcement
The responsibility for enforcement of this Ordinance falls under the jurisdiction of the Planning
Board, Department of Public Works, Zoning Enforcement Officer, Conservation Commission,
and/or its employees or agents.
2. Violations
Any development activity that has commenced or is conducted contrary to this Ordinance may
be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
3. Notice of Violation
When the Permit Granting Authority determines that an activity is not being carried out in
accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance, it shall issue a written notice of violation to
the owner of the property. The notice of violation shall contain:
A. The name and address of the owner and applicant if different from the owner.
B. The address when available or the description of the building, structure, or land upon
which the violation is occurring.
C. A statement specifying the nature of the violation.
D. A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the development activity into
compliance with this Ordinance and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial
action.
E. A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to
whom the notice of violation is directed.
4. Stop Work Orders
A. Persons receiving a notice of violations will be required to halt all construction activities.
This “stop work order” will be in effect until the Permit Granting Authority confirms that
the development activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily
addressed. Failure to correct a violation in a timely manner can result in civil, criminal,
or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this
Ordinance.
B. Failure to correct a violation within the time limits imposed the by the notice of violation
shall constitute a public nuisance and subject the violator(s) to all of these statutory and
common law remedies available to the town including performance of the necessary
measures by the town to correct the violations and imposing the costs thereof on the
owner of the property.
Stormwater Ordinance – Chapter 145
Large Development Projects 16
5. Penalties
In enforcing this Ordinance, the Authorized Enforcement Agency shall have the following
options:
A. Criminal Complaint: Whoever violates any provision of this Ordinance may be penalized
by a complaint brought in the district court. Except as otherwise provided by law and as
the district court may see fit to impose, the maximum penalty for each violation, or
offense, brought in this manner, shall be three hundred ($300.00). Each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense; or
B. Non-criminal disposition: Whoever violates any provision of this Ordinance may be
penalized by a non-criminal disposition as provided in Massachusetts General Laws,
Chapter 40, Section 21D and may be punished by a non-criminal fine of fifty dollars
($50.00) for the 1st offense, seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the 2nd offense, and one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for the 3rd offense. Each day a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
6. Appeals
The decision of the Department of Public Works shall be final but is reviewable in the Superior
Court in an action filed within sixty (60) days in accordance with GL c 249 § 4.
7. Restoration of Lands
Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that
restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the Permit Granting Authority
may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property
until paid.
8. Holds on Occupancy Permits
Occupation permits will not be granted until corrections to all stormwater practices have been
made and accepted by the Permit Granting Authority.
§ 145-12 SEVERABILITY
The invalidity of any section or provision of this Ordinance shall not invalidate any other section
or provision thereof.
TOWN OF PALMER ILLICIT CONNECTIONS AND DISCHARGES TO THE
MUNICIPAL STORM DRAIN SYSTEM ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 146
§ 146-1 PURPOSE
Regulation of illicit connections and discharges to the municipal storm drain system is necessary for the
protection of Palmer’s water bodies and groundwater, and to safeguard the public health, safety, welfare and the
environment. Increased and contaminated stormwater runoff are major causes of :
1. impairment of water quality and flow in lakes, ponds, streams, rivers, wetlands and groundwater;
2. contamination of drinking water supplies;
3. alteration or destruction of aquatic and wildlife habitat; and
4. flooding.
The objectives of this Ordinance are:
1. To prevent pollutants from entering Palmer’s municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4);
2. To prohibit illicit connections and unauthorized discharges to the MS4;
3. To require the removal of all such illicit connections;
4. To comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating to stormwater discharges; and,
5. To establish the legal authority to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance through
inspection, monitoring, and enforcement.
§ 146-2 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following shall mean:
Authorized Enforcement Agency: The Director of the Department of Public Works or Town Manager or
designated representative or agent shall enforce this Ordinance.
Best Management Practice (BMP): Structural or biological devices that retain, temporarily store, and/or treat
stormwater runoff to reduce the quantity and/or improve the quality of stormwater runoff. BMPs, as recognized
by both the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Management, can also be non-structural practices, such as a maintenance procedure, that reduce pollutants at
their source. BMPs are further described in a stormwater design manual, Stormwater Management, Volume
Two: Stormwater Technical Handbook (March, 1997, Mass. Department of Environmental Protection, as
updated or amended).
Clean Water Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) as hereafter amended
Illicit Discharge Ordinance
8/8/2013
2
Discharge of Pollutants: The addition from any source of any pollutant or combination of pollutants into the
municipal storm drain system or into the waters of the United States or Commonwealth from any source by any
means.
Groundwater: All water beneath the surface of the ground.
Illegal Discharge: Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the municipal storm drain system, except
as specifically exempted in Section 7 or permitted pursuant to Section 8 of this Ordinance. The term does not
include a discharge in compliance with an NPDES Storm Water Discharge Permit or resulting from fire fighting
activities exempted pursuant to Section 7, subsection 4, of this Ordinance.
Illicit Connection: Any surface or subsurface drain or conveyance, which allows an illegal discharge into the
municipal storm drain system or Waters of the Commonwealth. Illicit connections include conveyances which
allow a non-stormwater discharge to the municipal storm drain system including sewage, process wastewater or
wash water and any connections from indoor drains sinks, or toilets, regardless of whether said connection was
previously allowed, permitted, or approved before the effective date of this Ordinance.
Impervious Surface: Any material or structure on or above the ground that prevents water from infiltrating the
underlying soil
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) or Municipal Storm Drain System: The system of conveyances
designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage system, street,
gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility, retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or
altered drainage channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure that together comprise the storm drainage
system owned or operated by the Town of Palmer
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit: A permit issued by
United States Environmental Protection Agency or jointly with the State that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States.
Non-Stormwater Discharge: Any discharge to the municipal storm drain system not composed entirely of
stormwater or contains substances other than stormwater.
Person: Any individual, partnership, association, firm, company, trust, corporation, and, any agency, authority,
department or political subdivision of the Commonwealth or the federal government, to the extent permitted by
law, and any officer, employee, or agent of such person.
Pollutant: Any element or property of sewage, agricultural, industrial or commercial waste, runoff, leachate,
heated effluent, or other matter whether originating at a point or nonpoint source, that is or may be introduced
into any sewage treatment works or waters of the Commonwealth. Pollutants shall include:
(1) paints, varnishes, and solvents;
(2) oil and other automotive fluids;
(3) liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
(4) refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordnances, accumulations
and floatables;
(5) pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
(6) hazardous materials and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
(7) dissolved and particulate metals;
Illicit Discharge Ordinance
8/8/2013
3
(8) animal wastes;
(9) rock; sand; salt, soils;
(10) construction wastes and residues;
(11) and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Process wastewater means any water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with
or results from the production or use of any material, intermediate product, finished product, or waste product.
Recharge: The process by which groundwater is replenished through the percolation of runoff and surface
water received through precipitation.
Stormwater: Runoff from precipitation or snow melt.
Toxic or Hazardous Material or Waste: Any material, which because of its quantity, concentration, chemical
corrosiveness, flammability, reactivity, toxicity, infectiousness, or radioactivity, either separately or in
combination with any substance or substances, constitutes a present or potential threat to human health, safety,
welfare, or to the environment. Toxic or hazardous materials include any synthetic or organic chemical,
petroleum product, heavy metal, radioactive or infectious waste, acid and alkali, and any substance defined as
Toxic or Hazardous under M.G.L. Ch.21C and Ch.21E, and the regulations at 310 CMR 30.000 and 310 CMR
40.0000.
Watercourses: A natural or man-made channel through which water flows or a stream of water, including a
river, brook or underground stream.
Waters of the Commonwealth: all waters within the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth, including, without
limitation, rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, springs, impoundments, estuaries, wetlands, costal waters,
groundwaters, and vernal pools. As defined in 314 CMR 4.00 in Section 4.02, Definitions as the sane may from
time to time be amended.
Wastewater: any sanitary waste, sludge, or septic tank or cesspool overflow, and water that during
manufacturing, cleaning or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of
any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct or waste product.
§ 146-3 APPLICABILITY
This Ordinance shall apply to flows entering the municipally owned storm drainage system and Waters of the
Commonwealth.
§ 146-4 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION
The Department of Public Works, Town Manager or designated representative shall administer, implement and
enforce this Ordinance. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Department of Public Works/Town
Manager may be delegated in writing by the Department of Public Works/Town Manager to employees or
agents of the Department of Public Works or Town Manager.
Illicit Discharge Ordinance
8/8/2013
4
§ 146-5 REGULATIONS
The Department of Public Works and/or Town Manager may promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the
purposes of this Ordinance. Failure by the Department of Public Works and /or Town Manager to promulgate
such rules and regulations shall not have the effect of suspending or invalidating this Ordinance.
§ 146-6 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
1. Illegal Discharges
No person shall dump, discharge, cause or allow to be discharged any pollutant or non-stormwater discharge
into the municipal storm drain system, watercourse, or into the waters of the Commonwealth. Emergency
pumping performed by the Fire Department must utilize appropriate best management practices (BMPs) and
follow hazardous materials disposal guidelines to prevent contamination of the municipal storm drainage
system with hazardous materials. If hazardous materials are observed within the flooded area, or are suspected
to be contained within the flooded area, a qualified hazmat technician must be consulted before pumping. If
hazardous materials are observed at any point during pumping, cessation of pumping is required until a
qualified hazmat technician can be consulted and BMPs put in place to prevent the contamination of nearby
water ways and the municipal storm drainage system.
2. Illicit Connections
No person shall construct, use, allow, maintain or continue any illicit connection to the municipal storm drain
system, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under applicable law, regulation or custom at the
time of connection.
3. Obstruction of Municipal Storm Drain System
No person shall obstruct or interfere with the normal flow of stormwater into or out of the municipal storm
drain system without prior approval from the Director of the Department of Public Works.
4. Exemptions
This section shall not apply to any of the following non-stormwater discharges or flows provided that the source
is not a significant contributor of a pollutant to the municipal storm drain system as defined by Stormwater
Phase II Final Rule in the Federal Register Volume 64, No. 235 December 8, 1999
(1) Routine waterline flushing;
(2) Flows from potable water sources;
(3) Springs;
(4) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(5) Diverted stream flows;
(6) Rising groundwaters;
(7) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005(20), or uncontaminated pumped
groundwater;
(8) Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering
systems), crawl space pumps, or air conditioning condensation;
(9) Discharges from landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
(10) Water from individual residential car washing;
Illicit Discharge Ordinance
8/8/2013
5
(11) Discharges from dechlorinated swimming pool/hot tub water (less than one ppm chlorine) provided it is
allowed to stand for one week prior to draining and the pool/hot tub is drained in such a way as not to
cause a nuisance;
(12) Discharges from street sweeping (not including stockpile material);
(13) Discharges or flows resulting from fire fighting activities;
(14) Dye testing, provided written notification is given to the Director of the Department of Public Works
prior to the time of the test;
(15) Non-stormwater discharges permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
administered under the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, provided that
the discharge is in full compliance with the requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and applicable
laws and regulations; and
(16) Discharges for which advanced written approval is received from the Town Manager if necessary to
protect public health, safety, welfare or the environment.
§ 146-7 EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM ACCESS
The Director of the Department of Public Works and/or Town Manager may suspend municipal storm drain
system access to any person or property without prior written notice when such suspension is necessary to stop
an actual or threatened illegal discharge that presents or may present imminent risk of harm to the public health,
safety, welfare or the environment. In the event any person fails to comply with an emergency suspension
order, the Director of the Department of Public Works and/or Town Manager may take all reasonable steps to
prevent or minimize harm to the public health, safety, welfare or the environment.
§ 146-8 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS
Notwithstanding any other requirements of local, state or federal law, as soon as any person responsible for a
facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any
known or suspected release of materials at that facility operation which is resulting or may result in illegal
discharge of pollutants that person shall take all necessary steps to ensure containment, and cleanup of the
release. In the event of a release of oil or hazardous materials, the person shall immediately notify the
municipal fire and police departments and the Director of the Department of Public Works. In the event of a
release of non-hazardous material, said person shall notify the Director of the Department of Public Works no
later than the next business day. Written confirmation of all telephone, facsimile or in person notifications shall
be provided to the Director of the Department of Public Works within three business days thereafter. If the
discharge of prohibited materials is from a commercial or industrial facility, the facility owner or operator of the
facility shall retain on-site a written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence.
Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 146-9 ENFORCEMENT
1. Enforcement Agent
The Director of the Department of Public Works and/or Town Manager or an authorized agent shall enforce this
Ordinance, and the regulations promulgated thereunder, as well as the terms and conditions of all permits,
notices, and orders, and may pursue all civil and criminal remedies for such violations.
Illicit Discharge Ordinance
8/8/2013
6
2. Orders
The Director of the Department of Public Works and/or Town Manager may issue a written order to enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance or the regulations thereunder, which may include:
(a) Elimination of illicit connections or discharges to the storm drainage system;
(b) Termination of access to the storm drainage system;
(c) Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(d) Cessation of unlawful discharges, practices, or operations; and
(e) Remediation of contamination in connection therewith.
If the Director of the Department of Public Works and/or Town Manager determines that abatement or
remediation of contamination is required, the order shall set forth a deadline for completion of the abatement or
remediation. Said order shall further advise that, should the violator and/or property owner fail to abate or
perform remediation within the specified deadline, the Town may, at its option, undertake such work, and
expenses thereof shall be charged to the violator and/or property owner.
Within thirty (30) days after completing all measures necessary to abate the violation or to perform remediation,
the violator and/or the property owner will be notified of the costs incurred by the Town, including
administrative costs. The violator and/or property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount or
basis of costs with the Department of Public Works and/or Town Manager within thirty (30) days of receipt of
the notification of the costs incurred. If the amount due is not received by the expiration of the time in which to
file a protest or within thirty (30) days following a decision of the Department of Public Works and/or Town
Manager affirming or reducing the costs, or from a final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, the costs
shall become a special assessment against the violator and/or property owner and shall constitute a lien on the
owner’s property for the amount of said costs. Interest shall begin to accrue on any unpaid costs at the statutory
rate provided in M.G.L. Ch. 59, § 57 after the thirty-first day at which the costs first become due. Non-payment
of the amount due shall impose a lien on real property located within the town for any charge or fee, imposed by
the town that has not been paid by the due date. Such charges and fees include, but are not limited to, any fee
due under the provisions Section 9 of this code, any charge or fee imposed by the non-criminal ticketing process
established under the code or imposed by another department, division, board, or commission. This lien shall be
known as the “municipal charges lien.” The municipal charges lien will take effect upon the recording of a list
of unpaid municipal charges and fees by parcel of land, and by the name of the person assessed for the charge or
fee, in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds.
If a charge or fee which is secured by a municipal charges lien remains unpaid when the assessors are preparing
a real estate tax list and warrant to be committed under the General Laws, c. 59, § 53, the board or officer in
charge of the collection of the municipal charge or fee, or the collector of taxes shall certify such charge or fee
to the assessors, who shall forthwith add this charge or fee to the tax on the property to which it relates and
commit it with their warrant to the Collector of Taxes as part of the tax.
If the property to which such charge or fee relates is tax exempt, such charge or fee shall be committed as the
tax. A lien under this section may be discharged by filing a certification from the tax collector that all municipal
charges or fees constituting the lien, together with any interest and costs thereon, have been paid or legally
abated. All costs of recording or discharging a lien under this section shall be borne by the owner of the
property.
All invoices for the payment of municipal charges and bills are due within 30 days after they are mailed, unless
a different due date is otherwise provided by law or ordinance. Any invoice remaining unpaid after its due date,
whether established in this section or otherwise, will accrue interest from the due date at the rate of interest
Illicit Discharge Ordinance
8/8/2013
7
charged on tax bills under the provisions of General Laws, c. 59, § 57, as the same may from time to time be
amended.
3. Equitable Remedy
If anyone violates the provisions of this Ordinance, regulations, permit, notice, or order issued thereunder, the
Town of Palmer may seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction to restrain the person from
activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to abate or remediate the violation.
4. Non-Criminal Disposition
As an alternative to criminal prosecution or civil action, the Town of Palmer may elect to utilize the noncriminal
disposition procedure set forth in M.G.L. Ch. 40, §21D. Department of Public Works and/or Town
Manager, Chief of Police, or designated representative shall be the enforcing person. The penalty for the 1st
violation shall be $50. The penalty for the 2nd violation shall be $100. The penalty for the 3rd and subsequent
violations shall be $300.00. Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
5. Right-of-Entry
To the extent permitted by state law, or if authorized by the owner or other party in control of the property, the
Town Manager, Director of the Department of Public Works or designated representative may enter upon
privately owned property for the purpose of performing their duties under this Ordinance and regulations and
may make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the Town Manager, Director of the
Department of Public Works or designated representative deems reasonably necessary.
6. Remedies Not Exclusive
The remedies listed in this Ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable
federal, state or local law.
§ 146-10 SEVERABILITY
If any provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause, of this Ordinance shall be held invalid for any reason, all other
provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 146-11 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
All property owners shall have 60 days from publication of the ordinance in the legal notice section of the
newspaper to comply.
9-17-18 {1 | P a g e
TOWN OF PALMER
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS AND REGISTERED MARIJUANA
DISPENSARIES ZONING ORDINANCE
Adopted 9/17/18
Article XXIV - §171-124 – MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS AND RMDS
A. PURPOSE
(1) To regulate the siting, design, placement, security, safety, monitoring, modification, and
removal of Marijuana Establishments and Registered Marijuana Dispensaries in the Town
of Palmer.
(2) To minimize adverse impacts of Marijuana Establishments and Registered Marijuana
Dispensaries on adjacent properties, residential neighborhoods, , historic structures and
features, and other land uses potentially incompatible with said facilities.
B. APPLICABILITY
(1) The commercial cultivation, production, processing, assembly, packaging, retail sale,
distribution, and dispensing of marijuana is prohibited in Palmer unless permitted as a
Marijuana Establishment or RMD in compliance with the provisions of this Section.
(2) Marijuana Establishments and Registered Marijuana Dispensaries are not a form of
agriculture, horticulture, or floriculture for purposes of the Zoning Ordinance.
C. DEFINITIONS
Independent Testing Laboratory: a laboratory that is licensed by the Cannabis Control Commission
and is: (i) accredited to the most current International Organization for Standardization 17025 by a
third-party accrediting body that is a signatory to the International Laboratory Accreditation
Cooperation mutual recognition arrangement or that is otherwise approved by the Cannabis Control
Commission; (ii) independent financially from any medical marijuana treatment center or any licensee
or marijuana establishment for which it conducts a test; and (iii) qualified to test marijuana in
compliance with regulations promulgated by the Cannabis Control Commission.
Marijuana Cultivator: an entity licensed to cultivate, process, and package marijuana, to deliver
marijuana to marijuana establishments, and to transfer marijuana to other marijuana establishments,
but not to consumers.
Marijuana Establishment: marijuana cultivator, independent testing laboratory, marijuana product
manufacturer, marijuana retailer or any other type of licensed marijuana-related business.
Marijuana Product Manufacturer: an entity licensed to obtain, manufacture, process, and package
marijuana/marijuana products, to deliver marijuana and marijuana products to marijuana
9-17-18 {2 | P a g e
establishments, and to transfer marijuana and marijuana products to the other marijuana
establishments, but not to consumers.
Marijuana Products: products that have been manufactured and contain marijuana or an extract of
marijuana, including concentrated forms of marijuana and products composed of marijuana and other
ingredients that are intended for use or consumption, including edible products, beverages, topical
products, ointments, oils, and tinctures.
Marijuana Retailer: an entity licensed to purchase and deliver marijuana and marijuana products from
marijuana establishments and to deliver, sell or otherwise transfer marijuana and marijuana products to
marijuana establishments to consumers.
Medical Marijuana Treatment Center: An entity registered under 105 CMR 725.100 that acquires,
cultivates, possesses, processes (including development of related products), transfers, transports, sells,
distributes, dispenses, or administers marijuana, products containing marijuana, related supplies, or
educational materials to registered qualifying patients or their personal caregivers.
Other Type of Licensed Marijuana-Related Business: a licensed marijuana establishment other than a
marijuana cultivator, independent testing laboratory, marijuana product manufacturer, or marijuana
retailer.
Registered Marijuana Dispensary (RMD): A use registered or licensed by the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health, Cannabis Control Commission, or other state body pursuant to all
other applicable state laws and regulations, also to be known as a Medical Marijuana Treatment
Center, that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes (including development of related products
such as food, tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments), transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses,
or administers marijuana, products containing marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials to
registered qualifying patients or their personal caregivers. An RMD shall explicitly include facilities
which cultivate and process medical marijuana, and which may also dispense and deliver medical
marijuana and related products. An RMD may be located off-site from the cultivation/processing
facility (and controlled and operated by the same registered and approved entity which operates an
affiliated RMD) but which serves only to dispense processed marijuana, related supplies and
educational materials to registered qualifying patients or their personal caregivers.
Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA): The Palmer Planning Board is hereby designated the
SPGA to grant special permits for proposed Marijuana Establishments and RMDs in compliance with
the provisions of this Section.
D. ELIGIBLE LOCATIONS FOR MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS AND RMDS
Marijuana Cultivators, Marijuana Product Manufacturers, Independent Testing Laboratory, any Other
Type of Licensed Marijuana-Related Business, and RMDs shall be allowed by special permit in the
Industrial A, Industrial B Districts and in the Urban Renewal Industrial Park (URIP). Marijuana
Retailers and RMDs only dispensing (not cultivating or processing), shall be allowed by special permit
in the Highway Business Districts. Marijuana Establishments and RMDs are not allowed in any
Residential District, the General and Neighborhood Business Districts and the Village Centers
Districts I-IV.
9-17-18 {3 | P a g e
E. LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
The maximum number of Marijuana Retailers in the Town of Palmer shall be limited to three (3) at
any one time.
F. DESIGN STANDARDS AND SITING REQUIREMENTS
(1) Marijuana Establishments and RMDs shall comply with all applicable state laws and
regulations.
(2) All aspects of Marijuana Establishments and RMDs relative to the acquisition, cultivation,
possession, processing, sales, distribution, dispensing, or administration of marijuana,
products containing marijuana, related supplies or educational materials shall take place at a
fixed location within a fully enclosed permanent building and may not be located in a trailer,
cargo container, motor vehicle or other similar non-permanent enclosure.
(3) No outside storage is allowed except as permitted under Site Plan Review.
(4) No odor from marijuana cultivation, processing, manufacturing, or retail may be noxious or
cause a nuisance, a danger to public health, or impair public comfort and convenience.
Marijuana Establishments and RMDs shall incorporate odor control technology and
provisions, and ensure that emissions do not violate MGL Chapter 111, Section 31C,
including but not limited to those specified for odors.
(5) Signage shall conform to Article XVII, §171-94 Signs, of the Town of Palmer’s Zoning
ordinance and requirements of State laws and regulations governing such facilities including
935 CMR 500.105 (4).
(6) Marijuana, marijuana products, associated supplies, and/or promotional/advertising
materials shall not be displayed or visible to a person from the exterior of a Marijuana
Establishment or RMD.
(7) The hours of operation of Marijuana Establishments and RMDs shall be determined by the
SPGA as a condition of the special permit.
(8) No Marijuana Establishment or RMD shall be located within a radius of five hundred (500)
feet of the property boundary line of any lot in use as a public or private school providing
education in kindergarten or any of grades 1-12 or day-care center. The 500-foot distance
shall be measured in a straight line from property boundary line to property boundary line of
the proposed Marijuana Establishment or RMD established at the time the application is
received by the SPGA.
a. The distance requirement may be reduced by up to twenty-five percent (25%) by
Special Permit if the applicant can adequately demonstrate the following:
1] The Marijuana Establishment or RMD would otherwise be effectively prohibited
within the municipality.
2] The Marijuana Establishment or RMD will employ specific security measures to
prevent diversion of marijuana to minors and further minimize, through design, any
9-17-18 {4 | P a g e
adverse impacts on abutters and other parties in interest, as defined in M.G.L
Chapter 40A, Section 11.
(9) Marijuana Establishments and RMDs shall provide the Palmer Police Department,
applicable Fire Department, Building Inspector and the SPGA with the names, phone
numbers and email addresses of all management staff and key holders who can be contacted
if there are operating problems associated with the Marijuana Establishment or RMD.
(10) Marijuana Establishments and RMDs shall not have drive-thru service.
(11) Marijuana Establishments and RMDs shall not be located within a building containing
residential units.
(12) No smoking, burning, vaping or consumption of any product containing marijuana or
marijuana-related products shall be permitted on the premises of a Marijuana Establishment
or RMD with the exception of product testing performed at an Independent Testing
Laboratory or as a use allowed per state regulations and approved by the SPGA.
(13) Notwithstanding any provision of the Zoning Ordinance to the contrary, a Marijuana
Establishment and an RMD may be located within the same building.
G. SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
(1) Marijuana Establishments and RMDs shall meet the requirements set forth in Palmer’s
Zoning Ordinance under §171-28 Special permits; §171-29 Site plan approval process; and
this section. In addition, a special permit application for Marijuana Establishments and
RMDs shall include the following:
a. The name and address of each owner of the Marijuana Establishment or RMD.
b. Copies of all required licenses and permits issued to the applicant by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and any of its agencies for the Marijuana
Establishment or RMD, including the Cannabis Control Commission and Department
of Public Health, and any required license from the Town of Palmer.
c. Evidence that the applicant has site control and the right to use the site for a Marijuana
Establishment and/or RMD in the form of a deed or valid purchase and sales
agreement, or, in the case of a lease, a notarized statement from the property owner
and a copy of the lease agreement.
d. Details showing all proposed exterior security measures for the premises, including
lighting, fencing, gates and alarms, etc., which seek to ensure the safety of employees,
patrons, and residents, and to protect the premises from theft and other criminal
activity. A letter from the Town of Palmer Police Chief, or designee, acknowledging
review and approval of the security plan for the Marijuana Establishment or RMD
shall be submitted with the application. To the extent allowed by law, all such
documents shall be confidential.
9-17-18 {5 | P a g e
e. A description of all activities to occur on site, including all provisions for the delivery
of Marijuana Products to and/or from the premises.
f. A Waste Disposal Plan which provides details for disposal of the waste materials in
compliance with 935 CMR 500.105 (12).
g. Details of the ventilation system.
h. A Line Queue Plan to ensure the movement of pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic
along the public right of ways.
i. Upon written request from the applicant, the SPGA may waive the submission of such
information, or parts thereof, as may not be necessary for the consideration of the
application. The SPGA’s waiver decision shall be set forth in the written Special Permit
decision.
(2) A special permit granted under this Section shall run with the applicant and shall be nontransferrable
to another owner or operator without an amendment to the special permit with
all application information required in accordance with this Section and a noticed public
hearing.
H. PROHIBITION AGAINST NUISANCES
No Marijuana Establishment or RMD shall create a nuisance to abutters or to the surrounding
area, or which creates any hazard, including but not limited to, fire, explosion, fumes, gas, smoke,
odors, obnoxious dust, vapors, offensive noise or vibration, flashes, glare, objectionable effluent
or electrical interference, which may impair the normal use and peaceful enjoyment of any
property, structure or dwelling in the area.
I. ABANDONMENT OR DISCONTINUANCE OF USE
(1) A special permit granted under this Section shall lapse if not exercised within twelve (12)
months of issuance.
(2) Marijuana Establishments and RMDs shall be required to remove all material, plants,
equipment and other paraphernalia prior to surrendering its state issued licenses or permits
or within six (6) months of ceasing operations; whichever comes first.
J. SEVERABILITY
The provisions of this Section are severable. If any provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of
this Section or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this Section.
3 - 1 -7
Town of Palmer, Massachusetts
Chapter 171 - Zoning Ordinance
Stantec Revision 02-15-08 incorporating comments from L. Leduc email dated
02-12-08. (In red)
Changes made 3/10/08. New language is in red, which incorporates new MC
comments. Some remaining MC comments are highlighted in turquoise. Yellow
highlights are issues to still discuss.
Article XXII
Seasonal Cottage Resorts
§ 171-123. Reserved
§ 171-124 Reserved
§ 171-125. Seasonal Cottage Resort
A. Intent.
A Seasonal Cottage Resort (SCR), in accordance with this ordinance, shall be allowed by Special
Permit and Site Plan Review in all parts of the Rural Residential District except the Flood pPlain
District. Seasonal Cottage Resort shall mean a comprehensively planned, seasonal residential
development in which housing types, called seasonal cottages, and other community amenities
including recreational and/or commercial uses and activities, allowed under the permit, are clustered
together in a pattern of aeesthetically integrated, accessible open space.
Seasonal Cottage Resort (SCR) development standards are designed to support the town's goals of
preserving its open space and traditional New England rural character. Open space is
protectedcreated by requiring units to be clustered in order efforts to protect existing natural and
historical features of the site, to minimize the impact of the development on the Town’s resources
and to minimize the area of impervious surfaces. The more compact development requires results in
less infrastructure to be constructed and reduces site disturbance as a whole. Similarly, higher
densities permitted with this type of compact development preserves open space and maximizes the
use of the infrastructure. These features localize growth and preserve the town's rural character.
An SCR may be allowed by special permit in the Rural Residential District, except in those areas
located iin the fFlood pPlain dDistrict as designated on the FEMA Q3 Flood Pain Overlay zoning
mMap, if the Planning Board determines that it meets the standards of this section and the zoning
ordinance .
B. Purposes.
(1) TThe purposes of the Seasonal Cottage Resort are:
1) (a) To allow for greater flexibility and creativity in the design of residential
development;
Formatted
Formatted
Formatted
Formatted
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
- 2 -
4
2) (b) TTo insure that, to the greatest extent possible, extent residential developments leave
untouched and undisturbed the natural and historic features of the land, including but
not limited to, wetlands, watercourses, forests, prime agricultural land, steep slopes,
plants, wildlife, historic sites, stone walls, scenic views and rural character;
3) (c) To encourage the permanent preservation of open space as defined in section 171-5
of the Zoning Ordinance and natural resources including aquifers, water bodies and
wetlands, and historical and archaeological resources;
4) (d) To encourage more compact and efficient forms of residential development
that minimizes site disturbance and impervious surfaces and that conforms to existing
topography and natural and historic features;
5) (e) To maintain the town's traditional New England rural character and land use pattern
in which small villages contrast with open space and farmlands;
6) (f) To facilitate the construction of streets, utilities and management of town services in
an efficient manner and to encourage connection to town water and sewer services;
7) (g) To provide wildlife corridors connecting open spaces;
8) (h) To encourage development of seasonal residential properties to enhance recreational
and other appropriate land uses;.
C. Definitions.
In addition to the definitions elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, the following definitions apply:
Accessways: Shall mean privateely , travelledtraversed ways, inclusive of driveways, for vehicular
use within a Seasonal Cottage Resort; and for the purposes of this ordinance shall include both
paved and gravel travel surfaces of varying widths and construction buildup. Final width and
construction standards of Aaccessways shall be determined with input from the Planning Board and
Public Safety departments.
Base Maximum Density: Shall mean the maximum number of allowed seasonal cottage units
(“unit”) for a Seasonal Cottage Resort before accounting for any density bonuses as described in
section I of this ordnance. This number shall be equal to 6 5 units per each Net Developable Acre
(or one Seasonal Cottage Unit per 7,2608712 s.f. of Net Developable Acreage expressed in square
feet).
Commercial: Shall mean those accessory uses subordinate to the Seasonal Cottage Units and which
are in keeping with a resort development and are operated by the SCR management agency for
public or private use including but not limited to a restaurant, beach house or maintenance facility.
Common Open Space: Shall mean the space within a SCR which is not occupied by seasonal cottages
or associated private patios, walks, or gardens for the residents, and not occupied by roadways,
accesswaysaccess ways, driveways, off-street parking or loading areas, community room or center or other
facilities which are not for common recreational use; but which may include common walkways, green
spaces (natural or landscaped), gazebos, swimming pool or beach facilities, tennis, basketball or other “hard
court” areas, common buildings such as fitness or recreation centers, common garden, recreation field or
similar areas.
Community Amenities: Shall mean attractions and elements proposed or constructed as part of a SCR
which are open to or accessible to the members of the SCR and which generally enhance the experience of
Formatted
3 - 3 -7
the SCR including but not limited to ponds, common gardens, swimming pool and beach facilities,
recreation fields and courts, walking paths and gazebos.
Development: Shall mean a Seasonal Cottage Resort project inclusive of all facilities, seasonal
cottage units, common open space, accesswaysaccess ways and all other amenities proposed for the
project.
Facility or Facilities: Shall mean built portions of a Seasonal Cottage Resort exclusive of
individual Seasonal Cottage Units.
Gross Land Area: Shall mean the total acreage of a Seasonal Cottage Resort lot inclusive of existing
private rights of ways or easements expressed in acres.
Net Developable Acreage: Shall be used in the computation of Base Maximum Density. The Net
Developable Acreage shall equal the Gross Land Area less the following (in acres):
1) (1). The area of natural slopes greater than 25%.
2) (2) Area of wetlands as defined in this ordinance and delineated as such by the
Palmer
Conservation Commission under G. L. c. 131 the Town of Palmer ordinances.
2)3) (3) Area equallingequaling five percent (5%) of the Gross Land Area.
Net Developable Acre: Shall be used to describe the Net Developable Acreage on a “per acre”
basis.
Historic Structure: Shall mean a sStructurere or other historic resource as defined in MG.L c. 44B
§ 2,Section 171-5 of this ordinance; listed on the National Register of Historic Places or as identified
in G.L c. 44B § 2 as a Historic Structure or Building or as identified by the Palmer Historic
Commission as locally architecturally or historically significant.
MC added:
SEE G.L c. 44B § 2 “‘Historic resources’, a building, structure, vessel real property, document or
artifact that is listed or eligible for listing on the state register of historic places or has been
determined by the local historic preservation commission to be significant in the history, archeology,
architecture or culture of a city or town.”
Public Way: Shall be as defined in section the Town of Palmer Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances.
CITATION MC states that there should be a reference made for were the definition can be located in
these Ordinances. And although we use the terms they are not specifically defined. I think we shpuld
reference MGL, and I have sent an email to get it from MC because I’m not having any luck finding it
myself.
Recreation or Recreational Use: Shall mean the performance of such activities as typically related to
leisure time, social or athletic events or functions or a use promoting such activities.
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
- 4 -
4
Seasonal Cottage: Shall mean: A one-family efficiency dwelling located within a Seasonal Cottage
Resort, which shall be occupied only from March 1st to November 30th of each year. Seasonal Cottages
shall have a building footprint between 500 and 1,200 square feet.
D. Use Regulations.
Only the following uses will be allowed in a Seasonal Cottage Resort:
1) 1. Seasonal Cottages;
2) 2. A single dwelling unit designed for year-round use and occupied on a year round basis
by an on-site residential manager;
3) 3. RRecreational uses and/ or a community facility or facilities which are integral to and
serve the residents of the seasonal cottages including but not limited to facilities such as
tennis courts, swimming pools, gardens, community buildings and clubhouse;
4) 4. Commercial uses specifically allowed during the hearing process and by the SCR
Special Permit so long as they are directly accessory to the proposed development.
E. Restrictions.
The above uses shall also abide by the following:
1) 1. Occupancy of the development is limited to the dates March 1st to
November 30th' inclusive.
2)1) 2 A year-round, on-site resident, live-in manager is required to oversee
the maintenance and security of the development.
2) 3. The applicant and the association of residents must guarantyee reasonable and safe
access to the development throughout the year to ensure access for fire and police
vehicles and apparatus.
3) 4. Domestic water services to the cottages shall be suspended between
December 1st and February 28th of each year but provided year round to the on-site
manager’s house. Water supply systems for fire protection shall remain active yearround.
3)4) 5. Each cottage unit shall have a required minimum size of 500 square feet and
a
maximum size of 1,200 square feet.
F. Applicability.
Formatted
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted
Formatted
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted
3 - 5 -7
1) (1) Fifty (50) Acre Minimum. A person may apply for an SCR for land in the rRural
Rresidential dDistrict other than any part thereof within the Flood Plain District for a
parcel of at least fifty (50) contiguous acres of gross land area.
G. Base Maximum Density.:
1) (1) One seasonal cottage will be allowed for every 7,2608,712 square feet of Net
Developable Acreage. The Planning Board will not allow more than a Base Maximum
Density of 56 units per net developable acre. (Mike would like to look at this figure a
little closer to make sure we are not starting with a number that is too high. I recall that
this figure initially started at 5. I’m thinking it should go back down to 5 and then
consider raising the density bonus max to 75%, and also increasing all density bonus
opportunities to 10%)
2) (2) One on-site residential manager “one one-family dwelling” shall be permitted per
project in addition to the Base Maximum Density established under171-125 (G) (1).
H. Net Developable Acreage -.
1) Net Developable Acreage shall be used in the computation of Base Maximum Density as
defined herein in Section 171-125 (C).
I. Increase in Permissible Density. . As stated above, I’d like to make all the bonuses equal at
10% except option g, and change the maximum 75%.
(1)1) The Planning Board may award a density bonus to allow an increase in the number
of seasonal cottages beyond the Base Maximum Density. The density bonus for the
SCR shall not, in the aggregate, exceed 75% (50%) of the Base Maximum Density.
Calculations shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number when applying this
bonus. A density bonus may be awarded for each of the following circumstances:
(a) Minimizing environmental impacts: for SCR developmentss connected to
public sewer system, a bonus of 10% of the Base Maximum Density may be
awarded;.
(b) Minimizing environmental impacts: for SCR developmentss connected to
public water service, a bonus of 10% of the Base Maximum Density may be
awarded;.
(c) Preserving open space: For each additional ten percent (10%) of the Gross
Land Area (over and above the required 30% per Section 171-125 (L).) set
aside as common open space; a bonus of 10% (5%) of the Base Maximum
Density may be awarded.
(d) Preserving historic community character: For every historic structure or
other historic feature preserved and made subject to a historic preservation
restriction, a bonus of 10% of the Base Maximum Density may be awarded.
Formatted
Formatted
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted
Formatted
Formatted
- 6 -
4
one (1) dwelling unit may be added to the Base Maximum Density; (I spoke with
MM about this again and we both thought the 1 unit bonus was extreme compared
to the other bonuses opportunities.
(d)
(e) Provisions for creation or extension of public trail network (public access to
privately owned trails): A SCR agreeing to allow public access, limited to
pedestrian use only, to trails on the property, a bonus of 10% (5%) of the
Base Maximum Density may be awarded. In determining this increase in
density the Planning Board will look at the overall linear feet devoted to such
trails, their location in a wooded area or other area of scenic beauty and such
factors, which relate to the overall quality of the public trail network.;
(f) (f)Provisions for public access to recreational open space amenities and
public access to recreational amenities on property owned by the
Association.: An SCR agreeing, as a condition of the Special Permit, to allow
free public access to recreational open space and recreational amenities may
be awarded a bonus of 10% (5%) of the Base Maximum Density.;
(f) THE IDEA IS THAT IT IS NOT JUST AN AGREEMENT BUT A
CONTINUING COMMITMENT
(g) Provisions for reduced impacts upon community recreational amenities:
Developers/Owners of an SCR agreeing to contribute a one time fee of
$500.00 per each seasonal cottage proposed within the development,, as
allowed and calculated under based on the Base Maximum DensitySection G
of this Ordinance, may be awarded , a bonus of 5% of the Base Maximum
Density may be awarded.;
J. J. Dimensional Requirements.
The dimensional requirements applicable to a Seasonal Cottage Resort are as follows:
1) (1) The parcel must have a minimum of one hundred (100) feet of frontage on a
public way. Parcels within the SCR have no minimum frontage requirement.
2) (2) The minimum front yard setback shall be fifty (50) feet. Side and rear yard
setbacks
shall be thirty (30) feet. These setbacks apply only to and are measured from the
perimeter of the property. There are no internal setback requirements for the
individual structures within the Seasonal Cottage Resort, other than as may be
required by other fire protection or governing building codes.
3) (3) The plan must show and the applicant must maintain a buffer strip suitable and
sufficient to provide a visual barrier between adjoining properties in conformance
with Section 171-93.
4) (4) The Planning Board may modify or waive the buffer requirement in cases where
topography or other circumstances prove to provide a sufficient visual buffer.
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
3 - 7 -7
5) (5) The Planning board shall allow a reduction in the side or rear yard setbacks when
such property line is defined by a waterbodywaterbody.
K. Parking and Circulation Requirements.
All Seasonal Cottage Complex Resorts shall provide for the following:
1) (1) An adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of pedestrian circulation,
roadways, driveways and parking.
2) (2) Vehicular access from an existing public way, which in the opinion of the
Planning Board is adequate to serve the proposed development. The board may,
after review by the police and fire departments require, in its sole discretion, an
alternative or additional access for emergency use.
3) (3) Accessways and walkways within the Seasonal Cottage Resort shall
be privately owned and maintained by the association of owners and shall be
designed in accordance with sound engineering practices and shall be designed with
sufficient width, suitable grade and adequate construction to safely provide for the needs
of vehicular and pedestrian traffic generated by the development.
4) (4) At least one (1) parking space shall be provided for each seasonal
cottage unit. Parking shall be provided for guests and shall not be less than one (1)
additional space per every two seasonal cottage units. Overall, one and one-half (1.5)
parking spaces per each seasonal cottage unit shall be provided in aggregate for the
project.
L. Common Open Space Requirements.
All Seasonal Cottage (SCR) shall provide the following:
1) (1) The area of the Common Open Space shall equal at least thirty (30%) percent of
the Net Developable Acreage of the site. Such land shall have a shape, dimension,
character and location suitable to assure its use for gardens, park, recreation, or
conservation purposes by all the residents of the development. Stormwater
management facilities may be included within Common Open Space areas
calculations. Waters of the Commonwealth, as defined in Section 4.02 of CMR 4.00,
and wetlands, as defined in Ponds as defined in the Town of Palmer Wetland
Regulations, lakes, and wetlands as defined in Section 171-5 on the Town of
Palmer’s Zoning Ordinance, may not be included in Common Open Space
calculations.
2)
(2) Suitable and usable outdoor recreational area or areas shall be provided for the
use of the development residents and their guests. The area required for
Common Open Space may include land reserved for passive or active
recreational uses, trails or paths, buffers, as well as land set aside as protected
wildlife habitat or other conservation purposes. The Planning Board may permit
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
- 8 -
4
up to three (3) percent of the Common Open Space area to be paved or built upon
for structures accessory to the dedicated use of open space as defined under stated in
Section 171-125 L. (1).
3)
(3) Further subdivision of Common Open Space, or its use for other than recreation or
conservation, except for easements for underground utilities or stormwater
management, shall be prohibited. Provision shall be made so that the Common
Open Space shall be owned in common and accessible to the owners and residents
of all seasonal cottage units in the development, or by membership, corporation,
ttrust or association whose members are the owners and residents of the units.
M. Community Facility
1) (1) Unless waived by the Planning Board, a community room or facility must be
established for use by the residents. There shall also be room for meetings and other
functions held by the residents. The community building shall not be calculated into
the Common Open Space.
N. N. Community Homeowner’s Association.
1) (1) A homeowner’s' association shall be established, requiring membership
of each
unit or seasonal cottage owner, in the Seasonal Cottage Resort. The association
shall be responsible for the permanent maintenance of communal water, sewage,
and other common utilities, recreational, common open space and common
accesswaysaccess ways, and said agreement shall include language guaranteeing the
continued maintenance of such common utilities, land and facilities, assessing
each unit or cottage a share of maintenance expenses. As a condition of the
Special Permit, the association agreement or covenants shall be submitted to the
Planning Board and such agreement shall be forwarded to the town attorney
for his/her comments to assist in the Planning Board’s final approval of the
document(s).
2) (2) The Homeowner’s Association agreement, owner’s covenant, and any other
recordable documents, once executed, shall be recorded in the Hampden County
Registry of Deeds, and proof of said recording shall be provided to the Palmer
Planning Board.
O. Application Requirements
1) (1) Application requirements are as specified in the Special Permit Application and
Site Plan Review sections of this ordinance (Sections 171.28 and 171.29),
respectively and the Rules and Regulations of the Town of Palmer Planning Board
Formatted
Formatted
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted
Formatted: Bullets and Numbering
Formatted
3 - 9 -7
, Article 9.






