The Charter
:1

Chapter C
CITY CHARTER
CITY CHARTER
C:1

Part I: Administrative Legislation
CITY CHARTER
C:3

Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
General Penalty
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 1.16 of the 1993 Code]
§ 1-1. Criminal complaint.
Whoever violates any provision of this Code may be penalized by indictment or on
complaint brought in the District Court. Except as may be otherwise provided by law
and as the District Court may see fit to impose, the maximum penalty for each violation,
or offense, brought in such manner, shall be $300.
§ 1-2. Noncriminal disposition.
§ 1-3. Fines and penalties to inure to use of City.
All fines and penalties for the violation of any ordinance or any order of the City Council
shall, when recovered, inure to the use of the City and be paid into the City treasury,
unless it be otherwise directed by law or ordinance.
A. Whoever violates any provision of this Code, the violation of which is subject to a
specific penalty, may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in
MGL c. 40, § 21D. The noncriminal method of disposition may also be used for
violations of any rule or regulation of any municipal officer, board or department
which is subject to a specific penalty.
B. Without intending to limit the generality of the foregoing, it is the intention of this
provision that only the ordinances which specifically invoke the use of a
noncriminal disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D, are to be included within
the scope of this section. In addition to police officers, who shall in all cases be
considered enforcing persons for the purpose of this provision, the municipal
personnel listed for each section, if any, shall also be enforcing persons for such
sections. Each day on which any violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate
offense.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
§ 1-4. Municipal Code adopted.
The ordinances of the City of Quincy of a general and permanent nature adopted by the
City Council of the City of Quincy, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 375, are hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the Municipal Code of the City of Quincy,
hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-5. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances
enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are hereinafter
expressly saved from repeal or continued in force.
§ 1-6. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of the
ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code by this ordinance,
are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as new enactments, and
the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior
ordinances.
§ 1-7. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall remain there
for use and examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance, and,
if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the City Clerk,
and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said City Clerk to be made
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in
effect.
§ 1-8. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when adopted
in such form as to indicate the intention of the Council to make them a part thereof,
shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the
City of Quincy" shall be understood and intended to include such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be inserted in the Code
as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-9. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the City of Quincy shall cause this ordinance to be published in the manner
required by law. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the
Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment
and publication of this ordinance, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:5
for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-10. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by the Clerk,
to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the Code required to be filed in the Clerk's office
for use by the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to
the effective date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes or
new ordinances are included as supplements to said Code.
§ 1-11. Sale of Code.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from the Clerk or
an authorized agent of the Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by the City Council.
The Clerk may also arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-12. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions or deletions,
any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Quincy to be misrepresented thereby.
Anyone violating this section, or any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon
conviction, to the penalties as set forth in § 1-1 of the Code.
§ 1-13. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent section or part
of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void
or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality
of any other sections or parts thereof. If any provision of this Code or the application
thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and
the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected
thereby.
§ 1-14. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of any section
or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof
§ 1-15. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions contained in
the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed; provided, however, that such
repeal shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any valid legislation of
the City of Quincy which is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be
deemed to remain in full force and effect. The following chapters from the 1993 Code
are specifically repealed: Chapter 2.104, Board of Managers of Hospital Department,
Chapter 2.128, Rent Grievance Board, and Chapter 8.28, Smoking (except Order No.
§ 1-9 QUINCY CODE § 1-15
1:6
2017-039 amending Chapter 8.28, which is saved from repeal).
§ 1-16. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-15 of this
ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and obligations, which are
hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to April 22, 2019.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative
provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any action or proceeding
brought for the enforcement of such right or liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this ordinance in
violation of any legislative provision or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which
may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any
judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance brought pursuant to
any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating,
straightening, establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public
place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any
bond or other instruments or evidence of the City's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property or any
lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The annexation or dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. Ordinances providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or special
assessments therefor.
L. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund for
municipal employees.
M. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of municipal officers and employees or
establishing or classifying positions.
N. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing traffic or parking regulations.
O. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee amount for any
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:7
§ 1-17. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
license, permit or service obtained from the City.
P. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance accepting or adopting the provisions of
any general law or special act of the commonwealth.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code of the City
of Quincy, no changes in the meaning or intent of such ordinances have been made
except as provided for in Subsections B and C hereof. Certain grammatical changes
and other minor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces
of legislation. It is the intention of the City Council that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the ordinances had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
B. Nomenclature. The following titles are updated throughout the Code:
(1) "Chairman" and "Chair" to "Chairperson."
(2) "Director of Inspections," "Building Inspector," "Building Commissioner" and
"Building Official" to "Director of Inspectional Services."
(3) "Department of Inspections" and "Building Department" to "Department of
Inspectional Services."
(4) "Commissioner of Public Health" and "Board of Health" to "Health
Commissioner."
(5) "Licensing Board," "License Board," "License Commissioners" and "Board of
License Commissioners" to "Board of Licensing Commissioners."
(6) "Treasurer," "Collector," "Collector of Taxes," "Treasurer-Collector" and
"Collector-Treasurer" to "Treasurer/Collector."
(7) "Planning Director" to "Director of Planning and Community Development"
and "Planning Department" to "Department of Planning and Community
Development."
(8) "Park Department" and "Park and Forestry Department" to "Department of
Natural Resources" and "Director of Parks and Forestry" and "Director of Park
and Forestry" to "Commissioner of Natural Resources."
(9) "Massachusetts Department of Public Works" to "Massachusetts Department
of Transportation."
(10) "Board of Appeals" to "Zoning Board of Appeals."
C. In addition, the amendments and/ or additions as set forth in Schedule A attached
hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective upon the
effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section number references are to the
ordinances as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
1. Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file at the office of the City Clerk.
§ 1-16 QUINCY CODE § 1-18
1:8
§ 1-18. When effective.
This Ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by law.
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:9

Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See Ch. 12.
City Council — See Ch. 19.
Departments — See Ch. 25.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 66.
§ 1-18 ADMINISTRATION § 1-18
5:1

ARTICLE I
Organization of City Government
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.04 of the 1993 Code]
§ 5-1. Office hours for public business.
In accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 41, § 110A, every officer in charge of a
department shall have all offices open for the transaction of public business for not less
than eight hours on every day except Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays.
§ 5-2. City organization for administrative and fiscal purposes.
The City, for administrative and fiscal purposes, shall be organized into the branches,
departments and divisions designated or created by this article.
§ 5-3. Branches under Mayor's supervision.
There are hereby established the following administrative branches for whose
administration the Mayor, as chief administrative officer, shall be responsible:
§ 5-4. Branch of general government.
The branch of general government shall contain the following departments and
divisions:
A. The branch of general government.
B. The branch of public safety.
C. The branch of natural resources. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
D. The branch of public works.
E. The branch of public service.
F. The branch of central service.
A. Assessing Department.
B. Department of Municipal Finance. [Amended 10-20-2008 by Order No.
2008-272]
C. Human Resources Department. [Amended 4-22-2003 by Order No. 2003-032]
D. Law Department.
E. Purchasing Department.
F. Planning and Zoning Division.
G. Community Promotions Division.
H. Board of Licensing Commissioners.
I. Health Department. [Added 2-4-2019 by Order No. 2018-176]
§ 5-1 ADMINISTRATION § 5-4
5:3
§ 5-5. Branch of public safety. [Amended by Order No. 97-337]
The branch of public safety shall contain the following departments and divisions:
§ 5-6. Branch of natural resources. [Amended 2-4-2019 by Order No. 2018-176]
The branch of natural resources shall contain the following divisions:
§ 5-7. Branch of public works. [Amended by Order No. 94-227]
The branch of public works shall consist of the following departments:
§ 5-8. Branch of public service. [Amended 2-4-2019 by Order No. 2018-176]
The branch of public service shall contain the following:
§ 5-9. Branch of central service.
The branch of central service shall contain the following departments and divisions:
J. Veterans' Services Department. [Added 2-4-2019 by Order No. 2018-176]
A. Department of Civilian Defense.
B. Police Department.
C. Fire Department.
D. Department of Inspectional Services.
E. Department of Traffic, Parking, Alarm and Lighting. [Amended 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012]
A. Park Division.
B. Forestry Division.
C. Recreation Division.
D. Cemetery Division.
E. Conservation Division.
A. Sewer, Water and Drain Department.
B. Public Works Department.
A. Library Department. The Thomas Crane Public Library shall be administered in a
manner consistent with St. 1880, c. 202, as amended.
B. Park and Recreation Board. The Park and Recreation Board shall be administered
in a manner consistent with St. 1961, c. 78, as amended. [Amended 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012]
A. Automotive and Maintenance Division.
§ 5-4 QUINCY CODE § 5-9
5:4
§ 5-10. Branch of education.
The School Committee, the School Department and its associated activities shall, for
administrative and fiscal purposes, be known as the branch of education.
§ 5-11. Legislative Department.
The City Council, the Clerk of Committees and the City Clerk shall be known, for
administrative and budgetary purposes, as the Legislative Department.
§ 5-12. Executive Department. [Amended 10-20-2008 by Order No. 2008-272]
The office of the Mayor shall be known, for administrative and budgetary purposes, as
the Executive Department.
§ 5-13. Department of Municipal Finance. [Amended 10-20-2008 by Order No.
2008-272; 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
The office of the Treasurer/Collector, the central accounting office, the business
manager, the manager of accounts, and the bookkeeper-payroll shall constitute the
Department of Municipal Finance.
§ 5-14. Automotive and Maintenance Division.
B. Equipment Division.
C. Printing Division.
D. Mailing and Communication Division.
E. Department of Information Technology and Telecommunications Systems.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
A. Established. The Automotive and Maintenance Division is hereby established.
B. Duties and powers. The Automotive and Maintenance Division shall undertake all
necessary repairs, alterations and service work on all City-owned motor vehicles
and equipment and shall have the use and control of all automotive repair
equipment owned by the City.
§ 5-9 ADMINISTRATION § 5-14
5:5

Chapter 12
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historical Commission — See Ch. 180, Art. I.
Noise Control Advisory Board — Ch. 215.
Affordable Housing Trust Committee — See Ch. 375,
Zoning, § 7.1.
Public Art Commission — See Ch. 375, Zoning, § 8.3.10.
Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 375, Zoning, § 9.2.
§ 5-14 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 5-14
12:1

ARTICLE I
Planning Board
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.92 of the 1993 Code]
§ 12-1. Membership; appointment; powers and duties.
The Planning Board of the City established under the provisions of MGL c. 41, §§ 81A
to 81Y, shall consist of five members, who shall have the powers, duties and
responsibilities provided in MGL c. 41, §§ 81A to 81Y, and who shall serve without
pay. They shall be appointed in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 41, §§ 81A to
81Y.2
§ 12-2. Review of City Council actions concerning public land and facilities.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
Before final action is taken by the City Council with reference to the location, relocation
or layout of any new public highway, the location or erection of any new public building
or structure, park, playground or bridge, or the acquisition of land for any public purpose,
it shall submit the same to the Planning Board, through the Mayor, for its report and
recommendation. The Planning Board shall file its report with the City Council within 30
days after the matter has been submitted to it, and if it fails so to do, the City Council may
proceed to final action without reference to the report of the Planning Board, provided
that compliance with all appropriate laws and ordinances has been met.
2. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 375, Zoning, § 9.3, Planning Board.
§ 12-1 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 12-2
12:3

ARTICLE II
Board of Assessors
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.96 of the 1993 Code]
§ 12-3. Organization; appointment of Chairperson.
The Assessors shall meet on the first Monday in February, or as soon thereafter as
may be practical, and organize as a board. If the Mayor has not appointed one of such
Assessors Chairperson of the Board in accordance with the provisions of Section 2,
Chapter 216 of the Acts of 1900, then the Board shall choose by ballot one member
thereof Chairperson and the Assessor so chosen shall act as Chairperson for the balance
of the year.
§ 12-4. Assessors to work full time.
The Assessors shall devote their whole time during the usual hours of each business day
of the year to the duties of their office.
§ 12-5. Assistant Assessors.
A. Appointment; term. The Assessors, during the month of September in each year,
shall appoint as Assistant Assessors such number of suitable citizens as they deem
necessary, and may remove them. Every such Assistant Assessor shall hold office
for the calendar year following his appointment unless sooner removed, provided
that, in case the Assessors fail to appoint a successor to any such Assistant Assessor
during the month of September preceding the expiration of his term of office, he
shall continue to serve during the ensuing calendar year unless sooner removed.
B. Duties. The Assistant Assessors shall perform such duties as may be required of
them by the Board of Assessors and shall devote such time thereto as shall be
necessary to enable them to reasonably and properly perform the same and shall
attend meetings of the Board and, whenever requested by the Board, shall be in
attendance at the office of the Board of Assessors.
§ 12-3 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 12-5
12:5

ARTICLE III
Board of Registrars of Voters
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.100 of the 1993 Code]
§ 12-6. Election of Clerk.
Pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 51, §§ 15 to 41, the Board of Registrars of Voters,
duly appointed by the Mayor, shall organize annually in April by electing one of its
members Clerk.
§ 12-7. Duties; annual register of voters.
It shall be the duty of the Board of Registrars to hold one meeting in each ward of
the City prior to the time set for closing of registration for state and City elections,
for the purposes of preparing the annual register of voters and of receiving evidence of
qualifications from persons claiming the right to vote at all state and City elections held
in the City.
§ 12-8. Records; voter registration.
The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the records of the Board of Registrars. He shall
provide a convenient location in City Hall which shall be open and accessible to all those
desiring to be registered as voters during the usual hours for the transaction of business
at City Hall.
§ 12-6 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 12-8
12:7

ARTICLE IV
Board of Managers of Elizabeth Serposs Clinic
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.108 of the 1993 Code]
§ 12-9. Establishment; composition. [Amended 10-20-2003 by Order No.
2003-263]
The management of the proceeds of the trust fund established under the will of the late
Ervant Serposs for the purpose of establishing the Elizabeth Serposs Clinic shall be
vested in a Board of Managers of the Elizabeth Serposs Clinic, such Board consisting of
the Mayor, Health Commissioner, the Superintendent of Schools, the City Solicitor and
the Treasurer/Collector.
§ 12-10. Powers and duties; rules and regulations.
§ 12-11. Compensation.
No salary or other compensation for services rendered shall be paid to any member of
the Board from the Elizabeth Serposs Clinic funds.
A. The Board shall have the management of the fund and property acquired for the use
of the fund and shall exercise all the powers and duties of the government of the
City in relation thereto as prescribed by the last will and testament of Ervant
Serposs.
B. The Board shall make such rules and regulations for its own government and for
the operation of the clinic as it deems expedient.
§ 12-9 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 12-11
12:9

ARTICLE V
Conservation Commission
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.116 of the 1993 Code]
§ 12-12. Composition; terms; powers; Conservation Enforcement Officer.
[Amended by Order No. 97-337]
§ 12-13. Employment classification. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
Pursuant to MGL c. 268A, § 1, members of the Quincy Conservation Commission shall
be classified as special municipal employees.
A. The Conservation Commission is established. It shall consist of seven residents of
the City appointed by the Mayor for a term of three years. The appointments shall
be arranged so that approximately 1/3 of the members are appointed on the first
Monday of each February. The Mayor shall annually appoint a Conservation
Enforcement Officer on the first Monday of February. The Enforcement Officer
shall be paid a salary as established by the City Council. The Enforcement Officer
shall not be a member of the Commission and shall report to the Director of
Inspectional Services.
B. The Commission shall have all powers, including enforcement power, granted to
conservation commissions by MGL c. 40, § 8C, as amended.
§ 12-12 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 12-13
12:11

ARTICLE VI
Commission on Disability
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.120 of the 1993 Code]
§ 12-14. Establishment.
There is established in the City of Quincy a Commission on Disability.
§ 12-15. Composition.
The Commission on Disability shall consist of nine members, all of whom shall be
residents of the City of Quincy. In addition, there shall be three alternate members who,
in the absence or inability of any member to attend and participate in the affairs of
the Commission, may be designated by the Chairperson to act in the place of a regular
member.
§ 12-16. Appointment; terms; vacancies.
Appointments to the Commission shall be made by the Mayor for a term of three years,
with three members and one alternate being appointed on the first Monday of each
February. Vacancies as well as initial appointments shall be for the remainder of the
unexpired term. A majority of the Commission members shall consist of people with
disabilities, one member shall be a member of the immediate family of a person with
a disability and one member shall be either an elected or appointed City official. The
Commission shall annually elect a Chairperson from among its members.
§ 12-17. Duties.
The Commission shall:
§ 12-18. Rules and regulations.
The Commission shall adopt and may from time to time amend rules and regulations
establishing a time for its regular meetings and for its government and the management
A. Research local problems of people with disabilities.
B. Advise and assist municipal officials and employees in ensuring compliance with
state and federal laws and regulations that affect people with disabilities.
C. Coordinate or carry out programs designed to meet the problems of people with
disabilities in coordination with programs of the Massachusetts Office on
Disability.
D. Review and make recommendations about policies, procedures, services, activities
and facilities of departments, boards and agencies of the City as they affect people
with disabilities.
E. Provide information, referrals, guidance and technical assistance to individuals,
public agencies, businesses and organizations in all matters pertaining to disability.
F. Coordinate activities of other local groups organized for similar purposes.
§ 12-14 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 12-18
12:13
of projects within its jurisdiction. It shall annually submit to the Mayor a report of its
activities for the prior year.
§ 12-18 QUINCY CODE § 12-18
12:14
ARTICLE VII
Traffic Commission
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.132 of the 1993 Code; amended in its entirety by
Order No. 95-033]
§ 12-19. Establishment; membership; compensation and expenses.
§ 12-20. Chairperson; Traffic Coordinator. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
The Director of Traffic, Parking, Alarm and Lighting or his designee shall act as
Chairperson of the Traffic Commission. There shall be a Traffic Coordinator appointed
by the Director of Traffic, Parking, Alarm and Lighting who shall act as the Secretary to
the Traffic Commission, arrange for its meetings, keep its records, obtain data, prepare
reports and perform such other duties as determined by the Director of Traffic, Parking,
Alarm and Lighting.
§ 12-21. Powers and duties.
A. The Traffic Commission of the City of Quincy is established. It shall consist of six
officials, ex officio, or their designees, as follows:
(1) Chief of Police Department.
(2) Chief of Fire Department.
(3) City Clerk.
(4) Commissioner of Public Works.
(5) Director of Planning and Community Development.
(6) Director of Traffic, Parking, Alarm and Lighting. [Amended 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012]
B. The members of the Traffic Commission shall receive no compensation for their
services as Commissioners, but all expenses incurred in the performance of their
duties shall be paid by the City.
A. The Traffic Commission, through the Department of Traffic, Parking, Alarm and
Lighting, shall study all facets of traffic in and through the City of Quincy and shall
suggest and advise the City Council of ways and means to regulate traffic in the
City and recommend changes and amendments to this article, with a view toward
better traffic control, elimination of congestion and the reduction of accidents.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
B. The Traffic Commission shall review all traffic problems and, in particular,
concentrate in the following areas:
(1) Curbside parking: bus, taxi, and loading zones.
(2) Public and private off-street parking.
§ 12-19 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 12-21
12:15
§ 12-22. Review of proposed traffic and parking ordinances. [Amended 6-1-2020
by Order No. 2020-012]
Prior to the final adoption by the City Council, all proposed ordinances concerning
the operation and parking of motor vehicles within the City shall be referred to the
Director of Traffic, Parking, Alarm and Lighting for his study and recommendation. The
Director of Traffic, Parking, Alarm and Lighting shall report to the City Council, the
City Clerk and the Clerk of Committees on each matter referred to him within 14 days.
The failure to render a report within the time required shall constitute an unfavorable
recommendation.
§ 12-23. Rules and regulations; notice of meetings; reports. [Amended 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012]
The Traffic Commission may promulgate rules and regulations for its internal
management, the holding of meetings and rules of procedure. Notice of all its meetings,
which shall be held at the discretion of the Director of Traffic, Parking, Alarm and
Lighting, shall be duly posted as required by MGL c. 30A, § 20. All official reports to
be transmitted to the City Council shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk, which
reports shall be available for public inspection.
(3) Parking meter maintenance, supervision and enforcement.
(4) One-way streets, arterial routes, and noncommercial traffic routes.
(5) Traffic islands: pedestrian barriers and crossings.
(6) Pedestrian safety.
(7) Traffic signs and pavement markings.
(8) Traffic control signals.
(9) Traffic speed regulations.
(10) Advertising on motor vehicles.
(11) Any other transportation issues.
§ 12-21 QUINCY CODE § 12-23
12:16
ARTICLE VIII
Council for the Aging
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.136 of the 1993 Code]
§ 12-24. Establishment; purpose. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
There is established in the City of Quincy a Council for the Aging for the purpose of
carrying out programs designed to meet the problems of the aging in coordination with
programs of the Department of Elder Affairs for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
§ 12-25. Composition; terms. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
The Council shall consist of 15 members, including the Health Commissioner, the
Director of Elder Services and the Director of Recreation, who shall be members ex
officio, and 12 residents of Quincy, who shall be appointed for staggered three-year
terms, four members to be appointed on the first Monday of each February.
§ 12-26. Meetings; officers.
The Council shall meet once a month and during the month of February shall elect from
its members a Chairperson who shall preside at the meetings and a Clerk, who shall be
one of the ex officio members, who shall be custodian of the records of the Council.
§ 12-27. Rules and regulations; annual report.
The Council shall adopt and may from time to time amend rules and regulations
establishing a time for its regular meeting and for its government and for the
management of such projects and property as may fall within its jurisdiction. The
Council shall annually submit to the Mayor a report of its activities for the prior year.
§ 12-28. Compensation.
No salary or compensation shall be paid to any member of the Council for the Aging for
services rendered said Council.
§ 12-29. Use of records. [Added 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
The names, addresses, telephone numbers, or other identifying information about elderly
persons in the possession of the Council shall not be public records, but the use of
these records shall comply with MGL c. 19A, §§ 14 to 24, inclusive, as a condition of
receiving a government contract, program grant or other benefit, or as otherwise required
by law.
§ 12-24 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 12-29
12:17

ARTICLE IX
Human Rights Commission
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.150 of the 1993 Code; amended in its entirety
6-28-1993 by Order No. 93-159]
§ 12-30. Policy.
§ 12-31. Establishment; membership. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
There is hereby established a municipal board to be known as the "Human Rights
Commission of the City of Quincy" (hereinafter referred to as the "Commission").
The Commission shall consist of 15 members appointed by the Mayor for a term of
three years. Twelve out of the 15 members shall be Quincy residents. The members
of the Commission should include the Police Department Civil Rights Officer and the
Chairperson or his designee of the Commission on Disability, Fair Housing Committee,
and Mayor's Commission on the Status of Women, and members of any agency and
organization that delivers programs or services that are beneficial to the residents, and
shall, so far as practicable, be so selected as to provide representation from fields
including but not limited to religion, education, housing, law, labor, industry, commerce
and behavioral sciences.
§ 12-32. Terms; compensation; organization; meetings.
A. It shall be the stated policy of the City of Quincy, including its employees, agents
and officials, to protect and promote the constitutional, civil and human rights of all
people within the City. Further, the City asserts that:
(1) All people have certain inalienable rights, including the right to life, liberty,
property, the pursuit of happiness and equal justice under the laws of the
United States, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the City of Quincy.
(2) No person in our City shall have these rights constrained, reduced, ignored or
violated; all people in our City shall be protected in the exercise of these
human and civil rights.
(3) No person in our City shall be unlawfully discriminated against in matters of
housing, employment, education, contracts, purchasing or public
accommodations on the basis of age, ancestry, citizenship status, color,
disability, economic status, ethnicity, family/marital status, gender, military
status, national origin, race, religion, sexual orientation, source of income or
gender identity. [Amended 6-4-2018 by Order No. 2018-012]
B. The Quincy Human Rights Commission shall work toward mutual respect and
understanding among the individuals and groups in the City through improving the
quality of public discourse and eliminating unlawful discrimination.
A. For the initial appointments to the Commission, the Mayor shall appoint members
as follows:
(1) Five members for a term of three years.
(2) Five members for a term of two years.
§ 12-30 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 12-32
12:19
§ 12-33. Functions, duties and powers. [Amended 10-15-2001 by Order No.
2001-147; 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
To uphold and secure the mandates, rights and privileges of its policy, the Quincy
Human Rights Commission shall be guided by the following functions, duties and
powers:
(3) Five members for a term of one year.
B. Thereafter, the Mayor shall appoint each successor to a term of three years. No
members of the Commission may serve for more than two consecutive terms. A
member having served two consecutive terms must remain off the Commission for
at least one year before becoming eligible for appointment.
C. Appointees to unexpired terms must remain off the Commission for at least one
year before becoming eligible for reappointment. Appointments to unexpired terms
shall not be counted as a term for the person appointed. The members of the
Commission shall serve without compensation. The Commission shall annually
elect one of its members as Chairperson and may elect other officers as it may deem
necessary. In addition, the Equal Opportunity Administrator of the City shall serve
on the Commission and provide assistance and counsel to the Commission. The
Commission shall meet at least 10 times a year. Ten members of the Commission
shall constitute a quorum, and a majority of those present shall be sufficient for any
action taken by the Commission, except where this article provides otherwise.
A. The Human Rights Commission shall promote and assist in developing an
environment of fairness and respect among citizens in the City of Quincy by
providing education programs which encourage tolerance of differences.
B. The Commission shall ensure that responses to acts of exclusion, bias, and
discrimination be taken seriously and that proper agencies of authority be notified
immediately when allegations of civil rights and/or hate crimes come to the
attention of individual group members.
C. The purpose of the Commission does not include the investigation or managing of
civil rights violations or hate crimes. Such cases shall be referred first to the Civil
Rights Officer of the Quincy Police Department and, when appropriate, to the
District Attorney's office.
D. The Commission shall work with a broad-based civil rights network that includes
all those groups invested in eliminating unlawful discrimination and intolerance in
the City of Quincy. Racial, religious, ethnic, civic, fraternal, benevolent, private and
public agencies that seek to cultivate an atmosphere of mutual understanding and
harmony will be crucial network members.
E. The Commission shall develop ways to measure and monitor community conflicts,
race relations, and civil rights issues, with a particular focus on population groups
which have been commonly victimized.
F. The Commission shall develop ways of anticipating, preparing for, and relieving
community tensions arising from intolerance and misunderstanding.
§ 12-32 QUINCY CODE § 12-33
12:20
§ 12-34. Standing committees.
Any committee appointed by the Mayor consistent with the issues under this article shall
be part of the standing committees and in its capacity will fulfill its own duties and act
as an advisor to the Commission.
§ 12-35. Interpretation.
The provisions of this article shall be interpreted liberally for the accomplishment of
the purposes thereof, and any ordinance inconsistent with any provision hereof shall not
apply, but nothing contained in this article shall be interpreted to contravene the general
laws of the commonwealth or ordinances of the City of Quincy.
G. The City Solicitor shall serve as counsel of the Commission.
§ 12-33 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 12-35
12:21

ARTICLE X
Commission on the Family
[Adopted by Order No. 94-036 (Ch. 2.137 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 12-36. Findings and purpose.
§ 12-37. Establishment.
There is established in the City of Quincy a Commission on the Family, hereafter
referred to as the "Commission."
§ 12-38. Functions and duties. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
The Commission shall have the following duties:
A. In the past 30 years, the American family has undergone major change. There has
been an increase in the number of single-parent families, blended families, divorced
families, dual-career families, teen parents and children not living with families.
B. Changed family patterns pose significant challenges to parents who are trying to
raise children without blueprints or knowledge of how to cope. Many of the old and
traditional extended family supports do not exist. The Commission on the Family
thereby is established to create a Quincy organization which will both genuinely
seek to determine the real range of family needs and assemble the public and private
resources necessary to meet the challenge.
A. To prepare and complete a family needs assessment to determine the current and
future needs of the family.
B. To identify, evaluate and recommend to the families of Quincy those resources
available to meet needs.
C. To provide families with a directory of, and contact with, all those agencies, public
and private, providing services to families.
D. To identify those areas of family need where resources are lacking and work toward
the creation or discovery of those resources at all levels of the public and private
sector to meet those needs.
E. To work specifically with families to explain ways in which the public school
system can be more effective in meeting the changing needs of families.
F. To work with City departments and the public school system to create those afterschool
and evening programs that will provide wholesome and meaningful
educational and recreational opportunities for youth.
G. To work closely with all service provider departments of the City to create new and
innovative ways in which families can be assisted by those dynamic and growing
institutions.
H. To provide families with a sense of family community that breaks down the sense
of isolation that many parents and children feel as a result of the changing family
structure.
§ 12-36 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 12-38
12:23
§ 12-39. Composition.
The Commission shall consist of 17 members, all of whom shall either live or work in
Quincy.
§ 12-40. Appointment; terms; organization; compensation; meetings.
I. To work with the Police Department, particularly the drug unit, to provide the
Department with a sense of how families feel about law enforcement, as it pertains
to them, and how it could become more effective and more sensitive to family
needs.
J. To assist new families moving into the City of Quincy in becoming acquainted with
the Commission on the Family and with all services provided to families in areas
such as education, health, recreation and employment.
K. To create an atmosphere or climate in which people fully understand the full scope
of community resources to keep the family strong.
L. To establish and maintain a channel for Quincy citizens of all ages to volunteer their
efforts in ways to help children and families, including but not limited to such
activities as mentoring and talent banks.
M. To create an annual calendar of events, family-oriented, nonalcoholic events. Said
calendar shall be distributed free of charge to Quincy residents. The Commission
shall look into private sources of funding, but public sources shall not be excluded,
to publish said calendar.
A. Thirteen appointments to the Commission shall be made by the Mayor for a term of
three years, with four members being appointed on the first Monday of February.
Vacancies, as well as initial appointments, shall be for the remainder of the
unexpired term. So far as practical, members appointed shall be from the following
fields: public education, law enforcement, City planning, job training, domestic
violence, recreation, clergy, business, media, social services, community services,
health care, and mental health. The Commission shall annually elect a Chairperson
from among it members and may elect other officers as it deems necessary. All
members shall serve without compensation. The Commission shall meet at least 10
times a year. Nine members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, and a
majority of those present shall be sufficient for any action taken by the
Commission, except where this article provides otherwise.
B. For the initial appointments to the Commission, the Mayor shall appoint members
as follows:
(1) Five members for a term of three years.
(2) Four members for a term of two years.
(3) Four members for a term of one year.
C. Thereafter the Mayor shall appoint each successor to a term of three years. No
member of the Commission may serve for more than two consecutive terms. A
member having served two consecutive terms must remain off the Commission for
§ 12-38 QUINCY CODE § 12-40
12:24
§ 12-41. Family Council.
at least one year before becoming eligible for reappointment.
D. Four appointments to the Commission shall be made by the Family Council in a
manner to be determined by the bylaws of the Family Council.
A. The Family Council shall be a source of information and serve to advise the
Commission on the Family on the needs of the family, resources necessary to meet
those needs and any and all other matters inherent in the operation of the
Commission on the Family. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
B. There shall be established, by the Commission, a Family Council, hereafter referred
to as the "Council." The Council shall have at least 15 members, but not more than
25. Members shall be chosen by the Commission upon the recommendation of the
Chairperson of the Commission on the Family, with any member of the
Commission having the right to submit a name or names directly to the Commission
for consideration. All members of the Family Council must reside in Quincy.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
C. Appointment of members to the Family Council shall follow the following
guidelines: families which are blended, are affected by divorce, contain dual
careers, have grandparents raising grandchildren, follow a traditional model and
represent different areas of the City.
D. Members of the Council shall be appointed for three-year terms, with 1/3 of the
members being appointed on the first of February of each year. Four alternate
members shall be appointed, who in the absence or the inability of any member of
the Family Council to attend and participate in the affairs of the Commission may
be designated by the Chairperson of the Commission to act in the place of a regular
Council member.
E. For initial appointments to the Council, the Commission shall appoint members as
follows:
(1) One-third of the members for a term of three years.
(2) One-third of the members for a term of two years.
(3) One-third of the members for a term of one year.
F. Thereafter the Commission shall appoint each successor to a term of three years.
No member of the Council may serve for more than two consecutive terms. A
member having served two consecutive terms must remain off the Council for at
least one year before becoming eligible for reappointment.
G. The Council shall meet at least 10 times annually and shall provide minutes of its
meetings to the Commission. A majority of the total number of Council members
appointed shall constitute a quorum, and a majority of these present shall be
sufficient for any action taken by the Council, unless where this article provides
otherwise, or the rules of the Commission provide otherwise.
H. The Family Council shall elect from its membership a Chairperson and all other
§ 12-40 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 12-41
12:25
§ 12-42. Annual report.
The Commission on the Family shall provide the Mayor and City Council with an annual
report of its activities as well as an audited financial report of all money received and
expended.
officers it deems necessary as provided for in the Council bylaws.
§ 12-41 QUINCY CODE § 12-42
12:26
ARTICLE XI
Recycling Commission
[Adopted by Order No. 96-086 ( Ch. 2.117 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 12-43. Establishment; terms; purpose.
The Recycling Commission is established. It shall consist of 10 residents of the City
appointed by the Mayor for a term of three years. The purpose of the Commission is to
monitor the recycling efforts of the City of Quincy and to promote, when appropriate,
additional recycling efforts.
§ 12-43 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 12-43
12:27

ARTICLE XII
Community-Oriented Policing and Problem-Solving Commission
[Adopted by Order No. 97-071 (Ch. 2.138 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 12-44. Findings.
§ 12-45. Establishment; membership; compensation; officers.
There shall be a Community-Oriented Policing and Problem-Solving Commission
(hereinafter referred to as the "Commission") consisting of 20 members appointed by the
Mayor of the City of Quincy unless otherwise noted.
A. Over the years, maintaining public order has shifted from being primarily the
responsibility of families, communities and individuals, assisted by police officers,
to being primarily the responsibility of the police alone. In the process, enforcing
laws and exacting penalties have become the principal if not the sole response to
public order and safety issues.
B. Community policing reverses that trend by recognizing that the community at large
is responsible for the conditions that generate crime. Deterrence, law enforcement
and incarceration by themselves cannot resolve the underlying conditions that cause
crime and social disorder. In fact, specific responsible people within the community
have as much to do with the overall policing of the community and the regulation
of conduct as uniformed police officers.
C. To cultivate this transition, an educational process and heightening of awareness
must take place. The community must accept and share responsibility with the
police for social order and both must work cooperatively in order to identify
problems and develop proactive community-wide solutions. The police must
acknowledge that they cannot do the job alone, recognize that they have valuable
resources available to them within the community and understand that the
community must be involved in the problem-solving process. In turn, government
and community leaders must recognize and accept responsibility for keeping their
neighborhoods safe. Communities must take a unified stand against crime, violence
and disregard for the law. The Police Department must help build stronger, more
self-sufficient communities, communities in which crime and disorder will not
thrive.
D. Community policing is democracy in action. All who share a concern for the
welfare of the neighborhood should bear responsibility for safeguarding that
welfare.
A. Commission members shall include permanent members and private members.
(1) The following permanent members shall serve on the Commission until their
successor is appointed: Police and Fire Chiefs, Commissioner of Natural
Resources, Director of Recreation, Superintendent of Schools, City of Quincy
Captain Community Policing, City of Quincy President Police Patrolmen's
Union, President of the Superior Officers' Association, and a community
police officer appointed by the City of Quincy Chief of Police.
§ 12-44 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 12-45
12:29
§ 12-46. Rules and regulations; meetings.
A majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, and the affirmative vote of a
majority of all the members of the Commission shall be necessary in order to adopt any
motion or resolution. The Commission shall, from time to time, establish rules for its
proceedings. Regular and special meetings of the Commission shall be held at a time and
place fixed by the Commission. The sessions of the Commission shall be open to the
public, and every matter coming before the Commission for action shall be put to a vote,
the result of which shall be duly recorded. A full and accurate journal of the proceedings
of the Commission shall be kept and shall be open. All existing collective bargaining
agreements by the City of Quincy and all employees of the Quincy Police Department
are recognized and shall be binding upon all actions of the Commission.
§ 12-47. Functions and purpose.
The Commission is established to create a Quincy organization which will assist
Quincy's communities in building partnerships with the Quincy Police Department and
in assisting the Quincy Police Department in its mission to serve and to protect and
to enhance and expand community policing and problem-solving efforts. The work,
(2) The following members shall be asked to serve on the Commission until their
successor is appointed: the Executive Director of the Quincy Housing
Authority, an individual from the Probation Department of the Quincy District
Court appointed by the presiding justice of the Quincy District Court, an
individual from the Norfolk County Sheriff's Department appointed by the
Norfolk County Sheriff, a representative from the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts Department of Children and Families, and an individual from
the Norfolk County District Attorney's office appointed by the Norfolk County
District Attorney. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
(3) In addition, the Mayor shall make every effort to appoint three private
members from the following: court system, social service agencies and clergy.
(4) In addition, there shall be three neighborhood representatives from a
community policing area appointed by the Mayor upon the recommendation
of the community police officer.
(5) The following shall be resources to the Board: Commissioner of Public Works,
Director of Planning and Community Development, Health Commissioner,
Director of Inspectional Services and business leaders.
B. All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
C. A vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term. Upon the expiration of the
term of office of a member, his/her successor shall be appointed in the same manner
aforesaid.
D. The Chairperson of the Commission shall be the Police Chief of the City of Quincy.
E. There shall be an Executive Director of the Commission who shall be a resident of
the City of Quincy. The compensation of the Executive Director shall be established
by the Mayor.
§ 12-45 QUINCY CODE § 12-47
12:30
function and purpose of the Commission shall be limited to the following:
A. Prepare a strategic plan and mission statement based on needs and objectives of the
community and to update the same as needed and deemed necessary.
B. Identify and prioritize problems that plague communities.
C. Develop, implement and support community police officers with innovative and
effective responses.
D. Organize neighborhood groups of citizens to become activists with City officials to
deter criminal activity.
E. Support the community police officer in his/her efforts to identify problems and
solve problems within the community.
F. Cultivate cooperative problem-solving relationships between private and public
agencies and the community.
G. Educate and inform the public about community policing.
H. Establish and maintain a channel for Quincy residents to volunteer and/or assist in
Quincy's community policing efforts.
I. Foster a recognition that community policing is democracy in action that requires
the active participation of all citizens.
J. Maximize Quincy's share of grant moneys.
§ 12-47 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 12-47
12:31

ARTICLE XIII
Educational Fund Committee
[Adopted 9-23-2002 by Order No. 2002-204 (Ch. 2.154 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 12-48. Establishment; membership; terms.
Pursuant to MGL c. 60, § 3C, the City of Quincy Educational Fund Committee is
established. It shall consist of the Superintendent of Schools or his designee and six
residents of the City appointed by the Mayor pursuant to the City Charter. The initial
appointments shall be for two members through the first Monday in February 2005, two
members to 2004, and two members to 2003. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for a
term of three years. When appointed, one Committee member shall be a teacher in the
Quincy public schools, one shall be a member of a City-wide parent organization, one
shall be a member of the School Committee, one shall be a member of the City Council
and two shall be concerned residents of the City interested in school affairs.
§ 12-49. Duties.
Pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 60, § 3C, the Committee shall oversee the
distribution of donated funds to provide supplemental educational funding for local
educational needs.
§ 12-50. Employment classification.
Members of the Committee shall be considered special municipal employees.
§ 12-48 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 12-50
12:33

ARTICLE XIV
Community Preservation Committee
[Adopted 12-18-2006 by Order No. 2006-296 (Ch. 2.256 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 12-51. Establishment; membership. [Amended 5-6-2013 by Order No. 2013-070;
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
There shall be a Community Preservation Committee in accordance with Chapter 267
of the Acts of 2000, as amended,3 which shall consist of nine members: one member
of the Conservation Commission as designated by the Commission; one member of the
Planning Board as designated by the Board; one member of the Historical Commission
as designated by the Commission; one member of the Housing Authority, established
under MGL c. 121B, as designated by the Authority; one member of the Park and
Recreation Board as designated by the Board; one member of the City Council as
recommended by the City Council President and appointed by the Mayor; and three
citizens not currently holding elected or appointed office appointed by the Mayor. Any
vacancy shall be filled by the respective board, commission, Housing Authority or
Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term.
§ 12-52. Terms of office. [Amended 9-6-2011 by Order No. 2011-093]
The term of office shall be for three years. To stagger the terms of the members, initially,
the Historical Commission member, the Planning Board member and the Housing
Authority member shall serve for two years, and the members from the Conservation
Commission, City Council and Park and Recreation Board shall serve for one year. In
the event that a designee of a multimember body no longer serves on the board he or she
represents on the Community Preservation Committee, that position shall be vacant and
filled by the appropriate multimember body.
§ 12-53. Authority and duties.
A. The Community Preservation Committee shall study the needs, possibilities and
resources of the City, including the consideration of regional projects, regarding
community preservation. The Committee shall consult with the Mayor, City
Council, and existing municipal boards, including the Conservation Commission,
the Historical Commission, the Planning Board, the Park and Recreation Board and
the Housing Authority, or persons acting in those capacities or performing like
duties, in conducting such studies. [Amended 5-6-2013 by Order No. 2013-070;
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
B. As part of its study, the Committee shall annually hold one or more public
informational hearings on the needs, possibilities and resources of the City
regarding community preservation possibilities and resources, notice of which shall
be posted publicly and published for each of two weeks preceding a hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City.
C. By November 1 of each year, the Community Preservation Committee shall provide
a list of anticipated capital projects needing City Council action during the fiscal
3. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 44B, the Community Preservation Act.
§ 12-51 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES § 12-53
12:35
year. Such submittal should include all recommendations for the acquisition,
creation, preservation, restoration and rehabilitation of all allowable assets pursuant
to MGL c. 44B. [Amended 5-6-2013 by Order No. 2013-070; 6-1-2020 by Order
No. 2020-012]
D. Twenty-one days before the date the Mayor is required to submit a proposed City
budget to the City Council, the Community Preservation Committee shall submit
its budget to the Mayor. The budget may include recommendation to set aside for
later spending funds for specific purposes that are consistent with community
preservation but for which sufficient revenues are not then available in the
Community Preservation Fund to accomplish that specific purpose or to set aside
for later spending funds for general purposes that are consistent with community
preservation.
E. For each fiscal year at least 10% of the estimated annual fund revenues must be
appropriated or reserved for acquisitions and initiative in each of the following
categories:
(1) Open space, including land for recreational purposes. [Amended 5-6-2013 by
Order No. 2013-070]
(2) Community housing.
(3) Historic resources.
F. Annual appropriations for the administrative and operating expenses of the
Community Preservation Committee may not exceed 5% of the year's estimated
annual Community Preservation Fund revenues.
§ 12-53 QUINCY CODE § 12-53
12:36
Chapter 19
CITY COUNCIL
§ 19-1. Ordinances.
§ 19-2. Forms of expression by Council. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
Whenever the City Council expresses anything by way of command, the form of
expression shall be "ordered," and whenever such Council expresses opinions,
principles, facts or purposes, the form shall be "resolved."
§ 19-3. When ordinances, orders, resolutions and votes become effective.
Every ordinance, order, resolution or vote shall go into effect upon its passage, unless
otherwise provided by law.
§ 19-4. Open meetings.
The meetings of the City Council shall be held in the Council chamber, City Hall, and
shall be open to the public.
§ 19-5. Regular meetings. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
Regular meetings of the Council shall be held in the Council chamber (Harry W. Tirrell
Hall) the first and third Monday evenings of each month, commencing at 7:30 p.m.
and shall adjourn at 11:00 p.m. The Clerk of the Council shall notify the Councilors
of all meetings of the Council by notice as required by MGL c. 30A and sent by mail.
Whenever the first or third Monday evening of the month is a holiday, the regular
meeting shall be held on the first or third Tuesday evening of the month at 7:30 p.m.,
unless otherwise provided for by motion. During July and August, regular meetings shall
be suspended. The Council may, by majority vote, dispense with any regular meeting or
change the day and hours of holding or adjournment of any regular meeting.
§ 19-6. Special meetings.
The President of the City Council, or any four members thereof, may at any time call
a special meeting of the Council by causing written notices stating the time, place and
purpose of the meeting and signed by the person or persons calling the same to be
delivered in hand to each member of the Council, or left at his usual dwelling place,
A. Enacting style. The enacting style of City ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by
the City Council of Quincy as follows."
B. Recordation; specifications for recordation book; public inspection. All ordinances
shall be recorded by the City Clerk in the order in which they are passed to be
ordained, in a book prepared and kept for that purpose, made of strong ledger paper,
with proper margins and indexes and strongly bound. This book shall be lettered
"Records of Ordinances of the City of Quincy" and shall be preserved in the office
of the City Clerk, subject to public inspection.
§ 12-53 CITY COUNCIL § 19-6
19:1
at least 12 hours before the time for such meeting. There shall be held on the second
Monday of each month a special meeting of the City Council for the purpose of holding
public hearings. These special meetings shall be only for this purpose unless called
for some other purpose, of which due notice shall be given as provided herein. Such
meetings shall commence at 7:30 p.m. Whenever the second Monday evening of the
month is a holiday, the special meeting shall be held on the second Tuesday evening
of the month at 7:30 p.m. During July and August, these special meetings shall be
suspended.
§ 19-7. Conduct during meetings.
§ 19-8. City Council members. [Added 11-10-2016 by Order No. 2016-246 (§ 2.10
of the 1993 Code)]
A. If a person behaves in a disorderly manner during any meeting of the City Council,
and after notice from the presiding officer persists therein, the presiding officer may
order him to withdraw from the meeting, and on his refusal may order any other
persons to take him from the meeting. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
B. The person so refusing to withdraw when requested as provided in Subsection A
shall for such offense be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, of this Code.
A. Term. The City Council, consisting of nine persons elected at large by and from the
qualified voters of the City and one member from each of the six wards in the City.
One of its members shall be elected by the Council annually as its President. There
shall be elected at each annual City election a sufficient number of members to fill
the vacancies created by the expiration of said terms, each member so elected to
serve for two years.
B. Description. To serve as a direct representative of the residents of Quincy.
Responsible for creating, investigating, deliberating and enacting legislation.
Communicate with residents; assist them with requesting and receiving City
services.
C. Duties.
(1) A full-time position (1,820 hours per year) with flexible hours that allow for
other non-City of Quincy employment.
(2) To represent the residents of Quincy in all legislative matters.
(3) Council members' statutory duties are to be performed, almost without
exception, by the Council as a whole.
(4) To identify and discuss issues impacting the City of Quincy, receive and
consider public input, make appropriate decisions in a manner which
encourages full and open discussion, and exercise all the powers that state
statutes and City ordinances empower to the Council members to lawfully
govern the community.
(5) Solicits and receives input from affected parties and the general public.
§ 19-6 QUINCY CODE § 19-8
19:2
(6) Responds to constituent requests for information or assistance with problem
resolution. Acts as liaison between the City and the general public.
(7) Reviews and approves an annual budget and tax levy.
(8) Authorizes any and all borrowing by the City of Quincy.
(9) Sets and interprets rules governing its own proceedings.
D. Compensation. In accordance with Chapter 72, Article I, Job Classifications and
Salaries, § 72-1, official salary schedules shall be kept on file in the office of the
City Clerk.
E. Qualifications. To be elected by the residents of Quincy.
§ 19-8 CITY COUNCIL § 19-8
19:3

Chapter 25
DEPARTMENTS
§ 19-8 DEPARTMENTS § 19-8
25:1

ARTICLE I
Police Department
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Chs. 2.68 and 2.84 of the 1993 Code]
§ 25-1. Establishment; composition.
A Police Department is established which shall consist of a Chief of Police and not fewer
than five captains, 16 lieutenants, 26 sergeants and 188 police officers (patrolmen and
patrolwomen), or such larger numbers as are deemed necessary by the Mayor, but, in the
event that any position in the Police Department, as hereby established, becomes vacant
because of death, resignation or retirement, it shall be the prerogative of the Mayor to
fill such opening or openings.
§ 25-2. Chief of Police.
§ 25-3. Rules and regulations for alarm systems.
The Chief of Police is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations for the orderly
use of alarm systems within the City. Such rules and regulations may provide for the
payment of fees or fines for the misuse or malfunction of such alarms. Such fees
and fines shall be reasonably related to the cost incurred by the Police Department in
responding to alarms which are misused or malfunction. Such rules and regulations,
including, without limitation, any provisions with respect to such fees and fines, shall be
subject to the written approval of the Mayor.
§ 25-4. Duties of patrolmen.
Patrolmen shall, during such hours as the rules prescribe, patrol the streets and other
parts of the City as the Chief of Police shall direct, to prevent danger from fire and to
see that disturbances and disorders are prevented and suppressed, and shall perform such
other duties as the Chief shall, from time to time, direct. They shall immediately make
a careful examination of every case of accident, personal injury or injury to property
coming to their notice, secure the names of witnesses thereto, and make a full report
thereof to the Chief, who, if the liability or the property of the City is involved, shall
forthwith furnish the City Solicitor with a full report upon such cases together with the
names of the witnesses. They shall take notice of all obstructions, nuisances and defects
in the streets and, if authorized, shall remove the same when practicable. They shall
notice every streetlamp not lighted at the proper time and shall immediately report the
same to the Chief.
A. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the discipline, good order and proper
conduct of the men constituting the Police Department and for the good condition
of all the property connected with the Department.
B. The Chief of Police shall make to the Mayor annually, and more often if required,
a detailed report of all the business of the Police Department and shall keep a record
of the prosecutions instituted before the courts or by it, and shall, on the last day of
the week, prepare a payroll of all personnel in the Department and all persons
attached to his Department or under his supervision and present it to the Auditor.
§ 25-1 DEPARTMENTS § 25-5
25:3
§ 25-5. Deposit of fees collected by Department.
All fees in any criminal case for the service of any criminal process or any fee for
service in behalf of the City received by the Chief of Police or any member of the Police
Department shall be paid to the Treasurer/Collector.
§ 25-6. Disability; pensioning.
If, in the opinion of the Mayor, the disability of a member of the Police Department has
become permanent, then MGL c. 32, § 83, regarding pensioning of officers, may be put
into operation.
§ 25-7. Police work for private parties.
Regular patrolmen shall not engage in police work for hire for private parties, unless
designated by the Chief of Police.
§ 25-8. Absence of Chief of Police.
Whenever, by reason of sickness or absence from the City or for any other cause, the
Chief of Police shall be unable to perform the duties of his office, the senior captain shall
be in charge of the Police Department during such absence or disability. When the senior
captain is so in charge of the Police Department, he shall be respected and obeyed as
Chief.
§ 25-9. Uniforms.
Whenever any member of the Police Department is required to wear a uniform other than
the regulation uniform prescribed in the manual, such uniform shall be furnished by the
City.
§ 25-10. Paid police details. [Added 12-6-1999 by Order No. 99-188A]
A. Should Police Department personnel while on duty in service to the Department be
dispatched or caused to respond to an incident involving crime resulting in an arrest,
citation, application for a criminal complaint or indictment against a person or
property, including but not limited to disturbing the peace, trespassing, underage
drinking or assault, at a particular property or location, the Chief of the Department
is hereby authorized and empowered to assign to such property or location a
member or members of the Department to staff such paid police detail or details as
the Chief of the Department deems appropriate to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Quincy.
B. Such assignment of a detail shall only occur after the following procedures:
(1) The Department shall record the number of such incidents, and after four such
incidents in a twelve-month period, the Chief of the Department shall cause a
copy of this section to be sent by regular and certified mail to the property
owner or management company of record according to the most recent records
of the Assessors' office.
(2) After the eighth such incident in a twelve-month period, the Chief of the
§ 25-5 QUINCY CODE § 25-10
25:4
Department, in his discretion, shall notify the property owner by certified and
regular mail of his decision to assign said detail commencing seven days after
the date of such notice.
(3) The property owner may request, in writing, a hearing before the Chief of the
Department within said seven days to appeal the Chief's decision to assign a
detail. The Chief of the Department shall, within 90 days of the enactment of
this section, promulgate rules, procedures and regulations relative to the same.
C. If, after termination by the Chief of the Department of a paid detail, Police
Department personnel while on duty in service to the Department are again
dispatched or caused to respond to an incident at a particular property as described
in Subsection A of this section, within 60 days of such termination, the Chief of the
Department is hereby authorized and empowered to again assign a paid detail to
such property or location as the Chief of the Department shall deem appropriate,
following the procedure as set forth in Subsection B of this section.
D. For the purposes of this section, "paid police detail" shall mean one or more
otherwise off-duty member or members of the Quincy Police Department assigned
by the Chief of the Department to a particular property or location for the purpose
of presence, monitoring, patrol, supervision and otherwise acting to maintain the
peace and good order of and at the property or location to which such member or
members of the Police Department is or are assigned.
E. Paid police details shall be of a minimum of four hours in duration.
F. The member or members of the Police Department staffing such paid police details
shall be paid therefor at the rates set by the City of Quincy or the Quincy Police
Department, and such paid police details shall be subject to such other rules and
regulations of the Department that pertain to police details other than as provided
for under this section.
G. The Chief of the Department or his designee shall keep an accurate record of the
number of paid police details assigned to a particular property or location under this
section and of the number of members of the Department staffing such paid police
details, and the Chief of the Department or his designee shall forward such
information to the office of the Treasurer/Collector.
H. In addition to the other duties of the Treasurer/Collector, it shall be the duty of and
the Treasurer/Collector is hereby authorized and empowered to bill to the record
owner of the particular property or location the costs of such paid police details
assigned thereto, pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 58.
I. Fees for police details. [Amended 12-5-2011 by Order No. 2011-149]
(1) Fees for police details must be paid within 30 days after the issuance of a bill.
In the event that such charges remain unpaid after the expiration of the 30
days, interest will accrue at a rate equivalent to that assessed for unpaid taxes
pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 59, § 57, as said provision may from time
to time be amended. A late fee equal to 10% of the billable detail cost shall
also be assessed.
§ 25-10 DEPARTMENTS § 25-10
25:5
§ 25-11. Communications Division.
The Communications Division is established, under the direct supervision of the Chief of
Police. The Division shall be responsible for the planning, installation and maintenance
of all radio and communications equipment within the Department. The employees of
the Division shall not be considered as members of the uniformed police.
(2) The Police Chief may develop a policy assuring timely payment of such fees,
including but not limited to requirement of a deposit or escrow of funds
sufficient to cover such obligations.
J. All amounts so collected by the Treasurer/Collector shall be deposited into the
general fund of the City and used to pay the member or members of the Department
for the service rendered in staffing the paid police details provided for pursuant to
this section.
§ 25-10 QUINCY CODE § 25-11
25:6
ARTICLE II
Fire Department
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as §§ 2.72.010 to 2.72.180 and 2.72.200 to 2.72.220 of the 1993
Code]
§ 25-12. Composition.
The Fire Department shall consist of the Chief and as many deputy chiefs, captains,
lieutenants and firefighters as are deemed necessary by the Mayor.
§ 25-13. Organization.
The Fire Department shall be organized into seven engine companies, five ladder
companies, one combination hose company and one lighting unit.
§ 25-14. Officers and members; hours of duty.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall arrange the officers and members of the Fire
Department into such groups and details as may be necessary so that the weekly hours
of duty of the officers and members of the Fire Department shall not exceed 48 hours in
any week.
§ 25-15. Fire Chief.
A. Conduct of officers and members. The Chief of the Fire Department shall be
responsible for the discipline, good order and proper conduct of the officers and
men constituting the Fire Department and shall have the superintendence and the
control of the several fire stations, the apparatus, the furniture therein and all other
property appertaining to the Department. He shall, from time to time, make such
rules and regulations for the government of the Department as he may deem
expedient.
B. Suspension of officers and members. The Chief of the Fire Department may,
subject to the provisions of the General Laws, suspend from duty any officer or
member who shall neglect or refuse to perform his duty or who shall be guilty of
any disorderly conduct or of disobedience to any superior officer, or of the rules
and regulations of the Department, or of any violation of any general orders, and
shall forthwith report such suspensions to the Mayor.
C. Control and command at fires. The Chief of the Fire Department shall have the sole
and absolute control and command of all members of the Department and of other
persons present at a fire.
D. Absence. In case of the absence of the Chief of the Fire Department, the ranking
officer on duty shall, during such absence, have and exercise all the power and
authority of the Chief and shall perform the duties of his office. The officer in
command of the first company which arrives at a fire shall be the officer in
command until a superior officer arrives.
E. Member records. The Chief shall keep a roll of the members of the Department
specifying the name, age and residence and date of appointment and discharge of
§ 25-12 DEPARTMENTS § 25-15
25:7
§ 25-16. Key box access to buildings.
§ 25-17. Interference with fire signal boxes.
No unauthorized person shall open any of the fire signal boxes, except in case of fire,
or interfere with the wires or the poles or other supports of the wires of the fire signal
boxes.
§ 25-18. Investigation of false alarms.
The Chief of the Fire Department, or any officer or member delegated by him in writing,
shall investigate and make certain that every person sounding or causing to be sounded
a false alarm of fire or other false emergency call is prosecuted if apprehended.
§ 25-19. Prohibited conduct in Department buildings.
No gambling shall be allowed in any building occupied by the Fire Department, nor shall
spirituous liquors or drugs be carried into, kept or used there.
§ 25-20. Apparatus leaving City.
No apparatus shall be taken out of the City to a fire without the permission of the Chief
of the Fire Department or, in his absence, that of the ranking officer on duty, provided
that this section shall not apply when an agreement for mutual aid between any other city
or town and this City shall be in effect.
§ 25-21. Obstructing firefighters or fire equipment.
No person shall impede or in any way obstruct the progress of any official or apparatus
each member of the same.
F. Annual report. The Chief of the Fire Department shall annually make to the Mayor,
and more often if required, a detailed report in writing of the condition of the Fire
Department, of the fires, loss and accidents by fires, with the cause thereof, as well
as he can ascertain, together with a description of the buildings and other property
destroyed or injured, the amount of insurance and the names of owners.
G. Fire alarm signal system. The Chief of the Fire Department shall have full charge
of the operation of the fire alarm signal system and shall assign to duty in
connection therewith such members of the Department as he may deem expedient.
A. All buildings other than a residential building of fewer than six units shall contain
a secure key box installed in a location accessible to the Fire Department in case of
emergency. This key box shall contain a complete set of building entry keys and
keys to fire alarm control panels and other keys necessary to operate or service fire
protection systems. The key box shall be a type approved by the Chief of the
Quincy Fire Department and shall be located and installed as approved by the Chief.
B. Any entity violating a provision of this section shall be subject to a fine of $100 and
$10 per day until it is in compliance with the ordinance codified in this section,
enforceable through the authorized personnel of the Quincy Fire Department.
§ 25-15 QUINCY CODE § 25-21
25:8
connected with the Fire Department by driving or riding a motor vehicle, team or bicycle
in front of such official or apparatus while the same is answering an alarm of fire or other
emergency alarm. No person shall stop a vehicle, bicycle or other similar device or park
or leave the same unattended or place or cause to be placed any material or things in
such manner as to impede or obstruct the progress of any vehicle of the Fire Department
while the same is responding to an alarm or other emergency call.
§ 25-22. Crossing fire hose.
No person shall drive over any hose belonging to the Fire Department, with any vehicle,
when such hose is stationed, located or laid in any street, except under the direction of
the officer in command thereat.
§ 25-23. Right-of-way of Fire Department.
In case of fire, the Fire Department, its officers and members, with their machines and
equipment, shall have the right-of-way in the public streets and ways of the City, as
against all other persons, vehicles or animals.
§ 25-24. Fire or explosion hazard; paid fire detail.
§ 25-25. Transportation and/or detonation of explosives. [Added by Order No.
94-132]
A. Whenever the maintenance, operation, or use of any land, building, structure,
material or other object, or any part thereof, including vehicles used in the transport
of hazardous materials, constitutes a fire or explosion hazard which is dangerous or
unsafe or a menace to the public safety, and the action to be taken to eliminate such
dangerous or unsafe condition or conditions which create, or tend to create, the
same is not specifically provided for in the prior City ordinances, and unless
otherwise prohibited by law or regulations, the head of the Fire Department is
authorized and empowered to take such action as may be necessary to eliminate
such dangerous or unsafe condition or conditions, including the evacuation of
buildings and/or the assignment of a paid fire detail pending such elimination.
B. "Paid fire detail" means off-duty authorized member or members of the Quincy Fire
Department, contracted to act as a paid fire detail, who take immediate and proper
steps to prevent injury or loss of life or property.
C. The members, equipment and duties of the fire detail shall be those specified as
necessary by the head of the Fire Department to handle the hazardous condition.
Compensation shall be at the rate established by the pay scale of the Quincy Fire
Department and shall be paid by the outside employer. Such paid fire detail shall be
paid by the person demolishing the building or other person designated by the head
of the Fire Department.
A. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
EXPLOSIVES — Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or
common purpose of which is to function by explosion, i.e., with substantially
instantaneous release of gas and heat; also, any explosive or other chemical
compound or mixture confined in a container and capable of doing damage to
§ 25-21 DEPARTMENTS § 25-25
25:9
§ 25-26. Building demolition; notification; paid fire detail required. [Amended by
Order No. 97-337]
persons or property or both on ignition or detonation. Further, any compound,
mixture, or device suspected of being an explosive whether confined in a container
or not.
PERSON(S) — Any person, firm, corporation, society, association or partnership
and/or any employee/member of any federal agency, duly authorized militia of the
commonwealth, or state or local police department and/or fire department, even if
acting within his/her official capacity.
B. No person shall transport or detonate any Class A or Class B explosives, as defined
in 527 CMR 13.03, within the City of Quincy unless such transportation/detonation
has been authorized, in advance, by the Quincy Fire Chief.
C. Whenever the maintenance, operation, or use of any land, building, structure,
material or other object, or any part thereof, including vehicles used in the transport
of hazardous material, constitutes a fire or explosion hazard which is dangerous or
unsafe, or a menace to the public safety within the City limits, the Chief of the
Quincy Fire Department is authorized and empowered to take such action as may
be necessary to abate such dangerous or unsafe condition or conditions, including:
(1) Directing employees of other City departments and agencies;
(2) Ordering and supervising evacuation of buildings;
(3) Directing the transport of hazardous materials, including the speed of such
transport, the routes, the amounts transported and/or the hours of
transportation; and/or
(4) Any further actions which the Fire Chief may deem appropriate in the
circumstances.
A. Any person who has been issued a permit from the Director of Inspectional Services
to demolish a building in the City must notify the head of the Fire Department or
his authorized agent, in writing, before beginning demolishment of such building.
Such person must state the time and date of the building razing and he must make
arrangements for a paid fire detail to cover this demolishing operation. Such paid
fire detail shall be assigned by the Chief of the Fire Department and shall continue
until such time as the demolishing operation has been completed and the debris
removed from the site.
B. Any person receiving a permit to demolish a building from the Director of
Inspectional Services who fails to notify the head of the Fire Department of a
demolishment permit and does not arrange for a paid fire detail and proceeds with
the demolishment of the building without the fire detail shall be punished by a fine
of $50 or, in case of a continuing offense after notice of such violation, by a fine of
$50 for every day during which the violation continues. [Amended 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012]
§ 25-25 QUINCY CODE § 25-27
25:10
§ 25-27. Fire watch detail for temporary structures.
Any temporary structures or facilities not permanently affixed to land and having an
occupancy capacity of 100 or more persons shall be required to engage a fire watch
detail of City of Quincy firefighters during all hours of operation when such structures
or facilities are open for public use, unless such requirement is waived, after review, by
the Fire Chief or his designee.
§ 25-28. Fees for fire detail. [Added 12-5-2011 by Order No. 2011-149A]
A. Fees for fire details must be paid within 30 days after the issuance of a bill. In the
event that such charges remain unpaid after the expiration of the 30 days, interest
will accrue at a rate equivalent to that assessed for unpaid taxes pursuant to the
provisions of MGL c. 59, § 57, as said provision may from time to time be
amended. A late fee equal to 10% of the billable detail cost shall also be assessed.
B. The Fire Chief may develop a policy assuring timely payment of such fees,
including but not limited to requirement of a deposit or escrow of funds sufficient
to cover such obligations.
§ 25-27 DEPARTMENTS § 25-28
25:11

ARTICLE III
Department of Information Technology and Telecommunications Systems
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.76 of the 1993 Code; amended in its entirety
9-24-2001 by Order No. 2001-136]
§ 25-29. Establishment. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
Under the authority of MGL c. 43, § 5, there is established a Department of Information
Technology and Telecommunications Systems (hereinafter in this article called the
"Department"), which shall be within the branch of central service designated in Chapter
5, Article I, of this Code.
§ 25-30. Functions.
§ 25-31. Personnel.
The Department shall consist of a Chief Information Officer approved and funded.
§ 25-32. Appointment of Chief Information Officer. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order
No. 2020-012]
The Chief Information Officer (CIO) shall be the head of the Department. The Mayor
shall annually on or before the first Monday in February appoint the Chief Information
Officer, who shall hold office for one year from the first Monday in February of the year
A. It shall be the function of the Department to provide information technology and
telecommunications systems services as required, including but not limited to the
planning, development and production of information technology and
telecommunications systems and systems analysis for all departments of the City,
including the School Department. Such information technology and
telecommunications systems services shall also include the provision of programs
or systems for the collection, processing, storage and retrieval of information and
for the preparation of reports. As used in this article, the term "information
technology and telecommunications systems" shall include without limitation word
processing, management information systems, database management, and
information technology, networking and telecommunications.
B. Information technology and telecommunications systems services provided by the
Department to the Quincy College shall be for compensation to the Department
through interdepartmental billing in accordance with St. 1993, c. 53.
C. The Department may, upon request and for compensation to the City in accordance
with the rules and regulations provided for in § 25-35 and subject to the approval of
the Mayor, provide information technology and telecommunications systems
services to the Quincy Housing Authority (hereinafter in this article called the
"Authority") and to the City of Quincy - South Coastal Career Development
Administration and any successor thereto.
D. No department in the City may purchase information technology and
telecommunications systems products or services from any source other than the
department approved by the Chief Information Officer as hereinafter defined.
§ 25-29 DEPARTMENTS § 25-32
25:13
of his appointment and until his successor is appointed and qualified. The Mayor may
make the initial appointment of a Chief Information Officer (CIO) upon enactment of
this article.
§ 25-33. Duties of Chief Information Officer.
The CIO shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
§ 25-34. Control of data.
The Chief Information Officer (CIO) shall establish rules and regulations controlling
the access and release of data, not inconsistent with Massachusetts General Laws and
the revised ordinances of the City of Quincy. Neither the CIO nor any other employee
of the Department may release any information or data collected or processed by the
Department except as authorized or required.
§ 25-35. Rules and regulations.
The Chief Information Officer shall establish rules and regulations as to the use of the
Department's services by other departments of the City.
A. To organize and implement a centralized information technology and
telecommunications systems center for the City.
B. To direct, organize and implement the planning, development and production of
information systems, including the development of an integrated municipal
information system.
C. To direct and control the information technology and telecommunications systems
operations and personnel of the Department.
D. To coordinate as may be required, through advice and counsel, the Information
Technology and Telecommunications Systems Department of the City.
E. To advise the Mayor and City Council on information technology and
telecommunications systems matters, including the review of proposed information
technology and telecommunications systems applications or equipment
acquisitions.
F. To provide information technology and telecommunications systems to City
departments, in accordance with the priorities of the City.
G. To maintain and safeguard data, information, programs and equipment of the
Department.
H. To perform such other duties as prescribed by law.
I. To maintain City telephone and wireless service to all City departments.
J. To provide, maintain and secure City-wide network to all City buildings.
§ 25-32 QUINCY CODE § 25-35
25:14
ARTICLE IV
Department of Traffic, Parking, Alarm and Lighting
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.80 of the 1993 Code]
§ 25-36. Establishment; functions. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
The Department of Traffic, Parking, Alarm and Lighting is established. The Mayor
shall annually appoint a Traffic Engineer who shall be the head of the Department,
who shall be experienced in traffic engineering, including traffic and signal design.
The Department shall provide traffic studies as required and oversee the placement and
maintenance of all traffic signs and signals, roadway markings and parking meters within
the City. The Department shall also oversee the collection of parking meter receipts and
the shared enforcement of parking restrictions with the uniformed police, but not the
collection of fines, which shall remain with the Parking Clerk.
§ 25-36 DEPARTMENTS § 25-36
25:15

ARTICLE V
Department of Emergency Management
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.88 of the 1993 Code]
§ 25-37. Establishment; functions.
There is established a Department of Emergency Management. It shall be the function
of the Department to have charge of emergency management as defined in Section
1, Chapter 639, Acts of 1950, and to perform emergency management functions as
authorized or directed by such chapter or by any and all executive orders or general
regulations promulgated thereunder, and to exercise any authority delegated to it by the
Governor under such Chapter 639.
§ 25-38. Definitions.
§ 25-39. Emergency Program Manager.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
COUNCIL — The Emergency Management Advisory Council.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Emergency Management.
MANAGER — The Emergency Program Manager.
B. References to Chapter 639. All references to Chapter 639, Acts of 1950, as now in
force, shall be applicable to any act or acts in amendment or continuation of or
substitution for such Chapter 639.
A. The Department of Emergency Management shall be under the direction of an
Emergency Program Manager, who shall be appointed as prescribed by law. The
Emergency Program Manager shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration and operation of the Department, subject to the direction and control
of the appointing authority, and shall receive such salary as may be fixed from time
to time by the appointing authority and approved by the City Council. The
Manager, with the approval of the Mayor, may, within the limits of the amount
appropriated therefor, appoint such experts, clerks and other assistants as the work
of the Department may require, and may remove them, and may make such
expenditures as may be necessary to execute effectively the purposes of Chapter
639, Acts of 1950. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
B. The Manager shall also have authority to appoint district coordinators and may
accept and receive, on behalf of the City, services, equipment, supplies, materials
or funds by way of gift, grant or loan for the purposes of emergency management
offered by the federal government or any agency or officer thereof or any person,
subject to the terms of the offer and the rules and regulations, if any, of the agency
making the offer. The Manager shall cause appropriate records to be kept of all
matters relating to such gifts, grants or loans, copies of which shall be filed with the
City Clerk.
§ 25-37 DEPARTMENTS § 25-40
25:17
§ 25-40. Emergency Management Advisory Council.
There is established an Emergency Management Advisory Council. Such Council shall
serve without pay and shall consist of the Emergency Program Manager, such other
department heads and such other persons as the authority appointing the Manager may
deem necessary. Such member of the Council as the appointing authority shall designate
shall serve as Chairperson of the Council. The Council shall serve subject to the direction
and control of the appointing authority and shall advise the appointing authority and the
Manager on matters pertaining to emergency management.
§ 25-41. Police to aid other municipalities.
The Police Department of the City is authorized to go to aid another city or town at the
request of such city or town in the suppression of riots or other forms of violence therein.
§ 25-42. Duration.
This article shall remain in force during the effective period of Chapter 639, Acts of
1950, and any act in amendment or continuation thereof or substitution therefor.
§ 25-40 QUINCY CODE § 25-42
25:18
ARTICLE VI
Department of Inspectional Services
[Adopted by Order No. 97-337 (Ch. 2.52 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 25-43. Establishment; composition. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
There is established in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 88 of the Acts
and Resolves of 1995 of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts the Department of
Inspectional Services. The Department shall include the Wiring Department, the
Building Department, including the plumbing personnel thereof, the Department of
Weights and Measures, the Conservation Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement
Officer and the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 25-44. Director of Inspectional Services.
§ 25-45. Sealer of Weights and Measures.
A. The Mayor shall annually appoint the Director of Inspectional Services who shall
have supervision and control of the Department of Inspectional Services. Such
Director shall possess all the necessary qualifications, experience, and certification
required for an inspector of buildings or building commissioner under the
provisions of MGL c. 143. Such Director shall be exempt from the provisions of
MGL c. 31.
B. The Director shall perform all duties and responsibilities required of the inspector
of buildings or building commissioner as required by the laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the ordinances of the City of Quincy,
including the appointment of plumbing and gas fitter inspectors. All local building
inspectors and the plumbing and gas inspectors shall report to the Director of
Inspectional Services.
C. The Director shall conduct a meeting on a biweekly basis and shall summon to such
meeting any and all department heads, inspectors, or other employees, including but
not limited to local building inspectors, wire inspectors, plumbing and gas
inspectors, the Health Commissioner and inspectors within his/her Department, fire
safety inspectors, the Director of Planning and Community Development, the
Commissioner of Public Works, and the Conservation Enforcement Officer
necessary to review applications for building permits for buildings with a gross
floor area in excess of 10,000 square feet. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
A. The Mayor shall, pursuant to MGL c. 98, § 34, appoint the Sealer of Weights and
Measures. He shall be subject to the provisions of MGL c. 31 and shall report to the
Director of Inspectional Services.
B. The Sealer of Weights and Measures shall, as directed by the Director of
Inspectional Services, perform the following duties:
(1) Collect the fees and charges which by law he is allowed to receive and pay
over to the City treasury all money received by him;
§ 25-43 DEPARTMENTS § 25-45
25:19
§ 25-46. Inspector of Wires.
(2) At the time of sealing, furnish the owner of the articles sealed or his agent a
certificate signed by the Sealer, stating the name and address of the owner of
the article, the date when sealed, and the amount of the fee, if any, collected;
(3) Keep a detailed record of all work performed by him and annually make a
report to the Director;
(4) Establish office hours for the convenience of the public who desire to have
scales, weights and measures tested;
(5) Have the care and custody of all public scales of the City; and
(6) Perform such other duties that the Director of Inspectional Services deems
necessary for the proper performance of his duties.
A. The Mayor shall, pursuant to MGL c. 166, § 32, appoint the Inspector of Wires. He
shall be a licensed electrician and subject to MGL c. 31. He shall report to the
Director of Inspectional Services. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
B. The Inspector of Wires shall, as directed by the Director of Inspectional Services,
perform the following duties:
(1) Have supervision of all electric and other wires erected in, upon, over or under
any building;
(2) Keep a detailed record of the business transacted in the Department over which
he has charge, and shall submit an annual report of the same to the Director in
January;
(3) Require any person operating electric or other wires to furnish him with such
information as may be necessary to the faithful and effectual discharge of his
duties;
(4) Have access at all reasonable times to all wires and appliances and apparatus
in the interior of a public building or on private premises which are intended
for carrying an electric light or power current, and no person shall arrange,
affix or change any such wires, fitting or apparatus without giving the
Inspector reasonable opportunity to inspect the same before it is covered or
enclosed;
(5) Establish rules regulating the time of notification of work to be done, the
requirements or conditions for turning on the electric current and such other
matters as he may deem advisable; and
(6) Perform such other duties that the Director of Inspectional Services deems
necessary for the proper performance of his duties.
§ 25-45 QUINCY CODE § 25-46
25:20
ARTICLE VII
Department of Constituent Services
[Adopted 6-17-2002 by Order No. 2002-118 (Ch. 2.52 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 25-47. Department created.
The Department of Constituent Services is hereby created.
§ 25-48. Appointment of Director and personnel.
The Mayor shall annually, on the first Monday of February, appoint a Director of
Constituent Services and such Constituent Services Associates as may be funded by the
City Council.
§ 25-49. Qualifications of Director and personnel.
The Director and each Constituent Services Associate shall be individuals who the
Mayor believes, based upon training, education and work experience, to be qualified to
interact with and solve specific problems or questions for the general public, department
personnel and department heads, elected officials and their staff at the municipal, state
and federal governments with whom they will be brought into contact and have regular
ongoing communications. In the absence of the Director, the Mayor may designate any
Constituent Services Associate to assume the responsibilities of the Director.
§ 25-50. Responsibilities.
§ 25-51. Intent.
It is the express intention of this article to foster and promote open and direct
communications between the citizens and businesses within the City and elected and
appointed officials of the City and to ensure that the services provided by the City are
carried out in a manner that maximizes the benefits to the public at large and in a fair
and open atmosphere so as to increase confidence in the public that their municipal
government is delivering the appropriate level of services in an efficient manner.
A. The Department of Constituent Services shall be responsible for receiving,
investigating, responding to and coordinating specific inquiries received from
citizens and businesses within the City concerning the delivery of municipal
services. The Department shall serve as a liaison to all other City departments to
ensure that appropriate responses are provided to the public in a timely manner.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
B. The Department shall develop and implement a program to monitor citizen contacts
to help improve the responses both as to timeliness and as to substance.
C. The Department may make recommendations as appropriate to help various City
departments improve their responses to citizen concerns, all with the overriding
goal of improving the delivery of services to the citizens of Quincy.
D. The Department shall develop and implement an outreach program with community
and civic organizations to better facilitate the delivery of municipal services.
§ 25-47 DEPARTMENTS § 25-51
25:21

ARTICLE VIII
Department of Municipal Finance
[Adopted 10-20-2008 by Order No. 2008-272 (Ch. 2.18 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 25-52. Establishment; duties and responsibilities.
There shall be a Department of Municipal Finance (hereinafter "Department")
responsible for the performance of the accounting and financial activities of the City.
The Department shall assume all of the duties and responsibilities related to accounting
and financial activities which prior to the adoption of this article were performed by
or under the authority of the City Auditor. The Department may have such additional
powers, duties and responsibilities with respect to accounting and financial-related
functions and activities as may from time to time be provided by ordinance.
§ 25-53. Director of Municipal Finance.
A. Appointment; term. The Mayor shall appoint the Director of Municipal Finance
(hereinafter "Director") who shall hold office for a term of not more than three
years, unless sooner removed, or until his/her successor is appointed. The Director
shall be a person especially fitted by education, experience and training to perform
the duties of the office. The minimum qualifications for the position of Director
shall be a master's degree in business administration and/or a master's degree in
public finance and/or accounting, and/or a certified public accountant certification,
and a minimum of five years of municipal finance experience in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts. The Director shall be responsible for the
supervision and coordination of all activities of the Department in accordance with
state statutes, City ordinances, administrative code and rules and regulations.
B. Duties and responsibilities. The powers and duties of said Director of Municipal
Finance shall include the following:
(1) Coordination, administration, and supervision of all financial services and
activities.
(2) Assistance in all matters related to municipal financial affairs.
(3) Implementation and maintenance of uniform systems, controls, and
procedures for financial activities in all departments, including but not limited
to maintenance of all financial and accounting data and records.
(4) Implementation and maintenance of uniform budget guidelines and
procedures.
(5) Assistance to the Mayor in development and preparation of all department
budgets and spending plans.
(6) Financial review of all contracts and obligations.
(7) Monitoring of existing debt and coordination of future borrowing plans.
(8) Monitoring of the expenditure of all funds and the receipt of all revenues,
including periodic reporting to appropriate agencies of the status of accounts
§ 25-52 DEPARTMENTS § 25-53
25:23
and including reporting to the City Council at the second meeting of each
month as to the status of funds and receipts as of the end of the preceding
month.
(9) Coordinating the strategy for the funding of capital improvement plans.
(10) Exercise the duties enumerated in MGL c. 41, §§ 51, 52, 54, and 54A.
(11) Where the duty is not expressly charged to any other department or office, it
shall be the duty of the Director to promote, secure, and preserve the financial
interests of the City.
§ 25-53 QUINCY CODE § 25-53
25:24
ARTICLE IX
Department of Public Buildings
[Adopted 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
§ 25-54. Establishment.
There shall be a Department of Public Buildings which shall be responsible for the
oversight, maintenance, construction of, and improvements to all City buildings,
including school buildings.
§ 25-55. Commissioner of Public Buildings.
The Department of Public Buildings shall be headed by a Commissioner of Public
Buildings who shall be appointed by and shall be responsible to the Mayor. The
Commissioner of Public Buildings shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor, coterminous
with the Mayor's term of office. The Commissioner of Public Buildings shall be a person
especially fitted by education, experience and training to perform the duties of the office.
The Commissioner of Public Buildings shall be responsible for the supervision and
coordination of all activities of the Department of Public Buildings in accordance with
state statutes, City ordinances, and rules and regulations.
§ 25-54 DEPARTMENTS § 25-55
25:25

ARTICLE X
Department of Natural Resources
[Adopted 2-4-2019 by Order No. 2018-176 (Ch. 2.38 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 25-56. Commissioner of Natural Resources.
§ 25-57. Program Manager.
§ 25-58. Director of Recreation.
A. Appointment; term. The Mayor shall, on or before the first Monday in February of
the first year of the Mayor's term in office, appoint the Commissioner of Natural
Resources who shall hold office for four years from the date of appointment,
coterminous with the Mayor, subject, however, to the provisions of Section 54 of
the Municipal Charter.
B. Powers and duties generally.
(1) The Commissioner of Natural Resources shall have full supervision, direction
and control of each division within the Department, subject to the direction of
the Mayor, except that the Park Division and the Recreation Division shall
remain subject to the provisions of Chapter 78 of the Acts of 1961 and the
Cemetery Division shall remain subject to the provisions of Chapter 499 of the
Acts of 1958. The Commissioner shall be responsible for, and have control
over, all functions and responsibilities under Chapter 222, Parks and
Recreation Areas, of this Code.
(2) The Commissioner shall have full supervision, direction and control of the
Forestry Division and its Tree Warden and the Conservation Division and its
Earth Scientist.
A. All divisions; appointment; term. The Mayor shall annually on or before the first
Monday in February appoint a Program Manager for the Department who shall hold
office for one year from the date of appointment and until a successor is appointed.
B. Powers and duties generally. The Program Manager shall work directly with the
Commissioner in regard to the day-to-day supervision of the employees of the
divisions and such other and further matters as the Commissioner shall assign. The
Program Manager shall assist with the work of all divisions within the Department,
as directed, and shall assist the Commissioner in the performance of duties and
obligations set forth in Chapter 78 of the Acts of 1961. [Amended 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012]
A. Appointment; term. The Mayor shall annually on or before the first Monday in
February appoint a Director of the Recreation Division who shall hold office for
one year from date of appointment and until a successor is appointed.
B. Powers and duties generally. The Director of Recreation shall supervise the
employees of the Division subject to the direction and control of the Commissioner
of Natural Resources. The Director shall assist the Commissioner in the
performance of duties and obligations set forth in Chapter 78 of the Acts of 1961.
§ 25-56 DEPARTMENTS § 25-59
25:27
§ 25-59. Tree Warden.
§ 25-60. Earth Scientist.
A. Appointment; term. The Mayor shall annually on or before the first Monday in
February appoint a Tree Warden of the Forestry Division, subject to the provisions
of MGL c. 41, § 106, who shall hold office for one year from the date of
appointment and until a successor is appointed.
B. Powers and duties generally. The Tree Warden shall supervise the employees of the
Forestry Division and shall plan and oversee the trimming, removal and planting of
trees together with all stump grinding associated therewith subject to the direction
and control of the Commissioner of Natural Resources. The Tree Warden shall be
responsible for compliance with the provisions of MGL c. 87, MGL c. 40, § 15C,
and all other applicable state and/or municipal laws, regulations and/or ordinances.
A. Appointment; term. The Mayor shall annually on or before the first Monday in
February appoint a duly qualified Earth Scientist of the Conservation Division, who
shall hold office for one year from the date of appointment and until a successor is
appointed.
B. Powers and duties generally. The Earth Scientist shall be directly responsible for
the stewardship, maintenance and improvement of the City's ecological resources,
including but not limited to marshes, Sailor's Pond, Butler's Pond and all other
conservation areas/open spaces in the City as the Commissioner shall so direct, and
ensure compliance with all applicable state and/or municipal laws, regulations and/
or ordinances as might apply thereto. The Earth Scientist shall be responsible for
short- and long-term planning and programmatic development and shall solicit
grant funding for eligible projects subject to the direction and control of the
Commissioner.
§ 25-59 QUINCY CODE § 25-60
25:28
Chapter 34
FINANCE AND ASSESSMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Assessors — See Ch. 12, Art. II.
Department of Municipal Finance — See Ch. 25, Art. VIII.
Purchasing and contracts — See Ch. 78.
§ 25-60 FINANCE AND ASSESSMENTS § 25-60
34:1

ARTICLE I
Fiscal Year
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 3.04 of the 1993 Code]
§ 34-1. Designation of fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the City shall begin July 1 and end June 30 of each year.
§ 34-1 FINANCE AND ASSESSMENTS § 34-1
34:3

ARTICLE II
Assessment Procedures
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 3.08 of the 1993 Code]
§ 34-2. Delivery of tax lists, bills and notices; additional assessments.
The Assessing Department shall make out and deliver to the Treasurer/Collector, on
or before the first day of June in each year, lists of all taxes assessed, the tax bills
and notices of same property numbered for identification, together with warrant for
the collection of the sums named therein. On or before the first day of every ensuing
month, the Assessing Department shall deliver lists of all additional or supplementary
assessments made during the preceding month, the tax bills and notices of same likewise
numbered together with warrants for their collection.
§ 34-3. Abatements. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
The Assessing Department shall forward to the Auditor and the Treasurer/Collector all
abatements by it and shall, before the fifth of the month next following the granting
of any abatement, forward to the Auditor and the Treasurer/Collector a summary of all
certificates of abatement granted during the preceding calendar month.
§ 34-4. Tax list.
The Assessing Department shall render to the Auditor, at the time when it delivers any
tax list to the Treasurer/Collector, a statement of the amount of such tax list, so far as the
amount thereof has not been included in any statement previously made by it.
§ 34-5. Receipts used in determining tax levy; abatement ledger.
The Assessing Department shall furnish to the Auditor, when so requested, a total of
the receipts used by it in determining the tax levy and shall keep in ledger form the
abatements made from year to year.
§ 34-6. Procedure for division of tax.
When it becomes necessary to divide a tax, the Treasurer/Collector shall return the
original bill to the Assessing Department, which shall issue new bills in place thereof
to the Treasurer/Collector and shall indicate the changes made on the tax list by proper
entries and cross-references, which shall also appear upon the bills. The original bill
shall be cancelled and retained by the Assessing Department and the coupon thereof
cancelled and returned to the Treasurer/Collector.
§ 34-2 FINANCE AND ASSESSMENTS § 34-6
34:5

ARTICLE III
Revolving Funds
[Adopted 12-3-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-187 (§ 3.20 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 34-7. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to establish and authorize revolving funds for use by City
departments, boards, committees, agencies and officers in connection with the operation
of programs and activities that generate fees, charges, or other receipts to support all
or some of the expenses of those programs or activities. These revolving funds are
established under and governed by MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2.
§ 34-8. Expenditure limitations.
A department or agency head, board, committee or officer may incur liabilities against
and spend monies from a revolving fund established and authorized by this article
without appropriation subject to the following limitations:
§ 34-9. Interest.
Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this article shall be
credited to the general fund.
§ 34-10. Procedures and reports.
Except as provided in MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2, and this article, the laws, Charter
provisions, ordinances, rules, regulations, policies or procedures that govern the receipt
and custody of City monies and the expenditure and payment of City funds shall apply
to the use of a revolving fund established and authorized by this article. The Director
of Municipal Finance shall include a statement on the collections credited to each
fund, the encumbrances and expenditures charged to the fund and the balance available
for expenditure in the regular report the Director of Municipal Finance provides the
department, board, committee, agency or officer on appropriations made for its use.
§ 34-11. Authorized revolving funds.
The attached table establishes:
A. Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are paid from the
fund shall also be paid from the fund.
B. No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of the fund.
C. The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount authorized
by the City Council on or before July 1 of that fiscal year, or any increased amount
of that authorization that is later approved by the Mayor and City Council.
A. Each revolving fund authorized for use by a City department, board, committee,
agency or officer;
B. The department or agency head, board, committee or officer authorized to spend
from each fund;
§ 34-7 FINANCE AND ASSESSMENTS § 34-11
34:7
C. The fees, charges and other monies charged and received by the department, board,
committee, agency or officer in connection with the program or activity for which
the fund is established that shall be credited to each fund by the City Auditor;
D. The expenses of the program or activity for which each fund may be used;
E. Any restrictions or conditions on expenditures from each fund;
F. Any reporting or other requirements that apply to each fund; and
G. The fiscal years each fund shall operate under this article.
§ 34-11 QUINCY CODE § 34-11
34:8
Chapter 44
INSIGNIA
§ 34-11 INSIGNIA § 34-11
44:1

ARTICLE I
City Seal
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 1.08 of the 1993 Code]
§ 44-1. Design of City Seal.
The design of the City Seal shall be a circle 1 1/2 inches in diameter; in the center of the
Seal a view of Mount Wollaston; in the outer circle, over the top, the dates "1625, 1640,
1792"; upon a scroll under the dates the word "Manet"; upon a table under the view the
word "Quincy" and the date of its incorporation as a City, 1888, the whole to be arranged
as shown below:
§ 44-2. Documents requiring Seal.
All deeds and other legal documents made, given or entered into by the City, requiring a
seal, shall be sealed with the City Seal and shall be signed and acknowledged in behalf
of the City by the Mayor.
§ 44-1 INSIGNIA § 44-2
44:3

ARTICLE II
Municipal Standard and City Flag
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 1.12 of the 1993 Code]
§ 44-3. Specifications for municipal standard and City flag.
The municipal standard of the City, which is hereby established, shall be made of white
silk and shall be five feet in length and 3 1/2 feet in width, or in proportion thereto,
provided that a City flag of like design and color may be made of bunting for outdoor
display, the size of such bunting flag to depend upon the place of display. The body
of the standard shall be white, as specified, with the official City Seal delineated in
the center. The reverse of the municipal standard shall be the same as the body of the
standard. The municipal standard shall have a fringe of gold; the City flag to be without
a fringe.
§ 44-4. Display of standard.
The municipal standard of silk may be carried or displayed in parades, at reviews and on
other official occasions when the Mayor is present, and when directed by him.
§ 44-5. Copies of standard.
City organizations may have copies of the municipal standard on approval, in writing, of
the Mayor.
§ 44-6. Restrictions on use of standard and flag.
§ 44-7. Custodian.
The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the municipal standard and of the City flags that
are the property of the City.
A. Neither the municipal standard nor the City flag nor any reproduction shall be used
for any commercial purpose, and no advertising device shall be placed upon it or
used in connection with it, and the municipal standard or flag shall not be used for
any purpose not authorized by this and the three preceding sections, except with the
written permission of the Mayor.
B. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of
$20 for each offense, and not only the person actually doing the prohibited thing
but also his employer and every person concerned in so doing shall be punished by
such fine. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
§ 44-3 INSIGNIA § 44-7
44:5

Chapter 66
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 72.
§ 44-7 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 44-7
66:1

ARTICLE I
Clerk of Committees
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.12 of the 1993 Code; amended in its entirety
11-10-2016 by Order No. 2016-246]
§ 66-1. Term.
The City Council shall annually in the month of January and whenever a vacancy occurs
in such office elect a Clerk of Committees, who shall hold this office until a successor is
elected.
§ 66-2. Description.
Under the direct supervision of the City Clerk, City Auditor and with minimal
supervision, performs multifaceted and complex general office duties. Working
independently and with others in a fast-paced and customer service oriented
environment. Coordinating, scheduling and staffing all of the City Council and City
Council subcommittee meetings. Taking and maintaining accurate meeting minutes.
§ 66-3. Duties.
A. A full-time position (1,820 hours per year) with flexible hours that allow attendance
of all City Council and committee meetings of the City Council during nonbusiness
hours.
B. Word processing correspondence, other documents with speed and accuracy.
C. Scheduling individual and community meetings for City Councillors.
D. Liaison to the general public, other elected and appointed officials.
E. Routing and following up requests for services.
F. Drafting, editing and mailing correspondence on behalf of the City Councillors.
G. Ensuring all outgoing correspondence uses proper grammar, punctuation and
spelling.
H. Working and communicating with City departments and outside agencies including
but not limited to utility providers.
I. Performs other department work as assigned by City Councillors, City Clerk and
City Auditor.
J. Performs various confidential projects for City Councillors, consistent with their
public duties, and maintains strict confidentiality.
K. Train and assist new employees.
L. Able to work adjustable thirty-five-hour work week based on meeting schedule.
M. Attendance to each and every City Council meeting and City Council subcommittee
meeting.
§ 66-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 66-3
66:3
§ 66-4. Compensation.
In accordance with Chapter 72, Article I, Job Classifications and Salaries, § 72-1, official
salary schedules shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 66-5. Qualifications.
N. Scheduling and public notification of any and all meetings of the City Council and
its committees.
O. Drafting and distribution of agenda for the City Council and subcommittee
meetings.
P. Management and oversight of the City Council calendar and legislation.
Q. Ensure accuracy, approval and public dissemination of all meeting minutes.
R. Keeping of all meeting minutes for all City Council and subcommittee meetings.
S. Record and produce all minutes of City Council and subcommittee meetings.
T. Type final City Council orders for City Clerk and Mayor's signature.
U. Familiarity with all City ordinances.
V. All duties reasonably anticipated.
A. Work processing ability and general office knowledge.
B. Knowledge and proficiency in Munis and Microsoft Office.
C. Advance training in Microsoft Office, Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Publisher and
Outlook.
D. Ability to update Council information on website and social media.
E. Capable of offering problem-solving measures and resolution to constituent
requests.
F. Knowledge of municipal operations.
G. Strong interpersonal skills, allowing for sound communication with the public and
others.
H. Work effectively under pressure and with frequent interruptions.
I. Ability to work simultaneously on multiple projects from different City
Councillors.
J. Ability and willingness to work independently and in groups.
§ 66-3 QUINCY CODE § 66-5
66:4
ARTICLE II
City Clerk
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as §§ 2.16.010 to 2.16.050 of the 1993 Code]
§ 66-6. Financial duties.
The City Clerk shall notify the Auditor, Assessors and Treasurer/Collector of all orders
passed by the City Council authorizing appropriations, assessments, apportionments or
abatements, and also any department or officer of any order appropriating money to be
expended by the department or officer, or directing the department or officer to do or
not to do, or authorizing the doing, or in any way affecting the powers or duties of the
department or officer, promptly after such orders are passed or are otherwise in force,
and shall file promptly with the Mayor and City Solicitor a copy of each ordinance, order
and resolve passed by the Council.
§ 66-7. Record of streets, ways and sidewalks.
The City Clerk shall keep a book, alphabetically arranged, showing the names of all
streets, ways and sidewalks in the City which have been or may be laid out and accepted,
with the date of the laying out and acceptance and the width and alterations made from
time to time.
§ 66-8. Custodian of City Seal.
The City Clerk shall be ex officio keeper of the City Seal but shall permit the Mayor or
any other officer to affix the same to any document to which the City Seal is required to
be affixed.
§ 66-9. Clerk of the Council.
§ 66-10. Assistant City Clerk.
The City Clerk shall appoint, subject to confirmation by the City Council, an Assistant
City Clerk, as provided in MGL c. 41, who shall be under the direction of the City Clerk
and shall assist him in the performance of his duties. In the absence of the City Clerk, or
a vacancy in the office, he shall perform the duties of the City Clerk.
A. The City Clerk shall be ex officio Clerk of the City Council and designated "Clerk
of the Council." He shall keep a journal containing a record of the proceedings of
the City Council and a record of all votes taken by roll call. He shall engross, sign
and attest all ordinances, orders and resolutions of the City Council. He shall,
annually before the first day of March, cause to be printed, in pamphlet form, all
additions, amendments and changes made in the revised ordinances during the
previous year.
B. The City Clerk shall be authorized, with the approval of the City Council, to employ
such clerical assistance as may be necessary. He shall be the custodian of the
journal and papers of the City Council and they shall be kept in a place convenient
for examination and reference.
§ 66-6 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 66-10
66:5

ARTICLE III
City Auditor
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.20 of the 1993 Code; amended in its entirety
11-10-2016 by Order No. 2016-246]
§ 66-11. Term.
The City Council shall, by majority vote, elect an individual to serve as the City Auditor.
Such individual shall be a person especially fitted by education, experience and training
to perform the duties of the office. The City Auditor shall be elected for a term of not
more than three years and until a successor is qualified, unless sooner removed.
§ 66-12. Description.
The City Auditor oversees the books and accounts of all officers and agencies of the
City.
§ 66-13. Duties.
§ 66-14. Compensation.
In accordance with Chapter 72, Article I, Job Classifications and Salaries, § 72-1, official
salary schedules shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.
A. A full-time position (1,820 hours per year) with flexible hours that allow attendance
of all City Council and committee meetings of the City Council involving financial
issues during non-business hours.
B. Examine the books and accounts of all officers and agencies of the City which are
entrusted with the receipt, custody or expenditure of money, including original bills
on which money has been or may be paid from the City treasury, the documentation
submitted by the agency requesting payment of any such bills supporting payment,
warrants for the payment of bills and the canceled checks on file in the Treasurer/
Collector's office.
C. Once in a fiscal year, or sooner, upon the initiative of the Auditor or vote of the City
Council, audit or cause to be audited the cash balance of each such officer and
agency by the actual count of the cash on hand and by reconciliation of bank
balances.
D. Conduct financial and performance audits following government auditing standards
as promulgated by the Comptroller General of the United States.
E. Make periodic reports to the City Council in such detail and with such frequency as
the City Council shall direct by ordinance, by rule or by other vote, and shall attend
each and every City Council meeting or committee meetings of the City Council
involving financial issues.
F. Exercise the duties enumerated by MGL c. 41, §§ 50 and 53
G. Perform such duties as the City Council deems necessary for the proper
performance of the Auditor's duties.
§ 66-11 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 66-15
66:7
§ 66-15. Qualifications.
§ 66-16. Miscellaneous provisions.
A. Bachelor's degree in business administration, and/or master's degree in public
finance and/or accounting, and/or a certified public accountant certification.
B. Minimum of five years of municipal finance and/or similar experience in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
A. The Mayor, the Mayor's staff, heads of all City departments, and the employees of
all City departments shall provide to the City Auditor all services, assistance and
access to accounts and records as shall be necessary for the City Auditor for the
proper performance of the Auditor's duties.
B. The City Auditor shall be prohibited from contributing to, either by financial or in
kind contribution, or participating in, the campaign of any candidate for Quincy
City Council or Mayor of Quincy, or in the campaign of any Quincy City
Councillor or Mayor of Quincy for any other political office.
§ 66-15 QUINCY CODE § 66-16
66:8
ARTICLE IV
City Solicitor
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.24 of the 1993 Code]
§ 66-17. Appointment; head of Law Department; term.
The Mayor shall annually appoint a City Solicitor who shall have charge of the Law
Department and such Assistant Solicitors as may be required. Such officer shall hold
office for a term of one year and until his successor has been appointed and qualified.
§ 66-18. Powers and duties generally; special counsel.
§ 66-19. Investigation of reported accidents.
The City Solicitor shall investigate the facts in relation to accidents reported to him by
the Chief of Police or any other City official. He shall keep a record of the same together
with the names and addresses of the witnesses and may incur any reasonable expense
in doing the same, provided that all bills contracted by him for such purposes shall be
subject to the approval of the Mayor.
§ 66-20. Administration of City real estate and eminent domain proceedings.
A. The City Solicitor shall have charge of and perform, under direction of the Mayor,
all the law business of the City except as otherwise provided. He shall initiate and
prosecute all actions, suits and other legal proceedings founded upon any claim,
demand, right or privilege of the City or any department or administrative board
thereof. He shall appear in defense of any action, suit or proceeding which may be
brought against the City or any of its officers or any administrative board in its
official capacity, or wherein any right, privilege, property, estate, act or franchise
of the City may be affected or brought into question, before any court, board of
commissioners, or committee of the General Court of this commonwealth. He shall
prepare all legal instruments which may be required of him by the Mayor and shall,
when requested by the Mayor or the City Council, furnish a written opinion on any
legal question which may be submitted to him in regard to any matter relating to the
City or its affairs.
B. This section shall not prevent the engagement of special counsel to prosecute
particular cases whenever authorized by the City Council and an appropriation is
provided to be expended under the direction of a branch, department or the Mayor,
as designated by the City Council.
A. The City Solicitor may be allowed such sums as the Mayor and City Council may
determine for the examination of the title to any real estate in which the City has or
proposes to acquire an interest.
B. He shall prepare all legal papers necessary to transfer the title to any real estate to
the City which the City may acquire either by purchase, right of eminent domain or
otherwise.
C. He shall prepare all legal papers relating to the taking of any land by the City for
any purpose by right of eminent domain or otherwise. He shall prepare all orders of
§ 66-17 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 66-20
66:9
the City Council relating to or connected with the taking of any land or any interest
therein.
§ 66-20 QUINCY CODE § 66-20
66:10
ARTICLE V
Treasurer/Collector
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.28 of the 1993 Code]
§ 66-21. Office established.
The office of Treasurer/Collector of the City is established.
§ 66-22. Duties generally.
The duties of the Treasurer/Collector shall consist of the statutory duties of a city
treasurer and city tax collector under the General Laws of Massachusetts and in addition
thereto the duty to collect all accounts due the City pursuant to MGL c. 41, § 38A.
§ 66-23. Sole depository of City funds.
The office of the Treasurer/Collector shall be the sole depository of City funds and
whenever possible shall receive the moneys directly.
§ 66-24. Account of payments and receipts; weekly report.
The Treasurer/Collector shall keep an accurate and true account of all payments and
receipts on behalf of the City. He shall make a written weekly report to the Auditor of
all moneys received and paid out by him during the preceding week.
§ 66-25. Payment of bills and claims against City.
The Treasurer/Collector is authorized to pay from the treasury all bills and claims against
the City which have been approved by the heads of various branches and divisions and
certified to by the Auditor unless otherwise provided by law.
§ 66-26. Collection of taxes, assessments, debts and other demands.
The Treasurer/Collector shall collect all taxes, assessments, water bills, debts and other
demands due the City as provided by law.
§ 66-27. Bonds to be filed with Mayor. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
The bonds required by law of the Treasurer/Collector and employees of this office shall
be filed with the Mayor.
§ 66-21 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 66-27
66:11

ARTICLE VI
Commissioner of Public Works
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as §§ 2.36.010 to 2.36.030 of the 1993 Code]
§ 66-28. Appointment; term.
The Mayor shall annually on or before the first Monday in February appoint the
Commissioner of Public Works who shall hold office for one year from the first Monday
in February of the year of his appointment and until his successor is appointed.
§ 66-29. Supervision of branch of public works.
The branch of public works shall be under the supervision and control of the
Commissioner of Public Works.4
§ 66-30. Powers and duties generally.
A. The Commissioner of Public Works shall have supervision, direction and control of
the construction, alteration, repair, care and lighting of streets, ways, sidewalks and
public bridges. He shall have supervision and control of the construction, alteration,
care and repair of public buildings, except that the care and repair of all school
buildings shall remain under the control of the School Committee, and the care of
the Thomas Crane Public Library under the control of the Board of Trustees of such
library. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
B. The Commissioner shall have supervision, direction and control of the construction,
alteration, repair and care of the public sewers and drains and shall have charge of
the collection of garbage, ashes and rubbish.
C. He shall have full supervision, direction and control of the Sewer, Water and Drain
Department. Any reference in this Code to the former Water Department, Sewer
Division or Drain Unit of the Highway Division will be deemed to read "Sewer,
Water and Drain Department."
D. He shall in general, except as otherwise provided by the City Charter, have
exclusively the powers and may be subject to the duties, liabilities and penalties
which may, by law, be given to or imposed upon road commissioners.
E. The Commissioner of Public Works shall have the right to charge dumping fees in
accordance with rates established by the Commissioner to be charged to all people
using any dumping ground or sanitary landfill operation operated by the City of
Quincy or operated under contract with the City of Quincy. No fee shall be charged
to a Quincy homeowner who brings his rubbish, refuse or other debris to the dump
and no fee shall be charged to the contractor who picks up the rubbish for the City
of Quincy under contract with the City of Quincy. All fees for dumping shall be
turned over to the City Treasurer.
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Administration, § 5-7, Branch of public works.
§ 66-28 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 66-30
66:13

ARTICLE VII
Public Works Operations Manager and Program Manager
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as § 2.36.040 of the 1993 Code]
§ 66-31. Appointment; term; duties.
The Mayor shall annually on or before the first Monday in February appoint a Public
Works Operations Manager and a Public Works Program Manager who shall hold office
in the same manner as the Commissioner of Public Works. Said Managers shall report
to the Commissioner of Public Works and shall assist the Commissioner in carrying out
his/her duties in accordance with Article VI of this chapter.
§ 66-31 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 66-31
66:15

ARTICLE VIII
Health Commissioner
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as §§ 2.40.010 to 2.40.050 of the 1993 Code]
§ 66-32. Office established.
The office of Health Commissioner of the City is established.
§ 66-33. Appointment.
The Mayor shall appoint a Health Commissioner of the City whenever a vacancy occurs
in the office.
§ 66-34. Powers and duties.
The Health Commissioner shall be vested with all the powers and duties heretofore
exercised by and vested in the Board of Health of the City and such duties as are
provided by the General Laws.
§ 66-35. Duty to report violations.
Whenever there exists a violation of the health laws or regulations of the Health
Department in or upon the premises of any person holding a common victualer's license
or an alcoholic beverage license, which violation has not been seasonably corrected
or removed, the Health Commissioner, in addition to all other lawful proceedings
applicable thereto, shall cause a detailed written report of such violation to be filed with
the Board of Licensing Commissioners of the City.
§ 66-36. Clerk, assistants and inspectors
The Mayor may appoint a clerk and such officers, agents, assistants and inspectors as
may be necessary to execute the health laws and Health Department regulations.
§ 66-32 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 66-36
66:17

ARTICLE IX
Harbor Master
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.56 of the 1993 Code]
§ 66-37. Office established.
The office of Harbor Master of the City is established.
§ 66-38. Appointment.
The Mayor shall annually on or before the first Monday of February appoint a Harbor
Master.
§ 66-39. Studies and investigations.
A. Commercial studies. The Harbor Master shall make a careful study of all the
problems relating to the City's future commercial growth on the waterfront, and
particularly that of railroad connection with the City's waterfront and ocean
terminals, and keep himself informed as to any canal or inland waterway that may
be of commercial interest to the City.
B. Investigation of needs of waterfront. The Harbor Master shall investigate the
present and future needs of the City's waterfront and be ready at all times to advise
the Mayor as to a system or policy of waterfront improvement relating to the whole
or any part of the water frontage of the City. He shall give personal attention to any
matter relating to the wharves, landings, beaches, flats, marshes, industries or any
other business pertaining to the waterfront that may be referred to him by the Mayor
and make report on the same at his request.
§ 66-37 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 66-39
66:19

ARTICLE X
Director of Veterans' Services
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.60 of the 1993 Code]
§ 66-40. Appointment.
The officer in charge of the Department of Veterans' Services shall be known as the
"Director of Veterans' Services" and shall be appointed by the Mayor pursuant to MGL
c. 115, §§ 10 to 14.
§ 66-40 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 66-40
66:21

ARTICLE XI
City Engineer
[Adopted by Order No. 94-227 (§§ 2.36.050 to 2.36.070 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 66-41. Appointment.
The Mayor shall appoint a City Engineer5 for the City whenever a vacancy occurs in the
office or whenever deemed in the best interest of the City.
§ 66-42. Qualifications.
The City Engineer shall have a master's degree in civil engineering from an accredited
college and shall be a registered professional engineer in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts. The City Engineer shall have as a minimum 10 years of responsible
supervisory experience in the design and construction of municipal infrastructural
works.
§ 66-43. Responsibilities.
The City Engineer shall:
§ 66-44. Duties of City Engineer and staff.
A. Report to the Commissioner of Public Works.
B. Coordinate all policy matters, project scopes and implementation, budgets and other
important issues with the Commissioner of Public Works.
C. In consultation with the Commissioner of Public Works, establish project priorities
and make serious efforts to maximize the use of existing City personnel on all
projects and activities.
D. Directly supervise a staff of engineers and other technical and support personnel to
be determined by the Mayor and the City Council upon the recommendation of the
Commissioner of Public Works.
E. Provide advice and staff support on technical aspects of problems and projects to
the Mayor, the City Council, the Commissioner of Public Works, other City
departments, municipal boards and other project/task leaders, as requested.
F. Be responsible for field survey/investigations, engineering studies, estimates,
designs, drawings, specifications, construction (support/supervision/management),
alterations and repairs, as applicable, on all City-sponsored/funded projects and the
City-owned/controlled infrastructure and public facilities under the direction and
control of the Commissioner of Public Works.
A. The City Engineer and staff shall:
(1) Perform inspections, field surveys/investigations, data collection and analyses,
project layouts, estimates, engineering reports, project designs, drawings,
5. Editor's Note: Throughout this article, the title "Manager of Engineering" was amended to "City Engineer" 6-1-2020
by Order No. 2020-012.
§ 66-41 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 66-44
66:23
specifications, contract documents, construction and alterations on new and
existing improvement projects, as directed.
(2) Perform inspections, surveys, measurements, designs, sketches, estimates,
evaluation reports and the subsequent support required by Department of
Public Works operations personnel in regard to citizen complaints, or the
Department of Public Works initiated construction, alterations and repairs on
infrastructural systems and facilities, as directed.
(3) Provide support and assistance to Department of Public Works operations
personnel, other City departments, municipal boards, other project/task leaders
and outside agencies, as applicable. The support may be in the form of field
surveys, locus descriptions, site inspections, engineering studies, layouts,
estimates, data collection/analyses, development plans, designs, reviews,
comments, evaluation reports, construction, alteration and repairs, as
applicable, on various private or City projects and proposals such as individual
property or subdivision developments or community projects, determination
of unsafe building premises, protection and restoration of public right-of-way,
property and facilities, storm damage assessments, FEMA programs, and other
assistance as reasonably determined by the Commissioner of Public Works.
(4) Continuously update all record documents related to the City infrastructure,
public facilities/amenities, rights-of-way, easements, lot/plot/house numbers,
parks, wetlands and floodplains, etc., as applicable. All record documents shall
be classified based on their respective statutory life and indexed. The
classification, indexing, master listing, recordkeeping and archiving of all
documents, including those originating from offices of the Mayor, the City
Council, the City Clerk, Assessors, Commissioner of Public Works, and all
other departments, boards, and agencies, shall be done to achieve an easy
identification and retrieval of documents.
(5) Appear for court testimony, answer all public inquiries and attend public
hearings and meetings on technical matters with other City departments,
municipal boards, general public, consultants/contractors and outside
agencies, as directed.
B. The City Engineer, on or before January 31 of every year, shall submit an annual
work plan for the Department for the coming fiscal year. This plan shall include all
major engineering and construction work proposed with budget estimates for
design, construction, and personnel services. The City Engineer, at the same time,
shall also submit a detailed status report on projects and activities undertaken
during the current work plan.
§ 66-44 QUINCY CODE § 66-44
66:24
ARTICLE XII
Purchasing Agent
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.48 of the 1993 Code]
§ 66-45. Authority; responsibilities.
The Purchasing Agent shall have charge of the Purchasing Department and shall be
responsible to the Mayor for its proper administration.
§ 66-46. Purchase of City supplies and services.
§ 66-47. Purchase register.
The City Purchasing Agent shall at the end of each month make available to the Mayor a
running register of the purchases made by him the preceding month, which shall include
the prices paid, the names of the seller and the branch, department or division for whom
the purchases were made.
A. The City Purchasing Agent shall purchase all materials, equipment and supplies for
the City and every department thereof, except in case of unusual emergency.
B. No contract or other agreement for the purposes of providing goods, services or real
estate space to the City shall be entered into, renewed or extended with any person
or business enterprise unless such party certifies in writing, under the pains and
penalties of perjury, that he has complied with all laws of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts relating to taxes, including legal taxes under the provisions of MGL
c. 59.
C. No contract for the purposes of providing goods or services to the City shall be
entered into, renewed or extended with any person or other entity unless such
person or entity certifies in writing, under the pains and penalties of perjury, that it
does not do any business with or purchase any products from any company which
has direct investment or employees in the country of Burma, also known as
Myanmar. In the event the City Purchasing Agent determines that a person and/or
entity doing business with the City violates the terms of the certification herein
given, he shall forthwith terminate the contract with such by written notice sent by
first-class mail to the address of record listed in such contract. [Added 10-20-1997
by Order No. 97-229]
D. The City Purchasing Agent shall establish and maintain a list which contains the
names of all persons and/or companies currently doing business in Burma. [Added
10-20-1997 by Order No. 97-229]
§ 66-45 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 66-47
66:25

ARTICLE XIII
City Council Office Administrative Staff
[Adopted 11-10-2016 by Order No. 2016-246 (Ch. 2.14 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 66-48. Term.
At the pleasure of the City Council President.
§ 66-49. Description.
Under the direct supervision of the City Clerk, City Auditor and with minimal
supervision, performs multifaceted and complex general office duties. Working
independently and with others in a fast-paced and customer service oriented
environment. Coordinating, scheduling and staffing all of the City Council and City
Council subcommittee meetings. Taking and maintaining accurate meeting minutes.
§ 66-50. Duties.
§ 66-51. Compensation.
In accordance with Chapter 72, Article I, Job Classifications and Salaries, § 72-1, official
salary schedules shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 66-52. Qualifications.
A. A full-time position (1,820 hours per year) with set hours of 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
B. Under the direct supervision of the City Auditor and with minimal supervision,
performs multifaceted and complex general office duties as assigned by City
Councillors and/or City Auditor.
C. Working independently and with others in a fast-paced and customer service
oriented environment.
D. Responsible for operation of front office, answering of telephones, typing, drafting,
editing and mailing correspondence, sorting and distributing incoming mail,
scheduling individual and community meetings, liaison to the general public, other
elected and appointed officials and maintaining City Councillors and office filing
system.
A. Strong typing ability and general office knowledge.
B. Knowledge and proficiency of basic computer word processing programs.
C. Knowledge and proficiency of internet search programs and social media.
D. Capable of offering problem-solving measures and resolution to constituent
requests.
E. Knowledge of municipal operations.
F. Strong interpersonal skills allowing for sound communication with the public and
§ 66-48 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 66-52
66:27
others.
G. Work effectively under pressure and with frequent interruptions.
H. Ability to work simultaneously on multiple projects from different City
Councillors.
I. Ability and willingness to work independently and in a group.
§ 66-52 QUINCY CODE § 66-52
66:28
Chapter 72
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 66-52 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 66-52
72:1

ARTICLE I
Job Classifications and Salaries
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.148 of the 1993 Code]
§ 72-1. Official salary schedules. [Amended 6-17-2014 by Order No. 2014-120;
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
Copies of the City of Quincy's official salary schedules are on file in the office of the
City Clerk.
§ 72-2. Overtime pay for certain City employees; excluded positions.
§ 72-3. Retirement within 30 days of salary increase.
If any City employee retires within 30 days of the effective date of a salary increase,
then as to such employee the salary increase shall become effective 30 days prior to the
effective date of the increase in figuring the employee's pension.
§ 72-4. Additional compensation of City Clerk. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
The City Clerk shall receive the sum of $500 per year as Clerk of the Board of Registrars.
§ 72-5. Payment for accrued sick leave at time of retirement or death.
A. All full-time regular permanent employees of the City, except those persons whose
positions are specifically exempt from the provisions of this section and from the
provisions of MGL c. 149, § 33B, shall be compensated for overtime work at the
rate of 1 1/2 times their regular hourly compensation for all hours worked in excess
of their regular full-time work week (minimum 35 hours) or in excess of 40 hours
in any one week or eight hours in any one day; said eight hours shall be arranged to
fall within a period of not exceeding nine consecutive hours.
B. Except in cases of extreme emergency, overtime employment may only be
authorized with the prior written permission of the Mayor.
C. The following positions are specifically excluded from the provision of this section
pertaining to the payment of overtime work:
(1) All department heads.
(2) All employees of the School, Police and Fire Departments.
(3) All persons whose salary or compensation is not established by ordinance.
A. Any permanent employee, with the exception of School Department employees,
who, on or after July 1, 1976, retires, under the General Laws of Massachusetts,
from his position with the City or dies while in the employ of the City shall receive
$20 per day for his documented sick leave at the time of retirement or death.
B. Payments shall be computed at the current rate of pay on the date of retirement or
death. Said pay shall be 1/5 of his average weekly salary on such date.
§ 72-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 72-5
72:3
C. In the event of death, payments shall be made to a beneficiary designated by the
employee in writing or, in the absence thereof, to his estate.
§ 72-5 QUINCY CODE § 72-5
72:4
Chapter 78
PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public construction projects — See Ch. 249.
§ 72-5 PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS § 72-5
78:1

ARTICLE I
Leases, Conveyances and Contracts
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 3.12 of the 1993 Code]
§ 78-1. Execution of conveyances, leases and other instruments.
The Mayor may execute in behalf of the City all conveyances, leases and other
instruments to be executed by the City, but this provision shall not be construed to
prevent any officer from executing any conveyance, lease or other instrument in
performing the duties devolving upon him.
§ 78-2. Selection procedure for award of contracts for design services. [Amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
The Mayor is authorized and directed to adopt in writing, prior to publication requesting
applications, a selection procedure as required by MGL c. 7C, § 54, as from time to
time in effect, for the award of such contracts for design services as are subject to said
statute. Such adoption shall be by the issuance of rules and regulations, the content of
which shall be guided, to the extent the Mayor deems to be in the best interests of
the City, by the guidelines published pursuant to MGL c. 7C, § 54(b), by the Designer
Selection Board of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to the extent such guidelines
are from time to time in force and effect. Such rules and regulations may be amended
by the Mayor, from time to time, as he deems to be in the best interests of the City;
such amendment may include, without limitation, the repeal, revocation or rescinding of
individual rules and regulations, or portions thereof. The Mayor shall file with the City
Clerk all rules and regulations and amendments thereof which he shall issue pursuant to
this section.
§ 78-1 PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS § 78-2
78:3

ARTICLE II
Purchase of City-Owned Land
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 3.16 of the 1993 Code]
§ 78-3. Procedure.
The process for the purchase of any parcel of City-owned land shall be as follows:
A. Any party wishing to make an offer to purchase City-owned land shall submit an
offer form to the Treasurer/Collector in such form and in as many copies as the
Treasurer/Collector shall determine. Accompanying such offer shall be a deposit of
at least 25% of the proposed purchase price, but not less than $100. The Treasurer/
Collector shall not accept an offer of less than $100. Notification of each offer to
purchase is to be given to the Clerk of Committees by the Treasurer/Collector.
B. The Treasurer/Collector shall verify the City's ownership and report the method and
manner that the City obtained ownership in his report, which he shall forward to the
Planning Board and City Engineer at his earliest convenience.
C. The City Engineer shall issue a report to the Planning Board which shall include a
description of the property, any easements and restrictions which he feels should be
retained by the City and his opinion, based on his best professional judgment, as to
whether the parcel should be sold. The Planning Board and City Council shall not
be bound by such opinion. If a subdivision plan is necessary, the applicant shall
forward a copy of the plan to the City Engineer for his consideration.
D. After receiving the reports of the Treasurer/Collector and City Engineer, the
Planning Board, acting through the Director of Planning and Community
Development, shall determine whether a notice in the central register, established
by MGL c. 9, § 20A, is necessary. If so, such a notice shall be published. Following
the deadline contained in such notice or, if not required, at the next practical date,
the Planning Board shall hold a hearing to determine its recommendation on the
proposed purchase. The Planning Board's recommendation shall be forwarded to
the City Council.
E. The City Clerk, upon receiving a positive recommendation from the Planning
Board, shall draft an order including the description for the City Council's
consideration. If the Planning Board's recommendation is unfavorable, the City
Clerk need not draw the order until the Land Conveyance Committee indicates that
it will recommend that the Council not adopt the Planning Board's
recommendation.
F. Following a favorable vote by the City Council, and approval by the Mayor, the
prospective purchaser shall pay the balance of the purchase price and prorated taxes
as required by MGL c. 44, § 63A, to the Treasurer/Collector within 60 days. If such
payment is not made within 60 days, the offer shall be deemed withdrawn and the
deposit returned.
G. Upon receipt of total payment, the Treasurer/Collector shall so inform the City
Solicitor, who shall prepare a deed to be forwarded to the purchaser. The
responsibility for recording the deed shall be that of the purchaser.
§ 78-3 PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS § 78-4
78:5
§ 78-4. Excise taxes.
All purchasers and other grantees of real property from the City of Quincy shall pay the
full cost of any and all excise taxes required by MGL c. 64D, § 1, to be levied, collected
and paid in respect of the conveyance.
§ 78-4 QUINCY CODE § 78-4
78:6
ARTICLE III
Wage Theft Prevention
[Adopted 2-6-2017 by Ord. No. 2016-137 (§ 15.28 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 78-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply:
APPLICATION — An initial application or a renewal of a license or permit.
CITY CONTRACTOR—An employer who holds or seeks to hold a contract for goods,
services, or labor with the City of Quincy.
EMPLOY — Including as used in the term "employment": to suffer or permit to work.
EMPLOYEE — A natural person who performs work for an employer operating within
the geographic boundaries of Quincy, but shall not include any bona fide independent
contractor as defined by MGL c. 149, § 148B.
EMPLOYER — Any natural person or business, whether or not incorporated or
unincorporated, who or which suffers or permits another to work in the City of Quincy,
under a contract to which the City of Quincy or one of its departments is signatory, or
who or which otherwise maintains a commercial presence in the City of Quincy. This
definition excludes:
INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR — As defined in MGL c. 149, § 148B
("Massachusetts Independent Contractor Law"), and any applicable regulations or
advisory guidance implementing that statute.
MINIMUM WAGE — As defined in MGL c. 151, § 1.
OVERTIME — As defined in MGL c. 151, § 1A.
PREVAILING WAGE — As defined in MGL c. 149, §§ 26 to 27H.
TIMELY PAYMENT OF WAGES — As defined by MGL c. 149, § 148.
WAGE — As defined by MGL c. 149, § 148.
WAGE THEFT — Any action by an employer, his officers, agents, or employees
causing employer not to make a timely and/or complete payment of wages, prevailing
wage, or overtime earned and owing to an employee.
§ 78-6. City procurement, City contracts and debarment.
The United States or a corporation wholly owned by the government of the United
States; and
A.
B. The Commonwealth of Massachusetts, its subdivisions, and corporate bodies.
A. RFP/bid and successful bidder requirements.
(1) Every RFP or bid issued by the Purchasing Agent or other City department
shall include the certification and disclosure requirements required by this
article.
(2) Every RFP or bid issued by the Purchasing Agent or other City department
§ 78-5 PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS § 78-6
78:7
shall notify bidders that they have an affirmative duty to report any criminal
or civil judgment, administrative citation, final administrative determination,
or debarment against the bidder or any of their subcontractors occurring while
their bid is pending to the City, and, if they are the successful bidder, while
their contract with the City is in effect, within five business days of receipt.
The RFP or bid will identify the City department and individual to whom this
must be reported.
(3) Every RFP or bid issued by the Purchasing Agent or other City department
shall notify bidders that they may not contract with the City during any part of
the debarment by the City or state if they have been debarred by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the City of Quincy, either voluntarily or
involuntarily, for the entire term of the debarment. Such RFPs or bids shall
also notify bidders that they may not use any subcontractor who has been
debarred by the City or the state during the period of that subcontractor's
debarment.
(4) Successful bidders must either:
(a) Provide a certification of compliance as required by this article below. To
the extent the bidder has been in business for less than three years, it shall
provide a certification certifying compliance for the entire period of time
for which the entity has been in existence.
(b) To the extent a judgment, citation, or final administrative order has issued
against a bidder within three years prior to its bid, provide a copy of the
same, in addition to documentation demonstrating that all damages, fines,
costs, and fees have been paid to all aggrieved complainants. In addition,
the bidder must post a bond, to be maintained for the life of the contract,
as specified below.
(5) Successful bidders must agree to post the notice available at
http://www.mass.gov/ago/docs/workplace/wage/wagehourposter.pdf in a
conspicuous location accessible to all of their employees. To the extent not all
employees would have reasonable access to the notice if posted in a single
location by the successful bidder, the successful bidder must inform the
Purchasing Agent or other City department of the number and location of
postings in order to ensure that the successful bidder provides reasonable
notice to all of their employees and agrees to make those additional postings.
B. Certification and disclosures. The Purchasing Agent and any other City department
entering into contracts on behalf of the City shall adopt the attached certification
and disclosure requirement for all applicants providing:
(1) That an applicant certify to the Purchasing Agent or other City department that
neither they nor any of their subcontractors have been subject to a federal or
state criminal or civil judgment, administrative citation, final administrative
determination, or debarment resulting from a violation of MGL c. 149, MGL
c. 151 or 29 U.S.C. § 201 et seq. within three years of their application.
(2) In the alternative, the applicant shall disclose to the Purchasing Agent or other
City department any such criminal or civil judgment, administrative citation,
§ 78-6 QUINCY CODE § 78-6
78:8
final administrative determination, or debarment and include a copy of the
same in their applications.
(3) Every City department issuing a request for proposals or bids shall notify
applicants that they have an affirmative duty to report any criminal or civil
judgment, administrative citation, final administrative determination, or
debarment occurring while the contract is in effect to the department within
five business days of receipt.
C. Reporting and notice requirements during the contract term.
(1) Upon request by the Purchasing Agent or other City department, all City
contractors shall furnish their monthly certified payrolls to the City's
Purchasing Agent for all employees working on City contracts.
(2) To the extent a contract is for a term of one year or more, a City contractor will
provide the Purchasing Agent or other City department with a certification
compliant with this article on the effective date of the contract and at each
anniversary thereof until the contract expires.
(3) All City contractors will furnish to the Purchasing Agent or other City
department any criminal or civil judgment, administrative citation, final
administrative determination, or debarment issued during the term of their
contract(s) with the City against the City contractor or its subcontractors
within five business days of receipt.
(4) To the extent required as set forth below, all City contractors shall maintain a
wage bond for the term of the contract(s) with the City.
D. Wage bonds. Any successful bidder or City contractor admitting in writing to or
determined by the Purchasing Agent to have committed a wage theft violation or
subject to a criminal or civil judgment, administrative citation, final administrative
determination or debarment as a result of a violation of MGL c. 149, MGL c. 151
or 29 U.S.C. § 201 et seq. within the three-year period prior to the date of its bid to
contract with the City shall be required to obtain a wage bond or other form of
suitable insurance in an amount equal to the aggregate of one year's gross wages, or
for the term of the contract, whichever is less, for all employees, based on an
average of its total labor costs for the past two years. Such bond must be maintained
for the entire term of the contract(s), and for all contracts of one year or more, proof
of maintenance must be provided annually or upon request of the Purchasing Agent
or other City department.
E. Suspension or revocation of contract; wage theft as material breach of conditions in
RFP or bid. If a City contractor is found to be in violation of MGL c. 149, MGL c.
151 or 29 U.S.C. § 201 et seq. or this article, and therefore in breach of its contract
with the City, the City may take one or more of the following actions:
(1) Revocation of City contractor's contract with the City.
(2) Suspension of the City contractor's contract with the City.
(3) Debarment from all City contracts for a period of up to three years.
§ 78-6 PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS § 78-6
78:9
(4) Imposing conditions on any future contracts with the City, including but not
limited to the posting of a wage bond and other reasonable requirements.
§ 78-6 QUINCY CODE § 78-6
78:10
Chapter 89
SCHOOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
School grounds — See Ch. 266.
§ 78-6 SCHOOLS § 78-6
89:1

ARTICLE I
Adams Academy
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.140 of the 1993 Code]
§ 89-1. Authority of School Committee.
All the rights, powers and duties of the Board of Managers of the Adams Academy as
provided by Clause 14 of Section 34 of the original Charter of the City shall be exercised
by the School Committee of the City.
§ 89-1 SCHOOLS § 89-1
89:3

ARTICLE II
Adams Temple and School Fund
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.144 of the 1993 Code]
§ 89-2. Principal of fund; expenditure of net income.
The estate belonging to the Adams Temple and School Fund, which is held in trust by
the City of Quincy for the purposes set forth in the deeds of gift of the late John Adams
and Charles Francis Adams, together with bequests of the late Robert Charles Billings
and Louisa C. Smith, shall be deemed and considered as the principal of said fund. The
net income, except from the Billings and Smith gifts, is to be expended by the City of
Quincy, in its capacity as trustee of the Woodward Fund and Property for the conduct,
operation, maintenance, management and advancement of the Woodward School for
Girls, subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors of the Adams Temple and
School Fund.
§ 89-3. Board of Managers.
The Mayor, the President of the City Council and the Treasurer/Collector and two
members to be elected annually in the month of January by the City Council, one of
whom may be a member of the Board of Supervisors, shall constitute the Board to have,
in concert with the Board of Supervisors, the management, control and disposition of
the principal trust fund, subject to conditions as to the Adams Academy building and
the lot upon which it stands as hereinafter set forth, and such Board shall have full
power and authority, in concert with the Board of Supervisors, to invest, reinvest, sell or
otherwise dispose of such estate and make and execute all instruments or take any other
act necessary in the premises, and in taking such action they shall treat such property
as a trust and not invest or reinvest or otherwise dispose of the property excepting as
trustees of the same acting in behalf of the City. The Board shall cause to be collected
all rents, interests and other indebtedness that shall become due on account of such fund.
After paying all necessary expenses relating to the same, the Treasurer/Collector shall
hold the net amount and pay over the same, from time to time, to the City of Quincy in
its capacity as trustee of the Woodward Fund and Property.
§ 89-4. Fiscal year for disposition of income; employment of annual net income.
Each fiscal year for the disposition of the income shall begin upon February 11 and the
same may be employed annually for such purpose, but in the event of the entire net
income for any one year not being employed for such purpose, any surplus may be so
employed in any succeeding year.
§ 89-5. Sale or use of academy building lot.
The City is also authorized upon a three-fourths vote of the City Council and with the
approval of the Mayor to sell the lot upon which the present academy building stands or
any portion thereof and invest the proceeds with the other funds of this trust. If the City
desires to devote this land, or any part thereof, to its own use for other than school uses,
because of the historical connections therewith, it shall add to the income from the trust
funds such reasonable payment therefor as may be agreed upon between the City and the
Supervisors.
§ 89-2 SCHOOLS § 89-6
89:5
§ 89-6. Assessment and payment of taxes.
In determining the net income, the City shall require no payment from such income by
reason of any taxes assessed upon any lands or other property held in such fund, and in
the event of its being determined that any part of such estate is liable to pay any taxes,
the amount so paid out of such income shall, in order that such decree be fully enforced,
be appropriated by the City and paid to the Treasurer/Collector of the City to be added
to such income.
§ 89-7. Annual report.
The President of the Council shall annually, in the month of January, appoint three
members of the Council to investigate the condition of such Adams Temple and School
Fund, who shall make a detailed report to the Council within eight weeks of their
appointment.
§ 89-6 QUINCY CODE § 89-7
89:6
Part II: General Legislation
§ 89-7 SCHOOLS § 89-7
89:7

Chapter 101
ADVERTISEMENTS
§ 101-1. Posting placards, handbills or posters.
No person shall, without a license from the Commissioner of Public Works first
obtained, post up any placards, show cards, handbills or posters upon any tree, fence,
post or building within any street or public place in the City, or upon any buildings,
structure or land belonging to the City.
§ 101-2. Distribution of handbills or flyers.
No person shall distribute or circulate, or cause to be distributed or circulated, any
handbills, cards, posters or flyers in or upon any public street, way or place of the City by
placing the same in or upon any automobile or other vehicle standing in any such street,
way or place, except upon permission duly granted in writing by the Chief of Police. A
copy of such handbill, card, poster or flyer so proposed to be distributed or circulated
shall accompany the application for such permit, and no such permit shall be construed
to allow the throwing or scattering of such handbills, cards, posters or flyers in or upon
the streets named in the permit.
§ 89-7 ADVERTISEMENTS § 101-2
101:1

Chapter 105
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 25, Art. I. Fire Department — See Ch. 25, Art. II.
§ 101-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 101-2
105:1

ARTICLE I
Fire Alarm Systems
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 8.04 of the 1993 Code]
§ 105-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALARM ACTUATING — Any device such as a smoke or heat detector, pull station or
sprinkler flow switch that causes the alarm to sound.
AUTOMATIC DEVICE — A fire protection device that requires no manual operation
during activation.
FIRE ALARM CONTROL PANEL — The electrical and electronic center of a system
that detects alarm conditions, sounds signals and provides power and supervisory
features.
FIRE ALARM SERVICE COMPANY — A commercial firm that specializes primarily
in the installation and service of fire alarm devices.
FIRE WATCH — A Quincy firefighter having knowledge of fire safety rules and
regulations, and having the ability and knowledge to properly sound an alarm, who tours
the property being protected in the event of fire.
MANUAL DEVICE — A fire alarm pull station or other device that requires manual
activation for operation.
SERVICE INDIVIDUAL — An individual having extensive knowledge in the repair
and maintenance of fire alarm systems, such as an electrician who specialized in
signaling systems.
SIGNALING CIRCUIT—The electrical circuit that connects and operates all fire alarm
system horns, bells or other sounding devices.
SINGLE STATION UNIT — A self-contained fire protection device equipped with
all features of a system within a small housing unit, such as a battery-operated smoke
detector (i.e., detector, power supply and signal).
STANDBY BATTERY — An emergency power supply in case of loss of commercial
power to the fire alarm control panel.
SUPERVISORY CIRCUIT—Any fire alarm circuit that passes a small current through
a device and detects a fault on that circuit such as a ground, open or short.
TYPE I SYSTEM — A total fire alarm system that includes detecting devices,
annunciator, signals, power supply and control panel that sounds the local signals at the
structure being protected.[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
TYPE II SYSTEM — The same as Type I system, except no direct connection to the
Fire Department is required.
§ 105-2. Type I and Type II systems; where required; testing.
A. All buildings that are required to be equipped with a Type I or Type II fire alarm
system as determined and described by the Massachusetts State Building Code
Regulations, Massachusetts Fire Prevention Regulations or City of Quincy
§ 105-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 105-2
105:3
§ 105-3. Devices to be tested; qualifications of service providers.
§ 105-4. Building owner responsibilities.
ordinance shall have all fire alarm system devices tested in accordance with the
Massachusetts State Building Code and the Massachusetts Comprehensive Fire
Safety Code. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
B. Where required. Lodging homes having 13 or more tenants shall be equipped with
a Type I system. Lodging homes having 12 or fewer tenants shall be equipped with
a Type II system.
A. Devices to be tested are all alarm actuating (automatic or manual), signaling,
supervisory circuits, standby battery supplies, and other system and single station
units within the structure installed for the purpose of fire protection.
B. The Chief of the Quincy Fire Department, his representative, or the Quincy Wire
Inspector shall determine the qualifications of the fire alarm service organization or
individual.
A. Recordkeeping; inspection. The building owner shall be responsible for
maintaining proper written records of the tests, indicating dates, time, and signature
of the qualified tester, and such records shall be available to be viewed by any
public safety representative employed by the City.
B. Maintenance contract required; contents; information posting.
(1) The owner shall have written proof of a maintenance contract or agreement
with a qualified fire alarm service company, and such agreement or contract
shall indicate that the service company is on twenty-four-hour call and will
respond within 24 hours for maintenance or repair of the fire alarm system.
(2) The name and emergency telephone number of both the owner and the
qualified service organization shall be posted in a conspicuous place,
preferably on the fire alarm control panel.
C. System repair. Should a fire alarm system require maintenance or repair, it is the
responsibility of the owner or his representative that such system be repaired and
placed back into service within 24 hours of the discovery of the fault by the owner,
service company or Quincy public safety official. Notification of such fault to the
owner or his representative may be written or verbal.
D. Structures where life hazard exists. Should the system provide protection for a
structure where a life hazard exists, including but not limited to apartments (six
units or more), hotels, motels, lodging houses, hospitals, nursing homes, schools,
day-care centers or nurseries, it is the responsibility of the owner to have the system
in proper operation within the twenty-four-hour period or, at his expense, provide a
Quincy firefighter during the nighttime hours or when a life hazard exists. Those
failing to comply shall be considered in violation of this article. The Chief of the
Fire Department shall determine when a life hazard exists. When such conditions
exist, the Chief or his representative shall determine when the fire watch will be
removed.
§ 105-2 QUINCY CODE § 105-4
105:4
§ 105-5. Exemption from maintenance contract.
All residential structures of five units or fewer are exempted from the requirement to
procure a formal maintenance contract. However, it is the responsibility of the owner of
such structure to properly maintain and keep in good working order all fire protection
and fire alarm devices.
E. Evacuation of physically challenged residents during emergency. [Added
7-26-1993 by Order No. 93-093]
(1) All owners of residential structures of six or more units shall provide a
diagram of the floor and apartments and indicate on said diagram where
physically challenged individuals reside. This diagram, which shall be
approved by the Chief of the Fire Department, or his designee, shall be filed
with the Fire Department. Such information shall remain confidential and is
intended for Fire Department use only, to assist in an evacuation during an
emergency situation.
(2) This subsection shall apply forthwith to all new construction. All other
existing structures shall comply with the provisions of this subsection within
12 months of its effective date.
F. Violations and penalties. Any owner to be found in violation of this article shall be
fined the sum of $300 per day for each day of violation until the fire alarm system
is placed in service to the satisfaction of the Chief or his representative. [Amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
§ 105-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 105-5
105:5

Chapter 109
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 109-1. Definitions.
The following words, as used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, shall
have the following meanings:
PRIVATE PARKING AREA — Any private parking area or facility to which the
general public has the general right of access.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any building and the grounds thereof under the care and
control of the City.
PUBLIC PARK — Any park under the care and control of the City, including Veterans'
Memorial Field.
PUBLIC PARKING AREA — Any parking area or facility under the care and control
of the City.
PUBLIC PLAYGROUND — Any playground under the care and control of the City.
§ 109-2. Consumption prohibited in certain places.
No person shall drink or consume alcoholic beverages as defined in MGL c. 138, § 1,
while in, within, on, or upon any public way, or any place set forth in § 109-1, or any way
or beach to which the public has a right of access, or any private land or place without
the consent of the owner or person in control thereof.
§ 109-3. Possession prohibited in certain public places.
No person while in, within, on or upon any public building, public park or public
playground shall have in his possession any alcoholic beverage as defined in MGL c.
138, § 1.
§ 109-4. Grant of license.
The Board of Licensing Commissioners of the City may grant a license for possession
and consumption in, within, on or upon a public building, public park, public playground
or public beach, provided it is for no longer than one day at any given time.
§ 109-5. Sale in certain places prohibited; exemptions.
§ 109-6. Violations and penalties.
A. A license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages shall not be issued for use on
the premises of a recreational camp, overnight camp or cabin, motel or mobile
home park licensed under the provisions of MGL c. 140, § 32B.
B. This section shall not be construed to affect the renewal of any such license
presently in existence.
A. A police officer may arrest without a warrant anyone who violates this chapter.
§ 105-5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 109-6
109:1
B. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be penalized as provided
by MGL c. 40, § 21D. The penalty for violation shall be $100 for the first offense
and $200 for each subsequent offense. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
§ 109-6 QUINCY CODE § 109-6
109:2
Chapter 113
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 215. Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 222.
§ 109-6 ANIMALS § 109-6
113:1

ARTICLE I
Feeding of Waterfowl
[Adopted by Order No. 94-039 (Ch. 18.12 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 113-1. Prohibited acts.
No person, except the Director of the Division of Fisheries and Wildlife or his agents
as authorized pursuant to MGL c. 131, shall feed or bait any waterfowl of the family
Anatidae, including but not restricted to ducks, geese, and swans, at any place within the
City of Quincy, where it is so posted. As used in this section, "feeding" and "baiting," in
all their moods and tenses, shall mean the placing, exposing, depositing, distributing, or
scattering, directly or indirectly, of shelled, shucked, or unshucked corn, wheat, or other
grain, bread, salt, or any other feed or nutritive substances, in any manner or form, so as
to constitute for such birds a lure, attraction, or enticement to, on, or over any such areas
where such feed items have been placed, exposed, deposited, distributed or scattered.
§ 113-2. Emergency feeding.
Notwithstanding any of the above, the Director of the Division of Fisheries and Wildlife
may authorize the emergency feeding of waterfowl and other birds when, in his opinion,
such action is necessary in order to alleviate undue losses and suffering of such birds
due to unusual weather conditions and other circumstances. The Director may authorize
such action by proclamation, publication, or such other means as he deems necessary
and expedient, but such means shall include the immediate notification of the City Clerk
thereof by first-class mail.
§ 113-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article may be subject to a fine of $50 for
each offense thereof.
§ 113-4. Enforcement.
The article may be enforced by police officers, shellfish officers, harbor masters,
assistant harbor masters, agents of the Health Commissioner, environmental police
officers and other enforcement officers of the Division of Law Enforcement, and by
deputy environmental police officers.
§ 113-5. Filing of ordinance.
Upon approval of the ordinance codified in this article the City Clerk shall cause one
copy thereof to be sent to the Director of the Division of Fisheries and Wildlife and one
copy to the Director of the Division of Law Enforcement.
§ 113-1 ANIMALS § 113-5
113:3

ARTICLE II
Display of Nondomesticated Animals for Entertainment
[Adopted 2-21-1995 by Order No. 94-262]
§ 113-6. Display prohibited.
No living nondomesticated animals shall be displayed for public entertainment or
amusement in circuses, carnivals or other similar entities on property owned by the City
of Quincy, on City-owned property under lease, or on private property. As used in this
section, "displayed" shall include, but is not limited to, animal acts and performances,
animal rides and competitive animal races.
§ 113-7. Exceptions.
A. This article shall not apply to domestic animals, including but not limited to dogs,
cats, horses and farm animals, except that no domestic animal shall be used in
competitive animal races.
B. This article shall not apply to exhibits deemed educational by the Massachusetts
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.
§ 113-6 ANIMALS § 113-7
113:5

ARTICLE III
Animal Control
[Adopted by Order No. 97-058 (Ch. 6.04 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 113-8. Definitions.
The following words as used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, shall
have the following meanings:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER—Any person so designated by the Mayor pursuant to
MGL c. 140, § 151, to enforce the provisions of this article and the applicable statutes of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
AT LARGE — Any animal off the premises of the owner or keeper and not under the
control of the owner or keeper by leash, cord, chain, rope or other device that allows the
owner or keeper to control the movement and/or action of the animal.
KEEPER — Any person, other than the owner, harboring or having in his possession
any animal.
OFF-LEASH — Dogs may go unleashed to exercise and play in a controlled
environment under the supervision of their owners.[Added 6-27-2016 by Order No.
2016-157]
§ 113-9. Animals at large; disturbances.
An owner or keeper of any animal shall not permit or suffer such animal to go at large in
the City or to disturb the quiet of any person by barking, biting, howling or other manner.
§ 113-10. Animal waste.
§ 113-11. Exemptions.
§ 113-12. Violations and penalties.
A. An owner or keeper of an animal shall remove and dispose of any feces left by such
animal on any sidewalk, street, park or other public area, or on any private property
which is not owned or occupied by such owner. If an animal defecates on property
other than that of the owner or keeper, the owner or keeper of the animal is
responsible for the immediate removal of the feces.
B. Feces shall only be disposed of at a place suitable and regularly reserved for the
disposal of human feces or otherwise designated as appropriate by the Health
Commissioner, to include appropriate amounts of feces that can be disposed of in
the regular trash, provided it is contained in a plastic or paper bag.
A. Section 113-10A of this article shall not apply to a person who, by reason of a
physical disability, is unable to comply with the requirements of such subsection.
B. Section 113-9 of this article shall not apply to areas designated as off-leash dog
areas by the Park and Recreation Board and signed as such. [Added 6-27-2016 by
Order No. 2016-157]
§ 113-8 ANIMALS § 113-12
113:7
§ 113-13. Dog license.
The fee for a dog license issued pursuant to MGL c. 140 shall be $10. In addition, the
owner of a dog not licensed on or before April 30 in any year shall pay a late fee of $10,
in addition to the license fee.
§ 113-14. Impounded dogs; reclaiming and boarding fees. [Amended 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012]
The Animal Control Officer shall collect a reclaiming fee of $10 and boarding fees of $7
per day from the claimant of a dog that is in the custody of the City due to violation of
the ordinances of the City or laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
§ 113-15. Nuisance or dangerous dogs.
If any person shall make a complaint in writing to the Chief of Police that any dog
owned or harbored within the City is a nuisance by reason of vicious disposition or
excessive barking or other disturbance, the Chief of Police shall investigate or cause to
be investigated such complaint, including an examination on oath of the complainant,
and may make such order concerning the restraint or disposal of such dog as may be
deemed necessary.
§ 113-16. Restrictions on beaches. [Added 12-5-2005 by Order No. 2005-239]
A. Whoever violates the provisions of §§ 113-9 and 113-10A of this article may be
fined up to the maximum provided for in this Code.6
B. In addition to the enforcement as described above, the provisions of this article may
also be enforced by noncriminal complaint pursuant to the provisions of MGL c.
40, § 21D, and such penalty shall be $50 for each offense. [Amended 12-5-2005
by Order No. 2005-224]
A. An owner or keeper of an animal shall not permit or suffer such animal to go on any
beach under the jurisdiction of the City of Quincy during the period from May 1
through October 31.
B. The penalties set forth in § 113-12 shall apply to any violation of this section.
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, Art. I, General Penalty.
§ 113-12 QUINCY CODE § 113-16
113:8
Chapter 120
BOATS AND BOATING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Harbor Master — See Ch. 66, Art. IX. Water bodies and waterways — See Ch. 344.
§ 113-16 BOATS AND BOATING § 113-16
120:1

ARTICLE I
Regulation of Waterways
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 12.16 of the 1993 Code; amended in its entirety
6-17-2013 by Order No. 2013-108]
§ 120-1. Definitions.
As used in this article and Article II, City Harbor, of this chapter and in any regulations
adopted pursuant to these articles, the following words shall have the following
meanings, respectively:
ANCHOR—The holding of a vessel in place by lowering a heavy weight into the water
by cable, chain, line or other method, or the device used to so hold a vessel in place.
ANCHORAGE — See "mooring area" below.
CHANNEL — A navigable route for the passage of vessels, established by customary
use or under the authority of federal, state or municipal law.
DOCKING—The making fast of a boat, raft, or float by means of cables, anchors, lines,
chains, or other device or contrivances to the ocean bottom, the shore, or a dock, slip,
pier, or marina, meaning and intending that this phrase applies to boats, rafts or floats
which are secured to the ocean bottom, as well as to boats, rafts, or floats secured to a
dock or slip in a marina.
MOOR — The securing or making fast of a boat, raft, or float by means of cables,
anchors, lines, chains, or other device or contrivances to the ocean bottom, the shore,
or a dock, slip, pier, or marina, meaning and intending that this phrase applies to boats,
rafts or floats which are secured to the ocean bottom, as well as to boats, rafts, or floats
secured to a dock or slip in a marina.
MOORING — A temporary, semipermanent, or permanent anchorage installation,
comprising an anchor, chain, and mooring buoy, or their equivalents.
MOORING AREA — Areas within Quincy waterways designated as areas for the
securing of vessels to the bottom of the waterway by use of an anchor or mooring.
Mooring areas shall include all areas of Quincy waterways designated on the then
current and applicable chart published by or for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, the area within a marina or yacht club which area is properly licensed
pursuant to MGL c. 91, and such additional areas as the Harbor Master may
establish.[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
MOTOR VESSEL — A vessel that is actually being propelled or operated by
mechanical means, meaning by use of one or more engines or electric motors.
PERSON — An individual, a receiver, a trustee, a partnership, joint venture, a firm, an
unincorporated association, a syndicate, a trust, a corporation, or any other entity having
legal personality.
QUINCY WATERWAYS—The navigable bodies of water within the limits of the City
of Quincy, including, without limitation, the ponds, rivers, streams, seas, and oceans.
VESSEL — Inclusively, to the extent permitted by law, watercraft of every description,
including but not limited to ships of all kinds, barges, sailing vessels, craft and
powerboats of any type or kind by whatever means propelled; every object designed,
§ 120-1 BOATS AND BOATING § 120-1
120:3
adapted or capable of being navigated, towed or operated on water from place to
place for the transportation of merchandise, people, or for any other purpose (except a
seaplane); or other artificial contrivance used or capable of being used as a means of
transportation on water, and as otherwise construed under Massachusetts and/or federal
law.
§ 120-2. Motor vessels.
§ 120-3. Towing persons; waterskiiing.
§ 120-4. Notification of recreational vessel towing. [Added 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-016]
A. Safe operation required. No person shall operate a motor vessel on Quincy
waterways so that the lives, safety and property of the public might be endangered.
B. Minimum distance from swimming areas. All motor vessels shall keep 150 feet
distance from swimming areas. A swimming area shall extend 150 feet from the
water's edge at shore.
C. Minimum distance from moored or anchored boats. All motor vessels shall keep
150 feet distance from moored or anchored boats except when leaving or returning
to their moorings or the shore.
D. Wake restrictions. No motor vessel shall be operated at a speed greater than
minimum headway speed or in excess of six miles per hour, whichever is slower,
within 150 feet of water's edge at shore or within a mooring area. Vessels and the
owner and operator thereof are responsible for all damage caused by their wake.
A. No motor vessel shall be used to tow people, or to tow people on tubes, water skis,
aquaplanes or other device, unless said boat shall be occupied by no fewer than two
persons, one of whom shall give his full attention to the operation of the boat and
the other of whom shall give his full attention to the person or persons being towed.
Tow boats must be equipped with a boarding ladder or swim platform.
B. Permitted locations for waterskiing. Waterskiing is permitted in the following
areas: Town River Flats, Rock Island Cove, Recreation Station at Chapel Street,
between the Merrymount Anchorage area and Ruff's Hummock on Wollaston
Boulevard, between Moon Head and Peterson's Rocks, between Chapel Rocks and
Moon Head westerly and between Halftide Rock and Squaw Rock, and in such
other areas where there is sufficient clear area and depth of water so as to do so
safely.
A. Any company operating upon the jurisdictional waters of the City of Quincy that
conducts recreational vessel commercial assistance, vessel salvage, or towing of
recreational vessels may not conduct such operations without first reporting the
following information to the Quincy Police Department:
(1) Company information.
(2) Registration number and registration status (active or expired) of recreational
vessel to be salvaged or towed.
§ 120-1 QUINCY CODE § 120-4
120:4
§ 120-5. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
This article is to be enforced by the Harbor Master, Assistant Harbor Masters, and any
police officer authorized to make arrests in the City. Violations of this article shall, for
each offense, be punished by a fine of $50. All such fines shall be paid to the general
fund of the City.
§ 120-6. Compatibility with state law.
This article is enacted by the City of Quincy independently from any state law regarding
the operation of vessels upon the waters of the commonwealth. All vessels being
operated in Quincy waterways are expected to comply with both the laws of the
commonwealth and the ordinances of the City of Quincy. In the event of a conflict
between such laws and ordinances, the law of the commonwealth shall prevail.
(3) Recreational vessel owner contact information (including cell phone and
mailing address).
(4) Present location of recreational vessel to be towed.
(5) Marine facility or final destination where the vessel will be towed to.
(6) Name of authorizing point of contact at marine facility where recreational
vessel is being towed to.
B. In addition, it shall be a condition of such operations that the recreational vessels
involved have current identifying information readily available, so as to ensure
compliance with requirements in Subsection A(2) and (3) above. Any such vessel
with expired or improper federal or state registrations shall not be towed without
the express permission of the Chief of the Quincy Police Department or the Chief's
designee.
C. This section is intended to procure basic identifying information only, so as to
ensure that the interests of the boating community are properly preserved/protected
in regard to such operations.
§ 120-4 BOATS AND BOATING § 120-6
120:5

ARTICLE II
City Harbor
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 12.24 of the 1993 Code; amended in its entirety
6-17-2013 by Order No. 2013-109]
§ 120-7. Definitions. [Added 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
Definitions applicable to this article are provided in § 120-1, Definitions, in Article I,
Regulation of Waterways, of this chapter.
§ 120-8. Arriving commercial vessels; notification of Harbor Master; required
information.
All shippers or firms utilizing Quincy waterways, upon the arrival of a ship or vessel at
their wharf, shall immediately notify the Harbor Master of that fact and forward to him
a statement setting forth the following information:
§ 120-9. Tying up to public landing; time limits; removal authority.
A. Date of arrival.
B. Rig.
C. Name of vessel.
D. Nationality.
E. Captain.
F. Arrived from.
G. Amount of cargo.
H. Cargo.
I. Consignee of cargo.
J. Agent of vessel.
K. Register tons gross.
L. Register tons net.
M. Draught of water.
N. Unloading berth.
A. No person shall allow, permit, moor, anchor, tie, or cause a vessel or other article
that floats to be tied up to or in such a way as to interfere with the public landing
maintained by the City situated at the foot of Bay View Avenue in the Weymouth
Fore River, as shown on Assessors' Plan 1009-1010-1011, for a period of more than
30 minutes without the authority of the Harbor Master or Assistant Harbor Master.
B. Whoever violates this section shall be liable to a fine of $25 for each violation. The
§ 120-7 BOATS AND BOATING § 120-9
120:7
§ 120-10. Abandoned marine equipment prohibited on City shores.
Harbor Master or Assistant Harbor Master or member of the Quincy Police
Department may remove any such vessel or other article that floats which is in
violation of this section and moor or anchor the same in a safe place in said
Weymouth Fore River in a place which is in view of said public landing. [Amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
A. Notice to remove; removal authority; owner liability; violations and penalties. If
any person shall abandon any vessel or wharf, or any other structure similar in
nature, damaged or undamaged, on any beach or seashore in the City, he shall be
given no less than seven calendar days' written notice to remove the same, said
notice to be given by the Harbor Master or by the Police Department. If said vessel
or wharf, or any other structure similar in nature, damaged or undamaged, is not
removed within said seven-day period, the Harbor Master is hereby authorized to
remove it, either personally or by a person contracted by him, and all charges of
removal and storage shall be paid by the person so abandoning or by the sale of the
vessel, wharf or any other structure. The Harbor Master is hereby authorized to
contract with a person for the removal of the same.
B. Owners unknown; removal authority
(1) If in the judgment of the Harbor Master there is a vessel or wharf or any other
structure similar in nature, damaged or undamaged, on any beach or seashore
in the City, and after reasonable effort the Harbor Master is unable to ascertain
the owner thereof, the Harbor Master is hereby authorized to remove the
subject vessel or wharf or any other structure similar in nature.
(2) Prior to undertaking such removal, either personally or by a person contracted
by him, the Harbor Master shall cause there to be a publication made in a
newspaper in general circulation within the City of Quincy giving notice of his
determination that the subject vessel or wharf or any other structure similar in
nature, damaged or undamaged, has been deemed to be abandoned and of his
intention to remove it under the authority of this section or other law.
(3) Such publication shall give no less than seven calendar days' notice of the
intention of the Harbor Master and shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information: a description of such abandoned vessel or wharf or other structure
similar in nature, damaged or undamaged, sufficiently detailed so as to put the
owner on notice; the current location of said boat or wharf or other structure
similar in nature, damaged or undamaged; the date after which such removal
will be made; and contact information of the Harbor Master sufficient for the
owner to contact him.
(4) If the owner of the subject vessel or wharf or any other structure similar in
nature, damaged or undamaged, comes forth, the Harbor Master or Quincy
Police Department can order the removal thereof under the provision of
Subsection A. If the owner of the subject vessel or wharf or any other structure
similar in nature, damaged or undamaged, does not come forth prior to the
published date for removal, the Harbor Master is hereby authorized to remove
it, either personally or by a person contracted by him, and all charges of
§ 120-9 QUINCY CODE § 120-10
120:8
§ 120-11. Loading and unloading of petroleum products.
§ 120-12. Obstruction of channels.
No private marker, mooring or anchorage buoy, lobster pot buoy, or other temporary or
permanent marker may be placed in the fairway or channel of Quincy waterways at any
time without the express written permission of the Harbor Master unless such private
marker, mooring or anchorage buoy, lobster pot buoy, or other temporary or permanent
marker is authorized under MGL c. 91 or the regulations promulgated under said Chapter
91. Any unauthorized private marker, mooring or anchorage buoy, lobster pot buoy, or
other temporary or permanent marker so placed in any fairway or channel in Quincy
waterways shall be construed as a hazard to navigation and shall be removed by the
person causing it to be in place upon the order of the Harbor Master. After failure of
the person causing it to be in place, it may be removed by the Harbor Master, with no
liability to the Harbor Master or the City of Quincy, or the agents, servants, or employees
of either.
§ 120-13. Unauthorized boarding or moving of vessel.
No person shall board or move any vessel in mooring or anchorage or disturb any tender
removal, disposal or storage may be charged against the Waterways
Maintenance Fund of the City. The Harbor Master is hereby authorized to
contract with a person for the removal of the subject vessel or wharf or any
other structure similar in nature.7
A. Whenever any ship or vessel enters any wharf or oil terminal to load or unload
(deposit) oil or petroleum products into tanks and/or other receptacles within the
City and its waters, it shall be provided with a plastic boom fore and aft of said ship
so as to contain any seepage, overflow and/or excess oil from getting into and
otherwise contaminating Quincy waterways.
B. It is the responsibility of the terminal owners and/or operators to provide this plastic
boom for said purpose.
C. Harbor Master to report violations. The City Harbor Master shall be charged with
enforcement of this section and shall report all spills or violations to the Mayor,
City Council, state and City departments of public health, Fire Chief, U.S. Coast
Guard, Army Corps of Engineers, Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection and all others concerned.
D. Approval of booms. The City Harbor Master shall approve any and all booms
mentioned in this section.
E. Failure to comply with this section will constitute a violation and is punishable by
a fine of $50 per each day of violation.
F. Disposition of fines. All fines will be paid into the City Waterways Fund under this
section.
7. Editor's Note: Original § 12.24.038, Enforcement, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012. See § 120-15, Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 120-10 BOATS AND BOATING § 120-13
120:9
except in case of emergency or with the express consent of the owner, master or operator
of said vessel or as otherwise permitted by law.
§ 120-14. Vehicles prohibited from driving on beach.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any beach, flat or shoreline owned by the City
of Quincy without the written permission of the Commissioner of Natural Resources.
§ 120-15. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order
No. 2020-012]
This article is to be enforced by the Harbor Master, Assistant Harbor Masters, and any
police officer authorized to make arrests in the City. Except where otherwise provided,
violations of this article shall, for each offense, be punished by a fine of $50. All such
fines shall be paid to the general fund of the City.
§ 120-16. Compatibility with state law.
This article is enacted by the City of Quincy independently from any state law regarding
the operation of vessels upon the waters of the commonwealth. All vessels being
operated in Quincy waterways are expected to comply with both the laws of the
commonwealth and the ordinances of the City of Quincy. In the event of a conflict
between such laws and ordinances, the law of the commonwealth shall prevail.
§ 120-17. Authority of Harbor Master to issue regulations.
The Harbor Master is hereby authorized to adopt regulations governing the Quincy
waterways and, to the extent authorized under Massachusetts law, vessels on or in
the Quincy waterways, including but not limited to the anchorage, mooring, and/or
operation of such vessels; activities that take place on or in the Quincy waterways; and
to the extent said vessels and activities affect and/or are related to or directed to the
Quincy waterways, waters adjacent to the Quincy waterways, to the full extent permitted
by law. All such waterways regulations shall be submitted to the Mayor for approval.
Upon approval by the Mayor, a notice shall be published in a newspaper in circulation
in the City of Quincy and copies thereof shall be made available through the Harbor
Master, Chief of Police and the City web page. Said regulations may be amended from
time to time in the same manner as set forth herein. All such waterways regulations shall
be effective upon such publication. No such regulation shall conflict with the provisions
of any City ordinance.
§ 120-13 QUINCY CODE § 120-17
120:10
ARTICLE III
Mooring Permits
[Adopted 5-21-2001 by Order No. 2001-105 (Ch. 12.26 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 120-18. Applicability.
§ 120-19. Mooring permit required.
There is hereby established the requirement of a mooring permit for all subject vessels.
§ 120-20. Administration. [Amended 4-19-2005 by Order No. 2005-047]
The Harbor Master for the City of Quincy or his/her designee shall be responsible for the
administration of this article; however, nothing in this article shall authorize the Harbor
Master for the City of Quincy or his/her designee to implement a boat mooring fee in
the City of Quincy without the approval of the Quincy City Council following a public
hearing on the matter.
§ 120-21. Display of permit.
§ 120-22. Term of permit.
All mooring permits are valid for up to one year and shall expire on May 31 of each year.
§ 120-23. Payment of taxes as condition of permit. [Amended 6-17-2013 by Order
No. 2013-110]
A mooring permit shall not be issued for a subject vessel unless it has been demonstrated
to the satisfaction of the Treasurer/Collector for the City of Quincy that all lawfully
assessed excise taxes assessed pursuant to MGL c. 60B, § 2, as amended from time to
time, regarding such subject vessel and all other vessels currently or formerly owned by
or registered to the applicant for a mooring permit are paid in full or have been abated in
accordance with the law.
A. All vessels habitually moored, berthed or docked in the waters within the corporate
boundary of the City of Quincy, with the exception of human-powered or -propelled
vessels of 10 feet in length or less, shall be subject to this article. [Amended
6-17-2013 by Order No. 2013-110]
B. Any vessel that is located in the waters within the City for 30 or more days shall be
deemed to be habitually moored, berthed or docked in the waters within the City,
and all vessels the owner of which had declared to be moored, berthed or docked in
the waters of the City of Quincy shall be subject to this article.
A. All subject vessels shall display a current City of Quincy mooring permit by June 1
of each year.
B. No vessel shall be moored, docked or berthed in the Quincy waterways without a
mooring permit. A mooring permit shall be affixed and displayed on the rear port
(left) quarter just forward of the transom. [Amended 6-17-2013 by Order No.
2013-110]
§ 120-18 BOATS AND BOATING § 120-24
120:11
§ 120-24. Permit where no tax is assessed.
A person seeking to obtain a mooring permit for a subject vessel for which no excise
tax is assessed pursuant to MGL c. 60B, § 2, as amended from time to time, or which is
exempted from payment thereof by law, may obtain a mooring permit upon application
without the showing required in § 120-23 of this article.
§ 120-25. Permit not transferable.
§ 120-26. Display of fraudulent permit. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
The owner of a subject vessel found to have displayed thereon a fraudulent, stolen or
transferred mooring permit shall be subject to a fine of $300 per offense.
§ 120-27. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. A mooring permit is not transferable from one person to another person.
B. A mooring permit is not transferable from one subject vessel to another subject
vessel.
A. For a subject vessel found not to be in compliance with the provisions of this article,
with the exception of § 120-26, the Harbor Master or his designee shall issue a
written warning to the owner thereof and shall, if available to him/her, tender to
such owner a Massachusetts Department of Revenue Form 2BE-1, as amended
from time to time. Said owner shall have 10 business days to obtain a mooring
permit. If said ten-day period shall have expired without the owner of the subject
vessel having obtained the required mooring permit for that vessel, the Harbor
Master or his designee shall issue a citation for such violation to the owner of the
subject vessel.
B. In the case of violation of this article, after compliance with the provisions of
Subsection A, or in the case of a violation of the provisions of § 120-26, the Harbor
Master or his designee shall hereby have the authority to deliver to the owner of the
subject vessel found to be in violation a letter detailing the allegations of the
violation, and such letter shall direct the removal of the subject vessel from the
waters of the City of Quincy within 10 days of receipt. Any letter so delivered shall
be done in hand upon the owner of such subject vessel or by certified mail to the
last known address of such owner thereof as appearing in the records of the
Assessors of the City of Quincy or of the Registration Division of the
Massachusetts Environmental Police. If the Harbor Master or his designee is unable
to deliver to such owner the letter detailed herein, after making an affidavit of such
fact and of the efforts made to deliver the same, he may give notice thereof by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Quincy. Such notice
by publication shall detail the description of the subject vessel, the location of the
same, the owner thereof and the last known address, if any, of such owner as
appearing in the records of the Assessors of the City of Quincy or of the
Registration Division of the Massachusetts Environmental Police. Such publication
shall direct the removal of the subject vessel from the waters of the City of Quincy
within 10 days from the date of such publication. [Amended 6-17-2013 by Order
§ 120-24 QUINCY CODE § 120-27
120:12
No. 2013-110]
C. Upon expiration of the ten-day period provided for in Subsection B of this section,
the Harbor Master or his designee shall hereby be authorized to seize the subject
vessel and to cause the same to be removed from the waters of the City of Quincy.
Expenses relating to such seizure and removal, including the cost of towing,
haulage and storage, shall be the responsibility of the owner of the subject vessel.
All such charges must be paid to the City of Quincy and the same shall be deposited
in the general fund, or such charges, in the event that the Harbor Master or his
designee has engaged the services of a private contractor to so remove the seized
vessel, shall be paid directly to such private contractor.
D. In accordance with § 1-1 of the Quincy Municipal Code, as amended from time to
time, at the discretion of the Harbor Master or his designee, whoever violates any
provision of this article may be penalized by indictment or on a criminal complaint
brought in the District Court.
E. The fine for a violation of any provision of this article shall be $300 per offense.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
F. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
G. In accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21D, and § 1-2 of the Quincy Municipal Code,
each as amended from time to time, at the discretion of the Harbor Master or his
designee, whoever violates any provision of this article may be penalized by a
noncriminal disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D.
H. The enforcement provisions of this article shall be cumulative and not exclusive of
one another.
§ 120-27 BOATS AND BOATING § 120-27
120:13

Chapter 124
BODY ART
§ 120-27 BODY ART § 120-27
124:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 124-1. Purpose.
§ 124-2. Administration and enforcement.
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Commissioner of Health of the
City of Quincy established pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 26B, and Chapter 66, Article VIII,
of the Quincy Municipal Code.
§ 124-3. Definitions.
The following terms used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, shall
have the following meaning:
AFTERCARE INSTRUCTIONS — Written instructions, approved by the Department,
given to a person upon whom one or more body art activities have been performed,
specific to the body art procedure(s) rendered or performed, concerning the proper care
to be given to the area of the body upon which the body art has been performed and
concerning the surrounding area of the body.
ANTISEPTIC—An agent that destroys disease-causing microorganisms on human skin
or mucosa.
AUTOCLAVE — An apparatus for sterilization utilizing steam pressure at specific
temperature over a designated period of time.
A. The City of Quincy is promulgating rules and regulations in the form of this chapter
which provide minimum requirements to be met by any person performing body art
activities for hire upon another individual and for any establishment wherein body
art activities are to be performed. These requirements include, but are not limited
to, requirements concerning the general sanitation of the establishment wherein
body art activities are to be performed and the sterilization of instruments to be used
in the conduct of body art. By enacting this chapter, the City of Quincy has
determined that these rules and regulations are necessary to protect the public's
health by preventing disease, including but not limited to the transmission of
Hepatitis B and/or Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV/AIDS).
B. In addition, this chapter establishes a requirement for registration and a procedure
for the registration with the Health Commissioner of the City of Quincy of all
persons performing such body art activities, a requirement for minimal training
standards for such practitioners, including requirements for the prevention of
disease transmission and for knowledge of anatomy and physiology, provisions for
the regular inspection of establishments wherein body art activities are to be
performed and for revocation of the registration of any person or establishment
deemed in violation of the rules and regulations promulgated under this chapter, or
for other means of enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
C. This chapter provides for an annual fee to be paid by a person and establishment
registered under this chapter. This fee is intended to help defray the cost to the City
of Quincy of the administration of the requirements of this chapter.
§ 124-1 BODY ART § 124-3
124:3
AUTOCLAVING — The process which results in the destruction of all forms of
microbial life, including highly resistant bacterial spores, by the use of an autoclave for
a minimum of 30 minutes at 17 pounds of pressure (PSI) at a temperature of 250° F.
BODY ART — The practice of physical body adornment, alteration or modification
by means including, but not limited to, piercing, tattooing, branding, braiding, beading/
implantation or scarring.
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any facility that has been inspected and approved
by the Department for use in conducting of body art activities and for which a current
permit is issued by the Department in accordance with this chapter.
BODY ART ORDINANCE—Chapter 124 of the Quincy Municipal Code, as amended
from time to time.
BODY ART PRACTITIONER—A person who has received a license to perform body
art activities by the Department pursuant to this chapter.
BODY ART PRACTITIONER LICENSE — A license issued by the Department to a
person qualified to engage in the practice of body art in accordance with this chapter.
BODY PIERCING — Shall refer to the form of body art requiring or consisting of the
puncturing or penetration of the skin or of a membrane of a person for the purpose of the
temporary or permanent placement or insertion of jewelry or other adornment or device
therein.
BRAIDING — Shall refer to the form of body art requiring or consisting of the cutting
of strips of skin of a person, which strips are then to be intertwined with one another and
placed onto such person so as to cause or allow the incised and interwoven strips of skin
to heal in such intertwined condition.
BRANDING — Shall refer to the form of body art consisting of or requiring the
inducement of a burn and/or the resulting scarring of the skin of a person by means of
the use of a heated instrument or object.
CLEANING AREA — The area in a body art establishment used in the sterilization,
sanitation or other cleaning of instruments or other equipment used for the practice of
body art.
CONTAMINATED or CONTAMINATION — Shall refer to the presence of or a
reasonable possibility of the presence of blood, bodily fluids, or infectious or potentially
infectious matter on an inanimate object.
CONTAMINATED WASTE — Any liquid or semiliquid blood or other potentially
infectious material; contaminated items that would release blood or other potentially
infectious material in a liquid or semiliquid state if compressed; items on which there is
dried blood or other potentially infectious material and which are capable of releasing
these materials during handling; and sharps and any wastes containing blood or other
potentially infectious materials, as defined in 29 CFR 1910.1030, as defined in 105 CMR
480.00 et seq. or in this chapter.
COSMETIC TATTOOING — Also known as "permanent cosmetics," "micropigment
implantation" or "dermal pigmentation," shall refer to the form of body art requiring the
implantation of permanent pigment around the eyes, lips and cheeks of the face and hair
imitation.
§ 124-3 QUINCY CODE § 124-3
124:4
CUSTOMER or CLIENT—A person upon whom one or more body art activities is/are
to be performed, and shall include a minor client.
CUSTOMER WAITING AREA — The area in a body art establishment for use and
occupation by persons and clients prior to and after the conduct of body art.
DEPARTMENT — The Quincy Health Department or the Commissioner of Health,
established in accordance with MGL c. 111, § 26D, and in accordance with Chapter 66,
Article VIII, of the Quincy Municipal Code.
DISINFECT — The destruction of pathogenic microorganisms using a liquid chemical
germicide.
DISINFECTANT — The same as "liquid chemical germicide."
DERMIS — The deeper, thicker portion on the skin lying beneath the epidermis, to
include the subcutaneous layer.
EAR PIERCING — The puncturing of the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear using
a presterilized single-use stud and clasp ear piercing system following manufacturer's
instructions.
EPIDERMIS — The outer layer of skin which is composed of four recognizable layers
of cells usually a total of about 0.1 millimeter thick.
EQUIPMENT — All machinery, fixtures, containers, vessels, tools, devices,
implements, furniture, display cases, storage units, sinks, and all other apparatus and
appurtenances used in connection with the operation of a body art establishment.
EXPOSURE — An event whereby there is an eye, mouth or other mucous membrane,
non-intact skin or parenteral contact with the blood or bodily fluids of another person
or contact of an eye, mouth or other mucous membrane, non-intact skin or parenteral
contact with other potentially infectious matter.
EXPOSURE CONTROL PLAN — A plan drafted by an operator pursuant to the
requirements of the United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration to
eliminate or minimize the potential for an exposure.
EXPOSURE INCIDENT REPORT — A written report detailing the circumstances of
an exposure.
GERMICIDE or GERMICIDAL SOLUTION — The same as "liquid chemical
germicide."
HAND SINK — A sink supplied with hot and cold potable water under pressure which
is used solely for washing hands, arms, or other portions of the body.
HEALTH COMMISSIONER — The Health Commissioner of the City of Quincy
established in accordance with MGL c. 111, § 26D, and in accordance with Chapter 66,
Article VIII, of the Quincy Municipal Code.
HOT WATER—Water which is heated to attain and maintain a temperature of between
110° and 130° F.
INFECTIOUS WASTE — The same as "contaminated waste."
INSTRUMENT or INSTRUMENT USED FOR BODY ART — Those hand pieces,
needles, needle bars and other instruments that may come in contact with a client's body
or possible exposure to bodily fluids during body art procedures.
§ 124-3 BODY ART § 124-3
124:5
INSTRUMENT STORAGE AREA — The area in a body art establishment used for the
storage of linens, equipment and instruments used for body art.
INVASIVE — Describes a procedure causing entry into the body either by incision or
by the insertion of an instrument into or through the skin or mucosa, or by any other
means intended to puncture, break or compromise the skin or mucosa.
JEWELRY—Any device or adornment inserted into a pierced or incised area or portion
of the body.
LICENSE—A document issued by the Department pursuant to this chapter authorizing
a person to conduct allowed body art procedures in the City of Quincy.
LIQUID CHEMICAL GERMICIDE — A substance registered with the United States
Environmental Protection Agency for use in the destruction of pathogenic
microorganisms or an approximate 1:100 dilution of household chlorine bleach in clean
water mixed fresh daily.
MINOR or MINOR CLIENT —A person of less that 18 years of age as of that person's
last birth date.
MOBILE BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any trailer, truck, car, van, camper or
other motorized or nonmotorized vehicle, a shed, tent, movable structure, bar, home
or other facility wherein, or concert, fair, party or other event whereat, one desires
to or actually does conduct body art procedures, excepting only a licensed body art
establishment.
OPERATOR — Any person alone or jointly with other persons who owns, controls,
operates or manages a body art establishment.
PARENTERAL — The invasion of the skin barrier or mucous membranes.
PERMIT — A document issued by the Department pursuant to this chapter authorizing
the use of a facility for the conducting of body art activities.
PHYSICIAN — A person licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts in
accordance with MGL c. 112, § 2.
PROCEDURE SURFACE — Any surface of an inanimate object that contacts an
unclothed part of a person upon whom body art is to be performed.
PROHIBITED FORMS OF BODY ART — Shall refer to those forms of body art
prohibited under this chapter and set forth in Article IX hereof.
SANITIZE — The process of reducing the number of microorganisms on a surface to a
safe level using a liquid chemical germicide.
SANITIZER — The same as "liquid chemical germicide."
SCARIFICATION — Shall refer to that form of body art that requires the use of an
instrument to cut a design into the skin to produce a scar.
SHARPS — Any object (sterile or not) that may purposefully or accidentally cut or
penetrate the skin or mucosa of a person, including but not limited to needles, scalpel
blades, razor blades and lancets.
SHARPS CONTAINER — A puncture-resistant, leakproof container that can be closed
for handling, storage, transportation or disposal and is labeled with the international
biohazard symbol.
§ 124-3 QUINCY CODE § 124-3
124:6
SINGLE USE — Products or items that are intended for one-time, one-person use and
are to be disposed of after such use, including but not limited to cotton swabs or balls,
tissues or paper products, paper or plastic cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, razors,
piercing needles, scalpel blades, stencils, ink cups and protective gloves.
STERILIZATION UNIT — A unit designed to and which is effective at killing all
microorganisims, including bacterial spores, and which is approved by the Department
for use for sterilization in a body art establishment.
STERILIZE — To effectively kill all microorganisims, including bacterial spores.
TATTOO — Shall refer to the form of body art consisting of the injection of ink, dye
or other medium to form or create an indelible mark, figure or decorative design in the
subcutaneous portion of the skin.
TATTOO GUN — An electric, vertically vibrating tool used for tattooing.
TATTOOING — The act or process of creating a tattoo.
TATTOO INKS/PIGMENTS/DYES or INKS/PIGMENTS/DYES—The metal- or saltbased
substance injected into the subcutaneous portion of the skin in the act or process
of creating a tattoo.
TEMPORARY BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — The same as "mobile body art
establishment."
THREE-DIMENSIONAL (3D) BODY ART OR BEADING OR IMPLANTATION —
Shall refer to the form of body art consisting of or requiring the placement, injection
or insertion of an object, device or other thing made of matters such as steel, titanium,
rubber, latex, plastic, glass or other inert materials beneath the surface of the skin of a
person. This term does not include body piercing.
ULTRASONIC CLEANING UNIT — A unit approved by the Department and
physically large enough to fully submerge instruments in liquid, which unit removes all
foreign matter from the instruments by means of high-frequency oscillations transmitted
through the contained liquid.
UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS or STANDARD PRECAUTIONS — The set of
guidelines and controls published by the Centers for Disease Control as "Guidelines
for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B
Virus to Health Care and Public Safety Workers" in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) June 23, 1989, Vol. 38, No. S-6,
and as "Recommendations for Preventing Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency
Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedures"
in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. RR-8, each as
amended or updated. This method of infection control requires the employer and the
employee to assume that all human blood and specified human body fluids are infectious
for HIV, HBV and other blood pathogens. Precautions include hand washing, gloving,
personal protective equipment, injury prevention, and proper handling and disposal of
needles, other sharp instruments, and blood and body fluid contaminated products.
WORKSTATION — An area within a body art facility designated for use in the
conducting of body art activities.
§ 124-3 BODY ART § 124-4
124:7
§ 124-4. Body art practitioner license required.
No person shall conduct any form of body art activity unless such person holds a valid
body art practitioner license issued by the Department pursuant to this chapter.
§ 124-5. Body art establishment permit required; proximity to schools restricted.
[Amended 5-19-2008 by Order No. 2008-191]
No person shall establish a facility for the conduct of a business consisting of or
including the performance of one or more body art activities upon the person of another
without a valid permit to operate such facility as a venue within which to conduct body
art activities issued by the Department in accordance with this chapter. No such facility
shall be permitted within 1,000 feet of any school.
§ 124-6. Exemptions.
§ 124-7. Business certificate.
The requirements of this chapter to obtain a body art practitioner license and a body
art facility permit are separate from and in addition to the requirements of MGL c.
110, § 5. An applicant for a body art establishment permit must comply with the
requirements of MGL c. 110, § 5. Prior to the issuance of a body art establishment permit
an applicant therefor must demonstrate to the Department compliance therewith by way
of presentment to the Department of the original of the business certificate issued by the
City Clerk under the provisions of said MGL c. 110, § 5.
§ 124-8. Compatibility with state law.
The requirements of this chapter to obtain a body art practitioner license and/or a body
art facility permit are separate from and in addition to any similar requirements that may
be mandated by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
A. Physicians who practice body art activities as a part of patient treatment are exempt
from the provisions of this chapter so long as such body art activities are performed
in a medically acceptable manner.
B. Individuals who pierce only the lobe of the ear with a presterilized, single-use stud
and clasp ear piercing system without the use of a so-called piercing gun are exempt
from the provisions of this chapter.
§ 124-4 QUINCY CODE § 124-8
124:8
ARTICLE II
Body Art Practitioner
§ 124-9. Application fee; term of license.
A person seeking registration under this chapter so as to obtain a body art practitioner
license shall submit a completed application provided by the Department and shall pay
to the City of Quincy a fee of $250. A body art practitioner license shall be valid for no
more than one year. The Department may renew a body art practitioner license under this
chapter, and each applicant for such renewal shall pay to the City of Quincy a renewal
fee of $250. All body art practitioner licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year of
issuance.
§ 124-10. Qualifications of applicant.
An applicant for a body art practitioner license shall demonstrate to the Department
his/her successful compliance with all training, disclosure, consent and educational
requirements of this chapter relative to the form of body art activities for which such
applicant seeks a body art practitioner license prior to the issuance or renewal of a body
art practitioner license by the Department.
§ 124-11. Hepatitis B vaccination status.
§ 124-12. Hygiene.
Every body art practitioner shall maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness, conform
to hygienic practices and wear clean clothes when conducting body art activity. If the
clothes of a body art practitioner are or become contaminated, clean clothing shall be
donned prior to commencement of any further body art activity.
§ 124-13. Minimal training requirements.
Every applicant for a body art practitioner license or a renewal of a body art practitioner
A. A Hepatitis B vaccination is highly recommended.
B. An applicant for a body art practitioner license shall provide to the Department, and
shall provide to the owner of any body art establishment in which the applicant
intends to perform or in which he does perform body art activity, valid
documentation of his Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) vaccination status stating:
(1) Certification of completed vaccination;
(2) Laboratory evidence of immunity;
(3) Documentation stating the vaccine is contraindicated for medical reasons.
Contraindication requires a dated and signed licensed health care
professional's statement specifying the name of the body art practitioner
license applicant employee and that the vaccine cannot be given; or
(4) Certificate of vaccination declination of HBV, i.e., for medical or religious
reasons as provided in MGL c. 76, § 15.
§ 124-9 BODY ART § 124-13
124:9
license, in order to be qualified for such license, shall provide to the Department
evidence of satisfaction of the following minimal training requirements:
§ 124-14. Blood-borne pathogen training course.
A. For a body art practitioner license enabling one to perform body piercing, the
completion of a complete course in anatomy and physiology (i.e., Anatomy and
Physiology I and II) with a grade of C or better at a college accredited by the New
England Association of Schools and Colleges or comparable accrediting entity.
This course work must include instruction on the systems of the integumentary
system (skin).
B. For a body art practitioner license that enables one to perform tattooing, branding
and scarification, but not body piercing, the successful completion of a complete
course in anatomy and physiology (i.e., Anatomy and Physiology I and II) with a
grade of C or better at a college accredited by the New England Association of
Schools and Colleges or comparable accrediting entity. This course work must
include instruction on the systems of the integumentary system (skin). Such other
course or program as the Department shall deem appropriate and acceptable may be
substituted for the course in anatomy and physiology otherwise required of an
applicant for a body art practitioner license that enables one to perform tattooing,
branding and scarification, but not body piercing.
C. For all body art practitioners, the successful completion of a course on prevention
of disease transmission and blood-borne pathogens taught by an instructor trained
and sufficiently knowledgeable to teach this Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) course. Such knowledge shall include the requirements of
29 CFR 1910.1030.
D. Current certification in American Red Cross basic first aid or its equivalent and
advanced cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
E. Experience.
(1) Evidence satisfactory to the Department of at least two years' actual experience
in the practice of performing body art activities of the kind for which the
applicant seeks a body art practitioner license to perform, whether such
experience was obtained within or outside of the commonwealth; or
(2) Evidence of a completed apprenticeship program as approved by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the Department, with instruction in the
kind of body art for which the applicant seeks a body art practitioner license to
perform.
A. Any course taken by an applicant to fulfill the requirements set forth in this chapter
concerning exposure control and blood-borne pathogen training shall meet the
requirements of 29 CFR 1910.1030 et seq., as amended from time to time, and, at a
minimum, shall provide instruction in the following subject matter:
(1) A general explanation of the epidemiology and symptoms of blood-borne
diseases and all communicable diseases potentially transmitted through body
art activity;
§ 124-13 QUINCY CODE § 124-14
124:10
§ 124-15. Statement agreeing to comply with Body Art Ordinance.
An applicant for a body art practitioner license shall sign a statement provided by the
Department consenting to and agreeing to abide by all of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 124-16. Issuance of license.
(2) An explanation of the modes of transmission of blood-borne pathogens and
other communicable diseases potentially transmitted through body art activity;
(3) An explanation of the appropriate methods for recognizing tasks and other
activities that may involve exposure to blood for the body art practitioner and/
or the client/recipient;
(4) An explanation of the use and limitations of methods that will prevent or
reduce exposure to the body art practitioner and/or the client/recipient of
blood-borne pathogens and other communicable diseases;
(5) Information on different types, proper use, and removal of gloves and proper
hand washing techniques;
(6) Information on the proper selection and use of autoclaveants and antiseptics;
(7) Information on the HBV vaccine, including information on its efficacy, safety,
and method of administration, and the benefits of vaccination against HBV;
(8) An explanation of what constitutes an exposure incident, the risk of disease
transmission following an exposure incident, and the options for post-exposure
evaluation and follow-up if an exposure incident occurs involving blood-borne
pathogens; and
(9) An opportunity for interactive questions and answers with the instructor of the
training session.
B. Upon conclusion of a course as describe above, an examination based on the
information covered in the course shall be administered to each attendee of the
course by the entity administering the course, with documentation of the results for
each attendee provided to him or her. The body art practitioner license applicant
shall provide the results of such examination to the Department.
A. If an applicant for a body art practitioner license demonstrates compliance with
§ 124-13A and all other provisions of § 124-9 et seq. of this chapter, excepting only
§ 124-13B, then the Department is hereby authorized to issue a body art practitioner
license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter which authorizes the applicant to
conduct body art activities consisting only of body piercing, tattooing, branding and
scarification.
B. If an applicant for a body art practitioner license does not demonstrate compliance
with § 124-13A of this chapter but does demonstrate compliance with § 124-13B
and with all other provisions of § 124-9 et seq. of this chapter, then the Department
is hereby authorized to issue a body art practitioner license pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter that authorizes the applicant to conduct body art activities
consisting only of tattooing, branding and scarification.
§ 124-14 BODY ART § 124-17
124:11
§ 124-17. Scope of license.
A body art practitioner shall only perform those forms of body art for which he/she holds
a body art practitioner license issued by the Department.
§ 124-18. Posting of license.
A body art practitioner and/or operator shall post in an area of the body art establishment
accessible to the Department and to clients the original of the current body art
practitioner license of the body art practitioner.
§ 124-19. Impairment by drugs or alcohol.
No body art practitioner shall conduct any form of body art activity while under the
influence of alcohol or drugs.
§ 124-20. Restriction of certain body art activities.
No body art practitioner shall:
§ 124-21. Sterile conditions.
A body art practitioner shall only conduct body art activities under sterile conditions.
§ 124-22. Rash, lesion or visible sign of infection.
The skin of a body art practitioner shall be free of rash, any lesion or visible sign of
infection. A body art practitioner shall not conduct any form of body art activity upon
any area of a client that evidences the presence of any rash, lesion or visible sign of
infection.
§ 124-23. Activities to be conducted at facility with permit.
A body art practitioner shall only conduct body art activities within a facility with a
current body art establishment permit, and which establishment is in compliance with all
provisions of this chapter.
§ 124-24. Use of mobile or temporary body art establishment prohibited.
No body art practitioner shall conduct any form of body art activity in a mobile or
A. Tattoo a minor client;
B. Brand a minor client;
C. Scar or perform scarification upon a minor client;
D. Pierce the genitalia of a minor client;
E. Pierce a client under 14 years of age, with the sole exception of ear piercing; or
F. Perform or engage in any of the activities prohibited under Article IX of this
chapter.
§ 124-17 QUINCY CODE § 124-24
124:12
temporary body art establishment.
§ 124-24 BODY ART § 124-24
124:13

ARTICLE III
Apprenticeship Program
§ 124-25. Apprenticeship program authorized.
The Department, pursuant to and in accordance with the authority to promulgate rules
and regulations for the protection of the public health granted in MGL c. 111, § 31,
and pursuant to the authority granted hereunder, is hereby empowered and authorized to
establish a body art practitioner license apprenticeship program.
§ 124-26. Participants to comply with Body Art Ordinance.
Any body art practitioner license apprenticeship program established under the authority
of § 124-25 of this chapter shall require that all participants in such program adhere to
and abide by all relevant provisions of this chapter excepting only §§ 124-13 and 124-14.
§ 124-27. Definitions.
For the purposes of § 124-26 of this chapter and, where the context so requires, for
purposes of the body art practitioner license apprenticeship program established by the
Department pursuant to § 124-25 of this chapter, the term "body art practitioner" shall
mean "body art practitioner apprentice," and the term "body art practitioner license" shall
mean "body art practitioner apprentice license."
§ 124-28. Minimum program requirements.
As a minimum requirement of the body art practitioner license apprenticeship program
established by the Department, the Department shall require that each participant in
such program shall be required to complete the requirements of § 124-13A through D
inclusive and § 124-14 of this chapter prior to a participant in such program conducting
any form of body art activity upon a client or the person of another.
§ 124-29. Issuance of apprentice license.
The Department is hereby authorized is issue a body art practitioner apprentice license
to participants in the body art practitioner license apprenticeship program established
pursuant to § 124-25 of this chapter, provided that each such participant qualifies for
the same pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and the body art practitioner license
apprenticeship program.
§ 124-30. Client notice and written consent.
A. Before a person acting under a body art practitioner apprentice license conducts any
form of body art activity upon a client, that client shall be advised that the person to
conduct such body art activity is in fact an apprentice and is acting only under a
body art practitioner apprentice license.
B. Before a person acting under a body art practitioner apprentice license conducts any
form of body art activity upon a client, such person must obtain the client's written
consent. This written consent shall be physically affixed to the application and
consent form for body art activity required pursuant to § 124-32 of this chapter and
§ 124-25 BODY ART § 124-30
124:15
such written consent shall be maintained therewith.
§ 124-30 QUINCY CODE § 124-30
124:16
ARTICLE IV
Customers/Clients
§ 124-31. Application and consent form required.
Every client shall complete an application and consent form approved by the Department
prior to having any body art activity performed upon or to his or her body.
§ 124-32. Contents of application and consent form.
Every application and consent form required by § 124-31 of this chapter shall contain a
minimum of the following:
A. General information regarding body art, including, at a minimum, the following
statements:
(1) Tattoos should be considered permanent; and
(2) The removal of tattoos and scars would require surgery or other medical
procedure that may result in scarring or additional scarring of the skin;
B. Information as to the side effects of body art, including but not limited to
hypertrophic scarring, possible adverse reaction to ink/dye/pigment, possible
change in color of ink/dye/pigment over time, a decreased ability of physician to
locate skin melanoma in regions concealed by tattoos, brands, scars and other forms
of body art, possible nerve damage, febrile illness, tetanus, systemic infection, and
keloid formation;
C. Client information, including:
(1) Name;
(2) Age and valid identification;
(3) In the case of a minor client, the parent's or legal guardian's name, proof of
parentage or legal guardianship through a copy of a birth certificate or court
order of guardianship respectively, or a notarized document signed by the
parent or legal guardian attesting to the parent's or legal guardian's relationship
to the minor client, and the consent to the conduct of the contemplated body
art activity upon the minor client; and
(4) The type of the body art activity to be performed;
D. Instructions requiring the client to adhere to the exposure control plan as such plan
relates to the client's conduct in the body art establishment;
E. The address and phone number of the Department and instructions for the client or,
in the case of a minor client, the minor client and his/her parent or legal guardian to
contact the Department with any questions or concerns regarding safety,
sanitization or sterilization procedures;
F. The name of the body art practitioner who is to conduct the body art upon the client
or minor client and that practitioner's Department registration number;
§ 124-31 BODY ART § 124-32
124:17
§ 124-33. Disclosure of certain health-related information.
§ 124-34. Impairment by drugs or alcohol.
No person shall receive any form of body art activity who is under the influence of drugs
or alcohol.
§ 124-35. Aftercare instructions.
All clients shall obtain and read and follow the Department-approved aftercare
G. The manufacturer codes, if any, the identity of the manufacturer, and lot numbers
of any dye/ink or pigment to be used in the body art activity;
H. Signature of client;
I. In the case of a minor client, the signature of client's parent or legal guardian. The
parent or legal guardian shall sign the consent form in the presence of the body art
practitioner;
J. The signature of the body art practitioner;
K. The date(s) of all signature(s); and
L. The date(s) of the body art procedure, including a daily estimate of progress for the
conduct of body art requiring multiple days to complete.
A. A client shall inform the body art practitioner of any known chronic medical or
communicable conditions, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Diabetes.
(2) History of hemophilia (bleeding).
(3) History of skin disease, skin lesions or skin sensitivities to soap, disinfectants,
etc.
(4) History of allergies or adverse reactions to pigments, dyes or other skin
sensitivities.
(5) History of epilepsy, seizures, fainting or narcolepsy.
(6) The taking of medications such as aspirin or other anticoagulants, which thin
the blood and/or interfere with blood clotting.
(7) History of or suspicion of adverse reaction to latex or products containing
latex.
B. A client shall inform the body art practitioner of a known pregnancy or possibility
of pregnancy.
C. The body art practitioner shall require the client to sign a release form confirming
that the above information was obtained or attempted to be obtained and the client
refused to disclose the same.
§ 124-32 QUINCY CODE § 124-35
124:18
instructions appropriate for the form of body art conducted upon such person.
§ 124-36. Minimum contents of aftercare instructions.
Aftercare instructions shall be approved by the Department and shall include, at a
minimum, the following:
§ 124-37. Age requirements for certain body art activities.
§ 124-38. Rash, lesion or visible signs of infection.
The skin area or mucosa of a client to receive any form of body art activity shall be free
of rash, any lesion or from any visible sign of infection.
A. Responsibilities and proper care following the procedure;
B. Restrictions, if any, upon the client;
C. Signs and symptoms of infection; and
D. Instructions to contact a physician if possible signs of infection occur.
A. No minor client shall receive a tattoo.
B. No minor client shall be branded.
C. No minor client shall be scarred.
D. No minor client shall have his or her genitalia pierced.
E. No client under 14 years of age shall be pierced with the sole exception of ear
piercing.
§ 124-35 BODY ART § 124-38
124:19

ARTICLE V
Body Art Establishments
§ 124-39. Application fee; term of permit.
A person seeking registration under this chapter so as to obtain a body art establishment
permit shall submit a completed application provided by the Department and shall pay
to the City of Quincy a fee of $250. A body art establishment permit shall be valid for
no more than one year. The Department may renew a body art establishment permit
under this chapter, and each applicant for such renewal shall pay to the City of Quincy a
renewal fee of $250. All body art establishment permits shall expire on December 31 of
the year of issuance.
§ 124-40. Hours of operation.
The operation of a body art establishment and/or the conduct of any body art activity
under a body art practitioner license therein shall not occur before 9:00 a.m. nor after
9:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and not before 9:00 a.m. nor after 10:00 p.m. on
Friday and Saturday.
§ 124-41. Facility plans and specifications; inspection.
Every operator or applicant for a body art establishment permit shall submit to the
Department scaled plans and specifications of the proposed facility wherein any body
art activity is intended to be conducted demonstrating the compliance of the facility with
this chapter. The Department may require an on-site inspection of the proposed facility
to determine and/or ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter prior to the
issuance by the Department of a body art establishment permit pursuant to this chapter.
§ 124-42. Workstation requirements.
§ 124-43. Cleaning area; instrument storage area; customer waiting area.
A. Every workstation shall have minimum of 60 square feet.
B. Each body art establishment shall have at least one workstation.
C. The area within each workstation shall be completely screened from view from any
person outside such workstation.
D. A workstation shall be used for no other purpose.
E. Each workstation shall be separated from any other area of the body art facility,
including other workstations within such body art facility, by a wall or other solid
barrier extending from the floor to a minimum height of eight feet.
F. A workstation shall be maintained in a clean and sterile condition.
A. Every body art establishment shall have therein a cleaning area. Every cleaning area
shall have an area for the placement and use of an autoclave or other sterilization
unit located or positioned so as to be a minimum of 36 inches from a required
ultrasonic cleaning unit.
§ 124-39 BODY ART § 124-43
124:21
§ 124-44. Walls, floors and ceilings.
§ 124-45. Electrical wiring.
§ 124-46. Lighting and ventilation.
B. Every body art establishment shall have therein an instrument storage area
exclusive of the cleaning area. The instrument storage area shall be equipped with
cabinets for the storage of all instruments and equipment. The required cabinets
shall be located a sufficient distance from the cleaning area so as to prevent
contamination of the instruments and equipment stored therein.
C. Every body art establishment shall have therein a customer waiting area exclusive
of and separate from any workstation, instrument storage area or cleaning area.
A. Every workstation, instrument storage area, toilet room, and cleaning area shall be
constructed and maintained as follows so as to provide a durable, smooth,
nonabsorbent and washable surface:
(1) Floors: constructed of commercially rated continuous sheet vinyl, smooth
sealed cement, ceramic tile with sealed grout, or other similar materials
approved by the Department and shall be maintained in good repair free of any
holes or cracks.
(2) Walls: covered with a semi-gloss or gloss enamel paint or constructed of
fiberglass-reinforced panel, ceramic tile with sealed grout or other similar
materials approved by the Department and shall be maintained in good repair
free of any holes or cracks.
(3) Ceiling: covered with a semi-gloss or gloss enamel paint or approved
commercially rated panels or tiles and maintained in good repair free of any
holes, cracks or falling matter.
B. All such floors, walls and ceilings shall be light colored. For purposes of this
chapter, "light colored" shall mean a light reflectance value of 70% or greater.
A. All electrical wiring shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the state
and local wiring codes.
B. All electrical outlets in all workstations and cleaning areas shall be equipped with
approved ground fault (GFCI) protected receptacles.
A. Every workstation shall be well ventilated and have a minimum light service
maintained at all times during the conducting of body art activities at an equivalent
of not less than 20 footcandles as measured 36 inches above the floor, except that a
minimum of 100 footcandles shall be provided on the area of the client's body
subject to the conduct of body art, in any area where instruments or sharps are
assembled, and all cleaning areas.
B. Every workstation, cleaning area and every area in a body art establishment where
linens, instruments, sharps or other equipment is exposed, sanitized or sterilized
shall be equipped exclusively with readily cleanable light fixtures with light bulbs,
§ 124-43 QUINCY CODE § 124-46
124:22
§ 124-47. Plumbing.
§ 124-48. Toilet rooms.
§ 124-49. Hand washing sinks.
lenses or globes of shatterproof material.
A. All plumbing and plumbing fixtures shall be installed in compliance with local
plumbing codes.
B. To the extent permitted by applicable federal, state and local laws and ordinances,
all liquid wastes shall be discharged through the plumbing system into the public
sewerage system or into a Department-approved private sewage disposal system.
C. An adequate pressurized potable water supply shall be provided to every body art
establishment.
D. The public water supply entering a body art establishment shall be protected by a
testable, reduced-pressure backflow preventor installed in accordance with 248
CMR 10, as amended from time to time. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
A. Every body art establishment shall provide toilet rooms with adequate lighting and
ventilation to the outside for use by employees and clients, which shall be available
to clients during business hours.
B. The number and construction of toilet rooms shall be in accordance with local
building and plumbing codes.
C. Every water closet or toilet stall shall be enclosed and have a well-fitting, selfclosing
door.
D. An adequate supply of toilet tissue shall be provided in a permanently installed
dispenser in each water closet or toilet stall.
E. Toilet rooms shall not be used for the storage of instruments or other supplies used
for body art activity.
F. A body art establishment permanently located within a retail shopping center, or
similar setting housing multiple operations within one enclosed structure having
shared entrance and exit points, shall not be required to provide a separate toilet
room within such body art establishment if Department-approved toilet facilities
are located in the retail shopping center within 300 feet the body art establishment
so as to be readily accessible to any client or body art practitioner.
A. A hand washing sink shall be provided within or adjacent to any toilet room and in
each workstation.
B. Every hand washing sink shall be equipped with an adequate supply of hot and cold
water under pressure with fixtures to allow for washing of hands, liquid hand
cleanser, single-use sanitary towels in devices for dispensing, and a waste container
of washable construction.
§ 124-46 BODY ART § 124-49
124:23
§ 124-50. Janitorial sink.
At least one janitorial sink shall be provided in every body art establishment for use in
cleaning the body art establishment and proper disposal of liquid wastes in accordance
with all applicable federal, state and local laws. For purposes of this chapter, "janitorial
sink" means a sink of adequate size equipped with hot and cold water under pressure
so as to permit the cleaning of the body art establishment and any equipment used for
cleaning.
§ 124-51. Instrument sink.
§ 124-52. Exposure control plan required.
Each operator shall create, update as needed, and comply with an exposure control plan.
§ 124-53. Submission of exposure control plan.
§ 124-54. Telephone access; emergency communication.
A body art establishment shall be required to have a telephone in good working order
and easily accessible to all employees and clients during all hours of operation for
the purpose of contacting police, fire or emergency medical assistance or ambulance
services in the event of an emergency or perceived emergency. A legible sign shall
be posted at or adjacent to the telephone indicating the correct emergency telephone
numbers and the number of the Department.
§ 124-55. Restrictions on use of body art establishment for other activities.
No operator shall permit the use of a body art establishment:
C. A hand washing sink shall not be used as a janitorial sink.
A. Every cleaning area shall have a sink used exclusively for the cleaning of
instruments.
B. Every instrument sink shall be of adequate size and equipped with hot and cold
water under pressure so as to permit the cleaning of instruments.
A. The exposure control plan for a body art establishment shall be submitted by the
operator to the Department for review so as to meet all of the requirements of
OSHA regulations, to include but not limited to 29 CFR 1910.1030 et seq., as
amended from time to time.
B. A copy of the body art establishment's exposure control plan shall be maintained at
the body art establishment at all times and shall be made available to the
Department upon request.
A. For the sale of food and/or beverages, whether to be consumed at the body art
establishment or off site;
B. As a barbershop or hair salon;
§ 124-49 QUINCY CODE § 124-55
124:24
§ 124-56. Issuance of permit.
If an applicant for a body art establishment permit demonstrates to the Department
compliance with § 124-39 et seq. of this chapter, the Department is hereby authorized to
issue a body art establishment permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 124-57. Posting of permit.
The operator of a body art establishment shall post in an area of the body art
establishment accessible to the Department and to clients the original of the current body
art establishment permit issued by the Department.
§ 124-58. Mobile or temporary body art establishment prohibited.
No person shall establish or operate a mobile or temporary body art establishment.
§ 124-59. Health of employees.
No person affected with boils, infected wounds, open sores, abrasions, weeping
dermatological lesions or acute respiratory infection shall work in any area of, or in any
capacity in, a body art establishment which would create a likelihood that that person
could contaminate equipment, instruments, supplies, procedure surfaces, or workstations
or otherwise compromise or could reasonably be expected to compromise the sterility of
the body art establishment with body substances or pathogenic organisms.
C. As a nail salon;
D. As a bar, with or without a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages;
E. As a bowling alley;
F. For human habitation;
G. As a tanning salon;
H. As a massage parlor; or
I. For any other use which, in the opinion of the Department, may cause the
contamination of instruments, equipment, a procedure surface or workstation.
§ 124-55 BODY ART § 124-59
124:25

ARTICLE VI
Instruments and Equipment
§ 124-60. Composition and maintenance of surfaces.
The procedure surface and the surface of all furniture and counter tops located in a
workstation, instrument storage area and cleaning area shall be made of materials that
are, or shall be treated so as to be, smooth, nonabsorbent, nonporous, easily cleanable
and able to withstand repeated cleaning and disinfecting. Such surfaces shall be
maintained in a good condition free from holes and cracks.
§ 124-61. Sanitizing and sterilization units.
§ 124-62. Waste receptacles.
§ 124-63. Linens.
Every body art establishment or body art practitioner shall maintain an adequate supply
of reusable, launderable linens or single-use linens, such as drapes, lap cloths and aprons,
to be used in conducting body art activities.
§ 124-64. Rotary pens.
If used in body art activity, rotary pens, also known as "cosmetic machines," shall have
detachable, disposable, sterile combo couplers and shall have detachable, disposable
casings or casings designed and manufactured to be easily cleaned and sterilized.
§ 124-65. Inks, dyes and pigments.
A. Every body art establishment shall have at a minimum the following:
(1) One or more ultrasonic cleaning units sold for cleaning purposes under
approval of the United States Food and Drug Administration. Every ultrasonic
cleaning unit shall be clearly labeled "Biohazardous" and shall be installed or
placed in the cleaning area at a minimum distance of 36 inches from the
required autoclave or other sterilization unit.
(2) One or more autoclaves or other sterilization units sold for medical
sterilization purposes under approval of the United States Food and Drug
Administration.
B. Every operator and body art practitioner shall be knowledgeable in the required
washing, cleaning and sterilization procedures, including the proper operation of
the ultrasonic cleaning unit and autoclave or other sterilization unit.
A. Every workstation shall have a foot-operated, covered, cleanable waste receptacle
for disposal of trash and other debris.
B. Every workstation shall have an approved sharps container exclusively used for the
disposal of contaminated waste in accordance with Quincy Municipal Code Chapter
175, Article II, Infectious Waste Disposal.
§ 124-60 BODY ART § 124-65
124:27
§ 124-66. Inserted objects; jewelry.
§ 124-67. Single-use equipment and instruments.
Equipment, instruments and supplies intended for single use shall not be used more that
one time.
§ 124-68. Prohibited instruments and materials.
No operator, body art practitioner or other person shall utilize or have available in a body
art establishment any:
A. All inks, dyes, and pigments used to alter the color of skin in the conduct of body
art shall be specifically manufactured for such purpose, approved, properly labeled
as to their ingredients, manufacturer and lot number in accordance with applicable
United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) requirements, and shall not be
contaminated or adulterated. The mixing of such inks, dyes or pigments or the
dilution of the same with potable sterile water is acceptable, unless prohibited or
not recommended by the product manufacturer.
B. Inks, dyes and pigments prepared by or at the direction of a body art practitioner for
use in body art activity shall be made exclusively of nontoxic and noncontaminated
ingredients approved by the Department or the FDA.
A. Jewelry shall be sterilized, free from polishing compounds, and free from nicks,
scratches, burrs or irregular surface conditions.
B. Jewelry of 16 gage girth or thicker shall not have raised external threads or
threading.
C. Jewelry shall be in good condition, designed and manufactured for insertion into
the intended body part of the client.
D. The use of previously worn jewelry or jewelry brought into the body art
establishment by the client or another is prohibited.
E. Only jewelry manufactured of surgical implant stainless steel of American Society
for Testing and Materials Standards Grade F138, surgical implant solid 14K or 18K
white or yellow gold, niobium, surgical implant titanium of Ti6A4V ELI, American
Society for Testing and Materials Standards F-136-98, platinum or other materials
considered by the Department to be equally biocompatible and capable of adequate
cleaning and sterilization shall be inserted into a client.
A. Instruments or materials, such as styptic pencils or devices, alum, or any similar
material, used to check the flow of blood;
B. Liquid sterilants for the attempted sterilization of any reusable instrument or
component;
C. Rotary pens that are designed or manufactured with a sponge-type material at the
opening of the chamber for the purpose of prohibiting the backflow of pigment and
body fluid into the machine;
§ 124-65 QUINCY CODE § 124-68
124:28
D. Multiple-use instruments or components that are designed in such a manner that
restricts or prevents proper washing, cleaning or sterilization;
E. Drugs, chemicals or agents that require a licensed medical practitioner's
authorization for use, application or dispensation;
F. Suturing kits or suturing devices, scalpels, cauterizing tools or devices, or other
tools, devices or instruments used for or in conjunction with any prohibited body
art activity, and not otherwise properly used for any allowed body art activity;
G. Piercing needles or piercing tapers for the sale or use by one not a body art
practitioner; or
H. Needles used in the practice of "play piercing," so-called.
§ 124-68 BODY ART § 124-68
124:29

ARTICLE VII
General Requirements
§ 124-69. Animals.
§ 124-70. Smoking, eating and drinking prohibited.
No person shall smoke, or otherwise use any form of tobacco, eat or drink at or in a
workstation, instrument storage area or cleaning area. Only in the case of medical need
may fluids be consumed by a client.
§ 124-71. Disease transmission.
Except as set forth in these regulations, no operator, body art practitioner or other person
shall commit or permit any act that may expose any client or person to disease or illness
or otherwise contaminate any instrument or area in a body art establishment.
§ 124-72. Exposure incident report.
§ 124-73. Record maintenance.
A. No body art practitioner shall conduct any form of body art upon an animal.
B. No animal, except one actually serving as a guide animal, signal animal or service
animal accompanied by a totally or partially blind person or deaf person or a person
whose hearing is impaired or handicapped person, shall be allowed in a body art
establishment.
A. An exposure incident report shall be completed by the close of the business day
during which an exposure has or might have taken place by the involved or
knowledgeable body art practitioner for every exposure incident occurring in the
conduct of any body art activity.
B. Each exposure incident report shall contain:
(1) A copy of the application and consent form for body art activity completed by
any client or minor client involved in the exposure incident;
(2) A full description of the exposure incident, including the portion of the body
involved therein;
(3) Instrument(s) or other equipment implicated;
(4) A copy of the body art practitioner license of the involved body art
practitioner;
(5) Date and time of exposure;
(6) A copy of any medical history released to the body art establishment or body
art practitioner; and
(7) Information regarding any recommendation to refer to a physician or waiver
to consult a physician by persons involved.
§ 124-69 BODY ART § 124-73
124:31
§ 124-74. Establishment maintenance.
Every area of a body art establishment shall be kept in good repair, clean and free of all
vermin and maintained so as to prevent contamination of clients and other persons.
§ 124-75. Toilet room and plumbing maintenance.
Every toilet room, all plumbing and all plumbing fixtures shall be kept clean, fully
operative, and in good repair.
§ 124-76. Equipment and instrument maintenance.
A. Every operator shall have and retain at the body art establishment for inspection by
the Department the following information for the time period specified below, to be
updated as needed to remain current:
(1) Exposure control plan. One copy of the exposure control plan for the body art
establishment submitted to the Department;
(2) Employee records (three years). Indicating: name, home address, home phone
number, identification photograph, state identification card number, physical
description as detailed on state identification card, date of birth, type(s) of
body art procedures conducted, dates of employment at the body art
establishment, body art practitioner registration number, and Hepatitis B
vaccination status or declination notification;
(3) Body art practitioner independent operator (nonemployee of the body art
establishment) records (three years). Indicating: name, home address, phone
number, state identification card number, physical description as detailed on
state identification card, date of birth, type(s) of body art procedures
conducted, dates operating at the body art establishment; body art practitioner
registration number, and Hepatitis B vaccination status or declination
notification;
(4) Client records (two years). Copies of all application and consent forms for
body art activity;
(5) Waste hauler manifests for contaminated waste transport and disposal (three
years);
(6) Training records (three years). Documentation to verify training of exposure
control plan to all employees and body art practitioner independent operators
conducting body art activity at such establishment;
(7) Commercial biological monitoring (spore) system test results (three years);
and
(8) Body Art Ordinance. One copy of the most current version of this chapter and
any state regulations concerning the practice of body art.
B. Every operator shall have and retain at the body art establishment for inspection by
the Department all exposure incident reports permanently. The disposal or
destruction of these reports is prohibited.
§ 124-73 QUINCY CODE § 124-76
124:32
§ 124-77. Contaminated instruments.
A. All instruments, equipment and procedure surfaces used for body art activity,
including but not limited to devices, containers, cabinets, storage compartments,
chairs, tables, counters, and dispensers, shall be maintained clean, fully operative,
and in good repair and free from contamination.
B. All instruments manufactured for performing any specific body art activity shall be
so designated, used and approved and shall not be modified, adulterated,
contaminated or improperly used. Instruments used for body piercing shall be
constructed of stainless surgical-grade steel and designed and manufactured for
such use.
A. Every contaminated reusable instrument or component thereof, including but not
limited to needles, needle bars, needle tubes, needle caps, body piercing tubes,
rotary pens, and coil machines, shall be immersed in water or other approved liquid
solution in the cleaning area until cleaned and sterilized.
B. Prior to sterilization, every such instrument shall be thoroughly washed by
scrubbing with an appropriate disinfectant and hot water in accordance with
manufacturer's instructions so as to remove contamination and foreign matter.
C. Upon completion of the washing process as set forth in Subsection B above, every
such instrument shall be cleaned using an ultrasonic cleaning unit in accordance
with manufacturer's instructions.
D. Upon completion of the cleaning process as set forth in Subsection C above, every
such instrument shall be packaged into procedure set-up packages with color
change indicators designed to indicate complete sterilization thereof, initials of the
person responsible for sterilizing the instruments and date of such sterilization.
Instruments may be packaged individually or with other instruments to the extent
permitted under the package manufacturer's instructions.
E. Upon completion of the packaging process as set forth in Subsection D above, every
such instrument shall be properly sterilized by properly autoclaving in an approved
autoclave or sterilized in another type of sterilization unit according to
manufacturer's instructions.
F. If a package becomes wet, is opened or is otherwise compromised so as to allow
the possible contamination of the contents of the package, any instrument therein
shall be deemed contaminated and shall again be washed, cleaned, packaged and
sterilized as indicated above prior to use.
G. Sterilized instruments shall be stored in a dry, clean cabinet or tightly covered
container. Cabinets and containers designated for the storage of sterilized
instruments shall be used for that purpose exclusively.
H. Every sterilized package shall be deemed expired six months after the date of
sterilization. Every instrument therein shall again be washed, cleaned, packaged
and sterilized consistent with the provisions of this section prior to use.
I. Liquid sterilants shall not be used for the sterilization of any reusable instrument.
§ 124-76 BODY ART § 124-78
124:33
§ 124-78. Instrument storage.
All instruments must be stored in the instrument storage area in a manner so as to
prevent contamination. Identical instruments shall be exclusively stored together, unless
intermingled storage with different instruments does not represent a hazard as
determined by the Department.
§ 124-79. Use of chemicals and cleansers.
All germicides, disinfectants, chemicals, and cleansers must be used according to the
manufacturer's requirements, used only for the purpose approved and intended by the
manufacturer and properly labeled and stored so as to prevent contamination and hazard.
§ 124-80. Labeling.
All storage containers, cabinets, shelves and other storage areas in the instrument storage
area shall be properly labeled as to their contents, including but not limited to
identification of contaminated or soiled contents as appropriate.
§ 124-81. Linen storage and cleaning.
§ 124-82. Cleaning and testing of ultrasonic cleaning units and sterilization units.
A. Clean linen shall be stored in a manner so as to prevent contamination. Containers
used for the storage of such linen shall be clearly labeled as to the contents and used
for no other purpose. Linens that have become soiled or contaminated shall be
disposed of, or not be used, until properly laundered. Contaminated linen shall be
labeled, handled, stored, transported, and laundered or disposed of so as to prevent
hazard in a manner approved by the Department.
B. Any other protective clothing, garment or cloth items worn during or used during
body art activity and intended for reuse shall be mechanically washed with
detergent and dried after each use. The items shall be stored in a clean, dry manner
and protected from contamination until used. Should such items become
contaminated directly or indirectly with bodily fluids, the items shall be washed in
accordance with standards applicable to hospitals and medical care facilities at a
temperature of 160° F. or a temperature of 120° F. with the use of chlorine
disinfectant.
A. Every ultrasonic cleaning unit and autoclave or sterilization unit shall be used and
maintained according to manufacturer's specifications. Each ultrasonic cleaning
unit, autoclave or other sterilization unit shall be emptied and thoroughly cleaned
and disinfected at least once each day that the unit is used.
B. Every autoclave or sterilization unit shall be tested with a commercial biological
monitoring (spore) system test in a manner and frequency consistent with the
manufacturer's instructions, but no less than once every week, to monitor the
efficacy of the eradication of all living organisms, including spores, by the
autoclave or other sterilization unit.
C. Biological monitoring (spore) system testing of the autoclave or other sterilization
unit shall be performed by an independent commercial testing laboratory contracted
§ 124-78 QUINCY CODE § 124-82
124:34
§ 124-83. Waste hauling.
by the operator and/or body art practitioner. A provision shall be included in the
contact between the operator and/or body art practitioner with the commercial
testing laboratory requiring the commercial testing facility to notify the Department
of any failure of the autoclave or other sterilization unit to eradicate all living
organisms, including spores.
A. All waste shall be removed from the body art establishment on a daily basis and
placed in an approved secured receptacle for pickup and removal.
B. All contaminated waste in solid form and sharps shall be disposed of through use
of an approved waste hauler in accordance with all applicable state and federal and
local laws and regulations, specifically to include Chapter 175, Article II, of the
Quincy Municipal Code. The frequency of disposal shall be determined by the
Department, but shall be no less than every 30 days.
§ 124-82 BODY ART § 124-83
124:35

ARTICLE VIII
Conduct of Body Art
§ 124-84. Workstation sanitizing.
§ 124-85. Hand washing and use of gloves.
§ 124-86. Instrument and equipment preparation.
A. All surfaces in a workstation which come in contact with a client or which become
contaminated or which may reasonably have become contaminated shall be cleaned
with water and soap or other appropriate cleaning compound immediately
following the conduct of body art upon a client.
B. The workstation, including but not limited to the client's chair, table, tray, procedure
surface and similar surfaces, shall be thoroughly sanitized with an approved
disinfectant immediately before and immediately after the conduct of body art upon
a client therein/thereon.
A. A body art practitioner shall clean his/her hands and forearms thoroughly by
washing with antibacterial soap and warm water and promptly dry the same with
single-use paper towels or like material prior to conducting any body art activity.
B. A body art practitioner shall wear new, clean, single-use examination gloves while
assembling all instruments and other supplies intended for use in the conduct of
body art and during the conduct of body art upon a client. New, clean, single-use
nonlatex examination gloves shall be used during the preparation for and the
conduct of any body art activity upon a client with a known or a suspected latex
allergy.
C. If an examination glove is pierced, torn or contaminated through contact with any
part of the client not subject to the conduct of body art or such other surface so as
to present the possibility of contamination, any person other than the client, or
otherwise exposed to an unsanitary or nonsterile surface, both gloves must be
promptly removed and discarded into an appropriate waste receptacle. The body art
practitioner shall don new gloves before proceeding with the conduct of body art.
D. If the gloves of a body art practitioner are removed at any time during assembly of
instruments or supplies, or the conduct of body art, the body art practitioner must
clean his/her hands and don new gloves in accordance with this section.
E. The use of single-use examination gloves does not preclude or substitute for the
above hand washing requirement.
A. Every body art practitioner shall use linens, properly cleaned in accordance with
these regulations, or new single-use drapes, lap cloths, and aprons for each element
of body art conducted upon a client.
B. Every substance used in the conduct of body art shall be dispensed from containers
so as to prevent contamination or the possibility of contamination of the unused
portion. Immediately before tattooing a client, a sufficient quantity of the ink, dye
or pigment to be used therefor shall be transferred from its original bottle or
§ 124-84 BODY ART § 124-86
124:37
§ 124-87. Use of workstation.
§ 124-88. Use of instruments, supplies and sharps.
§ 124-89. Waste disposal.
Disposable items such as gloves, wipes, cotton balls, Q-tips, water cups, rinse cups (used
alone or in an ultrasonic cleaning unit), drapes, lap cloths, aprons and other single-use
items that have come into contact with any person, client, workstation, instrument trays,
counters, towels or linens used for the conduct of body art, or have otherwise become
contaminated, shall be promptly discarded during or upon completion of the conduct of
container into sterile, single-use disposable cups, caps or containers.
C. Upon sanitization of the workstation, the instrument tray shall be covered with an
uncontaminated single-use paper towel, tray cover or similar material.
D. Every instrument required for the conduct of body art upon a client shall be placed
and arranged on the instrument tray in a manner so as to prevent contamination of
sterilized instruments. All sterilized instruments shall remain in sterile packages
until opened in front of the client.
E. Sharps containers shall be easily accessible to the body art practitioner and located
as close as is feasible to the immediate area where the sharps will be used.
A. The conduct of body art shall occur only upon a client or minor client in a
workstation under sterile conditions.
B. Only the client, the parent or legal guardian of a minor client, the guide or service
animal of a client, the body art practitioner conducting the body art and an assistant
or apprentice to the body art practitioner, with the express permission of the client,
shall be permitted in the workstation during the conduct of body art.
A. All instruments used in the conduct of body art shall be without contamination and
shall be properly cleaned, sanitized and sterilized in accordance with this chapter.
B. All instruments and other equipment or supplies used in the conduct of body art that
are designed or intended for single use shall only be used once.
C. All sharps shall be properly disposed of immediately following use in a sharps
container.
D. All product applied to the skin, including body art stencils, shall be single use and
shall be used only once.
E. Products used in the application of body art stencils shall be dispensed and applied
to the area of the client upon which the body art activity is to be performed with
sterile gauze or other sterile applicator so as to prevent contamination of the
container and contents of the product in use. The gauze or other applicator shall be
used only once.
F. Only single-use disposable razors shall be used in the conduct of body art activities,
and such single-use disposable razors shall not be used more than one time.
§ 124-86 QUINCY CODE § 124-89
124:38
body art into an appropriate waste receptacle in accordance with this chapter.
§ 124-90. Multiple body art activities.
The following shall be deemed to be multiple body art activities on a single client,
each requiring proper washing, cleaning, sanitization and sterilization of instruments,
workstations and other equipment and areas as set forth under these regulations:
A. Creating two or more tattoos on different areas of the body of a single client;
B. The use of more than one needle or scalpel during the conduct of body art upon a
single client; or
C. Creating one tattoo and the use of one needle or scalpel on a single client.
§ 124-89 BODY ART § 124-90
124:39

ARTICLE IX
Prohibited Activities
§ 124-91. Use of piercing gun prohibited.
The use of a piercing gun is prohibited at all times.
§ 124-92. Cosmetic tattooing prohibited; exceptions.
§ 124-93. Certain body piercings prohibited.
The following body piercings are hereby prohibited.
A. Cosmetic tattooing, also known as "permanent cosmetics," "micropigment
implantation" or "dermal pigmentation," is hereby prohibited unless performed by
a medical doctor licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or such other
person that receives a license, permit or registration by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts specifically to perform such activities.
B. If a person obtains such a license, permit or registration from the commonwealth,
such person may conduct such body art activity provided all requirements of this
chapter are complied with, excepting only § 124-4.
A. Piercing of the uvula.
B. Piercing of the tracheal area.
C. Piercing of the neck.
D. Piercing of the ankle.
E. Piercing between the ribs or vertebrae.
F. Piercing of the web area of the hand or foot.
G. Piercing of the lingual frenum (tongue web).
H. Piercing of the clitoris.
I. Any form of chest or deep muscle piercings, excluding piercing the nipple.
J. Piercing of the anus.
K. Piercing of an eyelid, whether the top or bottom.
L. The form of body piercing known as "pocketing."
M. Piercing of the gums.
N. Piercing or skewering of a testicle.
O. So-called "deep" piercing of the penis, meaning piercing through the shaft of the
penis, or "trans-penis" piercing in any area from the corona glandis to the pubic
bone.
§ 124-91 BODY ART § 124-93
124:41
§ 124-94. Tongue splitting.
The cutting, splitting or other bifurcation of the tongue is hereby prohibited unless
performed by a medical doctor licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
§ 124-95. Braiding.
The braiding of the skin is hereby prohibited unless perform by a medical doctor licensed
by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
§ 124-96. Three-dimensional body art and implantation.
Three-dimensional body art, including "beading," and implantation are hereby
prohibited unless performed by a medical doctor licensed by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
§ 124-97. Tooth filing, fracturing or removal.
The filing or shaping or the intentional fracturing or extraction of a tooth is hereby
prohibited unless performed by a dentist licensed by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
§ 124-98. Cartilage modification.
The cutting, notching, sculpting or other modification of cartilage is hereby prohibited
unless performed by a doctor licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
§ 124-99. Amputation.
The intentional amputation of any part of the body is hereby prohibited unless performed
by a doctor licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
§ 124-100. Genital modification.
Modification of the genitalia by means of sub-incision, bifurcation, castration, male or
female nullification or other surgical means is hereby prohibited unless performed by a
doctor licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
§ 124-101. Introduction of saline or other liquids.
The introduction of saline solution or other liquid or semiliquid substance into the body
of another for the purposed of causing a modification of the body is hereby prohibited
unless performed by a medical doctor licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
P. So-called "deep" piercing of the scrotum, meaning piercing through the scrotum, or
"trans-scrotal" piercing.
Q. So-called "deep" piercing of the vagina, to include, but not limited to, so-called
"triangles."
§ 124-93 QUINCY CODE § 124-101
124:42
ARTICLE X
Enforcement
§ 124-102. Conditions for grant of variance.
Variance may be granted from a particular section or provision of this chapter by the
Department with respect to a particular case only when, in the sole opinion of the Health
Commissioner:
§ 124-103. Procedure for variance request.
§ 124-104. Limitations on variance.
Any variance granted by the Health Commissioner pursuant to § 124-102 of this chapter
may be subject to such qualification, expiration, revocation, modification or suspension
as the Health Commissioner, in his or her sole discretion, shall deem appropriate.
§ 124-105. Violation by body art practitioner.
A. The enforcement of the subject section or provision would do manifest injustice;
and
B. The applicant for a body art practitioner license or body art establishment permit,
as the case may be, has proved to the satisfaction of the Health Commissioner that
the same degree of protection required under this chapter can be achieved without
the strict application or enforcement of the subject section or provision.
A. Every request for a variance pursuant to § 124-102 of this chapter shall be made in
writing to the Health Commissioner and shall state the specific section or provision
from which variance is sought.
B. Every variance granted by the Health Commissioner shall be in writing, and the
original of the variance document shall be posted, in the case of a variance relating
to a body art practitioner license, with the posting of the body art practitioner
license as required by § 124-18, and in the case of a variance relating to a body art
establishment permit, with the posting of the body art establishment permit as
required by § 124-57.
C. A copy or duplicate original of all variance documents issued by the Department
shall be held on file in the office of the Clerk of the City of Quincy or in the offices
of the Department.
D. A variance document issued by the Department shall contain information so as to
reasonably inform the public of the nature of the variance, the need therefor, the
specific section or provision of this chapter from which variance was granted and
the name of the subject body art practitioner or body art establishment.
E. Information advising as to whether the subject variance is unlimited in time or
duration or has a fixed expiration date shall be detailed in all variance documents
issued by the Department.
A. A body art practitioner license shall be suspended by the Department immediately
§ 124-102 BODY ART § 124-105
124:43
§ 124-106. Violation by operator or in body art establishment.
upon written notice of such suspension to the subject body art practitioner when,
in the sole discretion of the Health Commissioner, the Health Commissioner has
reason to believe that, due to a condition or practice of the subject body art
practitioner, an imminent threat to the public health and/or welfare exists.
B. When the condition or practice believed to cause such threat to the public health
and/or welfare is abated or corrected to the satisfaction of the Health Commissioner,
the Health Commissioner may terminate the suspension of the body art practitioner
license of the subject body art practitioner and reinstate the same upon written
notice to the subject body art practitioner, and the body art practitioner license of
such body art practitioner shall remain in full force and effect until the expiration
of the same or until the subsequent suspension, termination, revocation or
modification thereof.
C. In all other instances of a violation of this chapter by a body art practitioner, the
Department shall serve upon the subject body art practitioner written order of notice
detailing the condition, event or practice determined by the Department to be in
violation of this chapter, and such written order of notice shall instruct the body art
practitioner that he or she shall have five business days to abate or correct such
condition, event or practice to the satisfaction of the Department.
D. Should a body art practitioner subject to an order of notice pursuant to Subsection
C fail to abate or correct the condition, event or practice which is the subject of an
order of notice, or to otherwise comply with an order of notice, the Department may
suspend, terminate, revoke or modify the license held by such body art practitioner.
A. A body art establishment permit shall be suspended by the Department immediately
upon written notice of such suspension to the subject operator when, in the sole
discretion of the Health Commissioner, due to a condition of or practice in the body
art establishment, the Health Commissioner has reason to believe that an imminent
threat to the public health and/or welfare exists.
B. When the condition or practice believed to cause such threat to the public health
and/or welfare is abated or corrected to the satisfaction of the Health Commissioner,
the Health Commissioner may terminate the suspension of the body art
establishment permit of the subject operator and reinstate the same upon written
notice to the subject operator, and the body art establishment permit of such body
art establishment shall remain in full force and effect until the expiration of the
same or until the subsequent suspension, termination, revocation or modification
thereof.
C. In all other instances of a violation of this chapter by an operator or in a body art
establishment, the Department shall serve upon the subject operator written order
of notice detailing the condition, event or practice determined by the Department to
be in violation of this chapter, and such order of notice shall instruct the operator
that he or she shall have five business days to abate or correct such condition, event
or practice to the satisfaction of the Department.
D. Should an operator subject to an order of notice pursuant to Subsection C fail to
§ 124-105 QUINCY CODE § 124-106
124:44
§ 124-107. Criminal prosecution.
In accordance with § 1-1 of the Quincy Municipal Code, as amended from time to time,
at the discretion of the Department, whoever violates any provision of this chapter may
be penalized by indictment or on a criminal complaint brought in the District Court.
§ 124-108. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
The fine for a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be $300 per offense. Each
day that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
§ 124-109. Noncriminal disposition.
In accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21D, and § 1-2 of the Quincy Municipal Code, as
amended from time to time, at the discretion of the Department, whoever violates any
provision of this chapter may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in
MGL c. 40, § 21D.
abate or correct the condition, event or practice which is the subject of an order
of notice, or to otherwise comply with an order of notice, the Department may
suspend, terminate, revoke or modify the body art establishment permit held by
such operator.
§ 124-106 BODY ART § 124-109
124:45

Chapter 126
BODYWORK
§ 126-1. Purpose.
The City of Quincy is promulgating rules and regulations in the form of this chapter
which provide minimum requirements to be met by any person performing bodywork
therapies/activities for hire upon another individual and for any establishment wherein
bodywork activities/therapies are to be performed. By enacting this chapter the City
of Quincy has determined that these rules and regulations are necessary to protect the
public's health and safety. It is the City's intent that only individuals who meet and
maintain minimum standards of competence and conduct may provide services to the
public.
§ 126-2. Definitions.
A. Unless otherwise noted below, the following terms shall have the following
definitions:
BODYWORK—Various forms of therapies that may use touch, words or directed
movement to deepen awareness of patterns of movement in the body or the
affectation of the human energy system or acupoints or Qi meridians of the human
body. Such services shall not be designated or implied to be massage or massage
therapy. Bodywork practices shall include but not be limited to: the Feldenkrais®
method; reflexology; the Trager® approach, Rolf® structural integration; polarity
or polarity therapy; polarity therapy bodywork; acupressure; Jin Shin Do®; qigong;
tui na; shiatsu; and body-mind centering.
CORI—Criminal Offender Record Information as obtained by the Quincy License
Board8 from the Massachusetts Criminal History Systems Board.
DEPARTMENT — The Quincy Health Department or the Health Commissioner,
established in accordance with MGL c. 111, § 26D, and in accordance with Chapter
66, Article VIII, of the Quincy Municipal Code.
ESTABLISHMENT — The licensed room or group of rooms, office, building,
place of business, training facility or school, or location where bodywork therapy is
practiced or taught, which shall meet the standards set forth in 269 CMR 6.07.
LICENSE BOARD — The Board of Licensing Commissioners in accordance with
Chapter 70, Acts of 1920, as amended by Chapter 275, Acts of 1949, which
authorizes said Board to grant licenses and permits. The Board is made up of
the City Clerk, Health Commissioner, Fire Chief, Police Chief, and Director of
Inspectional Services (or their duly authorized designees).[Amended 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012]
NATIONAL CERTIFICATION FOR ASIAN BODYWORK THERAPY — The
professional credential issued by the National Certification Commission for
Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine (NCCAOM) after successfully meeting the
8. Editor's Note: Throughout this chapter references to the "Licensing Board" were amended to "License Board"
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012.
§ 124-109 BODYWORK § 126-2
126:1
§ 126-3. License required; fee; license not transferable; term of license.
eligibility requirements for and passing the national standardized exam.
NATIONAL PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATION, ASSOCIATION OR
INSTITUTE — An organization providing standards for practice, a code of ethics
and grievance procedure and providing or approving a five-hundred-hour course
of study for bodywork or a two-hundred-hour course of study for reflexology.
National professional associations or institutes meeting the above criteria include
but shall not be limited to those listed in Appendix A. Appendix A shall be amended
and updated as necessary with the approval of the Health Commissioner.9
OFF-PREMISES LOCATION — The practice of bodywork at a location(s) other
than an establishment.
PRINCIPAL MANAGING OFFICER — In the event that an applicant for a
bodywork establishment license is a corporation, the officers and/or directors of
the corporation must name at least one of said officers or directors to be named
principal managing officer. In the event that an applicant for a bodywork
establishment license is a partnership, the partners shall name at least one said
partner to be named principal managing officer. The principal managing officer
will assume responsibility as the applicant to complete all license requirements as
required under § 126-6 of these regulations.
PROFESSIONAL BODYWORK PRACTITIONER — Any person who has
completed a minimum five-hundred-hour credentialed course of study in bodywork
therapy or a two-hundred-hour credentialed course in reflexology and who meets
the standards of a national professional association or institute as evidenced by
a credentialed membership in a national professional organization, association or
institute and/or who has passed the Asian Bodywork Therapy Exam or National
Reflexology Certification Exam and who for compensation, hire or reward engages
in the practice of bodywork.
TRAINING FACILITY OR SCHOOL — Any premises, facility, structure or
building used to train individuals to become professional practitioners of bodywork.
B. Feldenkrais® is a registered service mark of the Feldenkrais Guild. The words
Rolfing® and Rolfer® are registered service marks of the Rolf Institute. Trager® is
a registered service mark of the Trager Institute.
A. No person shall practice as a professional practitioner of bodywork for hire or
reward or advertise or hold him/herself as being so engaged in the City of Quincy
unless first having been issued a license required pursuant to these regulations. The
fee for the initial license and for the annual renewal license shall be determined by
the current License Board fee schedule but shall be no less than $25 annually.
B. No person shall own or operate an establishment for the practice of bodywork
unless first having been issued a license required pursuant to these regulations. The
fee for the initial establishment license and annual renewal license shall be
determined by the current License Board fee schedule but shall be no less than $50
annually.
9. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 126-2 QUINCY CODE § 126-3
126:2
§ 126-4. Exceptions.
These regulations shall not apply to the following individuals while engaged in the
regular performance of the duties of their respective professions:
§ 126-5. Professional bodywork practitioner license.
No person shall be licensed to practice as a professional practitioner of bodywork in the
City of Quincy unless he/she meets the following requirements:
C. A license issued to the operator of an establishment or a license issued to a
professional practitioner of bodywork is not transferable to another location or
person.
D. All licenses expire on May 30 following the date of issue and must be renewed in
accordance with these regulations.
A. Physicians, chiropractors, osteopaths, occupational therapists or physical therapists
who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts.
B. An acupuncturist duly licensed under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
A. Submit to the Quincy License Board a completed application package as supplied
by the Quincy License Board.
B. Each application package shall include the following information:
(1) License Board application;
(2) CORI report;
(3) Tax form;
(4) Public hearing request form that includes sign-offs by Inspectional Services
and the Fire Department; and
(5) Quincy Health Department sign-off package that shall include the following:
(a) A definition of services to be provided.
(b) Name and residential address and all names, nicknames and aliases by
which the applicant has been known.
(c) The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three
years immediately preceding the date of application.
(d) The bodywork or similar business license history of the applicant,
whether such person has previously operated in this City or another town
or state, has had a business license revoked or suspended, the reason
therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such
action of suspension or revocation. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
§ 126-3 BODYWORK § 126-5
126:3
(e) Satisfactory evidence that the applicant is 18 years of age or older, by
presenting two forms of positive identification with photo or a valid
passport, or work visa (if applicable).
(f) Documentation of competency, to consist of submittal of sealed
transcripts from an accredited school of bodywork therapy or reflexology
therapy and evidence of having a current certificate of Asian Bodywork
Therapy (ABT) and/or proof of current credentialed membership in a
national bodywork therapy organization, association or institute. Such
organization shall have requirements for membership that include
standards for practice; code of ethics and grievance procedure; and
providing or approving a five-hundred-hour course of study in bodywork
or a two-hundred-hour course of study in reflexology (only) (see
Appendix A).
(g) Two front-face photographs taken within 30 days of the date of
application and at least two inches by two inches in size.
(h) Personal and professional references. Two professional and two personal
references shall accompany all license applications. The applicant shall
utilize a character reference form, to be supplied by the Quincy Health
Department. At least one of the professional references and at least one
of the personal references must be from Massachusetts residents. The
references must be persons other than relatives or business associates.
(i) Completion of the Quincy Health Department's Risk Assessment Form
for Tuberculosis. If deemed to be at risk, the applicant must submit proof
of a negative skin test and/or negative chest x-ray result for tuberculosis.
The tuberculosis skin test date and/or date of the chest x-ray shall not be
more than one year prior to the date of application for license.
(j) Applicants shall provide proof of liability insurance in an amount not less
than $1,000,000.
(k) Applicant must list the name(s) of the licensed establishment(s) where he
or she will practice bodywork.
(l) Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the
foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct,
said declaration being duly dated, signed and notarized in the City.
C. Issuance of license. The License Board shall issue a license for a bodyworker after
all requirements, terms and conditions, including the following, have been met and
complied with:
(1) The correct license fee has been tendered to the License Board.
(2) The applicant has attended a License Board public hearing and the Board has
sustained a majority vote to approve the issuance of the license.
(3) Criminal history.
(a) The applicant has no criminal history of an offense involving sexual
§ 126-5 QUINCY CODE § 126-5
126:4
§ 126-6. Establishment license.
No facility shall be licensed for the practice of bodywork in the City of Quincy unless
the applicant or, where appropriate, the principal managing officer meets the following
requirements:
misconduct.
(b) The applicant has no criminal history of an offense involving narcotics,
dangerous drugs or dangerous weapons.
(c) The Department may issue a license to any person with a criminal history
of any of the above-mentioned crimes upon review of the following
factors:
[1] Time since the offense (for convictions, must be at least five years);
[2] Age of the applicant at the time of the offense;
[3] Seriousness and specific circumstances of the offense;
[4] Relationship of the criminal act to the nature of the license being
sought;
[5] Number of offenses;
[6] Any relevant evidence of rehabilitation or lack thereof; and
[7] No subsequent criminal offense of any nature.
(4) The applicant has not knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of fact in the license application or in any document required by the
Board in conjunction therewith.
(5) The applicant has not had a bodywork license or other similar license denied,
revoked or suspended by the City or any other state, city or town within five
years prior to the date of the application. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
(6) The work establishment(s) listed by the applicant is/are licensed by the Quincy
License Board or meet(s) the requirements for initial licensure as set forth in
§ 126-6 of these regulations.
D. Renewal. A licensed bodywork practitioner must file an application on a form
available from the License Board for renewal not less than 45 days prior to the
expiration of his/her license. At time of filing the renewal application, the applicant
shall submit satisfactory evidence of his/her current professional status.
A. Submit to the Quincy License Board a completed application package as supplied
by the Quincy License Board.
B. Each application package shall include the following information:
(1) License Board application;
§ 126-5 BODYWORK § 126-6
126:5
(2) CORI report;
(3) Tax form;
(4) Proof of workers' compensation insurance for the establishment; [Amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
(5) Public hearing request form that includes sign-offs by Inspectional Services
and the Fire Department; and
(6) Quincy Health Department sign-off package that shall include the following:
(a) A definition of the service to be provided.
(b) The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the
business is to be conducted.
(c) The name and residential address and telephone number of each
applicant.
[1] If the applicant is a corporation, the names, telephone numbers and
residential addresses of each of the officers and directors of said
corporation and the address of the bodywork establishment, and the
name of the principal managing officer.
[2] If applicant is a partnership, the names, telephone numbers and
residential addresses of each of the partners, including limited
partners, and the address of the partnership itself, if different from
the address of the bodywork establishment, and the name of the
principal managing officer.
(d) Name and address of any bodywork business or establishment owned or
operated by any person whose name is required to be given in Subsection
B(6)(c)[1] or [2] wherein the business or profession of bodywork therapy
is carried on.
(e) Two front-face photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two
inches; if the applicant is a corporation, two front-face photographs at
least two inches by two inches of all officers and managing agents of said
corporation; if the applicant is a partnership, two front-face photographs
at least two inches by two inches in size of each partner, including a
limited partner in said partnership.
(f) The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three
years immediately preceding the date of application.
(g) The bodywork or similar business license history of the applicant,
whether such person has previously operated in this City or another town
or state, has had a business license revoked or suspended, the reason
therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such
action of suspension or revocation. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
(h) Satisfactory evidence that the applicant is 18 years of age or older, by
§ 126-6 QUINCY CODE § 126-6
126:6
presenting two forms of positive identification with photo or a valid
passport or work visa (if applicable).
(i) Personal and professional references. Two professional and two personal
references shall accompany all license applications. The applicant shall
utilize a character reference form, to be supplied by the Department. At
least one of the professional references and at least one of the personal
references must be from a Massachusetts resident. The references must
be persons other than relatives or business associates.
(j) A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises
or on adjoining premises owned, controlled or leased by the applicant.
(k) The potential number of employees to be utilized at the establishment.
(l) The proposed hours of operation for the establishment, in accordance
with § 126-8B of this chapter.
(7) Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the
foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, said
declaration being duly dated, signed and notarized in the City.
C. Prior to the Health Department sign-off, prior to any license renewal and upon
receipt of a complaint by the public, the Health Department shall perform an
inspection of a (proposed) facility for a bodywork establishment and review the
following:
(1) Provide that all rooms used for bodywork be clean and easily cleanable, well
lighted, adequately ventilated and properly heated in accordance with local
and/or state regulations.
(2) Maintain all areas of the establishment, including the furniture and equipment
therein, in sanitary condition at all times. All bodywork tables, mattresses, etc.,
shall be easily cleanable. All surfaces used for bodywork shall be properly
cleaned and sanitized after each bodywork session.
(3) Clean and sanitize after each use all robes, sheets, towels, etc., supplied by the
establishment which may come in direct contact with the body. Single-service
or disposable items are acceptable and shall be used only once.
(4) Display in a conspicuous place the current license of the establishment and
current licenses of all bodywork practitioners conducting bodywork therein.
(5) Every room to be used by a bodyworker must:
(a) Contain a hand washing sink, liquid soap and paper towels. Said hand
washing sinks shall be cleaned and sanitized daily and shall be
maintained at all times in a clean and sanitary condition.
(b) Be large enough to fit an exam table with at least three feet of clearance
on all sides and/or be of sufficient size for the bodywork activity
proposed for the space.
(c) Have adequate lighting, heat and ventilation.
§ 126-6 BODYWORK § 126-6
126:7
(6) Every establishment must have sanitary toilet facilities available for patrons,
in accordance with the requirements of the State Plumbing Code. Said toilet
facilities shall be cleaned and sanitized daily and shall be maintained at all
times in a clean and sanitary condition.
D. Issuance of license. The License Board shall issue a license for a bodyworker after
all requirements, terms and conditions, including the following, have been met and
complied with:
(1) The correct license fee has been tendered to the License Board.
(2) The applicant has attended a License Board public hearing and the Board has
sustained a majority vote to approve the issuance of the license.
(3) Criminal history.
(a) The applicant has no criminal history of an offense involving sexual
misconduct.
(b) The applicant has no criminal history of an offense involving narcotics,
dangerous drugs or dangerous weapons that amounts to a felony.
(c) The Department may issue a license to any person with a criminal history
of any of the above-mentioned crimes upon review of the following
factors:
[1] Time since the offense (for convictions, at least five years);
[2] Age of the applicant at the time of the offense;
[3] Seriousness and specific circumstances of the offense;
[4] Relationship of the criminal act to the nature of the license being
sought;
[5] Number of offenses;
[6] Any relevant evidence of rehabilitation or lack thereof; and
[7] No subsequent criminal offenses of any nature.
(4) The applicant has not knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of fact in the license application or in any document required by the
Department in conjunction therewith.
(5) The applicant has not had a bodywork establishment license or other similar
license denied, revoked or suspended by the City or any other state, city or
town within five years prior to the date of the application. [Amended 6-1-2020
by Order No. 2020-012]
(6) The applicant shall: [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
(a) Employ or cause to be employed as a bodywork practitioner(s) only
person(s) who has (have) a license(s) for the practice of bodywork from
the Quincy License Board.
§ 126-6 QUINCY CODE § 126-6
126:8
§ 126-7. Special requirements for training facilities or schools of bodywork.
§ 126-8. Operating requirements.
(b) Operate only under the name or designation specified on the license or a
change thereto as pursuant to Subsection B of this section.
(c) Perform or allow to be performed no illegal act within the establishment.
A violation of this subsection may be grounds for revocation, suspension
or modification of the bodywork establishment license.
(d) Serve no alcoholic beverages in the portion of a building that the License
Board determines is being used for the purpose of giving bodywork.
(e) Operate no x-ray, fluoroscope, diathermy or other similar equipment
unless licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to practice a
profession requiring the use of such equipment.
E. Renewal. Operators/owners of licensed bodywork establishments must file an
application for renewal not less than 45 days prior to the expiration of their license.
A. All instructors of bodywork shall be licensed as bodywork practitioners. Those who
teach non-hands-on classes only, such as biology, anatomy and physiology, and
business classes may be exempted from this requirement.
B. A licensed bodywork practitioner shall be in constant and direct control of the
school at all times hands-on lessons are being taught.
C. All training facilities or schools of bodywork must meet the requirements and
obtain an establishment license as described in § 126-6 of these regulations.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
A. Every operator of an establishment for the giving of bodywork shall require all
practitioners conducting bodywork on the premises to meet the following
requirements:
(1) Be licensed by the City of Quincy License Board.
(2) Not touch or work with a client when either the client or practitioner is
afflicted with any rash, lesion or visible sign of infection that could be spread
through bodywork or through close contact ordinarily associated with
bodywork.
(3) Wash hands thoroughly with proper soap or disinfectant and hot water
immediately before and after performing a bodywork session.
(4) Maintain sufficient level of personal cleanliness and be clothed in clean and
appropriate attire.
(5) Not administer bodywork to a minor without consent of the minor's parent or
guardian.
(6) Take all precautions for proper hygiene within the facilities.
§ 126-6 BODYWORK § 126-8
126:9
§ 126-9. Temporary off-premises license.
§ 126-10. Prohibitions.
(7) Not diagnose disease, prescribe medicine or perform any procedure which
requires a license from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, including but
not limited to psychotherapy, chiropractic, acupuncture, Ayurvedic medicine
and colonic hydrotherapy.
(8) Prominently display in the main seating area, entranceway or in each practice
room the license to practice bodywork therapy issued by the Quincy License
Board.
(9) Maintain a record of dates, names and addresses of all patrons. This record
shall be made available to the Quincy Health Department or the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health only in the event that a reportable communicable
disease is believed to have been brought to or transmitted through or from the
bodywork practitioner or the establishment.
(10) Follow all rules set forth in these regulations and conduct themselves in
accordance with the standards of their accrediting national professional
association.
(11) Use universal precautions in the prevention of all communicable diseases.
B. The operation of a bodywork establishment and/or the conduct of any bodywork
activity under a bodywork practitioner license therein shall not occur before 9:00
a.m. nor after 9:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and not before 9:00 a.m. nor after
10:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday.
A. A temporary off-premises license shall be required for any bodywork practitioner
while engaged in the practice of bodywork therapy in the City of Quincy at a
nonlicensed establishment on a temporary basis. Any practitioner seeking a
temporary off-premises license must submit to the Department a completed
application form as supplied by the Quincy License Board. There will be no fee for
a temporary off-premises license, which shall be valid for a period of no more than
three days.
B. Off-premises business will be allowed only by a professional practitioner of
bodywork who is licensed by the Quincy License Board and currently practices
within a licensed Quincy establishment.
C. A professional practitioner, while conducting off-premises business, shall comply
with the requirements specified by §§ 126-6D(6)(b) to (e) and 126-8A(1) to (7) and
(9) to (11) as contained herein.
D. The practitioner shall carry his/her City of Quincy professional practitioner license
when conducting off-premises business.
A. Colonic hydrotherapy. A bodywork license does not qualify the practitioner to
practice colonic hydrotherapy.
B. Acupuncture. A bodywork license does not qualify the practitioner to practice
§ 126-8 QUINCY CODE § 126-10
126:10
§ 126-11. Criminal Offender Record Information (CORI).
Each person applying for a license to practice bodywork or movement education (as
a professional practitioner or intern practitioner) or to own, operate, or conduct an
establishment for giving of bodywork or movement education for hire or reward shall
have a background free of conduct which, in the judgment of the Quincy License Board,
bears adversely upon his or her ability to safely and reputably provide bodywork. The
Quincy License Board shall, upon receipt of an initial application, and every three years
thereafter, seek Criminal Offender Record Information (CORI) about the applicant from
the Massachusetts Criminal History Systems Board.
§ 126-12. Inspections; types of violations.
acupuncture.
C. Ayurvedic medicine. A bodywork license does not qualify the practitioner to
practice Ayvurvedic medicine.
D. Sexual conduct and/or sexual relationships. Any person licensed by the Quincy
License Board to perform bodywork shall refrain from participating in a sexual
relationship or sexual conduct with a client, whether consensual or otherwise,
whether within or outside of the bodywork establishment, from the beginning of the
client/therapist relationship until the termination of the client/therapist relationship.
A. Inspection(s). Duly authorized agents of the Quincy License Board or their
designees or members of the Quincy Health Department as provided in MGL c.
140, § 52, may enter an establishment licensed for bodywork during any hours of
operation for the purpose of making an inspection to ascertain whether the
establishment is in compliance with these regulations. Refusal to allow entry to
authorized persons shall be sufficient reason to revoke the establishment license.
B. Violations.
(1) Noncritical violations. The failure to meet any operational standard set forth in
these regulations constitutes a noncritical violation of these regulations. As
such, the inspecting department shall serve upon the licensee written order of
notice detailing the condition, event or practice determined by the inspecting
department to be in violation of these regulations, and such written order of
notice shall notify the licensee that he or she shall have five business days to
abate or correct such condition, event or practice to the satisfaction of the
inspecting department.
(2) Critical violations. The following shall be considered critical violations of
these regulations and may allow the License Board, through its designees and/
or its agents, to seek penalties and/or license suspension or revocation as listed
in § 126-13:
(a) Diagnosing or treating classified diseases.
(b) Practicing spinal or other joint manipulations.
(c) Employing fraud or deceit in the practice of bodywork therapies or in
§ 126-10 BODYWORK § 126-12
126:11
§ 126-13. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
obtaining any license issued under these regulations.
(d) The use of intoxicating liquors or illegal or controlled drugs on the
licensed premises.
(e) Negligence in the practice of bodywork therapy or allowing unlicensed
persons to practice bodywork therapy in an establishment.
(f) Advertising or soliciting in a fraudulent, false, misleading or deceptive
manner.
(g) The performance of any illegal act within the establishment.
(h) The failure to comply with the terms or conditions of any license granted.
(i) Practicing colonic hydrotherapy.
(j) Practicing acupuncture (unless separately licensed for acupuncture under
the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Board of Registration
in Medicine, Committee on Acupuncture).
(k) Practicing Ayurvedic medicine (unless separately licensed under the laws
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Board of Registration in
Medicine).
(l) Participation in a sexual relationship or sexual conduct with a client as set
forth in § 126-10D.
(m) Any other section of these regulations which is deemed by the License
Board or its designees or agents to warrant classification as a critical
violation.
A. Penalties. Unless otherwise specified within these regulations the following shall
apply:
(1) Criminal complaint. Whoever, by his/her servant or agent, or as the servant or
agent of any other person or any firm or corporation, violates any regulation
of this chapter may be penalized by indictment or on complaint brought to the
Quincy District Court. Except as may be otherwise be provided by law and as
the District Court may see fit to impose, the maximum penalty for any
violation of these provisions shall be $300, as so allowed under MGL c. 111,
§ 31, and MGL c. 140, §§ 51 and 53. Each day in which a violation continues
shall constitute a separate and punishable violation.
(2) Noncriminal disposition. In addition to the enforcement as described above,
the provisions of these regulations may also be enforced by a noncriminal
complaint pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D; such penalty shall
be a fine of $50 per offense, per day. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
B. License revocation, suspension or modification.
§ 126-12 QUINCY CODE § 126-13
126:12
§ 126-14. Reciprocity; applicability.
§ 126-15. Variance.
Unless otherwise specified within these regulations the following shall apply:
§ 126-16. Effective date.
The effective date of these regulations shall be May 1, 2015.
(1) The Quincy License Board or Health Department may suspend, revoke or
modify a professional practitioner license or establishment license for any
critical violation of these rules and regulations or for the performance of any
illegal act on the premises by serving an order in writing to the person(s)
responsible for the violation or by requesting that the practitioner or
establishment owner appear at a hearing before the License Board. [Amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
(2) Should a licensee subject to an order of notice pursuant to § 126-12B(1) fail to
so abate or correct the condition, event or practice which is the subject of an
order of notice or otherwise not comply with an order of notice, the License
Board, upon public hearing, may suspend, terminate, revoke or modify the
license held by such and/or seek fines as provided under Subsection A.
A. Reciprocity. Any practitioner issued a license to practice bodywork within the City
of Quincy may qualify for a practitioner's license elsewhere in the City, provided
the site is a licensed establishment. An application addendum will be required to be
completed for the new site. No additional practitioner fee will be required.
B. These regulations shall apply to all practitioners of bodywork and all establishments
performing bodywork within the City of Quincy. These regulations shall not apply
to those practitioners and establishments operating as a licensed massage
practitioner/establishment under the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. There shall
be no exceptions or grandfathering for individuals or facilities that preexist prior to
the effective date of these regulations.
A. Upon receipt of written request, a variance from the specific requirements of this
chapter may be granted by the License Board after notice and a public hearing, if
the Board finds that owing to unique circumstances a literal enforcement of the
provisions of these regulations would involve a substantial hardship, financial or
otherwise, and that the relief sought may be granted without substantial detriment
to the public good and without nullifying or substantially derogating the intent and
purpose of these regulations.
B. The Board may impose conditions, safeguards or limitations, both of time and of
use, as it deems appropriate upon the grant of any variance.
§ 126-13 BODYWORK § 126-16
126:13

Chapter 129
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 129-1. Assignment of numbers.
It is the duty of the Commissioner of Public Works to assign a number to all buildings
on the streets of the City.
§ 129-2. Numbering conventions.
The Commissioner of Public Works shall prepare and keep on file in his office a plan
showing the streets and the location of all numbered buildings in the City. Such numbers
shall cover a frontage of from 10 to 50 feet, at the discretion of the Commissioner,
measuring from end to end of the street. Whenever one number shall be insufficient
to particularly designate additional tenements or buildings on the premises comprised
within a given frontage, to such additional tenements or buildings shall be assigned, in
conjunction with the usual and proper number, the letters of the alphabet in their order,
one letter to each such additional tenement or building.
§ 129-3. Numbering system; districts.
The City shall be divided into District A, embracing that portion of the City situated
easterly of Hancock Street and Quincy Avenue, and District B, embracing that portion
of the City situated westerly of Hancock Street and Quincy Avenue. In District A the
numbers shall commence on streets running east and west at the westerly end and on
streets running north and south at the northerly end. In District B the numbers shall
commence on streets running east and west at the easterly end and on streets running
north and south at the northerly end. The odd numbers shall be placed on the right-hand
side and the even numbers on the left-hand side of all streets following the direction of
the numerical order from the beginning.
§ 129-4. Placement and maintenance of numbers.
The owner and occupant of every tenement and building situated on any street in the
City shall cause to be placed and maintained on or over the outside doors fronting the
street, or on front corners of every tenement or building having its entrances on the side
thereof, such number or numbers, letter or letters as may be assigned thereto by the
Commissioner of Public Works under any of the provisions of this chapter, such number
or letter not to be less than two inches in height, and to be so placed as to be easily
observed from the street in front of the premises.
§ 129-5. Placement by City; assessment of costs.
If the owner or occupant of any tenement or building fails to number the same in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, it is the duty of the Commissioner of
Public Works to place the proper number or numbers, letter or letters thereon and the
cost thereof may be assessed by the City Council upon such owner or occupant.
§ 126-16 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 129-6
129:1
§ 129-6. Violations and penalties.
Whoever shall refuse or neglect to comply with the provisions of this chapter within 30
days after a notice in writing delivered to the owner or occupant of such tenement or
building of the number or numbers, letter or letters so assigned by the Commissioner
of Public Works shall for each and every offense be subject to the penalty provided by
Chapter 1, Article I, of this Code.
§ 129-6 QUINCY CODE § 129-6
129:2
Chapter 134
DRUGS
§ 129-6 DRUGS § 129-6
134:1

ARTICLE I
Synthetic Drugs
[Adopted 11-13-2013 by Order No. 2013-175 (Ch. 8.38 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 134-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them
below:
PERSON—An individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed
or unlicensed business.
SYNTHETIC MARIJUANA —
§ 134-2. Prohibited activity.
§ 134-3. Violations and penalties.
A substance as defined by 21 U.S.C. § 812(c), excluding "marijuana" as such term
is defined in MGL c. 94C § 1, 21 U.S.C. § 812(c) notwithstanding;
A.
Any one or any combination of the following cannabinoids or a substance
containing any one or combination of the following cannabinoids: JWH-018,
JWH-073, CP-47, 497, JWH-200, or cannabicyclohexanol; or
B.
Vegetable material that has been chemically treated and is processed, sold, or
purchased with the intent that it will, despite any labeling to the contrary, be
consumed by humans for the purpose of voluntary intoxication, said vegetable
material typically having a retail price of over $5 per ounce and contained within
packaging indicating that the content is not for human consumption, which, if
consumed, may induce an effect or effects of intoxication similar to a controlled
substance or imitation controlled substance, said effect or effects to include elation,
euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational behavior, exhilaration, paralysis,
stupefaction, dulling of the senses or nervous system, or distortion of audio, visual
or mental processes.
C.
A. No person shall sell, offer to sell, distribute, gift, or publicly display for sale any
synthetic marijuana or synthetic marijuana analogue.
B. No person shall knowingly possess or consume synthetic marijuana or synthetic
marijuana analogue.
C. This article shall apply regardless of whether the synthetic marijuana or synthetic
marijuana analogue is described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice, bath salts, plant
food or any blend thereof, and regardless of whether the substance is marketed for
the purpose of being smoked or ingested, and regardless of whether the substance
is marked "not for human consumption."
A. Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of $150 for a first offense.
B. Any subsequent violation shall be punishable by a fine of $300 for each offense.
C. Each ounce or portion thereof shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 134-1 DRUGS § 134-4
134:3
§ 134-4. Enforcement.
§ 134-5. Seizure of controlled substances.
All controlled substances described in this article may be seized and held until final
adjudication, whereupon they shall be destroyed by the seizing agency.
A. This article may be enforced by a criminal complaint before the District Court or
by noncriminal disposition in accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21D. (Statutory
reference: MGL c. 40, § 21; MGL c. 218, § 26.)
B. Any police officer may arrest without a warrant whomever there is probable cause
to believe is in willful violation of this article, pursuant to MGL c. 272, § 59.
§ 134-4 QUINCY CODE § 134-5
134:4
ARTICLE II
Prescription Drugs
[Adopted 6-15-2015 by Order No. 2015-091 (Ch. 8.31 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 134-6. Pharmacy posting requirements.
All pharmacies shall post notice of all permanent municipal disposal locations in a
visible location near pharmacy checkout and/or consultation windows. All postings may
either reference proper disposal of prescription drugs and associated risks of prescription
drug abuse or be supplemented with visible access to literature referencing risks and
additional disposal options.
§ 134-6 DRUGS § 134-6
134:5

Chapter 136
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
§ 136-1. Permit required.
Before proceeding to wire any building or to make any changes in existing wiring in
any building, a permit in writing must be obtained from the Inspector of Wires. The
above provision shall extend to the wiring or changes in wiring in or upon any structure,
pole or support on private premises and connected or designed to be connected with the
wiring system in any building or any wire thereof, and therein used to transmit an electric
current for heating, lighting or power purposes. Fees for permits issued under this section
shall be as set out in Chapter 150, Article V, of this Code.
§ 136-2. Interior electrical installation.
All interior electric light work shall be installed in accordance with the rules of the
National Electrical Code, the ordinances and regulations of the City and the rules
established by the Inspector of Wires.
§ 136-3. Connection to outside circuits.
No person shall connect such wires as described in § 136-1 of this chapter in the interior
of buildings or on private premises with an outside circuit which crosses or runs along,
over or under any street or way of the City without written permission therefor having
first been obtained from the Inspector.
§ 136-4. Responsibility for damages and injuries.
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of any party
owning, operating or controlling any electrical equipment for damages to property or to
anyone injured by reason of any defect therein, nor shall the City be held as assuming
such liability by reason of the inspection authorized herein, or by any permit given by its
officers or agents exercising the rights or powers given in this chapter.
§ 134-6 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 136-4
136:1

Chapter 138
ENTERTAINMENT, PUBLIC
§ 138-1. Use of halls and buildings; license required.
No hall or building in the City shall be used for public hire for public entertainments,
such as concerts, dancing parties or moving-picture shows, until the owner or lessee
of such hall or building shall have first obtained from the Board of Licensing
Commissioners a license for the same, such license to expire one year from date of issue.
§ 138-2. Police detail required. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
A. All halls and buildings for public hire wherein any form of public entertainment,
such as concerts, dancing parties or moving-picture shows, is held shall have in
attendance, when used for such purpose, a police officer, to be appointed by the
Chief of Police, the services of such police officer to be paid for by the licensees of
such hall or building.
B. The employment of a police officer at entertainments such as concerts, dancing
parties or motion pictures held for religious or charitable purposes shall be left to
the discretion of the Chief of Police.
§ 136-4 ENTERTAINMENT, PUBLIC § 138-2
138:1

Chapter 150
FEES
§ 138-2 FEES § 138-2
150:1

ARTICLE I
City Clerk
§ 150-1. Certificate and document fees.
Certificate and document fees include:
A. Certified long-form marriage, death or birth certificate: $10.
B. Certified long-form marriage, death or birth certificate (by mail): $12.
C. Genealogy copy of marriage, death or birth certificate (not for legal use): $2
D. Marriage application: $45.
E. Business certificate:
(1) New: $40.
(2) Renew: $40.
(3) Discontinue or change location: $10.
F. Resident book: $40.
§ 150-1 FEES § 150-1
150:3

ARTICLE II
Fire Department
§ 150-2. Fees for permits and inspections.
Types of Permits Fee Time
Blasting (require fire watch detail) $100 Limit 30 days
Tank trucks $100 2 years
Flammable fluids and gases $50 1 year
Tar kettles $50 Per job
Gunpowder $75 Per year
Oil burners — permit to installers $25 Per job
Oil burners — inspection for installers $35 Per job
Removal and installation of tanks less than or
equal to 275 gallons
$50 Per tank
Removal and installation of tanks greater than
275 gallons (1,000 gallons or over require fire
watch detail)
$100 Per tank
SARA Title III annual MSDS fee (material
safety data sheet) update
$100 Per year
Hazardous material/waste inspections $50 Per inspection
Smoke detector inspection of houses being sold
(MGL c. 148, § 26F)
$50 Single family
Up to 5 units per inspection $25 Each additional
unit
Reinspection each visit $25 Plus $10 per unit
reinspection
Nursing and convalescent homes
Under 25 beds $250 Per inspection
From 26 to 100 beds $300 Per inspection
Nursing schools and clinics $75 Per inspection
Kindergarten $200 Per inspection
Private schools $50 Per inspection
Team inspection (Building, Health and Fire
Departments)
$50 Per inspection
Lodging houses and rooming houses $200 Per year
Inns
Under 100 rooms $200 Per year
§ 150-2 FEES § 150-2
150:5
Types of Permits Fee Time
Above 100 rooms $300 plus $5 for each
additional room
Open burning permit — MGL c. 48 $100 Per job
Permit for display of fireworks (MGL c. 148,
§ 39A)
$100 Per job
Junkyards $100 Per year
Lumberyards $100 Per year
Theater inspections $75 Quarterly
Inspection of commercial garages $50 Per year
Dormitory inspection
Up to 100 occupants $100 Per year
Over 100 occupants $100 plus $5 for each
occupant
Gasoline stations $50 Per year
Total team check-out by Fire Department
Fire Alarm Division consists of final acceptance
test for occupants
$100 Per floor (one
time)
Certification of fire alarm detection by Fire
Alarm Division
$75 Initial site visit
and inspection
6 or more units $10 Per unit
inspection
Reinspection visit call back $25 Plus $10 per unit
reinspection
Review of plans, prints and specifications $150 Minimum based
on size of project
On-site visits – fire protection $25
Initial connection of master box to system $250
Initial connection to central office or other signal
to fire alarm
$100
Annual fee for connection to municipal fire
alarm system (rate of $25 per month — includes
central office and private alarm systems)
$300
§ 150-2 QUINCY CODE § 150-2
150:6
ARTICLE III
Department of Inspectional Services
§ 150-3. Building fees.
Fee
First $1,000 of estimated cost of construction $20
Each additional $1,000 or part thereof $12
Sewer rehab fee additional, per $1,000, except singlefamily
homes
$10
Change of occupancy $60
Demolition, swimming pools, paving $12 per $1,000 of
estimated cost
Signs $60 minimum
Starting work without a permit Fee x 2
Zoning Board of Appeals petition See Zoning Board of
Appeals Rules and
Regulations
Zoning Board of Appeals legal ad $100
Building Board of Appeals petition $75
Paving license $50
Builders' licenses $100
1-year renewal $30
Renewal after expiration (2 years maximum) $35
Upgrade examination $30 per category
Copies Fees as described by
Office of Documents,
Secretary of State
Public safety inspection fees See chart on file in the
office of the Director of
Inspectional Services
§ 150-4. Plumbing and gas fees.
Fee
Gas
Minimum permit fee $30
Furnaces and boilers $25
Conversion burners $25
Rooftop units $25
§ 150-3 FEES § 150-4
150:7
Fee
Unit heaters $20
Pool heaters $20
Hot water heaters – plumbing and gas combination $60
Electric/in-direct/storage tank $20
All other appliances/fixtures $10
Reinspection fee $30
Plumbing
Minimum permit fee $30
Reduced pressure backflow preventor $25
Hot water heaters – plumbing and gas combination $60
All other fixtures $10
Sewer connections $25
Starting job before securing permit Double fee
§ 150-5. Electrical fees.
Fee
Residential
Initial fee $40
New dwelling structures – single-family complete service,
rough and finish, fire alarm, attached garage, and all
appliances on initial permit
$250
Each additional dwelling unit over a single family $100
Residential service change
Up to a 200 amp with 1 meter $50
Each additional 100 amp $25
Each additional meter $20
Subpanels (each) $10
Other Residential Work
Any major appliance which requires a separate branch
circuit
$10
Central air conditioning $25
Electric vehicle charger $10
Energy saving lighting program
1 to 10 luminaires $10
11 or more (each) $0.50
§ 150-4 QUINCY CODE § 150-5
150:8
Fee
Fire alarm, burglar alarm, and CCTV per system up to 20
devices
$25
Each additional device $1
Generators (per KW) $2
Hot tub $50
Hydro massage tubs (each) $10
Non-metallic siding re-securing of electrical equipment $10
Oil or gas burner $10
Outlets, switches, receptacles, luminaires, 120 volt smokes,
tel-data
1 to 10 $10
11 or more (each) $1
Photovoltaic system $50
Subpanels (each) $10
Swimming pools
Above ground $50
In ground $90
Temporary repairs after a fire $25
Temporary service $25
Temporary wiring $25
Commercial/Industrial
Initial fee $50
New service up to 1,000 amps (per amp) $0.40
Each amp over 1,000 (per amp) $0.30
Subpanels (each) $10
Service change
Up to a 200 amp with 1 meter $50
Each additional 100 amp $25
Each additional meter $20
Other Commercial/Industrial Work
Air conditioner with blower unit (per) $40
Any major appliance which requires a separate branch
circuit
$20
Carnival $100
Cellular antenna (new or replacement) $200
§ 150-5 FEES § 150-5
150:9
Fee
Electric heat per branch circuit $10
Electric vehicle charger $20
Emergency lights (each) $2
Energy saving lighting program
1 to 10 luminaires $10
11 or more (each) $0.50
Fire alarm, burglar alarm, and CCTV per system up to 20
devices
$50
Each additional device $1
Gas pumps (per dispenser) $25
Generators (per KW) $2
Maintenance fee $200
Motors
First $10
Each additional $5
Office cubicle (per circuit) $10
Outlets, switches, receptacles, luminaires, tel-data
1 to 10 $20
11 or more (each) $1
Parking lot lighting (per pole) $10
Photovoltaic system
Up to 5 KVA $75
Over 5 KVA, each additional KVA $1
Temporary service $50
Temporary wiring $50
Transformers
Up to 5 KVA $20
Over 5 KVA, each additional KVA $1
Uninterruptible power systems (per KVA) $1
Wire sign (per) $25
A. Miscellaneous.
(1) A fee equal to double the cost of the permit will be charged on the 6th day
after work commences for which there is no permit.
(2) An additional fee of $50 shall be paid by the electrician for each additional
§ 150-5 QUINCY CODE § 150-5
150:10
§ 150-6. Weights and measures sealing fees.
Fee
Balance and scales (pounds)
Over 10,000 $150
5,000 to 10,000 $100
1,000 to 5,000 $75
100 to 1,000 $50
0 to 100 $35
Weights
Avoirdupois (each) $3
Metric (each) $3
Apothecary $3
Troy $3
Capacity Measures
Vehicle tank each indicator $20
Each 100 gallons or fraction thereof $20
Liquid
1 gallon or less $5
More than 1 gallon $10
Liquid measuring meters
Inlet 1/2 inch or less
Water vending $25
Oil, grease $25
Inlet more than 1/2 inch to 1 inch
Gasoline $30
Blended grades $15
Inlet more than 1 inch
Vehicle tank pump (in town) $75
Vehicle tank pump (out of town) $85
Vehicle tank gravity $75
Bulk storage $100
inspection necessitated by defective work, by the use of improper materials,
incorrect address, inability to gain access at the scheduled time, or other
inaccurate information.
(3) For all items not specifically itemized, the fee will be determined.
§ 150-5 FEES § 150-6
150:11
Fee
Company supplies prover $75
Pumps
Each stop on pump $10
Other devices
Taximeters $40
Odometer — hubodometer $40
Leather measure (semiannual) $25
Fabric measuring $25
Wire – rope – cordage $25
Scanner accuracy (number of scanners)
1 to 3 $75
4 to 10 $150
11+ $250
Linear measures
Yardsticks $10
Tapes $10
Miscellaneous
Milk jars (per gross) $15
Dry measures $5
Bottle returns $25
Adjusting - repairs - special facilities 1/2 sealing fee
§ 150-6 QUINCY CODE § 150-6
150:12
ARTICLE IV
Health Department
§ 150-7. Fee schedule.
Permit/License Fee Permit Period
Burial permit $20 N/A
Tobacco $50 June 1 to May 31
Body art establishment $300 January 1 to
December 31
Body art practitioner $300 January 1 to
December 31
Body art apprentice $250 January 1 to
December 31
Hotel/motel, less than 100 rooms $100 January 1 to
December 31
Hotel/motel, greater than 100 rooms $200 January 1 to
December 31
Recreational camps (per specialty
camp)
$50 Variable
Stable $75 July 1 to June 30
Swimming pools/spas, seasonal $100 May 31 to October 1
Swimming pools/spas, year-round $125 January 1 to
December 31
Saunas $50 June 1 to May 31
Steam baths $50 June 1 to May 31
Swimming pool construction, plan
review, existing
$100 As needed
Swimming pool construction, plan
review, new
$200 As needed
Tanning establishments $150 January 1 to
December 31
Inspection Division Food Fees
Manufacture of frozen dessert $25 June 1 to May 31
Food service, up to 50 seats $75 June 1 to May 31
Food service, 51 to 100 seats $125 June 1 to May 31
Food service, over 101 seats $175 June 1 to May 31
Bakeries, retail/wholesale $100 June 1 to May 31
Mobile food service/vendors $75 June 1 to May 31
Food service/vending $50 June 1 to May 31
§ 150-7 FEES § 150-7
150:13
Permit/License Fee Permit Period
Catering establishment $150 June 1 to May 31
Retail food establishment, less than
1,000 square feet
$50 June 1 to May 31
Retail food establishment, less than
4,000 square feet
$100 June 1 to May 31
Retail food establishment, greater than
4,000 square feet
$200 June 1 to May 31
Limited food service $50 June 1 to May 31
Temporary food service $25* As needed
Milk $15 June 1 to May 31
Manufacture of bottled beverage $75 June 1 to May 31
*Fee exempt for nonprofits and
charities
Waste Disposal Fees
Transporters of garbage (food waste) $100 January 1 to
December 31
Transporters of rubbish/refuse $100 January 1 to
December 31
Transporters of cesspool/septic tank/
grease trap contents
$100 January 1 to
December 31
Medical/infectious waste transport $150 January 1 to
December 31
Temporary septic (porta-potty) 7 days
or less
$15 As needed
Temporary septic (porta-potty) greater
than 8 days
$25 As needed
Disposal system plan review and
construction
$100 As needed
§ 150-7 QUINCY CODE § 150-7
150:14
Chapter 155
FENCES
§ 155-1. Fences enclosing public grounds.
No person shall sit or lounge upon any fence or post in front of or enclosing any of the
public grounds of the City.
§ 155-2. Electrified fences.
No person who has a chain-link fence or other type of fence which is capable of
conducting electricity shall cause said fence to be electrified so that it gives off an
electric shock.
§ 155-3. Swimming pool fencing. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
Fences shall be installed in accordance with the Massachusetts State Building Code and
State Sanitary Code. The penalty for violations of this section shall be $100. Each day a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 150-7 FENCES § 155-3
155:1

Chapter 163
GAS STATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 175.
§ 163-1. Manager license required. [Amended by Order No. 95-084]
No person in charge of a gasoline filling station shall act as a manager of said gasoline
station without a license from the Board of Licensing Commissioners of the City. The
license shall show the address of said gasoline station, and the license shall be valid as
to the address shown thereon only. The license fee shall be $25. Whoever violates this
section shall pay a fine of $50 for each violation.
§ 163-2. Self-service stations. [Amended by Order No. 95-084]
§ 163-3. Sale of food products. [Amended 6-4-2018 by Order No. 2018-037]
A. The Board of Licensing Commissioners may issue a license for a gasoline filling
station to be a so-called "self-service" station. Stations shall not be prohibited from
charging different prices for each level of service provided. [Amended 6-1-2020
by Order No. 2020-012]
B. Consistent with the provisions of MGL c. 94, § 295CC, gas stations shall post signs
of at least 80 square inches in size at self-service pumps stating that vehicles bearing
handicapped or disabled veteran number plates may be served at the self-serve
pump by an attendant on duty. The Board of Licensing Commissioners may impose
further conditions on said license as deemed necessary to provide for the safety of
the general public using such filling stations, including a limitation on the hours of
operation. The fee for such license shall be $400. [Amended 6-4-2018 by Order
No. 2018-037; 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
C. Prior to the issuance of any license under this section, the applicant shall provide
the Board of Licensing Commissioners with proof that all property owners within
300 feet of the applicant's property have received at least 14 days' notice of said
application. [Amended 6-4-2018 by Order No. 2018-037]
A. The Board of Licensing Commissioners ("Board") may, after a public hearing, issue
a license for a gasoline filling station to engage in the sale of pre-packaged food.
Prior to the issuance of any license under this section the applicant shall provide the
Board with proof that all property owners within 300 feet of the applicant's property
have received at least 14 days' notice of said hearing. Any applicant granted a
license shall pay in full any and all fees applicable to operate with a retail food gas
station license and must also comply with all food storage and sanitation
requirements put forth under the Health Department's Inspectional Division - Food.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
§ 155-3 GAS STATIONS § 163-3
163:1
B. Whoever violates this section shall pay a fine of $50 for each violation.
C. The Board may impose conditions on said license as deemed necessary to provide
for the safety of the general public using the gasoline filling station, including the
hours of operation, mandatory designated food handler staffing requirements at any
gasoline filling station engaged in auto repair, and regulations set forth by the Board
of Health related to food safety compliance.
§ 163-3 QUINCY CODE § 163-3
163:2
Chapter 175
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Gas stations — See Ch. 163. Hazardous materials transportation — See Ch. 325, Art. IX.
§ 163-3 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 163-3
175:1

ARTICLE I
Flammable Liquids
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 8.08 of the 1993 Code]
§ 175-1. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all new plants, stores, equipment and installations and to
existing plants, stores, equipment and installations which constitute a distinct hazard
to adjoining property due to their failure to comply with the provisions of this article,
insofar as the intent of such provisions can reasonably be fulfilled. All persons and
businesses storing, handling or using flammable liquids shall be governed by this article.
§ 175-2. Classification of flammable liquids.
§ 175-3. Manufactured liquids.
Any manufactured liquid which contains a flammable liquid shall be considered a
flammable liquid and shall be classed by § 175-2 according to the flash point of the
mixture.
§ 175-4. Covering of equipment; notification; inspection. [Amended 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012]
Before any equipment or installation to be used for storing or handling of the flammable
liquids within the provisions of this article or any lawful rule, order or regulation of the
Chief of the Fire Department is covered from sight, a notification in writing by registered
mail shall be given the Chief of the Fire Department. The Chief of the Fire Department
shall, within 72 hours after the receipt of such notification, inspect the equipment or
installation and give his written approval or disapproval. Upon failure of the Chief of the
Fire Department to inspect within the specified time, the equipment or installation may
be covered but shall be subject to inspection by the Chief of the Fire Department at the
expense of the City.
§ 175-5. Aboveground tanks.
A. For the purpose of this article, flammable liquids are divided into two classes,
according to their flash point, as follows:
(1) Class I: liquids with a flash point below 115° F. closed cup test, except
liquefied gases which are stored under pressure.
(2) Class II: liquids with a flash point above that for Class I and below 350° F.
closed cup test.
B. Flash point determinations made with the Tagliabue closed cup tester (standardized
by the National Institute of Standards and Technology) shall be authoritative.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
A. Distance from adjoining property. In case of aboveground tanks and containers for
the storage of Class I and Class II flammable fluids in quantities, the distance from
tanks or from diked areas surrounding the tanks to the line of adjoining property
§ 175-1 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 175-5
175:3
which may be built upon shall in no case be less than that set forth in Table I, and
not less than twice these distances in the case of playgrounds, parks, schools and
churches, or in the case of tanks for the storage of crude petroleum.
Table I
Capacity of Tank or Tanks
Within Diked Area
(gallons)
Minimum Distance From Dike to Line of
Adjoining Property Which May Be Built
Upon for Other Than Oil Storage
Purposes
(feet)
1,000 to 10,000 75
10,001 to 50,000 100
50,001 to 200,000 150
200,001 to 750,000 200
750,001 to 2,500,000 250
2,500,001 and over 300
B. Distance between tanks. Aboveground tanks for the storage of flammable liquids
shall be separated by a space not less than that given in Table II.
Table II
Capacity of Tank or the Larger
of the Two Tanks Between Which
the Distance Is To Be Established
(gallons)
Minimum Space Between Nearest Points
Of Tanks
(feet)
1,000 to 10,000 10
10,001 to 50,000 15
50,001 to 200,000 25
200,001 and above Equal to the diameter of the greatest
horizontal dimension of the larger of the 2
tanks between which the distance is to be
established.
C. Distance from tank car loading racks. Tank car or tank truck loading or unloading
racks shall be separated from aboveground storage tanks for flammable liquids,
warehouses and other buildings upon the premises by distances at least equal to
those given in Table II. Such racks shall also be located not closer than 50 feet to
the line of adjoining property which may be built upon and shall be sufficiently
enclosed by raised curbs or low retaining walls to prevent the spread of moderate
quantities of spilled liquids.
D. Diking. All aboveground tanks with a capacity greater than 100 gallons for the
storage of Class I flammable liquids and all aboveground tanks with a capacity
greater than 1,000 gallons for the storage of Class II flammable liquids shall be
§ 175-5 QUINCY CODE § 175-5
175:4
§ 175-6. Tanks and equipment.
§ 175-7. Dikes and walls; construction standards; capacity.
§ 175-8. Foam system.
diked or provided with other suitable means for the retaining of liquids within the
limits specified in Table I of Subsection A. Every tank having a capacity in excess
of 200,000 gallons for the storage of flammable liquids shall be in a separate diked
area.
E. Capacity limitations. The total storage capacity of any tank or tanks supported
above ground level by any material other than earth or solid masonry and within a
single diked area shall not exceed 50,000 gallons.
A. Foundations incombustible. Foundations for tanks and supports for pumps, piping
and other fixed equipment for the storing or handling of flammable liquids shall be
incombustible.
B. Electrical grounding. All aboveground tanks, piping and metallic equipment, as
well as all metal buildings or other metal structures on the premises within 200 feet
of any tanks or equipment for the storage or handling of flammable liquids, shall be
electrically grounded to permanent moisture. Telephone poles or other projections
liable to act as lightning discharge points shall be kept as far as practicable from
tanks. All steel work of reinforced concrete tanks shall be interconnected and
grounded.
A. Dikes or walls required by § 175-5D shall be of earth or masonry of a capacity not
less than equal in volume to that of the tank or tanks surrounded and of a
construction and strength to retain liquids safely to their required capacity and
without leakage.
B. Dikes for tanks for the storage of crude petroleum shall have a capacity of at least
1 1/2 times that of the tank or tanks enclosed.
C. The capacity of dikes required by this article shall be maintained at all times.
A. When required. At all plants, stores, equipment and installations where Class I
flammable liquids are stored and handled in aboveground tanks and equipment in
quantities exceeding 1,000 gallons, or Class II flammable liquids are stored or
handled in aboveground tanks and equipment in quantities exceeding 10,000
gallons, suitable foam generating equipment of either portable or fixed types shall
be provided to fulfill the requirements of Subsections B through F inclusive.
B. Permanent pipe system; when required. Each aboveground tank over 25,000 gallons
in capacity for the storage of flammable liquids, except ethyl alcohol, methyl
alcohol or acetone, shall be equipped with a permanently piped foam extinguishing
system in a manner approved by the Chief of the Fire Department. The foam system
may be of the two solution or of the dry powder type.
C. Permanent pipe system; minimum delivery capacity. Foam solution pumps or dry
powder foam generators shall be provided in sufficient capacity, and shall be
§ 175-5 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 175-8
175:5
§ 175-9. Powers of Fire Chief; enforcement.
arranged with suitable piping and auxiliary equipment, so that in 10 minutes of
operation at least one cubic foot of foam will be delivered for each square foot of
the largest surface of flammable liquid in any tank protected in accordance with
Subsection B.
D. Supply requirements. Sufficient supplies of powder for operating foam solution
pumps or of water for operating dry powder foam generators shall be available at
all times on the premises.
E. Maintenance; component quantities. Foam solutions or foam powder and the
necessary pumps, generators and auxiliary equipment shall be kept on the premises,
in good condition, and in a number or quantity at least sufficient to produce and
deliver five cubic feet of foam for each square foot of the largest diked area,
including the ground area occupied by tanks, in which is located any tank or group
of tanks for the storage of flammable liquids.
F. Location; rate. The foam system, including piping and auxiliary equipment, shall
be so proportioned and located, and so equipped with outlets, hydrants and suitable
hose for manual use, that at least the maximum rate of foam production specified
by Subsection C can be applied to any area enclosed by a dike required by this
article.
G. Location requirements. Foam generators, foam solution pumps, foam powder, foam
solutions, controlling valves and other equipment and accessories which must be
accessible during firefighting shall be located outside of, and at least 50 feet from,
dikes surrounding tanks for the storage of flammable liquids.
A. Powers; additional protective measures. The Chief of the Fire Department shall
have the power to require fire protective measures in addition to those specified in
this article if, after consideration of special features affecting the fire or explosion
hazards, he determines further safeguards to be necessary.
B. Enforcement. This article shall be enforced by the Chief of the Fire Department or
by any officer, member or inspector of the Fire Department specially deputized by
the Chief of the Fire Department to act for him.
§ 175-8 QUINCY CODE § 175-9
175:6
ARTICLE II
Infectious Waste Disposal
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 8.20 of the 1993 Code]
§ 175-10. Findings.
A potential public health hazard exists from exposure to improperly disposed infectious
waste. Stringent federal and state regulations require that specified methods of infectious
waste storage, packaging and disposal be practiced by both the generator and the
disposal contractor. At the same time, this geographical area is experiencing diminished
landfill capacity, thus promoting incineration as the preferred disposal method. Although
incineration is most commonly used by hospitals, the largest quantity generators of
infectious waste, problems of incinerator acceptability by the public greatly restrict
this disposal method. As a result, disposal costs continue to escalate, particularly for
the small quantity generator of infectious waste. All of these factors contribute to the
increased potential for the improper disposal of infectious waste.
§ 175-11. Authority; purpose; applicability.
Pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31, the City adopts the ordinance codified in this article,
which is designed to impose strict penalties upon persons and/or entities responsible for
any infectious waste which is improperly disposed of within the boundaries of the City.
This article shall apply to all generators and all disposal contractors affiliated with the
disposal of any type of infectious waste.
§ 175-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
IMPROPER DISPOSAL OF INFECTIOUS WASTE — Any action or lack of action
which causes infectious waste to be disposed of in a manner contrary to the requirements
for proper disposal as specified in § 175-14.
INFECTIOUS WASTE — Waste which because of its infectious characteristics may
cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious
irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness, and which may pose a substantial present
or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. "Infectious waste" includes isolation
wastes, cultures and stocks of etiologic (disease-causing) agents, blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, contaminated laboratory wastes, sharps (syringed needles,
scalpels, etc.), dialysis unit waste, animal and body parts, biologicals and contaminated
food and patient-care wastes.
INFECTIOUS WASTE DISPOSAL CONTRACTOR — Any person or company
responsible for the proper and legal disposal of solid waste, including but not limited
to hazardous infectious waste. Cleaning contractors responsible for the cleaning and
removal of waste from the property of an infectious waste generator shall be considered
a disposal contractor for the purposes of this article.
INFECTIOUS WASTE GENERATOR — Any person or entity which produces
infectious waste. Generators may include hospitals, doctors' offices, home health care
facilities, health maintenance organizations, teaching facilities (i.e., biology laboratories,
§ 175-10 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 175-12
175:7
etc.), research and development laboratories, clinics (all types, i.e., chiropractor,
acupuncture, sports medicine, etc.), veterinary facilities, nursing homes, funeral homes,
dental clinics and offices, and a single or group of individuals.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any person or entity which by definition is a generator
of infectious waste and/or which, by contract, agreement or otherwise, directly or
indirectly, arranged for or participated in the improper packaging, improper transport or
improper disposal of infectious waste.
§ 175-13. Compliance with state and federal regulations. [Amended 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012]
The generator and/or disposal contractor shall make every effort to ensure that all
infectious waste is packaged and disposed of in the manner specified in the regulations
of the Massachusetts Department of Public Health and the Massachusetts Department
of Environmental Protection (DEP). Persons or entities responsible for the transport
of infectious waste shall adhere to the appropriate United States Department of
Transportation and Massachusetts Department of Transportation regulations regarding
transportation of infectious waste on state and interstate highways.
§ 175-14. Proper disposal of infectious waste. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
§ 175-15. Information provided to Health Department.
All generators of infectious waste, as defined in this article, must submit in writing to
the Quincy Health Department, by March 1 of each calendar year or upon any change of
existing status or contract, the following information:
A. All infectious waste designated for off-site disposal, excluding sharp wastes, shall
be placed in nonpermeable three mil polyethylene (or equivalent) bags which are to
be securely sealed and placed into a second bag of similar construction which shall
also be securely sealed. This sealed double bag shall be placed into a rigid or semirigid
container and sealed. The container must be labeled according to Department
of Transportation regulations. Incineration of any infectious waste so contained in
a Type 4 DEP-approved incinerator, or the landfilling of treated (sterilized)
infectious waste similarly contained, and as per DEP (or out-of-state equivalent)
regulations, shall constitute proper disposal.
B. Sharp wastes, which can include hypodermic needles, syringes, pasteur pipettes,
broken glass, scalpel blades, disposable razors and suture needles which have come
in contact with infectious agents during use in patient care or in laboratories, must
be rendered unusable and placed in rigid, puncture-resistant containers immediately
after use. The containers of sharp waste shall either undergo incineration (in a Type
4, DEP-approved incinerator) or be processed by grinding (or another similarly
effective method) to eliminate the physical hazard of the sharps and then disposed
of in a sanitary landfill approved by the DEP (or out-of-state equivalent). Either
method shall constitute proper disposal of sharp wastes.
A. The type(s) of infectious waste being generated.
B. The method of infectious waste removal/disposal used by the generator.
§ 175-12 QUINCY CODE § 175-15
175:8
§ 175-16. Permit for transport.
All infectious waste disposal contractors, as defined by this article, involved in the
removal and disposal of infectious waste from any property within the City must obtain
a permit from the Quincy Health Department for the transport of garbage, offal or other
offensive substances as provided for in MGL c. 111, § 31A.
§ 175-17. Violations and penalties; liability.
C. The company of record contracted to remove and dispose of infectious waste.
A. Failure by a responsible party to properly dispose of infectious waste shall
constitute a violation of this article and as such shall be subject to penalties and/or
fines.
B. The responsible party or parties shall be held liable for the costs of emergency
cleanup and proper disposal of infectious waste found to be improperly disposed in
the City.
C. The responsible party or parties shall be assessed a fine of $200 for each separate
offense of the improper disposal of infectious waste. Each individual article of
infectious waste shall be deemed a separate offense and fined as such. [Amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
D. The Health Commissioner, or any agent of the Health Department, may, in his
discretion, dispose of any violation in a manner provided by MGL c. 40, § 21D.
§ 175-15 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 175-17
175:9

ARTICLE III
Petroleum and Petroleum Products
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 8.24 of the 1993 Code]
§ 175-18. Storage; licenses; fees. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
The fees to be charged for licenses under the provisions of MGL c. 148, § 13, are
established as follows:
§ 175-19. Notice of hearing.
Every such applicant for license under § 175-18B and C shall cause to be served by the
local licensing authority, not less than seven days prior to a hearing thereon, a notice in
writing of the time and place of such hearing to all property owners within 1,000 feet of
the designated location.
A. Automobile storage. For licenses for keeping in a designated building or structure:
(1) Not more than two automobiles: no charge, provided that a permit has first
been obtained therefor.
(2) Not more than five automobiles: $1.
(3) Not more than 25 automobiles: $4.
(4) More than 25 automobiles: $6.
B. Petroleum products storage. For licenses for keeping and storing in a designated
building or structure:
(1) Not more than 500 gallons of crude petroleum or any of its products: no
charge, provided that a permit has been obtained therefor.
(2) Not more than 2,000 gallons of the same: $5.
(3) More than 2,000 gallons: $10.
C. Petroleum products storage and sale. For licenses for keeping, storing and selling in
a designated building or structure:
(1) Not more than 1,000 gallons of crude petroleum or any of its products: $5.
(2) Not more than 5,000 gallons of the same: $10.
(3) Not more than 10,000 gallons of the same: $25.
(4) Not more than 30,000 gallons of the same: $40.
(5) Not more than 100,000 gallons of the same: $50.
(6) Not more than 200,000 gallons of the same: $75.
(7) Not more than 1,000,000 gallons of the same: $100.
(8) More than 1,000,000 gallons of the same: $1,000.
§ 175-18 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 175-20
175:11
§ 175-20. Fee for registration of certificate.
The fees to be charged for a registration of a certificate under provisions of MGL c. 148,
§ 13, shall be 1/2 of the amount of the fees established in § 175-18 for a license for like
use of the designated building or structure.
§ 175-20 QUINCY CODE § 175-20
175:12
ARTICLE IV
Environmental Assessment and Controls for City Projects
[Adopted 4-5-1999 by Order No. 99-019 (Ch. 18.16 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 175-21. Findings.
The potential exists for community exposure to hazardous materials which have been,
are or may be released during City-sponsored projects (such as building expansion,
infrastructure improvements, etc.). In order to minimize (reduce or eliminate) the
potential for hazardous exposure to the public, appropriate site-specific environmental
controls can and should be implemented before and during project implementation.
Effective risk communication through public outreach and notification should
complement actual environmental controls.
§ 175-22. Environmental assessment and control plan.
Any project conducted by or on behalf of the City of Quincy which has the potential to
create a nuisance condition of air pollution and which involves the application, removal,
or repair of any material deemed to be or to contain hazardous materials (including
but not limited to asbestos, lead, petroleum products, etc.) must include a site- and
project-specific environmental assessment and control plan. Review and approval of the
environmental assessment and control plan by the Quincy Health Department must be
received prior to the commencement of the project. The environmental assessment and
control plan must include, at minimum, the following:
§ 175-23. Notification requirements.
A. Project description.
B. Safety and/or health hazard assessment which will evaluate any potential
environmental hazards generated by the project (including pre-monitoring test
requirements and ambient air testing requirements, as applicable). [Amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
C. Operational plan which will include statements and references to the applicable
local, state and federal regulations and include site control and containment
measures (as applicable), along with detailed health and safety procedures that will
be required to be in effect for the duration of the project.
A. For any project which abuts, wholly or in part, any residential structure, or which
has the potential to impact a residential area within the City, a public informational
meeting describing the scope of the project (including anticipated project start and
completion dates), any potential environmental hazards, details of control measures
to be implemented, etc., must be conducted prior to the start of the project. This
section will exclude the repaving of roadways and underground utility work (water/
sewer/drain) within a public or private way.
B. Notification regarding the actual start and completion dates for the project must be
made at least 24 hours prior to the start to appropriate City officials [including but
not limited to the Quincy Health Department (Health Commissioner and/or
Environmental Sanitarian), Quincy Fire Department (Hazardous Materials Officer),
§ 175-21 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 175-23
175:13
Mayor's office, and Ward Councillor whose ward includes the project location].
C. Notification regarding any major project change (including procedural changes
with respect to environmental controls) should be made prior to the change,
whenever possible, or at a minimum within 24 hours of the change to appropriate
City officials [including but not limited to the Quincy Health Department (Health
Commissioner and/or Environmental Sanitarian), Quincy Fire Department
(Hazardous Materials Officer), Mayor's office, and Ward Councillor whose ward
includes the project location].
§ 175-23 QUINCY CODE § 175-23
175:14
ARTICLE V
Cleaning of Cesspools and Vaults
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 8.32 of the 1993 Code; amended in its entirety 6-1-2020
by Order No. 2020-012]
§ 175-24. Cleaning frequency.
All cesspools and vaults within the limits of the City shall be cleaned as often as, in the
opinion of the Health Commissioner, they become a nuisance and dangerous to public
health.
§ 175-25. Applications; deposit required.
All applications for the cleaning of vaults and cesspools shall be made at the office of
the Health Commissioner by the owner or his agent. A deposit of $100 shall be made
on orders for cleaning cesspools and cleaning vaults, against the cost of performing such
work for the owner or agent of such premises. Additional cost over this amount will be
charged for and a bill rendered, and a rebate will be made if the cost is less than the
amount deposited.
§ 175-24 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 175-25
175:15

Chapter 180
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 244. Zoning — See Ch. 375.
§ 175-25 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 175-25
180:1

ARTICLE I
Historical Commission
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 2.124 of the 1993 Code]
§ 180-1. Short title; authority.
The ordinance codified in this article shall be known and may be cited as the "Historic
Districts Ordinance" of the City of Quincy and is adopted pursuant to the provisions of
MGL c. 40C, as amended.
§ 180-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general
welfare of the public through the preservation and protection of the distinctive
characteristics of buildings and places significant in the history of the City, or its
architecture, and through the maintenance and improvement of settings for such
buildings and places and the encouragement of design compatible therewith. Regulations
may be promulgated by the Historical Commission, in accordance with the provisions of
MGL c. 40C, in order to fulfill the purposes of this article.
§ 180-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALTERED — Includes the words "rebuilt," "reconstructed," "restored," "removed" and
"demolished" and the phrase "changed in exterior color."
BUILDING — A combination of materials forming a shelter for persons, animals or
property.
COMMISSION — The Commission acting as the Historical Commission.
CONSTRUCTED — Includes the words "built," "erected," "installed," "enlarged" and
"moved."
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE — Such portion of the exterior of the
building or structure as is open to view from a public street, public way, public park
or public body of water, including but not limited to the architectural style and general
arrangement and setting thereof, the kind, color and texture of exterior building
materials, the color of paint or other materials applied to exterior surfaces and the type
and style of windows, doors, lights, signs and other appurtenant exterior fixtures.
PERSON AGGRIEVED — An applicant, an owner of property adjoining the property
of an applicant, an owner of property within the same historic district as the property of
an applicant and within 100 feet of said property as measured from a property line, and
any charitable corporation which one of whose purposes is the preservation of historic
structures or districts.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials other than a building, including a sign,
fence, wall, terrace, walk or driveway.
§ 180-4. Appointment of Commission; terms; nominees; compensation; officers.
A. In accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 8D, and MGL c. 40C, §§ 4 and
§ 180-1 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 180-4
180:3
§ 180-5. Powers and duties.
14, an Historical Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor. The Commission
shall consist of seven citizens of the City appointed for three-year terms, with the
terms of either two or three members expiring each year. Seven alternate members
shall be appointed in a like manner. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment for an unexpired term. One regular member and one
alternate member respectively shall be appointed from at least three nominees
submitted by the Boston chapter of the American Institute of Architects, from
at least three nominees submitted by the Quincy Historical Society and from at
least three nominees submitted by the South Shore Board of Realtors. One regular
and one alternate member shall be appointed, where possible, from among the
residents or property owners of the historic districts, and three regular and three
alternate members shall be appointed at large. If within 30 days after submission
of a request for nominees to an organization entitled to submit nominations for
membership on the Commission no such nominations have been made, the Mayor
may proceed to make the appointments to the Commission without nomination by
such organization.
B. In case of the absence, inability or unwillingness to act of a member of the
Commission, his or her place shall be taken by an alternate member designated by
the Chairperson. Each member and alternate shall continue in office until the
expiration of his or her term or until his or her successor is duly appointed and
qualified. All members shall serve without compensation. The Commission shall
annually elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from its number and a Secretary
from within or without its number.
A. The Commission shall, by majority vote of the members thereof, promulgate
appropriate procedural rules and regulations for the calling of meetings, the calling
and conduct of hearings, the issuance and filing of certificates and other
determinations, and the keeping of records, provided that the same shall be
consistent with the requirements of MGL c. 40C, §§ 10 and 11, and other provisions
of this article.
B. The Commission may, after public hearing, set forth in such manner as it may
determine the various designs of certain appurtenances, such as signs or lighting
fixtures, which will meet the requirements of an historic district and a roster of
certain colors of paint and roofing materials which will meet the requirements of an
historic district, but no such determination shall limit the right of an applicant to
present other designs or colors to the Commission for its approval. The Commission
shall, subject to appropriation, prepare and publish architectural and design
guidelines for the construction and alteration of buildings and structures within
historic districts.
C. The Commission may, where certain construction or alteration is otherwise
inappropriate, nevertheless determine that, owing to conditions especially affecting
the building or structure involved, but not affecting the historic district generally,
failure to approve an application will involve a substantial hardship, financial or
otherwise, to the applicant and that such application may be approved without
substantial detriment to the public welfare and without substantial derogation from
the intent and purposes of this article. If the Commission so determines, it shall
§ 180-4 QUINCY CODE § 180-5
180:4
§ 180-6. Certificate of appropriateness, nonapplicability or hardship. [Amended
by Order No. 97-337]
§ 180-7. Evaluation criteria.
cause a certificate of hardship to be issued to the applicant.
D. The Commission may, subject to appropriation, employ clerical and technical
assistants or consultants and incur other expenses appropriate to the carrying on of
its work and may accept money gifts and expend the same for such purposes.
E. The Commission shall have the powers, authority and duties of an Historical
Commission as provided in MGL c. 40, § 8D.
F. The Commission shall have, in addition, the powers, authority and duties granted to
it by the ordinance codified in this article, as it may from time to time be amended.
A. When required. Except as otherwise provided in § 180-8 or 180-9, no building or
structure within an historic district shall be constructed or altered in any way that
affects an exterior architectural feature unless the Commission shall first have
issued a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a
certificate of hardship with respect to such construction or alteration.
B. Application; required contents. Any person who desires to obtain a certificate from
the Commission shall file with the Commission an application therefor in such form
as the Commission may reasonably determine, together with such plans, elevations,
specifications, material or other information, including, in the case of demolition or
removal, a statement of the proposed condition and appearance of the property
thereafter, as may be reasonably deemed necessary by the Commission to enable it
to make a determination on the application.
C. Required for building permit issuance. No building permit for construction of a
building or structure or for alteration of an exterior architectural feature within an
historic district and no demolition permit for demolition or removal of a building or
structure within an historic district shall be issued by the Director of Inspectional
Services until the certificate required by this section has been issued by the
Commission.
A. In passing on matters before it, the Commission shall consider, among other things,
the historic and architectural value and significance of the site, building or structure;
the general design, arrangement, texture, material and color of the features
involved; and the relation of such features to similar features of buildings and
structures in the surrounding area. In the case of new construction or additions to
existing buildings or structures, the Commission shall consider the appropriateness
of the size and shape of the building or structure, both in relation to the land area
upon which the building or structure is situated and to buildings and structures in
the vicinity, and the Commission may, in appropriate cases, impose dimensional
and setback requirements in addition to those required by other applicable laws and
ordinances. The Commission shall not consider interior arrangements or
architectural features not subject to public view.
B. The Commission shall not make any recommendation or requirement except for the
§ 180-5 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 180-7
180:5
§ 180-8. Limits on Commission review.
§ 180-9. Exceptions.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance, repair
or replacement of any exterior architectural feature within an historic district which
does not involve a change in design, material, color or the outward appearance thereof;
nor to prevent landscaping with plants, trees or shrubs; nor construed to prevent the
meeting of a requirement certified by a duly authorized public officer to be necessary
for public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition; nor construed to prevent
any construction or alteration under a permit duly issued prior to the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this article.
§ 180-10. Appeals of Commission decisions.
Any person aggrieved by a determination of the Commission may, within 20 days after
the filing of the notice of such determination with the City Clerk, appeal to the Superior
Court for Norfolk County, in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 40C, § 12A.
§ 180-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended by Order No. 97-337]
purpose of preventing developments incongruous to the historic aspects or the
architectural characteristics of an historic district.
A. The authority of the Commission shall not extend to the reconstruction, if
substantially similar in exterior design, of a building, structure or exterior
architectural feature damaged or destroyed by fire, storm or other disaster, provided
that such reconstruction is begun within one year of the damage or destruction and
carried forward with due diligence.
B. The Commission may determine from time to time after public hearing that certain
categories of exterior architectural features, if the provisions of applicable laws or
ordinances do not limit the authority of the Commission with respect thereto, may
be constructed or altered without review by the Commission without causing
substantial derogation from the intent and purposes of this article.
C. Upon request, the Commission shall issue a certificate of nonapplicability with
respect to construction or alteration in any category then not subject to review by
the Commission in accordance with this section.
A. The Superior Court for Norfolk County may, in accordance with the provisions of
MGL c. 40C, § 13, enforce the provisions of this article and any determination,
ruling or regulation issued pursuant thereto and may, upon the petition of the
Commission or at the request of the Commission or the Director of Inspectional
Services, restrain by injunction violations thereof, and, without limitation, such
court may order the removal of any building, structure or exterior architectural
feature constructed in violation thereof, or the substantial restoration of any
building, structure or exterior architectural feature altered or demolished in
violation thereof, and may issue such other orders for relief as may be equitable.
B. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this article shall, in addition to such other
§ 180-7 QUINCY CODE § 180-11
180:6
penalty as may be provided by law, be subject to a fine of $100, imposed by
the Commission through the Director of Inspectional Services or designee of the
Mayor, as a noncriminal disposition pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D. Each day
during any portion of which a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate
offense. The Director of Inspectional Services or designee of the Mayor shall permit
a grace period of seven days after notice of a violation prior to the imposition of a
fine.
§ 180-11 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 180-11
180:7

ARTICLE II
Historic Districts
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 15.24 of the 1993 Code]
§ 180-12. Districts established.
§ 180-13. Administration.
The Quincy Center Historic District and the Adams Birthplace Historic District shall be
administered by the Historical Commission of the City in accordance with the provisions
of MGL c. 40C.
§ 180-14. Certificate of appropriateness, nonapplicability or hardship.
A. There are established under the provisions of, and in accordance with, the Historic
Districts Act10 the following historic districts:
(1) The Quincy Center Historic District; and
(2) The Adams Birthplace Historic District.
B. Such districts shall include the land and buildings shaded on the maps titled "Map
1A — Quincy Center Historic District" and "Map 2 — Adams Birthplace Historic
District" on file in the office of the City Clerk.
A. Required for certain construction. No exterior changes or new construction which
requires a permit from another City agency or which affects the color of paint or the
appearance of walls and fences, driveways, sidewalks or similar structures shall be
undertaken within an historic district unless the Commission shall first have issued
a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of hardship or a certificate of
nonapplicability with respect to such construction or alteration.
B. Commission duties. The Commission shall be responsible for making a
determination on all applications filed with it. Within 45 days of the filing of the
application, the Commission must issue a certificate of appropriateness, certificate
of hardship, or certificate of nonapplicability or issue a disapproval of an
application.
C. Proof of issuance required. No board, commission, department or agency of the
City shall give final approval to the construction or exterior alteration of a building
within an historic district without first receiving proof that the property owner has
obtained a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of hardship from the
Commission.
D. Certificate of hardship. A certificate of hardship shall be issued by the Historical
Commission when a proposed construction, alteration or demolition of an exterior
building feature is determined to be inappropriate but, owing to conditions
especially affecting the building or structure involved, but not affecting the historic
district generally, failure to approve an application will involve substantial
hardship, financial or otherwise, to the applicant. In order to issue a certificate of
10. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 40C.
§ 180-12 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 180-14
180:9
§ 180-15. Demolition of buildings.
No demolition of any building cited on List A, titled "Certificate of Appropriateness for
Demolition Required," on file in the office of the City Clerk and made part of this article,
shall be undertaken within an historic district unless the Commission shall first have
issued a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of hardship with respect to such
demolition. No board, commission, department or agency of the City shall give final
approval to the demolition of any building cited on List A without first receiving proof
that the property owner has obtained a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of
hardship from the Commission. Demolition of any building within the historic districts,
other than those cited on List A, does not require a certificate from the Commission.
§ 180-16. Major new developments or rehabilitation projects.
The Commission shall submit all determinations regarding major new developments or
major rehabilitation projects and the reasons for such determinations to the City Council.
The City Council shall then review the proposal and shall annul the determination of the
Commission if it finds the decision of the Commission inconsistent with the City's future
growth objectives and the objectives of this article. Major new developments and major
rehabilitation are defined to be projects with a gross building floor equal to or greater
than 30,000 square feet.
hardship, the Historical Commission must demonstrate:
(1) The difficulty and hardship found is inherent in the particular building or
structure;
(2) Exterior change will not alter the essential character of the historic district;
(3) Relief may be provided without detriment to the public good;
(4) Hardship or difficulty would be caused by the restrictions contained in this
article; and
(5) Relief is provided without nullifying the intent of this article.
§ 180-14 QUINCY CODE § 180-16
180:10
Chapter 183
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
§ 183-1. Approval of Housing Development Plan and Zone.
In accordance with the requirements of 760 CMR 66.03(3), the City Council hereby
approves the Housing Development (HD) Plan and Zone, authorizes and forwards
said HD Plan and Zone to the Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community
Development for its approval and endorsement, and authorizes the Mayor to negotiate
tax increment exemptions for a period not to exceed 20 years for certified HD projects
within the HD Zone in accordance with MGL c. 59, § 5M.
§ 180-16 HOUSING DEVELOPMENT § 183-1
183:1

Chapter 189
JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 226.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 234.
Precious metal dealers — See Ch. 240.
§ 183-1 JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS § 183-1
189:1

ARTICLE I
Junk Dealers and Junk Shops
§ 189-1. License required.
No person shall collect, deal in or keep a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old
metals or secondhand articles or keep or store the same in any building or place within
the limits of the City without a license from the Board of Licensing Commissioners.
§ 189-2. License issuance; conditions; term; fee. [Amended by Order No. 95-084]
§ 189-3. Record of licenses granted.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep a record of every license granted under the
provisions of this article.
§ 189-4. Rules and regulations.
§ 189-5. Recordkeeping requirements.
A. The Board of Licensing Commissioners may license suitable persons to be dealers
in and keepers of shops for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metals or
secondhand articles at such places within the City as may be designated in such
licenses, under such conditions and restrictions as are prescribed in this article,
which shall be incorporated in every such license.
B. Such license shall continue in force until the first day of May then next ensuing
unless sooner revoked, provided that such license may be granted in April to take
effect on the first day of May next ensuing. The licensee shall pay to the City Clerk
for the license, for the use of the City, $50.
A. Dealings with minors. No keeper of a shop as described in § 189-1 shall, directly or
indirectly, either purchase or receive by way of barter or exchange any of the
articles of a minor knowing or having reason to believe him to be such.
B. Sales restrictions; hours. No article purchased or received shall be sold or altered in
appearance, form or substance until a period of at least 30 days from the date of its
purchase or receipt has elapsed. No such shopkeeper shall have his shop open for
the transaction of business nor shall he purchase any of the articles mentioned in
the following section except between sunrise and 9:00 p.m. No person so engaged
as a dealer in or a keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old
metals or secondhand articles, licensed as required in § 189-1, shall keep, store or
deposit such junk, metals or secondhand articles other than in a covered building
devoted to that purpose.
C. Report to Chief of Police. Every such shopkeeper shall make out and deliver to the
Chief of Police every day, Sundays and holidays excepted, before the hour of 10:00
a.m., a legible and correct list containing an accurate description of all articles
purchased during the preceding business day, the prices paid therefor, the time
when such articles were purchased and the respective numbers of such articles as
provided for in § 189-5.
§ 189-1 JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS § 189-5
189:3
§ 189-6. Sign; inspection.
Every keeper of a shop as described in § 189-1 shall put in some suitable and
conspicuous place on his shop a sign having his name and occupation legibly inscribed
thereon in large letters. Such shops, and all articles therein, may at all times be examined
by the Mayor, Chief of Police, any member of the police force, any member of the Board
of Licensing Commissioners and by any person authorized by the Board of Licensing
Commissioners.
§ 189-7. Scales required.
Every keeper of a junk shop shall have on his premises scales capable of weighing at
least 250 pounds. Said scales shall be annually tested and sealed.
§ 189-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
Whoever, not being licensed as required by § 189-1, keeps a junk shop or is a junk dealer
in any place or manner other than that designated in his license, or after notice to him
that his license has been revoked, or whoever violates any rule, regulation or restriction
contained in his license shall be subject to a fine of $20.
A. Every keeper of a shop licensed as provided in this article shall keep a book in
which shall be written in English, at the time of every purchase, a description of the
junk, old metal or secondhand articles so purchased and the name, age and
residence of the person from whom, and the day and hour when, such purchase was
made.
B. Every such shopkeeper shall, at the time of making any purchase, attach a number
to each article bought and shall make entry of such number in the book. Such book
shall at all times be open for the inspection of the Mayor, Chief of Police, any
member of the police force, any member of the Board of Licensing Commissioners
and by any person authorized by the Board of Licensing Commissioners.
§ 189-5 QUINCY CODE § 189-8
189:4
ARTICLE II
Junk Wagons
§ 189-9. License issuance; conditions; term; fee. [Amended by Order No. 95-084]
The Board of Licensing Commissioners may license suitable persons to drive wagons
or other conveyances for the collection of junk, old metals, rags or secondhand articles,
under such conditions and restrictions as are prescribed in this article, which shall be
incorporated in every such license. Such license shall continue in force until the first
day of May then next ensuing unless sooner revoked, provided that such license may be
granted in April to take effect on the first day of May next ensuing. The licensee shall
pay to the City Clerk for the license, for the use of the City, $100.
§ 189-10. Record of licenses granted.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep a record of every license granted under the
provisions of this article.
§ 189-11. Rules and regulations.
§ 189-12. Scales required.
Every driver of a wagon or other conveyance used for the collection of junk, old metals,
rags or secondhand articles shall have on said wagon or conveyance scales capable of
weighing at least 50 pounds. Said scales shall be annually tested and sealed.
§ 189-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
Whoever, not being licensed as required by § 189-9, collects junk, old metal, rags or
secondhand articles, or after notice to him that his license has been revoked, and whoever
violates any rule, regulation or restriction contained in his license shall be subject to a
fine of $20.
A. Information to be displayed; driver designation. Every such wagon or other
conveyance as set out in § 189-9 shall bear conspicuously the owner's name and the
number of the license printed on a metal plate on the outside and on each side. Each
driver of a licensed junk wagon or other conveyance shall wear upon an outer
garment a metal badge, upon which shall appear in figures not less than one inch
square the number of his license, such metal plate and badge to be furnished by the
Chief of Police at the expense of the licensee. Every license shall designate the
person employed to drive such vehicle. Such driver shall not be changed without
the consent of the Board of Licensing Commissioners and record of such change
made in the office of the City Clerk. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
B. Dealings with minors. No driver of such wagon or conveyance shall, directly or
indirectly, either purchase or receive by way of barter or exchange any of the
articles described in § 189-9 of a minor knowing or having reason to believe him to
be such.
C. Hours of operation. No such driver shall purchase any of the aforesaid articles
except on weekdays between sunrise and sunset.
§ 189-9 JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS § 189-13
189:5

Chapter 196
LICENSES AND PERMITS
§ 189-13 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 189-13
196:1

ARTICLE I
Issuance; Denial or Revocation for Failure To Pay Taxes
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 5.04 of the 1993 Code]
§ 196-1. Authority to grant; exceptions.
In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 70, Acts of 1920, as amended by Chapter
275, Acts of 1949, the Board of Licensing Commissioners shall have all authority to
grant licenses and permits, except permits to public service corporations for locations in
streets and ways of the City.
§ 196-2. Applications; publication fees.
All applications for licenses and permits shall be filed at the office of the City Clerk, and
all petitions for hearings or other requests which require or provide for publication, or
advertising in newspapers, or require notification of abutters, shall be accompanied by a
fee sufficient to pay the expenses of such publication or notification, payable to the City
Clerk.
§ 196-3. Certification of tax law compliance.
In accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 62C, § 49A, no license or permit shall be
issued to any individual or business operating within the City unless said applicant has
certified in writing, under the pains and penalties of perjury, that he has complied with
all laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts relating to taxes, including local taxes
under the provisions of MGL c. 59. The failure to properly execute such certification
shall be considered grounds to revoke such license or permit.
§ 196-4. Persons failing to pay local taxes, fees and other charges.
A. List preparation. The Treasurer/Collector shall annually furnish to each department
and board that issues licenses or permits, including renewals and transfers
(hereinafter referred to as the "licensing authority"), a list of any person,
corporation, or business enterprise (hereinafter referred to as the "party") that has
neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other
municipal charges for not less than a twelve-month period, and that such party has
not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a
pending petition before the Appellate Tax Board. Such listing shall be prepared
with the assistance of the Chief Information Officer. [Amended 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012]
B. License or permit issuance limitations; certificate of compliance. The licensing
authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit, including renewals
and transfers, of any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the
licensing authority from the Treasurer/Collector or with respect to any activity,
event or other matter which is the subject of such license or permit and which
activity, event or matter is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or
exercised on or about real estate owned by any party whose name appears on said
list furnished to the licensing authority from the Treasurer/Collector; provided,
however, that written notice is given to the party and the Treasurer/Collector, as
§ 196-1 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 196-4
196:3
required by applicable provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held
not earlier than 14 days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence
for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any party. The
Treasurer/Collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with
respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by the
licensing authority with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension
shall be made only for the purposes of such proceeding and shall not be relevant
to or introduced in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such
license denial, revocation or suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended
or revoked under this section shall not be reissued or renewed until the licensing
authority receives a certificate issued by the Treasurer/Collector that the party is in
good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments
or other municipal charges payable to the City as of the date of issuance of said
certificate. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
C. Payment agreement. Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a
payment agreement, thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate
indicating said limitations to the license or permit, and the validity of said license
shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement. Failure
to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of
said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder shall be given notice and
a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
D. Waiver. The Mayor, with the City Council's approval, may waive such denial,
suspension or revocation if he finds there is no direct or indirect business interest
by the property owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his
immediate family, as defined in MGL c. 268A, § 1, in the business or activity
conducted in or on said property. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
E. Nonapplicability to certain licenses and permits. This section shall not apply to the
following licenses and permits: open burning, MGL c. 48, § 13; bicycle permits;
sales of articles for charitable purposes, MGL c. 101, § 33; children work permits,
MGL c. 149, § 69; clubs, associations dispensing food or beverage licenses, MGL
c. 140, § 21E; dog licenses, MGL c. 148, § 137; fishing, hunting, trapping license,
MGL c. 131, § 12; marriage licenses, MGL c. 207, § 28; theatrical events, public
exhibition permits, MGL c. 140, § 181; and building permits, MGL c. 143.11
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
11. Editor's Note: Original § 5.04.090, Vehicles used for commercial hauling, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012.
§ 196-4 QUINCY CODE § 196-4
196:4
ARTICLE II
Business Licenses and Fees
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 5.40 of the 1993 Code]
§ 196-5. Auctioneer. [Amended by Order No. 95-084]
Every person licensed as an auctioneer shall give a bond in the sum of $200 to the
Treasurer/Collector with sufficient sureties to be approved by the Board of Licensing
Commissioners, with condition that he shall in all things conform to the laws relating to
auctioneers, and shall pay for the license the sum of $25.
§ 196-6. Billiard tables, pool tables or bowling alleys. [Amended by Order No.
95-084]
Every person licensed to keep a billiard or pool table or a bowling alley shall pay the
City Clerk, for the use of the City, the sum of $125 for each table and $40 for each
bowling alley. All such licenses shall be recorded by the City Clerk in a book kept for
that purpose before being delivered to the licensee. Such record shall set forth the name
of the person so licensed, the nature and location of the business and the number of tables
or alleys, and such license shall continue in force, unless sooner revoked, until the first
day of May next ensuing. Such licenses, however, may be granted during the month of
April, to take effect on the first day of May then next ensuing.
§ 196-7. Common victualler. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
Every person licensed as a common victualler shall pay for the license the sum of $100.
§ 196-8. Fast-food vendors. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
No person shall, without a license from the Board of Licensing Commissioners, offer for
sale to the general public pizzas, submarine sandwiches, hamburgers, and food of like
nature and/or similar foods to be consumed off the premises. The license fee shall be
$50. Whoever violates this section shall pay a fine of $50 for each violation.12
§ 196-9. Lodging houses. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
The Board of Licensing Commissioners may grant a license for the operation of a
lodging house, which license shall expire on December 31 of each year but may be
granted during December to take effect on January 1 following. The fee for such license
shall be $250.
§ 196-10. Rental and lease of motor vehicles. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
The Board of Licensing Commissioners may grant licenses to such persons as it deems
expedient to employ or use any vehicle for rental or lease, which place of business is
within the City limits. The fees for such licenses shall be fixed by the Board.13
12. Editor's Note: Original § 5.40.050, Health Department fees, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012. See now Ch. 150, Fees, Art. VI, Health Commissioner Fees.
13. Editor's Note: Original § 5.40.080, School of massage or massage establishment, which immediately followed this
§ 196-5 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 196-11
196:5
§ 196-11. Secondhand motor vehicle dealers.
§ 196-12. Used car dealer's/motor II license. [Amended 6-4-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-014]
A. License; fees. The Board of Licensing Commissioners may grant licenses in
accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 140, §§ 58 and 59, and acts in
amendment thereof and addition thereto. The fees for such licenses shall be fixed
by the Board.
B. License requirements. No motor vehicle junk license, granted under MGL c. 140,
§ 59, shall be issued unless the location shall be at least 500 feet from the street line
and the nearest property lines and shall have a fence erected around the property
approved by the Board of Licensing Commissioners.
A. Licensing; fee.
(1) No person, company, corporation or other entity shall offer for sale more than
four secondhand motor vehicles in a calendar year without obtaining a used
car dealer's/motor II license from the Board of Licensing Commissioners. No
person, company, corporation or other entity shall offer auto repair services
without obtaining a used car dealer's/motor II license.
(2) Application for a used car dealer's license/motor II shall be made on a form
approved by the Board of Licensing Commissioners and shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable application fee of $100.
(3) Licenses shall expire annually on December 31. Except as provided in
Subsection E of this section, issuance of a license during the previous licensing
period shall not create a presumption in favor of the applicant.
(4) Notice of denial of an application for a license herein shall be accompanied by
a statement setting forth specific reasons for the denial.
(5) Licenses may be issued upon such terms and conditions and with such
restrictions as the Board of Licensing Commissioners deems expedient and in
the best interests of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of Quincy.
(6) Said licenses may not be sold, conveyed, assigned or transferred without the
consent of the Board of Licensing Commissioners.
B. Licensing; minimum standards. The Board of Licensing Commissioners may
license such applicants as it determines are suitable to conduct a used car sales/
motor II business in the City. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section,
with state consumer protection statutes or with any licensing terms, conditions or
restrictions imposed by the Board of Licensing Commissioners shall be prima facie
evidence that the applicant is not suitable to conduct said business. Applicants shall
be required, at a minimum, to demonstrate that the following criteria have been met:
(1) That the business is conducted at a location that satisfies all applicable
requirements of Chapter 375, Zoning;
section, was repealed 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012.
§ 196-11 QUINCY CODE § 196-12
196:6
(2) That the principal use of the location is used automotive sales/motor II and that
all other uses are supportive of or accessory to used automotive sales/motor II;
(3) That the area controlled by the business is of sufficient size to allow:
(a) Storage or display of the number of cars in and that can be sufficiently
located on the property as determined by the following: the total size of
property parcel divided in half, allowing for one car space per 300 square
feet of the remaining square footage. Any fractional proportions are to be
rounded down. Vehicles stored indoors overnight are not restricted under
this section. An appeal of the number of allowed car spaces per license
shall be made to the Board of Licensing Commissioners in writing within
30 days of the license issuance. The Board of Licensing Commissioners
shall not be permitted, upon appeal, under any circumstance to allow the
minimum square footage requirement per car space to be below 200
square feet per space.
(b) Employee and customer parking of no fewer than three spaces, provided
that one additional employee/customer parking space shall be required
for each additional 20 spaces for storage or display.
(4) That the applicant is engaged principally in the business of used car sales and/
or motor II.
(5) That the property can accommodate the number of spaces outlined herein.
[Added 2-3-2020 by Order No. 2020-014]
(a) The Board of License Commissioners must administratively approve that
the property can accommodate the number of spaces outlined herein. The
Board of License Commissioners may consider the following to reach its
determination: layout of site, topography, soil conditions, objects and
structures located on the property, access and egress, landscaping, and
any other condition that the Board of License Commissioners deems
relevant to maintaining public safety and safe passage to, from, and
through the location.
(b) Upon the administrative determination, by the Board of License
Commissioners or its designee, that the property cannot accommodate the
number of spaces allowed herein, or if the business/property is not in
compliance with any provisions of Chapter 375, Zoning, the number of
spaces may be reduced to an amount deemed reasonable based upon the
criteria contained herein. Any licensee for whom the Board of License
Commissioners or its designee has administratively reduced the
allowable spaces shall be notified, in writing, of their right to appeal to
the Board of License Commissioners for a hearing regarding the same. At
said hearing the licensee may present evidence and testimony on their
behalf before the Board of License Commissioners. At the conclusion of
the appeal hearing the Board of License Commissioners shall have the
authority to uphold the administrative determination, amend the
administrative determination, or amend with conditions. At no time shall
the number of spaces permitted be more than authorized by the
calculations of square footage herein.
§ 196-12 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 196-12
196:7
C. Business operation; minimum standards.
(1) Recordkeeping.
(a) Each used car dealer shall keep records as required by MGL c. 140, § 62.
(b) Said records shall be made available upon request to any police officer,
Board of Licensing Commissioners member, or duly appointed agent of
the Board of Licensing Commissioners authorized to enforce ordinances
relative to licensing.
(2) Maintenance of business premises.
(a) Each used car dealership shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
manner and shall comply with all applicable health, safety and sanitation
codes and standards promulgated by the City's building, wire, plumbing,
health and fire inspectors.
(b) Each used car dealership and auto repair service shall comply with
Chapter 375, Zoning, § 5.3, Signs.
(c) All parts and materials incidental to the operation of said used car
dealership/motor II shall be stored in a designated area and concealed
from public view. Waste oil shall be stored in compliance with 527 CMR
906. Disposal of residual parts and materials shall be made in a timely
manner and in accordance with applicable federal, state and local
regulations.
(d) Agents and employees of the City authorized to enforce health, safety and
sanitation codes may at any time enter onto the premises of a used car
dealer to inspect for compliance with applicable health, safety and
sanitation codes, the provisions of this section, and any license
restrictions or conditions.
(3) Display of license. Each used car dealer/motor II shall display at all times a
current used car dealer's license on the premises at which the business is
conducted. Said license shall be displayed in the business office, so as to be in
clear view of patrons.
(4) Dealer plates required. Each used car dealer shall apply for and obtain dealer
plates from the Registry of Motor Vehicles within 30 days of obtaining an
initial license. Copies of current dealer plate registrations shall be filed with
the City Clerk's office, upon receipt of the original registration and/or
registration renewals.
D. Failure to comply with provisions; penalties.
(1) Violation of any provision of this section or of the terms, conditions or
restrictions imposed on a specific licensee may be punished by a fine imposed
under the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D, in accordance with the following
schedule:
(a) First offense: $300.
§ 196-12 QUINCY CODE § 196-12
196:8
§ 196-13. Video and pinball games.
The Board of Licensing Commissioners may grant up to four licenses for video and
pinball games in the City. No more than four shall be issued to any one establishment.
(b) Second/subsequent offenses: $500 (each separate day an offense exists
shall be considered a subsequent offense).
(2) Violations of any provision of this section, applicable health, safety and
sanitation codes or the specific terms, conditions or restrictions of a license
may be cited by any person authorized by the Board of Licensing
Commissioners to enforce ordinances relative to licensing or to enforce
applicable provisions of health, safety and sanitation codes.
(3) Failure to comply with the provisions of this section, with state consumer
protection statutes or with any license terms, conditions or restrictions
imposed by the Board of Licensing Commissioners may result in suspension,
modification or revocation of any license, after three days' written notice and
hearing by the Board of Licensing Commissioners.
E. Implementation of provisions.
(1) This section shall take effect on July 1, 2018, provided that any person
licensed as a used car dealer on December 31, 2017, whose business does not
meet the minimum standards for licensure, as set forth in Subsection B above,
may apply annually for renewal of said license.
(2) Said licensees shall be eligible for re-licensing provided that they meet the
following criteria:
(a) That the business has remained in continuous operation since December
31,2017.
(b) That the applicant is the same person or entity licensed as of December
31, 2017. For purposes of this section, a corporation shall be considered
the same entity only so long as a majority of its officers, directors and/or
shareholders remain the same.
(3) Persons applying for renewal of licenses under this section shall be subject to
all the provisions of Subsections C and D above, and shall provide spaces for
storage/display of cars and employee/customer parking in a quantity
determined by the size of the lot.
(4) No applicant licensed under this section shall seek an increase in the number
of cars licensed for display and/or storage as of July 31, 2018. Nothing in this
section shall prohibit any dealer licensed under this section from applying for
a license under Subsections A and B of this section.
§ 196-12 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 196-13
196:9

Chapter 205
MEETINGS, PUBLIC
§ 205-1. Permit required.
No open air public meeting shall be held in any public street or public grounds of the
City, or upon any ground abutting upon any street or public way in the City, and no
person shall publicly address the people on or passing over any public street or grounds
in the City, unless a permit in writing therefor shall first be obtained from the Board of
Licensing Commissioners of the City.
§ 205-2. Application for permit.
Application to conduct any open air meeting described in § 205-1 shall be made in
writing to the Board of Licensing Commissioners by the person in charge or control
thereof or responsible therefor, and such application shall specify the place at which
it is desired to hold such meeting, the purpose thereof, and the name of the person,
corporation, society or organization in control thereof or responsible therefor, the time at
which such public meeting is to be held, and the probable duration thereof.
§ 205-3. Contents of permit.
Any permit for an open air meeting or public speaking under this chapter shall state
where the same shall take place and the date and hours when it shall be held.
§ 196-13 MEETINGS, PUBLIC § 205-3
205:1

Chapter 208
MINORS
§ 208-1. Curfew.
No child under 16 years of age shall be, loiter or remain upon any street, highway, park
or other public way or place in the City after the hour of 9:30 p.m. unless accompanied
by, or under the control or care of, a parent, guardian or other adult person, or performing
or returning from employment or the performance of some duty, directed in writing by
such parent, guardian or other adult person, and no such child, while performing such
duty, or returning from the performance thereof, or from employment, shall loiter upon
any such street, highway, park or other public way or place.
§ 208-2. Dissemination of matter harmful to minors.
§ 208-3. Sale of nonalcoholic beer to minors.
§ 208-4. Sale of knives to minors. [Added 11-10-2008 by Order No. 2008-304]
A. Whoever disseminates to a minor any matter harmful to minors, knowing it to be
harmful to minors, or has in his possession any such matter with the intent to
disseminate the same to minors, shall be punished by a fine of $200 for each offense
and to a like fine for each day's continuance of such violation. It shall be an
affirmative defense in any prosecution under this section that the defendant was in
a parental or guardianship relationship with the minor. It shall be an affirmative
defense under this section if the evidence proves that the defendant was a bona fide
school, museum or library, or was acting in the course of his employment as an
employee of such organization, or of a retail outlet affiliated with and serving the
educational purpose of such organization. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
B. The definitions of the words in this section shall be the same as those specified in
MGL c. 272, as amended by Chapter 430 of the Acts of 1974.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, business, corporation or partnership to sell or
cause to be sold to any person under the age of 21 nonalcoholic beer or any malt
beverage with any alcoholic content, however much reduced.
B. Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be fined $200 per offense.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to give, sell or offer for sale or cause any person
to give, sell or offer to sell a knife to any individual 17 years of age and younger
unless said person is a parent or legal guardian of said individual.
B. Any person selling knives shall positively establish the purchaser's age as of the
date of sale to be 18 years or older by viewing a valid form of photographic
identification such as a driver's license, Massachusetts identification card or
passport.
C. "Knife" shall be defined, in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 269, § 10, as
§ 205-3 MINORS § 208-4
208:1
any stiletto, dagger or a device or case which enables a knife with a locking blade
to be drawn at a locked position, any ballistic knife, or any knife with a detachable
blade capable of being propelled by any mechanism, dirk knife, any knife having
a double-edge blade, or a switch knife, or any knife having an automatic spring
release device by which the blade is released from the handle, having a blade over
1 1/2 inches.
D. Any person found in violation of this section shall be fined $300 per offense.
Enforcement of this section may be by noncriminal disposition as provided for in
MGL c. 40, § 21D, or by filing a criminal complaint in the Quincy District Court.
E. For purposes of this section, the Police Department shall be the enforcing
department.
F. Violations of this section occurring at a place of business shall be the responsibility
of the business owner and shall be referred to the Board of Licensing
Commissioners for further appropriate action.
§ 208-4 QUINCY CODE § 208-4
208:2
Chapter 215
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 113. Peace and good order — See Ch. 230.
§ 215-1. Findings; administration.
§ 215-2. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following words and phrases have the following meanings:
CONSTRUCTION — Temporary activities directly associated with site preparation,
assembly, erection, repair, alteration, or demolition of structures or roadways.
CONTINUOUS NOISE—A continuous sound level that has duration of more than one
second. "Continuous noise" may include but is not limited to the following: amplified
music or voice, unamplified music or voice, horn or signaling device from
nonemergency vehicles, leaf blowers, wood chippers, chain saws, landscaping
A. The Quincy City Council finds that excessive noise harms residential life, public
health, and general welfare and impairs the fundamental enjoyment of residential
real estate. The intent of this chapter is to control noise sources to protect residential
life, public health, and general welfare and to promote the peaceful enjoyment of
residential real estate. Quincy, as a community with many residential properties that
abut, or are located near, establishments that generate noise, requires legislation to
address this problem in a manner that is fair to both the resident(s) and the
commercial establishment(s) involved. This chapter must be liberally construed if
and when necessary to carry out this intent.
B. The Department of Inspectional Services ("Department") shall administer this
chapter.
(1) The Department must coordinate proposed noise abatement programs within
the City of Quincy.
(2) The Department, Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) and/or any special permit
granting authority so sitting, Planning Board, Board of Licensing
Commissioners and Conservation Commission must establish procedures to
identify and reduce noise sources when they issue permits, variances,
exemptions, approvals, conditions, or certifications. [Amended 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012]
(3) The Department, as the oversight authority, shall make recommendations to
the Mayor, City Council, and Planning Board regarding noise control policy,
administrative policies, and enforcement and assist in the identification of
noise-sensitive areas.
§ 208-4 NOISE § 215-2
215:1
equipment, construction equipment, vacuums, or a howling dog.
DAYTIME—The hours from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on weekdays and 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. on weekends and holidays or any hours permitted by the Director of Inspectional
Services in the event of an emergency.
dBA — The abbreviation designating the unit of sound level as measured by a high
precision grade sound-level meter using A-weighting.
Db or DECIBEL — A unit of measure equal to 10 times the logarithm to the base 10
of the ratio of a particular sound pressure squared to the standard reference pressure
squared. For this chapter, the standard reference pressure is 20 micropascals.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Inspectional Services.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Inspectional Services or the Director's authorized
designee.
HIGH PRECISION INSTRUMENT — A meter used to measure sound meeting the
standards of ANSI, as they may be amended from time to time.
IMPULSIVE NOISE—Either a single pressure peak or a single burst (multiple pressure
peaks) that has a duration of less than one second. "Impulsive noise" may include but
is not limited to the following: noise from weapons fire, pile drivers, punch presses, a
barking dog, or loading, unloading, opening, closing, or otherwise handling containers.
NIGHTTIME—The hours from 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. weekdays and 5:00 p.m. to 9:00
a.m. weekends and holidays.
NOISE — Sound, including sounds emanating from any and all sources, irrespective of
the source or sources, heard by an individual or captured by a sound recording/measuring
device.
NOISE DISTURBANCE REQUIRING ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITY — Any noise
that is:
NOISE-SUPPRESSION PLAN — A written plan to use the most effective noisesuppression
equipment, materials, and methods appropriate and reasonably available for
a particular type of construction.
NONRESIDENTIAL NOISE AREA —Refers to Business A, B and C and Industrial A
and B Zoning Districts as defined by Chapter 375, Zoning, of Quincy's Municipal Code.
PERSON — An individual, group of individuals, corporation, firm, partnership, or
voluntary association, or a department, bureau, agency, or instrument of the county or
any municipality, or of any other government to the extent allowed by law.
RECEIVING PROPERTY or RECEIVING NOISE AREA — Any location on real
property where people live or work and where noise can be heard, including an
apartment, condominium unit, or cooperative building unit, including attached
A. Unpleasant, annoying, offensive, loud or obnoxious;
B. Unusual for the time of day or location where it is produced or heard; or
Detrimental to the health, comfort, or safety of any individual or to the reasonable
enjoyment of property or the lawful conduct of business because of the loudness,
duration, or character of the noise.
C.
§ 215-2 QUINCY CODE § 215-2
215:2
balconies.
RESIDENTIAL NOISE AREA — Refers to Residence A, B and C and PUD Zoning
Districts as defined by Chapter 375, Zoning, of Quincy's Municipal Code.[Amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
§ 215-3. Noise Control Advisory Board.
§ 215-4. Maximum allowable noise levels.
A. A Noise Control Advisory Board must advise the Mayor, Director of Inspectional
Services, City Council, and Planning Board on noise control issues, including
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
B. The Board consists of seven members appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by
the City Council, each of whom shall be appointed within 30 days of the passage of
this chapter into law. The terms of the members shall be staggered at the time of
initial appointment, and after the first appointments establishing the Board will
commence on the first Monday of February as terms end:
(1) For three members, on the first Monday of February 2011 and every third year
thereafter;
(2) For two members, on the first Monday of February 2012 and every third year
thereafter; and
(3) For two members, on the first Monday of February 2013 and every third year
thereafter.
C. When appointing the first seven members to serve on the Board the Mayor must
designate the term in Subsection B for which the Mayor is appointing each
individual member.
D. Three members are to be appointed without regard to profession. Two members are
to be appointed from the legal profession. Two members are to be appointed from
the community.
E. The Board must elect one member as Chairperson and another member as Vice
Chairperson to serve at the pleasure of the Board. The Board must meet at the call
of the Chairperson as required to perform its duties, but not less than once each
quarter. A majority of the members of the Board constitutes a quorum for
transacting business. The Board may act by a majority vote of those present.
F. At least every third year, the Board must evaluate the effectiveness of the City's
noise control program and recommend any improvements to the Director of
Inspectional Services, Mayor, City Council, and Planning Board.
G. No later than March 1 each year, the Chairperson of the Board must report to the
Director of Inspectional Services, Mayor, City Council, and Planning Board on
activities and actions the Noise Control Advisory Board took during the previous
calendar year.
A. A person, business, event, contraption, or animal must not cause a noise disturbance
§ 215-2 NOISE § 215-4
215:3
§ 215-5. Noise level and noise disturbance standards for construction.
or permit noise levels that exceed the following levels when measured on the
receiving property/receiving noise area:
Maximum Allowable Noise Levels (dBA) for Receiving Noise Areas
Daytime Nighttime
Nonresidential noise area 77 72
Residential noise area 75 65
B. Sound that crosses from a nonresidential noise area to a residential noise area must
not exceed the levels set in Subsection A for residential noise areas.
C. Sound must be measured by a high precision instrument or recording device on the
receiving property where noise from the offending source is greatest. When the
complainant is not on a receiving property he cannot seek enforcement action under
this chapter.
A. Maximum allowable noise levels for construction.
(1) A person must not cause or permit noise levels from construction activity that
exceed the following levels:
(a) From 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays: (The hours set forth in this
chapter are not intended to modify the time restrictions otherwise set forth
in the Code for use of machinery and other noisy and disturbing items,
which time restrictions shall remain in full force and effect.)
[1] Seventy-five dBA if the Department has not approved a noisesuppression
plan for the activity; or
[2] Eight-five dBA if the Department has approved a noise-suppression
plan for the activity.
(b) The level specified in § 215-4 at all other times.
(2) Construction noise levels must be measured at the location, at a distance no
more than 50 feet from the source where noise from the source is greatest.
(3) The Department must, by administrative policies, establish requirements for
noise-suppression plans and adopt procedures for evaluating and approving
plans. The administrative policies must provide that, at least 10 days before
approving a noise-suppression plan, the Director must provide public notice
reasonably calculated to reach at least a majority of households that might be
affected by the construction activity where noise levels are above 75 dBA.
B. Examples. The following examples illustrate common construction noiseproducing
acts that violate this chapter if they exceed the noise level standards set
in Subsection A or create a noise disturbance. The examples are illustrative only
and do not limit or expand the construction noise level or noise disturbance
standards of this chapter.
§ 215-4 QUINCY CODE § 215-5
215:4
§ 215-6. Measurement of sound.
§ 215-7. Noise-sensitive areas.
§ 215-8. Exemptions.
This chapter does not apply to:
(1) Delivering materials or equipment or loading or unloading during nighttime
hours in a residential noise area.
(2) Operating construction equipment with audible backup warning devices
during nighttime hours.
A. The Department must issue administrative policies establishing the equipment and
techniques it will use to measure sound levels. The Department may rely on
currently accepted standards of recognized organizations, including the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI), the American Society for Testing and
Materials (ASTM), and the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
B. For multiple sources of sound it is permissible for the Department to measure sound
levels at any point or distance to determine the source of a noise.
A. Upon a two-thirds vote, the City Council may designate land within any
geographical area as a noise-sensitive area, so as to protect public health, safety,
and welfare. Land including uses such as churches, nursing homes, libraries and/or
schools shall be examples of such potentially designated land.14
B. Any such designation so voted must include within the vote:
(1) A description of the area by reference to named streets or other geographic
features;
(2) An explanation of the reasons for the designation;
(3) Established specific noise limits or requirements that apply in the noisesensitive
area; and
(4) A description by example or enumeration of activities or sources that violate
the noise disturbance limits or requirements.
A. Residential landscaping equipment maintained in accordance with the
manufacturer's specifications.
B. Emergency operations by fire and rescue services, police agencies, or public
utilities and their contractors.
C. A source or condition expressly subject to any state or federal noise control law or
regulation that is more stringent than this chapter.
D. Sound, not electronically amplified, created between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. by
sports, amusements, or entertainment events or other public gatherings operating
14. Editor's Note: Orders designating specific noise-sensitive areas are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 215-5 NOISE § 215-8
215:5
§ 215-9. Waivers.
§ 215-10. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
according to the requirements of the appropriate permit or licensing authority.
This includes athletic contests, carnivals, fairgrounds, parades, band and orchestra
activities, and public celebrations, except in areas designated noise-sensitive areas.
E. Noise sources associated with routine residential living during daytime hours, such
as home workshops, power tools, and power lawn and garden equipment, when
used in accordance with manufacturer specifications. This exception does not apply
to repairs or maintenance on a motor vehicle that is not registered for use on public
roads and/or amplified sound originating from a home entertainment system,
television, stereo or similar electronic device.
F. Boats operated in accordance with manufacturer specifications.
A. Temporary waiver.
(1) The Director may waive any part of this chapter for a temporary event if the
noise the event will create or cause in excess of the limits established under
this chapter is offset by the benefits of the event to the public.
(2) In order to obtain a temporary waiver, a party must apply to the Director on a
form prescribed by him, with said application provided at least 30 days prior
to the event. The Director shall provide notice of such application by
announcing the same at the next available Board of Licensing Commissioners
hearing and providing a written notification that shall be made a part of the
Board of Licensing Commissioners agenda. The notice shall provide that
written objection and/or comment on the application must be submitted to the
Director at least 10 days prior to the scheduled event. The Director shall notify
the applicant, the Board of Licensing Commissioners, and any party that
provides written comment/objection of his decision, in writing, at least seven
days prior to the scheduled event. If this notice provision is not adhered to by
the Director, then the application for waiver shall be deemed denied.
(3) No temporary waiver shall apply to an event that occurs on four or more days
within a seven-day period.
B. Other waiver. Any waiver other than a temporary waiver may only be granted by
the Board of Licensing Commissioners and shall be subject to the administrative
and procedure regulations of that body.
A. The Department of Inspectional Services is responsible for the enforcement of this
chapter. Consistent with the provision of municipal ordinance, the Police
Department shall retain its enforcement authority relative to the provisions herein,
subject to the discretion of the Chief of Police.
B. Each day a violation continues is a separate publishable offense. A violation of
§ 215-5 is a separate punishable offense.
C. A single fine of $100 per day will be assessed upon the violation of any section of
§ 215-8 QUINCY CODE § 215-10
215:6
this chapter.
D. The Department may seek injunctive or other appropriate judicial relief to stop or
prevent continuing violations of this chapter.
E. For any offender violating provisions of this chapter that holds a license granted by
the Board of Licensing Commissioners of the City of Quincy, a disciplinary hearing
will take place upon three violations within a twelve-month period. Disciplinary
actions to be considered shall include license suspension by day as well as total
license revocation.
F. If the Director finds that a person has violated this chapter, the Director may issue
a notice of violation and corrective order to the person. The notice must contain the
following information:
(1) The section of this chapter that the person violated.
(2) The date, nature, and extent of the violation.
(3) The action required to correct the violation.
(4) If the Director requires a compliance plan, one is to be placed on file with the
Director within 10 days of the violation.
G. The compliance plan referred to in Subsection F(4) must establish a schedule for
achieving compliance with this chapter, as specified in the corrective order. A
compliance plan and amendments to a plan are not effective until the Director
approves the plan or amendment. An action allowed under an approved compliance
plan does not violate this chapter.
H. A person aggrieved by any action or order of the Director under this chapter shall
seek review in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 249.
(1) A person responsible for a violation of § 215-5 and the person responsible for
the management or supervision of the construction site where the source of the
violation is located are jointly and severally liable for the violation.
(2) For recurring violations of § 215-5 on the same construction site, in addition
to any other penalty under this chapter, the Director may issue a stop-work
order for up to:
(a) Three consecutive working days for a second violation within 30 days
after the first violation;
(b) Five consecutive working days for a third violation within 60 days after
the first violation; and
(c) Seven working days per offense for the fourth and subsequent violations
within a one-hundred-twenty-day period.
(3) This section does not limit the Director's authority to revoke a permit or
approval issued under that section.
I. Any person aggrieved by a violation of this chapter may file a civil action in any
§ 215-10 NOISE § 215-10
215:7
court with jurisdiction against a person responsible for the alleged violation. The
aggrieved person must notify the alleged violator and the Director of Inspectional
Services of the alleged violation at least 60 days before filing the action.
§ 215-10 QUINCY CODE § 215-10
215:8
Chapter 222
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 109.
Animals — See Ch. 113.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 234.
§ 222-1. Maintenance and improvement.
The maintenance, improvement, upkeep and repair of public parks and playgrounds
and the structures and fixtures thereon shall be exercised by the Department of Natural
Resources, except as to school playgrounds, which shall be under the supervision of the
School Committee.
§ 222-2. Closing hours.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in or remain upon any park or playground in
the City from one hour after sunset until one hour before sunrise. The Department of
Natural Resources may suspend the operation of this section for any or all parks and/or
playgrounds within its sound discretion by posting a notice in a conspicuous place in the
park and/or playground where suspension is to be in effect and by stating the hours that
it is lawful to remain in said park and/or playground.
§ 215-10 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 222-2
222:1

Chapter 226
PAWNBROKERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk and secondhand dealers — See Ch. 189. Precious metal dealers — See Ch. 240.
§ 226-1. Licensing.
§ 226-2. Recordkeeping; inspection.
Every pawnbroker shall keep a book in which shall be written, at the time of receiving
any article as a pawn or pledge or purchasing any article, a description of the same and
the name, age and residence of the person from whom, and the day and hour when, he
received or purchased it. Such book shall at all times be open for the inspection of the
Mayor, the City Council or any person authorized by them to make such inspection and
members of the Police Department.
§ 226-3. Receipt of articles from minors.
No person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall, directly or indirectly,
receive any article in pawn or purchase any article of any minor, knowing or having
cause to believe him to be such.
A. License required. No person shall carry on the business of a pawnbroker unless he
is duly licensed therefor by the Board of Licensing Commissioners.
B. Premises designated. All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
designate the place where the person licensed may carry on his business, and he
shall not engage in or carry on his business in any place other than the one so
designated.
C. Fee. The fee for a pawnbroker's license shall be $100. [Amended by Order No.
95-084]
D. Bond. The licensee shall, at the time of receiving such license, file with the Board
of Licensing Commissioners a bond to such City, in the sum of $300, with two
sureties approved by such Board, and conditioned for the faithful performance of
the duties and obligations pertaining to the business so licensed. [Added 6-1-2020
by Order No. 2020-012]
E. Revocation. Any license granted under this chapter may be revoked at any time by
the Board of Licensing Commissioners.
F. Expiration. Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, licenses shall expire on
December 31.
§ 222-2 PAWNBROKERS § 226-4
226:1
§ 226-4. Examination of articles.
All articles received in pawn or purchased may be examined by the Mayor or Chief of
Police or any person authorized by them to make such examination at all times.
§ 226-5. Daily reports to police.
Every licensed pawnbroker shall make out and deliver to the Chief of Police every day,
Sundays and holidays excepted, before 10:00 a.m., a legible and correct list containing
an accurate description of all articles taken during the preceding 24 hours, the amount
loaned thereon and the time such articles were pawned.
§ 226-6. Rate of interest.
A. Licensed pawnbrokers may charge the following rates of interest: [Amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
(1) Over $25 to $100: 3% per month.
(2) Over $100: 2% per month.
B. No pawnbroker shall charge or receive any greater rate of interest than set forth in
this section.
§ 226-4 QUINCY CODE § 226-6
226:2
Chapter 230
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 105.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 109.
Animals — See Ch. 113.
Drugs — See Ch. 134.
Public entertainment — See Ch. 138.
Public meetings — See Ch. 205.
Minors — See Ch. 208.
Noise — See Ch. 215.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 234.
Sex offenders — See Ch. 274.
Smoking — See Ch. 288, Art. I.
§ 230-1. Throwing stones, snowballs and other missiles.
No person shall throw stones, snowballs or other missiles in or across any street or public
grounds in the City.
§ 230-2. Use of air gun, bow and arrow or sling.
No person shall shoot with or use an air gun, bow and arrow or sling in the City.
§ 230-3. Discharge of firearms.
No person shall fire or discharge a cannon, gun or other firearm within the limits of the
City, except at an historical occasion or military exercise or review authorized by the
military authority of the commonwealth or by the City Council or Mayor of the City, or
in lawful defense of a person, family or property of any citizen, or in the performance
of any duty required by law; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to
persons engaged in trap or target shooting on the grounds of a gun club licensed to be
used for such purposes by the licensing authorities of the City, nor to persons licensed for
hunting under the laws of the commonwealth while hunting wild game with a shotgun.
§ 230-4. Public bathing.
No person shall expose himself in swimming or bathing in any of the ponds, streams or
waters within the limits of the City, in view of spectators from any street, public grounds,
dwelling house, land or water vehicle, unless properly clothed.
§ 230-5. Disorderly conduct.
A. No person shall behave himself in a rude or disorderly manner, nor use indecent,
offensive, profane, loud, boisterous or abusive language in any street, public place
or public building in the City, nor be or remain upon any doorstep or other
projection from any such building, or at any window thereof, nor in any public hall
§ 226-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 230-5
230:1
§ 230-6. Disturbing the peace; loitering; profane language.
§ 230-7. Peeping or spying.
No person, except an officer of the law in the performance of his duties, shall enter
upon the premises of another or upon any public property with intention of peeping into
the windows of a house or other building or of spying in any manner upon any person
therein.15
§ 230-8. Indecent or obscene marks or signs.
No person shall make, write, print or post any indecent or obscene marks, words, figures
or signs upon any fence, building post, tree or other object exposed to public view.
or entrance thereto, and by such disorderly or offensive act or speech cause the
annoyance or disturbance of any person or persons.
B. No person, with purpose to annoy or alarm, or recklessly create a risk thereof, or
cause public inconvenience in any street, public place or public building in the City,
shall:
(1) Engage in fighting or threatening or in violent or tumultuous behavior;
(2) Make an unreasonably noisy or offensively coarse utterance, gesture or display
or address abusive language to any person present; or
(3) Create a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act which serves
no legitimate purpose of the actor.
C. Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $200 per offense.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
A. No person shall accost or annoy persons, or disturb the peace, or loiter or address
another person with profane or obscene language in any public park, public
reservation or City-owned land in the City.
B. The penalty for violation of this section shall be $200 per offense. [Amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
15. Editor's Note: Original §§ 9.08.080 and 9.08.090, which immediately followed this section and dealt with noise, were
repealed 6-7-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-114. See now Ch. 215, Noise.
§ 230-5 QUINCY CODE § 230-8
230:2
Chapter 234
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk and secondhand dealers — See Ch. 189.
Precious metal dealers — See Ch. 240.
Vehicles for hire — See Ch. 330.
§ 230-8 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 230-8
234:1

ARTICLE I
Solicitors and Canvassers
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 5.16 of the 1993 Code]
§ 234-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
SOLICITOR or CANVASSER — Any person who, for himself or for another person,
firm or corporation, travels by foot, automobile or any other type of conveyance from
place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to
lease or take orders for retail sale of goods, wares, merchandise or services, including,
without limiting, the selling, distributing, exposing for sale or soliciting orders for
magazines, books, periodicals or other articles of a commercial nature; the contracting
of all home improvements; or for services to be performed in the future, whether or not
such individual has, carries or exposes for retail sale a sample of the subject of such sale
or whether he is collecting advance payment on such retail sales.
§ 234-2. License required; exemptions.
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser as defined in this article to engage in
such business within the City without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance
with the provisions of this article. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any
person exempted under MGL c. 101, or to any person duly licensed under MGL c.
101, or to any person exempted by any other General Law, nor shall this article be
construed to prevent route salesmen or other persons having established customers to
whom they make periodic deliveries from calling upon such customers or from making
calls upon prospective customers to solicit an order for future periodic route deliveries.
The provisions of this article shall also not be construed as to apply to any person
engaged in the pursuit of soliciting for charitable, benevolent, fraternal, religious or
political activities.
§ 234-3. License application.
A. Applicants for a license shall file with the Chief of Police, on a form issued by the
Police Department, a written application signed under the penalties of perjury
containing the following information:
(1) Name of applicant.
(2) Address of applicant (local and permanent home address).
(3) Applicant's height, weight, and eye and hair color.
(4) Applicant's social security number.
(5) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired, including the
days and hours during which such solicitation is requested to occur.
(6) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold.
(7) The name and home office address of the applicant's employer. If self-
§ 234-1 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 234-3
234:3
§ 234-4. Investigation; issuance and contents of license; identification.
§ 234-5. Enforcement; license transfer.
The police officers of the City shall enforce this article. No license shall be transferred.
§ 234-6. License revocation.
The Chief of Police is vested with jurisdiction over the revoking of licenses. Any person
aggrieved by such revocation may appeal to the City Council within seven business days,
and a hearing will be scheduled for one of the next two regularly scheduled meetings of
the City Council.
§ 234-7. License expiration.
Each license issued under the provisions of this article shall continue in force from the
date of its issue until the 31st day of December following, unless sooner revoked.
employed, it shall so state.
(8) A photograph of the applicant, which picture shall be submitted by the
applicant and be two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of
the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
(9) If operating a motor vehicle, the year, make, model, motor number,
registration number, state of registration and vehicle's owner and address.
B. At the time of filing the application, each applicant shall pay a fee of $50.
A. Upon receipt of the application, the Chief of Police shall investigate the applicant's
reputation as to morals and integrity.
B. After an investigation of the applicant's morals and integrity, but within seven
business days of the filing of the application, the Chief of Police shall endorse on
such application his approval or disapproval. Failure of the Police Chief to act on
said license within seven business days of the applicant's filing shall constitute
approval. If disapproved, the applicant shall have the right of appeal to the City
Council in writing within seven days of the denial by the Chief of Police. The City
Council must act upon the appeal at one of its next two regularly scheduled
meetings. Failure to so act shall be deemed approval. [Amended 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012]
C. Such license, when issued, shall contain the signature of the Chief of Police and
shall show the name, address, and photograph of said licensee, the date of issuance
and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the license number.
The Police Department shall keep a record of all licenses issued for a period of six
years. Solicitors and canvassers, when engaged in the business of soliciting or
canvassing, are required to display an identifying badge issued by the Police
Department by wearing said badge on an outer garment. Each licensee is required
to possess an individual license.
§ 234-3 QUINCY CODE § 234-8
234:4
§ 234-8. License renewal.
A license issued under the provisions of this article may be renewed by the Chief of
Police. An applicant requesting a renewal of a license must apply in person for such
license renewal and provide such information as is required to obtain an initial license.
§ 234-9. Misrepresentation.
§ 234-10. Trespassing.
It shall be unlawful for any canvasser or solicitor to enter the premises of a resident
or business who or which has displayed a "no trespassing" or "no soliciting" sign or
poster. Further, it shall be unlawful for canvassers or solicitors to ignore a resident's or
business person's no solicitation directive or remain on private property after its owner
has indicated that the canvasser or solicitor is not welcome.
§ 234-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine of $50 for each and every offense. Any person convicted of a second
or subsequent violation shall forthwith have his license suspended by the Chief of Police.
A. No solicitor or canvasser, licensed or exempted from license, may misrepresent, in
any manner, the buyer's right to cancel as stipulated by MGL c. 93, 93A and 255D.
B. No solicitor or canvasser, licensed or exempted from license, may use any plan,
scheme or ruse which misrepresents the true status or mission of the person making
the call in order to gain admission to a prospective buyer's home, office or other
establishment with the purpose of making a sale of consumer goods or services.
§ 234-8 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 234-11
234:5

ARTICLE II
Hawkers and Peddlers
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 5.20 of the 1993 Code]
§ 234-12. License required.
No person, except one engaged in the pursuit of agriculture, shall go about from place to
place within the City carrying or exposing for sale or selling meats, butter, cheese, fish
and fresh fruit or vegetables in or from any cart, wagon or other vehicle, or in any other
manner, without a license therefor from the Sealer of Weights and Measures.
§ 234-13. License issuance; term; fee. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
The Sealer of Weights and Measures shall have authority to grant the license required
by § 234-12 to any person of good repute for morals and integrity who is a citizen of
the United States. The license shall bear the date of the day on which it is issued and,
unless sooner revoked, shall continue in force for one year from such date. Each person
so licensed shall pay therefor a fee of $50.
§ 234-14. Failure to exhibit license. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
Any licensee who fails, neglects or refuses to exhibit his license when it is demanded of
him by the Sealer or a Deputy Sealer of Weights and Measures or a constable or police
officer shall be subject to the same penalty as if he had no license.
§ 234-15. License revocation.
Any license granted under § 234-12 may be revoked by the Sealer of Weights and
Measures for violation of this article or any other good cause.
§ 234-16. Vehicle number plates.
Every vehicle or other conveyance used by a licensee as a conveyor for articles offered
for sale by him shall have attached to the vehicle or conveyance a number plate, where
it may readily and plainly be seen, to be furnished by the City with his license, at the
expense of the licensee, bearing the number and date of expiration of such license.
§ 234-17. Definitions. [Added 6-4-2007 by Order No. 2006-192]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HAWKER and PEDDLER — Includes any person, either principal, employer, supplier
or agent, who goes from place to place in the City selling or bartering or carrying for sale
or barter, or exposing therefor, any goods, wares or merchandise, either on foot or on or
from any animal or vehicle.
§ 234-18. Licensee to report to Chief of Police.
No person shall act at any time or place in the City as a hawker or peddler unless he
shall, upon receiving a license under the provisions of this article, report in person to the
Chief of Police and furnish evidence of such license and other information as shall be
§ 234-12 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 234-18
234:7
required by the Chief of Police.
§ 234-19. Sale of certain articles without license.
§ 234-20. Weighing and measuring devices.
No person shall be registered or assigned a number under the provisions of § 234-19A
until he obtains a certificate from the Sealer of Weights and Measures stating that all
weighing and measuring devices intended to be used by such person have been duly
inspected and sealed as required by law. The use of, or possession by such person with
intent to use, any false or unsealed weighing or measuring devices shall be sufficient
cause for the revocation of his license or the cancellation of his registration.
§ 234-21. Sales near parks and playgrounds. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
No hawker or peddler shall permit or cause a vehicle of any kind to stand, nor shall he
attempt to sell, solicit sales or make any sales, within a distance of 100 yards of any
public park or playground in the City.
§ 234-22. Sales near schools.
No hawker or peddler shall sell or barter, or carry for sale or barter, or expose therefor
any goods, foodstuffs, wares or merchandise within 300 feet of a school in the City at
any time.
§ 234-23. Certain items prohibited.
A. Registration. No hawker or peddler shall sell or offer or expose for sale any of the
articles enumerated in MGL c. 101, § 17, or in any acts in amendment thereof or in
addition thereto, until he has recorded his name and residence with the Sealer of
Weights and Measures.
B. General requirements. No person hawking, peddling or carrying or exposing for
sale any of the articles enumerated in MGL c. 101, § 17, or in any acts in
amendment thereof or in addition thereto, shall cry his wares to the disturbance of
the peace and comfort of the inhabitants of the City, nor shall he carry or convey
such articles in any manner that will tend to injure or disturb the public health or
comfort, nor otherwise than in vehicles and receptacles which are neat and clean
and do not leak.
A. No hawker or peddler shall sell, barter or carry for sale or barter any goods or
merchandise that is capable of exploding, including but not limited to exploding
caps, snappers, etc.
B. No hawker or peddler shall sell, barter or carry for sale or barter merchandise
capable of spraying or shooting an object, such as liquid string, through the use of
compressed air or gas.
§ 234-18 QUINCY CODE § 234-24
234:8
§ 234-24. Relationship to state license.
Nothing in this article relative to hawkers and peddlers shall be construed as conflicting
with any license issued under authority of the commonwealth.
§ 234-25. Violations and penalties.
A. Whoever violates any provision of this article may be fined up to the maximum
provided for in § 1-1 of this Code.
B. In addition to the enforcement as described in Subsection A of this section, the
provisions of this article may also be enforced by noncriminal complaint pursuant
to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D. The penalty for violation of any provision
of this article shall be $50.
§ 234-24 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 234-25
234:9

Chapter 240
PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk and secondhand dealers — See Ch. 189. Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 226.
§ 240-1. License required; exceptions.
§ 240-2. Rules and regulations.
A. Whoever is in the business of purchasing and selling gold, silver or platinum and
keeps or stores the same in any building or place within the limits of the City shall
be required to be licensed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 189, Junk
and Secondhand Dealers, of this Code.
B. This chapter shall not apply to numismatic matter in accordance with MGL c. 140,
§ 55, nor to wholesalers or wholesale transactions between licensed retailers under
this chapter.
A. Dealings with minors. No purchase of gold, silver or platinum shall be made from
a minor or from any person the keeper of such shop has reason to believe is a minor.
Any person who sells gold, silver or platinum shall be required to show to the
keeper of the shop, prior to said sale, identification which includes a photograph of
said seller.
B. Holding period. No article purchased or received which is subject to this chapter
shall be sold or altered in appearance, form or substance until a period of at least 30
business days, excluding weekends and holidays, from the date of its purchase or
receipt has elapsed. [Amended 6-16-2008 by Order No. 2008-068]
C. Reporting. [Amended 6-16-2008 by Order No. 2008-068]
(1) The Quincy Police Department shall prescribe the use of either a secure
internet-based asset tracking and recovery service (e.g. juststolen.net) or file
transfer protocol server transfer module which would be purchased, owned,
and maintained by the City of Quincy as a vehicle for the daily reporting by
such applicable shopkeeper. Every shopkeeper shall, at the time of making any
purchase, attach a number to each article bought and use this number for all
tracking and recordkeeping purposes.
(2) Every shopkeeper shall e-mail to the City of Quincy Police Department's
designated website at the end of every business day a correct list containing an
accurate description of all articles purchased during that business day, the
prices paid therefor, the time when the articles were purchased and the
respective numbers of such articles.
(3) A copy of a picture identification with the name, age, and residence of the
§ 234-25 PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS § 240-2
240:1
§ 240-3. Recordkeeping requirements; inspection.
person from whom the articles were purchased shall be included in all
electronically reported submissions along with a photograph of the articles
purchased.
D. Receipts; inspections. [Added 6-16-2008 by Order No. 2008-068]
(1) The shopkeeper and the seller of said articles shall sign a receipt with each
article and assigned number listed. The shopkeeper shall maintain a copy of
the receipt and the seller shall be issued a copy of the receipt. Such records
shall at all times be open for the inspection by the Chief of Police or his/her
designee within the Quincy Police Department as part of an authorized
inspection.
(2) In addition, the Chief of Police or his/her designee may, at any time, enter
upon the shopkeeper's premises to ascertain how the business is being
conducted. The officer is authorized to examine all articles that are the subject
matter of this chapter kept or stored in or upon the premises. The officer is
authorized to examine all books, receipts and inventories relating thereto.
Every shopkeeper, clerk, agent or any other person in charge of the premises
shall present to such officer upon demand any and all articles, records, books,
receipts, computerized records, photographs, and/or inventories.
E. Shopkeeper required to report. Shopkeepers shall immediately report to the Quincy
Police Department any and all incidents where a person claims that an article stolen
or wrongfully taken from him/her is located in the shopkeeper's place of business.
In the event that a person makes such a claim, the shopkeeper shall ask the
complaining party to remain in the shop until a police report can be made. The
shopkeeper or the shopkeeper's agent shall then contact the Quincy Police
Department, report the incident and request that a police officer make a report of
the same. The item or items in question shall then be stored in a safe place in the
shop and shall not be disposed of by the shopkeeper or the shopkeeper's agent until
completion of the investigation by the Quincy Police Department. If the
complaining party chooses not to wait for the arrival of the police, the shopkeeper
or the shopkeeper's agent shall gather as much information as possible from the
complaining party and a report of such incident shall be made forthwith to the
Quincy Police Department for investigation. All other unusual or suspicious
activity which might involve criminal behavior shall in good faith be reported
herewith to the Quincy Police Department by the shopkeeper or shopkeeper's agent.
If any goods or articles in the position of the shopkeeper are determined to be stolen
property, a police hold shall be placed on the item and it shall not be removed from
the premises until so directed by the investigating officer. The item or items may be
held in safekeeping on the premises or at the investigating officer's discretion taken
from the premises and stored in the police evidence facility until the conclusion of
the investigation. [Added 6-16-2008 by Order No. 2008-068]
F. All complaints shall be investigated by the Quincy Police Department and a report
shall be forwarded to the Board of Licensing Commissioners. [Added 6-16-2008
by Order No. 2008-068]
§ 240-2 QUINCY CODE § 240-3
240:2
§ 240-4. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any rule, regulation or restriction contained in his license shall be
subject to the penalty provided in Chapter 1, Article I, of this Code.
A. Every keeper of a shop licensed as provided in this chapter shall enter in a book
kept for that purpose, at the time of every purchase, a description of the item, the
quantity purchased, the purchase price, the name, age and address of the seller, and
the day and hour when such purchase was made and, at the time of making the
purchase, shall attach a number to each article bought and shall make entry of such
number in the book.
B. Said book shall at all times be open for the inspection of the Mayor, Chief of Police,
any member of the police force, any member of the Board of Licensing
Commissioners and by any person authorized by the Board of Licensing
Commissioners.
C. The transaction records shall accurately describe all items, including but not limited
to all distinguishing marks, model names or numbers and serial numbers. Any
etchings or engravings shall be noted. Any jewelry with affiliation of any institution
or organization shall include the name and any year indicated together with any
inscribed initials. Jewelry items shall include a complete description, including the
material, ring size, weight, chain length, shapes, karat weight and color. [Added
6-16-2008 by Order No. 2008-068]
§ 240-3 PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS § 240-4
240:3

Chapter 244
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 240-4 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 240-4
244:1

ARTICLE I
Abatement of Nuisances
[Adopted 5-7-2007 by Order No. 2007-013 (Ch. 8.40 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 244-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety and welfare by
requiring a minimum level of maintenance of private property to protect the livability,
appearance and social and economic stability of the City and to protect the public from
the health and safety hazards and the impairments of property values that result from the
neglect and deterioration of property.
§ 244-2. Property blight.
The presence of any one or more of the following conditions on property constitutes
property blight:
§ 244-3. Public nuisance.
A. Any condition that is detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare.
B. Any condition that constitutes a public nuisance as defined herein.
C. Any condition of deterioration or disrepair that creates a substantial adverse impact
on neighboring properties.
A. No person, whether as owner, agent, manager, operator, lessee, tenant, sublessee,
or occupant in possession of a property, shall maintain a blighted property or cause
or permit property to be maintained as a blighted property. No person, whether as
owner, agent, manager, operator, lessee, sublessee, tenant or occupant of a property,
shall take any action or allow any action to be taken at that property in violation of
any provision of this article or any order issued pursuant to the provisions of this
article.
B. Unlawful nuisance; inadequately maintained property. It shall be an unlawful
public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or having
charge or possession of any commercial and/or residential property to maintain or
allow to be maintained such property in such manner that the following conditions
are found to exist thereon where such conditions are visible from a public right-ofway
and/or neighboring property and such conditions have both a significant
adverse visual impact on the neighborhood and substantially contribute to the
dilapidated or deteriorated appearance of the neighborhood:
(1) Property which is not kept substantially clean and free from accumulations,
including but not limited to rank growth, rubbish, junk, garbage, litter, debris,
flyers or circulars, overgrown, dead or decayed trees, weeds or other
vegetation that constitutes a fire hazard or other condition that is dangerous to
the public health, safety, or welfare; or creates the potential for the harboring
of rats, vermin, vector, or other similar public nuisances; or substantially
detracts from the aesthetic and property values of neighboring properties; or is
overgrown onto a public right-of-way at least 12 inches; or is completely dead,
§ 244-1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 244-3
244:3
over 12 inches in height, and covers more than 50% of the front or side yard
visible from any street.
(2) Buildings or structures or significant sections thereof, including but not limited
to exterior stairs, roof, foundation, walls, fences, signs, retaining walls,
driveways, or walkways, which are substantially broken, deteriorated, or
defaced; or windows or doors which are missing, broken or inadequately
secured that create a hazardous condition or a potential attraction to
trespassers; or exterior walls or roof coverings that have become substantially
deteriorated, do not provide adequate weather protection, or show evidence of
the presence of termite infestation or dry rot. (For the purposes of this section
"defaced" includes, but is not limited to, writings, inscriptions, figures,
scratches, or other markings commonly referred to as "graffiti.")
(3) Property used or intended to be used for residential purposes which contains,
in the outdoor area, any refrigerator, washing machine, sink, toilet, bidet,
stove, heater, boiler, tank or any other household equipment, machinery,
furniture, or item, appliance or appliances, boxes, lumber, dirt or debris, trash,
garbage or refuse cans, or any items other than those commonly stored
outdoors, or any parts of such items, for a period of time in excess of 72
consecutive hours. This subsection does not prohibit machinery installed in the
rear setback areas for household or recreational use, furniture designed and
used for outdoor activities, trash cans in the front yard during the twenty-fourhour
period allowed for garbage pickup and garbage bins when employed in
construction for which a valid building permit has been issued by the City.
(4) Where property is vacant and otherwise required to be boarded up, the
boarding shall be done in a manner approved by the Director of Inspectional
Services and which does not itself have a significant adverse visual impact on
the neighborhood nor substantially contribute to the dilapidated or deteriorated
appearance of the neighborhood. To the extent feasible, the boarding up shall
cause the property to have the appearance of an occupied residence or utilized
commercial entity as determined by the Director of Inspectional Services. Any
boarded up property shall be subject to an initial periodic review by the
Director of Inspectional Services with the property owner as to the
circumstances which underlie the presenting condition, which review shall
include the establishment of a written plan and defined timetable for the
rehabilitation or reuse of said property to a useful intended permissible
purpose. Failure of the property owner to participate in said annual review with
a demonstrated effort to mitigate the property conditions shall constitute a
violation of this article. Information regarding the process, substance and
results of this review shall be made available to abutters and the City Council
upon request.
(5) Any property that is unsecured and constitutes an attraction to children or a
harbor for vagrants, criminals or other unauthorized persons, or is in a
condition such that persons can resort thereto for the purpose of committing a
public nuisance or unlawful act, constitutes property blight. A building or
structure is unsecured when either of the following conditions exists:
(a) The building or structure is inhabited, occupied or used without the
§ 244-3 QUINCY CODE § 244-3
244:4
consent of the owner or the agent of the owner; or
(b) Unauthorized persons can readily gain entry to the building or structure
without the consent of the owner or the agent of the owner.
(6) A partially constructed, reconstructed or demolished building or structure
upon which work has been abandoned constitutes property blight. Work is
deemed abandoned when there is no valid current building or demolition
permit for the work or when there has not been any substantial work on the
building or structure for a period of six months or more.
(7) The storage upon any property of building materials unless there is in force a
valid building permit issued by the City for construction upon said property
and said materials are intended for use in connection with such construction.
In no event, however, shall the storage of building materials occur on the
property in excess of 12 months without written consent from the Director of
Inspectional Services. Building materials shall include but shall not be limited
to lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical
wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete,
nails, screws, steel, or any other materials commonly used in constructing any
structure.
(8) Any property upon which there exists a hazardous condition constitutes
property blight. A property is considered to have a hazardous condition
prohibited by this article if any one or more of the following conditions exists
on the property:
(a) Land having a topography, geology, or configuration that, as a result of
grading operations or improvements to the land, causes erosion,
subsidence, unstable soil conditions, or surface or subsurface drainage
problems that pose a threat of injury or are injurious to any neighboring
property.
(b) Any condition or object, including without limitation landscaping, motor
vehicles, fencing or signs, that obscures the visibility of traffic,
pedestrians, or street intersections in a manner that constitutes a hazard.
(c) Items are present that are inadequately secured or protected and, due to
their accessibility to the public, may prove hazardous, including, without
limitation:
[1] Unused or broken equipment or machinery, motorized vehicles,
watercraft, or other personal property that is broken, rusted, partially
or wholly dismantled or otherwise due to deterioration is unsuited
for the purpose for which designed;
[2] Abandoned wells, shafts, or basements;
[3] Unprotected pools, ponds, or excavations;
[4] Structurally unsound fences or structures;
[5] Lumber or accumulations of lumber or other construction materials;
§ 244-3 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 244-3
244:5
§ 244-4. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
or
[6] Chemicals, motor oil, or other hazardous materials.
(d) Any swimming pool, pond or other body of water that is abandoned,
unattended, unfiltered, or not otherwise maintained, so that the water has
become or is becoming polluted water.
A. The Director of Inspectional Services, Health Commissioner, Fire or Police Chief
or their designees shall be authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of
this article and shall be deemed the enforcing authority. If the enforcing authority
shall be informed or have reason to believe that any provision of this article has
been, is being, or is likely to be violated, he shall make or cause to be made an
investigation of the facts, including an investigation of the property where the
violation may exist. If he finds any violation he shall give immediate notice in
writing to the owner and to the occupant of the premises of the violation and inform
the owner and the occupants pursuant to the notification provisions provided herein.
In making such inspection, the enforcing authority shall have such right of access
to the premises that may be lawfully exercised by him under the laws and
constitution of the commonwealth or of the United States. All enforcement officers
are authorized to inspect property and to take any other enforcement actions as may
be required or appropriate to administer or enforce the provisions of this article.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to
enforcement procedures for each violation through any lawful means available to
the City, including without limitation the issuance of a civil fine as provided herein.
C. If, after such notice and order, such violation continues, or if any owner or occupant
fails to obey any lawful order of the enforcing authority with respect to any
violation of the provisions of this article, the enforcing authority may make
complaint to the Superior Court or any court of competent jurisdiction on any
injunction or order restraining any further use of the premises and the continuation
of the violation and shall take such other action as is necessary to enforce the
provisions of this article.
D. In addition to the foregoing remedy, whoever violates any provision of this article
or fails to obey any lawful order issued by the enforcing authority in enforcing this
article shall be liable to a noncriminal fine of $200 for each violation. Each
violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. Each day that any such
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. The enforcing authority
may also issue a cease and desist order for any hazardous situation. The enforcing
authority shall reference the enforcement procedures referenced in Chapter 1,
Article I, of this Code. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
E. In any matter in which a complaint has been made by a person other than the
enforcing authority, the enforcing authority within his or her discretion shall notify
the complainant of all conferences or proceedings concerning resolution of the
property blight or of any enforcement action and the complainant shall be allowed
to be present and to be heard.
§ 244-3 QUINCY CODE § 244-5
244:6
§ 244-5. Notice to owner of abatement of nuisance.
Whenever the City determines that property in the City is maintained as a public
nuisance as provided for in this article and that abatement of such public nuisance is to
be required, it shall provide written notice to abate to the owner and occupants of the
premises in the manner and in the form provided in this article.
§ 244-6. Low-income owner; medical hardship.
As to a small property, herein defined as owner-occupied one- to four-family residential
properties, if the owner of such property is low income or a person with a medical
hardship, defined as no more than 120% of the HUD median income guidelines, the City
may extend or waive the time limits specified in this article if the owner does all of the
following:
A. The notice shall state the proper street address of the subject property and should be
served personally on the owner or by first-class mail, postage prepaid. Additionally,
one copy of the notice shall be conspicuously posted on the property.
B. The notice shall advise the owner of a reasonable time limit in which the owner
shall take corrective action to remedy the public nuisance. In no event shall the
owner be given less than seven calendar days or more than 60 calendar days to take
corrective action, except where there is an immediate threat to public health or
safety when shorter notice may be prescribed. The owner must commence the
corrective action requested in the notice within 30 days of the date of the notice.
The City may waive the time limits of this subsection only if a natural disaster, such
as a fire, flood or earthquake, interferes with the owner's ability to complete the
corrective action within the specified time or the work to be performed is inherently
of a nature which cannot reasonably be completed within the time limits prescribed.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
C. The notice shall specify the section of law violated and state all the facts
constituting the public nuisance.
D. The notice shall specify the corrective action required, including temporary
corrective action when appropriate, and inform the owner of City programs, if any,
available to assist low-income property owners with repairs to their property. The
corrective action shall be such that it eliminates the significant adverse visual
impact of the property on the neighborhood and eliminates the contribution of that
property to the dilapidated or deteriorated appearance of the neighborhood as
determined by the Director of Inspectional Services.
E. The notice shall advise the property owner that failure to correct the violation may
result in the City's correcting the violation and collecting the charges by billing or
by lien on the property.
F. The notice shall advise the owner that he/she must either correct the violation or
request an appeal in order to avoid City abatement and liability for cost of
abatement.
A. Demonstrates to the Director of Inspectional Services that complying with the
City's order to abate would create an undue financial hardship or be precluded by a
§ 244-5 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 244-6
244:7
§ 244-7. Removal of nuisance.
If the responsible party fails to remedy the nuisance caused by a burnt or dangerous
building, upon notice from the Director of Inspectional Services or his assigns to do
so, said Director of Inspectional Services or his assigns may cause the nuisance to
be removed as provided in MGL c. 139 at the owner's expense. Any such debt shall
constitute a lien on the land upon which the nuisance was located as provided in MGL c.
139, § 3A.
§ 244-8. Report by enforcing authority.
The Director of Inspectional Services shall make each month, upon request by the
City Council, a report that shall include all complaints of nuisance made during the
prior month, all proceedings begun under this article, all pending complaints and all
investigations and enforcement actions taken by the enforcing authority. The report shall
state the location of the premises, a summary of the nature of the complaint, the name of
the responsible party(ies), and the disposition or the status of the matter.
§ 244-9. Other remedies.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit any right or remedy otherwise available
in law or equity to any party harmed by a blighted property, nor shall this article in any
way limit the City's right to enforcement under any other provision of this Code or create
a duty or obligation on the part of the City to enforce this article.
§ 244-10. Implementation.
The provisions of this article shall be effective immediately upon passage and all
provisions shall be enforced immediately, but no monetary fine shall be imposed
pursuant hereto until 30 days after passage.
medical hardship.
B. The owner makes a good faith effort, as determined by the Director of Inspectional
Services, to comply with that portion of the order to abate that may be completed
without a significant expenditure of funds.
C. The owner makes a good faith effort, as determined by the Director of Inspectional
Services, to obtain financial assistance.
§ 244-6 QUINCY CODE § 244-10
244:8
ARTICLE II
Residential Properties in Foreclosure
[Adopted 11-10-2008 by Order No. 2008-131 (Ch. 8.44 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 244-11. Purpose and authority.
§ 244-12. Definitions.
When used in this article, unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
CITY — City of Quincy.
DAYS — Consecutive calendar days.
DIRECTOR — Director of the Inspectional Services Department.
FORECLOSING—The process by which a property, placed as security for a real estate
loan, is prepared for sale to satisfy the debt if the borrower defaults.
INITIATION OF THE FORECLOSURE PROCESS — Taking any of the following
actions:
LOCAL — Within 20 driving miles distance of the property in question.
MORTGAGEE — The holder of the mortgage interest in real property located in
Quincy or any successor in interest and/or assignee of the mortgagee's rights, interests or
obligations under the mortgage agreement.
OWNER — Every person, entity, service company, property manager or real estate
broker who, alone or severally with others:
A. Purpose. It is the intent of this article to protect and preserve public safety, security,
and quiet enjoyment by occupants and abutters of the homes and neighborhoods in
Quincy by:
(1) Requiring all residential property owners, including lenders, trustees, and
service companies, to properly maintain properties.
(2) Regulating the maintenance of any residential properties to prevent blighted
and unsecure residences, even if such residences are currently unoccupied due
to a foreclosure.
B. Authority. The Director of the Inspectional Services Department has enforcement
authority pursuant to, inter alia, MGL c. 143, § 3, the State Building Code, and the
Zoning Code of the City of Quincy. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
A. Taking possession of a residential property pursuant to MGL c. 244, § 1;
B. Delivering the notice of intention to foreclose pursuant to MGL c. 244, § 17B; or
Commencing a foreclosure action on a property in any court of competent
jurisdiction in this commonwealth.
C.
Has legal or equitable title to any dwelling, dwelling unit, mobile dwelling unit, or
parcel of land, vacant or otherwise, including a mobile home park;
A.
§ 244-11 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 244-12
244:9
PROPERTY — Any real property, or portion thereof, located in the City of Quincy,
including building or structures situated on the property, used primarily for residential
purposes. For purposes of this article only, "property" does not include property owned
or subject to the control of the City but shall include property owned or controlled by the
Quincy Housing Authority.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any property that contains one or more dwelling units
used, intended, or designed to be occupied for living purposes.
SECURING—Measures that assist in making the property inaccessible to unauthorized
persons.
§ 244-13. Registration required.
Has care, charge or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit, mobile dwelling unit or
parcel of land, vacant or otherwise, including a mobile home park, in any capacity,
including but not limited to agent, executor, executrix, administrator, administratix,
trustee or guardian of the estate of the holder of legal title;
B.
C. Is a mortgagee in possession of any such property;
Is an agent, trustee or other person appointed by the courts and vested with
possession or control of any such property;
D.
Is an officer or trustee of the association of unit owners of a condominium. Each
such person is bound to comply with the provisions of these minimum standards
as if he were the owner. However, this article shall not apply to a condominium
association created pursuant to MGL c. 183A to the extent that such association
forecloses on or initiates the foreclosure process for unpaid assessments due or
owing to the association. "Owner" also means every person who operates a rooming
house; or [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
E.
Is a trustee who holds, owns or controls mortgage loans for mortgage-backed
securities transactions and has initiated the foreclosure process.
F.
A. All mortgagees in possession must register foreclosed and/or foreclosing residential
properties with the Director of the Inspectional Services Department on forms
provided by the Director within 30 days of the date of initiation of the foreclosure
process, as defined above. All registrations must state the mortgagee's or its agent's
phone number and mailing address located within the commonwealth as required
by MGL c. 59, § 57D, MGL c. 156D, § 5.02, and 950 CMR 113.20. The mailing
address may not be a P.O. box. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
B. This registration must also certify that the property was inspected and identify
whether the property is vacant at the time of filing. If the property is vacant, the
registrant must identify a local individual or local property management company
responsible for the security and maintenance of the property. This designation must
state the individual or company's name, phone number, and local mailing address,
if a third party is used for this service. The mailing address may not be a P.O. box.
C. All property registrations are valid for one calendar year. An annual registration fee
of $100 must accompany the registration form. Subsequent annual registrations and
fees are due within 30 days of the expiration of the previous registration and must
§ 244-12 QUINCY CODE § 244-13
244:10
§ 244-14. Maintenance requirements.
§ 244-15. Inspections.
The Inspectional Services Department shall have the authority to inspect properties
subject to this article for compliance and to issue citations for any violations. The
Inspectional Services Department shall have the discretion to determine when and how
such inspections are to be made, provided that its policies are reasonably calculated to
ensure that only that the provisions of this article are enforced.
§ 244-16. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 244-17. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the requirements of this article or by a decision issued under
this article by the Inspectional Services Department may seek relief in any court of
competent jurisdiction as provided by the laws of the commonwealth.
certify whether the foreclosing and/or foreclosed property remains vacant. A list of
all vacant properties registered pursuant to the requirements of this article shall be
provided by the Director of Inspectional Services to the Chiefs of the Police and
Fire Departments.
D. Once the property is no longer vacant or is sold, the owner must provide proof of
sale or written notice and proof of occupancy to the Director of the Inspectional
Services Department.
A. Properties subject to this article must be maintained in accordance with the relevant
sanitary codes, building codes, and/or ordinances of the City of Quincy. The owner,
local individual or local property management company must inspect and maintain
the property on a monthly basis for so long as the property is vacant.
B. The property must be posted with the name and twenty-four-hour contact phone
number of the local individual or property management company responsible for
maintenance. This notice must be be placed on the lower end of the front door, so
as not to be visible from the street.
A. Failure to initially register with the Director shall be punishable by a fine of $300.
B. Failure to property identify the name of the local individual or local property
management company shall be punishable by a fine of $300.
C. Failure to maintain the property in accordance with the provisions of this article
shall be punishable by a fine up to $300 for each week the property is not
maintained.
D. Fines incurred under any provision of this article that remain unpaid beyond 30
days shall constitute a debt due the City as that term is used in MGL c. 139, § 3A,
and may be collected in the same manner as prescribed within that statute.
§ 244-13 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 244-18
244:11
§ 244-18. Effect on other regulations.
If any provision of this article imposes greater restrictions or obligations than those
imposed by any other general law, special law, regulation, rule, ordinance, bylaw, order,
or policy, then the provisions of this article control.
§ 244-19. Regulatory authority.
The Director of the Inspectional Services Department has the authority to promulgate
rules and regulations necessary to implement and enforce this article.
§ 244-20. Implementation.
The provisions of this article are effective immediately upon passage and all provisions
shall be enforced immediately, with the sole exception that no monetary fine(s) shall be
imposed pursuant hereto until 90 days after passage.
§ 244-21. Posting on website.
A copy of this article is to be posted on the City of Quincy website.
§ 244-18 QUINCY CODE § 244-21
244:12
Chapter 249
PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS
§ 244-21 PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS § 244-21
249:1

ARTICLE I
Hiring and Wage Requirements
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 12.28 of the 1993 Code]
§ 249-1. Employment of City residents.
§ 249-2. Prevailing wages.
In any project with a projected cost of more than $250,000, companies receiving public
assistance through the financing agencies listed in § 249-1A should be in concurrence
with the prevailing wages in the area, including wages in the Davis-Bacon Act. No
revenue bond applications are to be approved unless the applicant agrees to all of the
aforementioned conditions.
§ 249-3. Hiring of minorities and women. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
Minorities and women shall additionally be accorded preference for their hiring, as
provided for in the federal, state or municipal laws. This provision shall either be
included or provisions requiring the same will be deemed included in all construction
agreements.
§ 249-4. Employee information provided to Equal Opportunity Administrator.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
A. Ratio. On any construction project funded in whole or in part by City funds, funds
from a federal grant or loan, or City-approved Massachusetts Industrial Finance
Agency (MIFA) applications, or projects for which the City administers the
construction contract, and when a project has a projected cost of more than
$250,000, residents of Quincy who are qualified to perform the work to which the
employment relates shall be given preference in hiring on a one of every three ratio,
after the employer's foreman or supervisor and two key employees have been
employed for a one-week payroll period.
B. Posting of advertisements. Prior to entering into a construction agreement involving
more than $250,000, the owner, developer or contractor shall place a reasonable
size advertisement, at least three inches by five inches in size, at least twice, in at
least one newspaper having a local distribution, on a craft-by-craft basis, indicating
that bids are sought and that qualified residents of Quincy shall be given preference
consideration in hiring on a three-to-one ratio.
C. Definition. For purposes of this article, a resident of Quincy means an individual
who is domiciled in the City. Individuals who temporarily live in the City during
the term of the project shall not be considered residents of Quincy for the purposes
of this article.
A. Any bidder for work covered by this article must notify the Quincy Equal
Opportunity Administrator of the names and addresses of any individuals currently
employed by the bidder who are not residents of Quincy and who the bidder intends
to employ on the project. Such notice shall be in writing at least 48 hours prior to
the opening of the bids. Failure to so notify the Administrator shall be deemed an
§ 249-1 PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS § 249-4
249:3
§ 249-5. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
This article shall be enforced by the Commissioner of Public Works or his designee in
conjunction with the Quincy Equal Opportunity Administrator. A fine of $300 shall be
levied and withheld from the payment of any contractor who violates this article for each
day the contract remains in violation.
§ 249-6. Apprenticeship program. [Added by Order No. 97-104]
All bidders and all subcontractors under the bidder for projects subject to MGL c. 149,
§ 44A(2), shall, as a condition precedent for bidding, substantially agree in writing that
they shall comply with the following obligations:
admission by the bidder that the composition of the workforce for the project will
not be in accordance with § 249-1A.
B. The Quincy Equal Opportunity Administrator will be furnished copies of names
and home addresses of employees, upon request, and will be furnished such other
proof of compliance as said Administrator may request, upon written request for the
same, within seven days of such request.
A. The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must maintain or participate in a
bona fide apprentice training program as defined by MGL c. 23, §§ 11H and 11I,
for each apprenticeable trade or occupation represented in their workforce that is
approved by the Division of Apprentice Training of the Department of Labor
Standards and must abide by the apprentice to journeymen ratio for each trade
prescribed therein in the performance of the contract. [Amended 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012]
B. All bidders and subcontractors under the bidder who are awarded or who otherwise
obtain contracts on projects subject to MGL c. 149, § 44A(2), shall comply with
this obligation as set forth in Subsection A of this section for the entire duration of
their work on the project, and an officer of each such bidder or subcontractor under
the bidder shall certify under oath and in writing on a weekly basis that they are in
compliance with such obligation.
C. Any bidder or subcontractor under the bidder who fails to comply with this
obligation as set forth in this section for any period of time shall be subject to one
or more of the following sanctions which shall be ordered by the Mayor or his
designee:
(1) Cessation of work on the project until compliance is obtained.
(2) Withholding of payment due under any contract or subcontract until
compliance is obtained.
(3) Permanent removal from any further work on the project.
(4) Liquidated damages payable to the City in the amount of 5% of the dollar
value of the contract.
D. In addition to the sanctions outlined in Subsection C of this section, a general bidder
or contractor shall be equally liable for the violations of its subcontractor, with the
§ 249-4 QUINCY CODE § 249-6
249:4
exception of violations arising from work performed pursuant to subcontracts that
are subject to MGL c. 149, § 44F. Any contractor or subcontractor who has been
determined to have violated any of the obligations set forth in Subsections A and
B of this section shall be barred from performing any work on any future projects
for six months for a first violation, for three years for a second violation, and
permanently for a third violation.
E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to construction projects for which the
low general bid was less than $100,000 or to work performed pursuant to
subcontracts that are subject to MGL c. 149, § 44F, and that were bid for less than
$25,000, or to re-bids for construction projects for which the City receives fewer
than three qualified general contract bidders in the original bid.
§ 249-6 PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS § 249-6
249:5

Chapter 253
PUBLIC PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertisements — See Ch. 101.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 109.
Animals — See Ch. 113.
Public entertainment — See Ch. 138.
Public meetings — See Ch. 205.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 222.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 234.
School grounds — See Ch. 266.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 305.
Tree protection — See Ch. 311.
§ 253-1. Trees and shrubs.
No person shall climb, peel, deface or injure any ornamental or shade tree, shrub or vine
growing in any of the streets or public grounds of the City without a permit in writing
from the board or officer having such street or public grounds in charge.
§ 253-2. Fires.
No person shall wantonly or carelessly set fire to any tree, bush, grass, leaves,
brushwood, rubbish or other substance in any place in the City.
§ 253-3. Tended public grounds; use restrictions.
No person shall walk, stand or lounge upon any portion of any street or public grounds in
the City especially prepared and devoted by the officers in charge thereof to the growing
of grass or flowers, nor in any way dig up, injure or deface the same.
§ 253-4. Public fixtures; graffiti. [Amended by Order No. 95-112; Order No.
96-321]
A. No person shall willfully injure, mar, deface or destroy any fence, signboard,
guideboard, awning, lamppost, lamp or lantern in any street or public place in the
City.
B. Drinking fountains. No person shall, in any way, injure any of the drinking
fountains in the streets and public grounds of the City, nor throw or place any
substance into the same.
C. No person shall willfully injure, mar or deface with graffiti any public property in
the City of Quincy. Anyone who violates this subsection shall be punished with a
fine of $200. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
D. With regard to graffiti on privately owned buildings, the Department of Public
Works shall give 30 days' notice to the owners of said property to have the graffiti
§ 249-6 PUBLIC PROPERTY § 253-4
253:1
§ 253-5. Impure water running onto public places.
No person shall allow any sink water, or other impure water, to run from any house, barn,
garage or lot occupied by him or under his control into any highway or public place.
§ 253-6. Vending stands.
No person shall place or keep any table, stall, booth or other structure in any street or
sidewalk, nor place or keep the same in any of the public grounds of the City, for the
sale of fruit or other things, without permission in writing from the City officer or board
having the same in charge.
§ 253-7. Breaking glass in public places. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
Any person breaking, smashing or otherwise destroying a bottle, glass or other sharp
instrument on any park, parkland or other lands under the jurisdiction of the Department
of Natural Resources or other public place, including all public places, streets and right
of access, shall be punished by a fine of $250.
removed.
(1) At the option of the property owner after the execution of an appropriate
release by the property owner, the Department of Public Works shall remove
the graffiti forthwith.
(2) Failure of the property owner to execute the appropriate release and failure by
the property owner to remove graffiti following receipt of the thirty-day notice
shall result in the property owner being fined the sum of $200.
E. The Department of Public Works shall remove graffiti on municipally owned
buildings with 30 days of notification.
§ 253-4 QUINCY CODE § 253-7
253:2
Chapter 261
QUARRIES
§ 261-1. Trespassing.
§ 261-2. Use permit.
No person or organization shall have the use of any of the above-named quarries without
having first been issued a permit from the City Clerk during weekdays or the Chief of
Police on weekends. The City Clerk or Chief of Police shall use the utmost discretion
in the issuance of any and all permits. Each and every permit shall contain a release
that shall hold harmless the City from any and all liabilities that may be incurred by any
party using the quarries. A predetermined fee may be charged by the City Clerk; said
fee, however, shall not exceed $5.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass on any of the City of Quincy land
surrounding Badger's Quarry, as described on City Assessors' Map No. 4126 as Plot
No. 34, consisting of 248,944 square feet, more or less, and Swingles Quarry, as
described in the City Assessors' Map No. 4126 as Plot No. 50, consisting of 128,853
square feet, more or less. Said areas shall be properly posted with "no trespassing"
signs.
B. The fine for such trespass is established at $150 for the first offense and $200 for
the second offense and each offense thereafter.
§ 253-7 QUARRIES § 261-2
261:1

Chapter 266
SCHOOL GROUNDS
§ 266-1. Motor vehicles.
§ 266-2. Entry prohibited; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be on grounds under the control of the School
Committee between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. standard time and between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. daylight saving time, unless authorized to do so by the
School Committee. Worthwhile or recreational activity will be permitted during hours
other than those stated in this section if regular facilities are being used.
§ 266-3. Entry restricted during school hours.
§ 266-4. Trespassing prohibited on school property.
§ 266-5. Transportation of liquid chlorine in school zones. [Amended 6-1-2020 by
A. Motor vehicles are prohibited upon grounds under control of the School Committee
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless authorized by the School
Committee.
B. Motor vehicles and/or other conveyances shall be towed at any time from the
grounds under the control of the School Committee if they are deemed to be a
hazard to the public or student safety, or if they damage school property, or if they
impede the normal operations of the School Committee, or if they are parked in
areas designated for school personnel and/or students, or if they impede snow
removal on school grounds. The towing of the vehicles shall be ordered by the
Chief of Police or the Chief of the Fire Department or the Superintendent of Schools
or the Director of Plant Facility.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter a school building or school grounds
while school is in session, with the following exceptions:
(1) Pupils, faculty and/or staff of the school.
(2) Any employee(s) of the School Department and/or any other City department
having business at the school.
(3) Any other person who first obtains permission to enter from the principal of
the school or his/her designee, which permission must be obtained
immediately upon entry.
B. A violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of $200. [Amended 6-1-2020
by Order No. 2020-012]
A. Trespassing without authorization after 10:00 p.m. is prohibited on all Quincy
public school properties. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
B. A fine of $100 is imposed for the first offense and each offense thereafter.
§ 261-2 SCHOOL GROUNDS § 266-5
266:1
Order No. 2020-012]
No person shall transport more than 1,000 pounds of liquid chlorine in any school zone
within 1/2 hour of the beginning time or release time of that school. The provisions of
this section shall also be applicable to vehicles which have discharged a cargo of more
than 1,000 pounds of chlorine. During other times, more than 1,000 pounds of liquid
chlorine may be transported in a school zone only when accompanied by a police detail.
Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined $300.
§ 266-5 QUINCY CODE § 266-5
266:2
Chapter 270
SEWERS AND WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 175.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 300.
Utility permits — See Ch. 319.
§ 266-5 SEWERS AND WATER § 266-5
270:1

ARTICLE I
Sewerage Rehabilitation Fund
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 15.16 of the 1993 Code]
§ 270-1. Fund established; contributions.
In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 598 of the Acts and Resolves of 1986,
the City of Quincy Sewerage Rehabilitation Fund is established. Contributions to said
account shall be made by applicants for building permits for the construction, erection,
improvement, reuse or rehabilitation of land or the buildings thereon for industrial,
commercial, multifamily and residential uses. Excluded, however, shall be one-, twoand
three-family residences if the owner(s) will occupy said residence(s) for at least one
year from date of completion.
§ 270-2. Payments.
§ 270-3. When effective; pending applications.
This article shall apply to all building permits issued after the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this article.16 For any pending building applications, payment shall
be made as a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit.
A. The amount of said contribution shall be 1% of the estimated construction cost. The
estimated construction cost shall be computed by multiplying the gross floor area
(square feet) by the average square feet as published in the latest edition of "Mean
Cost Data" by R.S. Means Co., Inc., Duxbury, Massachusetts, or other similar
recognized national survey.
B. Payments made under this article shall be made at the time of application for a
building permit to the Department of Inspectional Services.
16. Editor's Note: This article was originally adopted by Order No. 1987-63.
§ 270-1 SEWERS AND WATER § 270-3
270:3

ARTICLE II
Sewer Use
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 13.08 of the 1993 Code]
§ 270-4. Particular sewers.
A. Defined. The term "particular sewers," as used in this article, is intended to mean
the house connections of the abutter with the main or common sewer.
B. Construction and connection; applications; requirements. All applications for the
construction of particular sewers and their entrance into common sewers shall be
made upon forms to be obtained at the office of the Commissioner of Public Works
and shall be signed by the owner or by the accredited agent of the premises to be
served.
C. Alterations and connection; permit specifications; modifications. No person shall
be allowed to make any alteration in or make any connection with any particular
sewer, except as stated in the original permit. Leave to depart therefrom must be
obtained from the Commissioner of Public Works on further application therefor to
the Commissioner.
D. Specifications; size and materials. The size and materials of particular sewers and
appurtenances shall be such as the Commissioner of Public Works shall prescribe
and in conformity with the requirements of the Health Department.
E. Laying; requirements; access. All particular sewers shall be laid accurately to
straight lines and grades. If angles along the lines thereof are unavoidable,
manholes or other approved means of access shall be provided.
F. Construction; materials and labor. The materials and labor required in the
construction of particular sewers and appurtenances thereof shall be provided and
the work done by the Commissioner of Public Works, or his duly authorized agents,
and by no other person, except that the applicant may make all of the excavation
and backfill outside the street lines, excepting so much as will affect the proper
bedding and securing of the pipe or other structure.
G. Connection with public sewer; certificate required. The plumbing of any building
shall not be connected with a particular sewer until the applicant shall file with the
Commissioner of Public Works a certificate by the Plumbing Inspector that the
plumbing work is in suitable condition for the connection with the public sewer.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
H. Grease traps. The Commissioner of Public Works may at any time require such
grease traps to be introduced along the line of any particular sewer, or on the
discharge of any fixture connected therewith, as he may deem necessary for the
proper maintenance of such particular sewer, or of the common sewers.
I. Control and maintenance responsibility; cost liability; City responsibility. All
particular sewers shall be under the control of, and be maintained and kept clean
by, the City. The expense in cleaning and repairing any particular sewer shall be
paid by the owner of the premises connected by such particular sewer, and
prepayment or security for the expenses may be required by the Commissioner of
§ 270-4 SEWERS AND WATER § 270-4
270:5
§ 270-5. Prohibited discharges; private drain infrastructure analysis and repair.
§ 270-6. Sewer use fee.
The City shall amend the ad valorem sewer use fee for use of the City's sewage system
effective with bills rendered on and after April 1, 1990. Such fee shall be collected in
the manner described in § 270-8 from the three classes of users described in § 270-7.
Sewer use fees shall be reviewed at least annually to reflect changes in operating costs
and revenue requirements.
§ 270-7. Sewer user classifications.
Public Works; provided, however, that any labor on a particular sewer occasioned
by defects or obstructions in the common sewer shall be paid for by the City.
A. Discharge of harmful water prohibited. No person shall throw or discharge into a
public sewer or any of its connections any steam or other matter or thing which may
tend to cause an obstruction thereof or a deposit therein or any injury thereto.
B. Private drain infrastructure analysis. The City shall impose a municipal charges lien
for unpaid charges incurred by Quincy property owners for a private drain
infrastructure analysis to be committed as a lien upon the real estate in conforming
with MGL c. 40, § 58. [Added 6-15-2015 by Order No. 2015-105]
C. Private drain infrastructure repair. The City shall impose a municipal charges lien
for unpaid charges incurred by Quincy property owners for a private drain
infrastructure repair to be committed as a lien upon the real estate in conforming
with MGL c. 40, § 58. [Added 6-15-2015 by Order No. 2015-106]
D. Discharge of roof or surface water prohibited. No person shall cause or allow any
roof water or surface water, by pipe or otherwise, to be conducted or to flow or
discharge into any pipe or drain connecting with or which indirectly discharges its
contents into any main drain or common sewer.
A. Major industrial users. Users who discharge more than 25,000 gallons per day into
the sewage system shall be classified as major industrial users. These users shall
pay their share of wastewater management costs in proportion to their actual use of
the sewage system. Users in this class shall be charged based on the actual metered
discharge to the sewer system or actual water usage, whichever is deemed
applicable by the Commissioner of Public Works.
B. Tax-exempt users. Users who are exempt from real estate taxes shall be classified
as tax-exempt users. Users in this classification shall pay their share of wastewater
management costs in proportion to their actual use of the sewage system. Users in
this class shall be charged based on their actual metered discharge to the sewer
system or actual water usage, whichever is deemed applicable by the Commissioner
of Public Works.
C. Small commercial and residential users. Users who are not exempt from real estate
taxes and who do not discharge more than 25,000 gallons per day of sewage into
the sewage system shall be classified as small commercial and residential users.
Each user shall pay its share of wastewater management costs in proportion to its
§ 270-4 QUINCY CODE § 270-7
270:6
§ 270-8. Sewer use charges.
actual use of the sewage system. Users in this class shall be charged based on their
actual metered discharge to the sewer system or actual water usage, whichever is
deemed applicable by the Commissioner of Public Works.
A. Calculation. Total annual sewer use charges for each user shall be based upon the
best available measurement or estimate of each user's contribution to wastewater
flows in the City prorated against estimated total annual wastewater flow in the
Quincy sewer system.
B. Assessment; method of calculation. The total annual sewer use charges assessed
shall equal as nearly as feasible the actual net costs and expenses of maintaining,
operating, and improving the sewer system, including charges and assessments
against the City by the Massachusetts Water Resources Authority (MWRA). These
costs shall be established in March of each year for the forthcoming fiscal year.
They shall be based on:
(1) An appropriate portion of the operating and capital budgets for the
forthcoming fiscal year for the Department of Public Works.
(2) Other costs, such as overhead, benefits and debt service, not included in
Subsection B(1) of this section.
(3) Anticipated sewer use charges and assessments against the City by the MWRA
during the forthcoming fiscal year.
(4) An adjustment for revenues received or anticipated during the current fiscal
year and not reflected in the current sewer use charges.
(5) An adjustment for costs, expenses and lost revenues incurred or anticipated
during the current fiscal year and not reflected in the current sewer use
charges.
(6) Anticipated revenues in the forthcoming fiscal year from sources other than
sewer use charges.
C. Base sewer rate. The Mayor shall annually approve, subject to the recommendation
of the Commissioner of Public Works, a base sewer use rate expressed as dollars
(and fraction) per hundred cubic feet of wastewater discharge. Said rate may
include a rate structure designed to encourage conservation by way of an inclining
block rate if so authorized by regulations of the MWRA.
D. Nonmetered users.
(1) Contribution determination. For those users whose wastewater flows are not
metered or otherwise reliably measured, the Commissioner shall use related
measures such as metered water usage, and best professional judgment, in
determining each user's contribution.
(2) Meter required; determination; expense. The Commissioner may require
metering or another form of measurement of any user's contribution to
wastewater flow at the expense of the user when in his judgment there is no
§ 270-7 SEWERS AND WATER § 270-8
270:7
§ 270-9. Commissioner of Public Works; powers and duties. [Amended 6-1-2020
by Order No. 2020-012]
The Commissioner of Public Works shall have full supervision, direction and control
of the Sewer, Water and Drain Department and shall make such rules and regulations
for its government as may be deemed advisable. The Commissioner of Public Works
must develop and implement a management plan which will be presented to the City
Council. The Commissioner is required to notify the City Council of any changes in the
management plan prior to their implementation.
§ 270-10. Massachusetts Water Resources Authority rules and regulations.
The City agrees to accept and adhere to the Massachusetts Water Resources Authority
rules and regulations covering the discharge of sewer drainage, substances or wastes as
may be adopted.
other reasonable means of establishing or estimating that contribution and the
cost of so metering or measuring is not unreasonable.
E. Collection and disposition. The Treasurer/Collector shall receive and collect all
sewer rates and any other income and place the same to the credit of the Sewer,
Water and Drain Department. All fees collected under this article shall be dedicated
and used to pay for the operation and maintenance costs, bonded debt and interests
costs, and the MWRA costs incurred by the City sewage portion of the Sewer,
Water and Drain Department. In the event that revenue exceeds expenses, such
excess shall be held in a sewer reserve account. The City Sewer, Water and Drain
Department, as part of its mission, will provide the consumers of water and sewer
services in the City with information, education and technical assistance pertaining
to water conservation. Financial assistance shall also be made available subject to
appropriation. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
F. Payment. All bills for sewer use shall be due and payable quarterly to the Treasurer/
Collector and shall use the same billing system as used for water bills.
G. Abatements. Any user of water and sewer service who has been granted a tax
exemption under MGL c. 59, § 5, Clause 41C, shall also be entitled to a reduction
of 25% in the total water and sewer bill.
§ 270-8 QUINCY CODE § 270-10
270:8
ARTICLE III
Water and Sewer Bills
[Adopted 4-23-2012 by Order No. 2012-022 (Ch. 13.04 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 270-11. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this
article shall be as follows:
BILL — The periodic mandate by the City for the payment of water use and/or
consumption, sewer use, water/sewer services, interest, and charges.
CHARGE — The mandate by the City for payment for water/sewer goods and services
provided to the customer.
CITY — The City of Quincy, in the County of Norfolk in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Public Works of the City of Quincy or his/
her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
CUSTOMER — The person, individual, firm, company, partnership, association,
society, corporation, group or any political subdivision of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts and/or any other legally defined entity listed in the Department of Public
Works records as the party responsible for the payment of bills for water service to a
property.
DEPARTMENT — The City of Quincy Department of Public Works located at 55 Sea
Street, Quincy, Massachusetts.
ENTERPRISE FUND—A fund established by the City in accordance with MGL c. 44,
§ 53F 1/2.
INTEREST — The rate established by City ordinance that enables the Department to
assess on overdue customer bill balances.
METER — An instrument used for measuring the quantity of water and/or sewer used
by a customer.
METER READING DEVICE — Any equipment and/or appurtenance attached or
otherwise connected to a meter which records and transmits the water use and/or
consumption and sewer use to the Department.
MWRA—The Massachusetts Water Resources Authority, as enabled in Chapter 372 of
the Acts of 1984.
MWRA SPECIAL ASSESSMENT — Any assessment, including but not limited to the
high-strength user fee, which is assessed to the City by the MWRA but attributable to an
individual water and/or sewer customer.
NEW CONNECTION — A water or sewer service which is connected into the City
water and/or sewer system for a customer and/or premises/property which has not been
previously connected.
PREMISES/PROPERTY — A parcel of real estate or portion thereof, including any
improvements thereupon, which is determined by the Department to be a single customer
for purposes of receiving, using, and paying for water use and/or consumption, sewer
§ 270-11 SEWERS AND WATER § 270-11
270:9
use, water/sewer services, interest, and charges.
TREASURER/COLLECTOR — The Treasurer/Collector of the City of Quincy or his/
her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
§ 270-12. Authority of Commissioner of Public Works. [Amended 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012]
The Commissioner shall have supervision, direction and control of the Public Works
Department and shall make such rules and regulations for its governance as may be
deemed necessary.
§ 270-13. Treasurer/Collector to receive payments.
The Treasurer/Collector shall receive and collect all water and sewer bill payments and
any other income and place the same to the credit of the water and sewer enterprise fund
accounts.
§ 270-14. Bill issuance.
§ 270-15. Authorized charges.
A. Bills shall be issued by the Department and payment shall be due and payable to the
Treasurer/Collector 30 days from the date of billing.
B. Billing intervals for all customers shall remain unchanged from current practices.
Bills shall be issued to customers on a monthly, bimonthly, or quarterly basis.
Changes to the current billing interval shall be made by the Commissioner upon
two weeks' notice to the customer.
A. The value of charges shall be recommended by the Commissioner and set by the
City Council. Initial setting of or changes to the value of charges shall be valid after
14 days' public notice. This shall not affect the setting of the water and sewer rates.
B. The authorized list of charges which may be assigned by the Department shall be:
(1) Water service turn on/turn off.
(2) Manual meter read.
(3) Water meter test, meter one inch or smaller.
(4) Water meter test, meter larger than one inch.
(5) Meter freeze up.
(6) Damaged, tampered, or missing meter.
(7) Damaged, tampered, or missing meter reading device.
(8) Valve replacement.
(9) Lawn service application.
(10) Water service application, one inch or smaller.
§ 270-11 QUINCY CODE § 270-15
270:10
(11) Water service application, 1 1/4 inches to three inches.
(12) Water service application, four inches or larger.
(13) Unauthorized water connection.
(14) Massachusetts Water Resources Authority (MWRA) special assessment.
(15) Water service line leak repair.
(16) Fire service application.
(17) Fire flow test observation and assistance.
(18) Fire hydrant meter application.
(19) Fire hydrant meter deposit, meter one inch or smaller.
(20) Fire hydrant meter deposit, meter larger than one inch.
(21) Fire hydrant meter late return.
(22) Fire hydrant meter service.
(23) Fire hydrant meter, minimum monthly usage, five-eighths-inch meter.
(24) Fire hydrant meter, minimum monthly usage, three-fourths-inch and one-inch
meter.
(25) Fire hydrant meter, minimum monthly usage, meter larger than one inch.
(26) Unauthorized hydrant use, first offense.
(27) Unauthorized hydrant use, second offense.
(28) Cross-connection/new construction, initial survey.
(29) Backflow prevention device test and inspection, double check valve.
(30) Backflow prevention device test and inspection, reduced pressure devices
(each), first five.
(31) Backflow prevention device test and inspection, reduced pressure devices
(each), next 10.
(32) Backflow prevention device test and inspection, reduced pressure devices
(each), 16 or more.
(33) Water/sewer pipe inspection, single instance.
(34) Water/sewer pipe inspection, multi-day.
(35) Denial of access to premises/property.
(36) Private infrastructure analysis.
(37) Private infrastructure repair.
§ 270-15 SEWERS AND WATER § 270-15
270:11
§ 270-16. Interest.
The interest rate on past due water and sewer bills shall be set at 14% per annum,
pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21E. Any customer bills due and payable to the City, including
interest thereupon, which are not paid within 60 days from their due date shall be a lien
upon such premises/property in the manner provided in MGL c. 40, §§ 42A to 42F.
§ 270-17. Meter ownership; responsibility for damage, repairs or replacement.
(38) Street/sidewalk opening application.
(39) Water testing, customer requested.
(40) Final meter read. [Added 5-7-2012]
A. Meter one inch or smaller.
(1) The Department shall install meters and meter reading devices for all
customers authorized to be connected to the City's water distribution system.
The meters and the meter reading devices shall be owned by the Department.
In the case of new connections to the system, the cost of the meter shall be
included in the new connection application charge.
(2) The customer shall be responsible for protecting and securing the meter and
meter reading device. Any meter or meter reading device damaged, tampered
with, destroyed, or missing from its installed location shall result in the
assessment of the appropriate charges.
(3) The customer may request a test of his meter to ensure accuracy upon payment
of the applicable charge. In the event that the meter is metering the volume of
water at a level above the meter's applicable AWWA accuracy standard, the
applicable charge shall be refunded and the customer may request that a new
meter be installed at the Department's expense. In the event that the meter is
metering the volume of water at a level below the meter's applicable AWWA
accuracy standard, no refund shall be given to the customer and the
Commissioner may require the installation of a new meter.
(4) Repair and/or replacement of meters and meter reading devices which fail due
to age or other cause not related to damage, tampering, or removal shall be the
responsibility of the Department. The presence of instances of damage,
tampering, or meter removal shall be determined by the Commissioner.
B. Meter larger than one inch.
(1) The meters and the meter reading devices shall be owned by the Department.
In the case of new connections to the system, the customer to be connected
shall be responsible for the purchase price of the meter and the meter reading
device in addition to the connection charge. Ownership for the newly installed
meter and meter reading device shall revert to the Department upon the new
water service being turned on.
(2) The customer shall be responsible for protecting and securing the meter and
meter reading device. Any meter or meter reading device damaged, tampered
§ 270-15 QUINCY CODE § 270-17
270:12
§ 270-18. Access to premises/property.
§ 270-19. Charges established.
with, destroyed, or missing from its installed location shall result in the
assessment of the appropriate charges. The charges shall include the cost of
replacing and/or repairing a damaged, tampered with, destroyed, or missing
meter.
(3) The Commissioner shall have the right to require the customer to complete a
test of his meter to ensure accuracy, such requests not to occur more frequently
than once per year. The customer shall be responsible for the cost of the meter
test. In the event that a customer's meter tests outside of the acceptable range
of accuracy, as defined within the meter's applicable AWWA standard, the
Commissioner shall have the right to require the replacement of the meter at
the customer's expense.
(4) Repair and/or replacement of meters and meter reading devices which fail due
to age or other cause not related to damage, tampering, or removal shall be the
responsibility of the customer. The presence of instances of damage,
tampering, or meter removal shall be determined by the Commissioner.
A. In the event that the Commissioner has reason to believe that either the meter or
meter reading device is recording/transmitting incorrect meter readings or that there
may be a leak in private water mains/service lines, access to the customer's
premises/property is required. Customers shall, at any reasonable time, grant the
Department access to enter a customer's premises/property for the purpose of
examining, removing, replacing, and/or repairing City meters, meter reading
devices, pipes, service lines, fittings and parts for supplying or regulating water and
of ascertaining the quantity of water consumed or supplied in accordance with
MGL c. 165, § 11D.
B. The refusal of a customer to grant access to his premises for the purpose of
examining, removing, replacing, and/or repairing City meters, meter reading
devices, pipes, service lines, fittings, and parts for supplying or regulating the
supply of water shall result in a fine, as identified in this article, per visit to gain
access, until such access is thereby granted, not to exceed one visit per business
day.
C. In the event that damaged, tampered, destroyed or missing meters are found,
applicable charges shall be assessed. In the event that water leaks from private
water pipes/service lines are found between the City main and the water meter, the
Commissioner shall provide notice to the customer requiring repairs to be made to
the private water pipes/service lines. If such repairs are not completed within 30
days of the notice, the Department shall have the right to enter the premises/
property to make repairs. The customer shall be required to reimburse the
Department for the full cost of repairs.
A. Upon the recommendation of the Commissioner of Public Works and with the
approval of His Honor, the Mayor, the value of charges shall be set at the following:
§ 270-17 SEWERS AND WATER § 270-19
270:13
(1) Water service turn on/turn off: $75.
(2) Manual meter read: $100 per billing interval.
(3) Water meter test, meter one inch or smaller: $100.
(4) Water meter test, meter larger than one inch: if commercial customer fails to
comply with City's request to test the meter, then the City is authorized to
engage a private vendor to disassemble and test the meter and charge the cost
of same to commercial customer.
(5) Meter freeze up: $100 plus cost of meter.
(6) Damaged, tampered, or missing meter: $150 plus cost of meter.
(7) Damaged, tampered, or missing meter reading device: $175 which includes
replacement of meter reading device.
(8) Valve replacement: $150 which includes labor, parts and valves.
(9) Lawn service application: $75.
(10) Water service application, one inch or smaller: $75.
(11) Water service application, 1 1/4 inches to three inches: $100.
(12) Water service application, four inches or larger: $150.
(13) Unauthorized water connection: $550 plus cost of meter.
(14) Massachusetts Water Resources Authority (MWRA) special assessment. The
Massachusetts Water Resources Authority billing charged to the City for highstrength
user(s) shall be charged to the high-strength user(s) so identified by
the Massachusetts Water Resources Authority.
(15) Water service line leak repair: After notice to customer to repair a leak on the
customer's property, if customer does not repair same then the City shall
complete the repairs and charge the customer for the cost of said labor,
materials and police detail(s).
(16) Fire service application: $300.
(17) Fire flow test observation and assistance: $250.
(18) Fire hydrant meter application: $75.
(19) Fire hydrant meter deposit, meter one inch or smaller: $500.
(20) Fire hydrant meter deposit, meter larger than one inch: $3,500.
(21) Fire hydrant meter late return: $10 per calendar day.
(22) Fire hydrant meter service: $100.
(23) Fire hydrant meter, minimum monthly usage, five-eighths-inch meter: $75 per
month.
§ 270-19 QUINCY CODE § 270-19
270:14
(24) Fire hydrant meter, minimum monthly usage, three-fourths-inch and one-inch
meter: $100 per month.
(25) Fire hydrant meter, minimum monthly usage, meter larger than one inch: $300
minimum monthly usage.
(26) Unauthorized hydrant use, first offense: $1,000.
(27) Unauthorized hydrant use, second offense: $5,000.
(28) Cross-connection/new construction, initial survey: $200.
(29) Backflow prevention device test and inspection, double check valve: $75.
(30) Backflow prevention device test and inspection, reduced pressure devices
(each), first five: $100.
(31) Backflow prevention device test and inspection, reduced pressure devices
(each), next 10: $50 each.
(32) Backflow prevention device test and inspection, reduced pressure devices
(each), 16 or more: $25.
(33) Water/sewer pipe inspection, single instance: $600 combined inspection.
(34) Water/sewer pipe inspection, multi-day: $100 per day.
(35) Denial of access to premises/property: $25 per visit.
(36) Private infrastructure analysis: cost of analysis/leak detection charged to
customer.
(37) Private infrastructure repair: cost of repair, including labor, repair and
materials.
(38) Street/sidewalk opening application: $75.
(39) Water testing: $25.
(40) Final meter read: $50.
§ 270-19 SEWERS AND WATER § 270-19
270:15

Chapter 274
SEX OFFENDERS
§ 274-1. Findings and purpose.
The intent of this chapter is to serve and protect the City's compelling interest in
promoting, protecting and improving the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
City of Quincy by creating areas around locations where children and elderly regularly
congregate in concentrated numbers and designating events where children regularly
participate wherein certain registered sex offenders are prohibited from entering or
loitering.
§ 274-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ELDERLY HOUSING FACILITY — Any building containing four or more dwelling
units restricted to occupancy by households having one or more members 55 years of
age or older.
GIS — Geographic information system.
LOITER — Remaining in or around property and/or buildings designated herein for
more than 15 minutes.
REGISTERED SEX OFFENDER — A person convicted of a criminal sex offense and
designated by the Massachusetts Sex Offender Registry Board as a Level 3 sex offender.
The Board has determined that these individuals have a high risk to reoffend and that
the degree of dangerousness posed to the public is such that a substantial public safety
interest is served by active community notification.
SCHOOL — A licensed or accredited public or private school that offers instruction
in preschool, including a licensed day care or other business permitted as a school by
the City of Quincy, or any of grades K through 12, or any college or university. This
definition shall not include private residences in which students are taught by parents or
tutors.
§ 274-3. Safety zones.
A. Prohibitions.
(1) A registered sex offender is prohibited from entering upon the premises of a
school, library, or day-care center unless previously authorized specifically in
writing by the school administration, library administration, or day-care center
owner.
(2) A registered sex offender is prohibited from entering upon the premises of an
elderly housing facility unless previously authorized in writing by the on-site
manager of the elderly housing facility. In the case of those dwellings under
the ownership, administration, or operation to the Quincy Housing Authority,
a registered sex offender is prohibited from entering upon the premises thereof
unless previously authorized in writing by the executive director of the Quincy
§ 270-19 SEX OFFENDERS § 274-3
274:1
§ 274-4. Postings.
§ 274-5. Enforcement.
The Police Department shall have the authority to enforce this chapter. A written list
Housing Authority to do so.
(3) A registered sex offender is prohibited from entering upon the premises of a
park or any recreational facility.
(4) A registered sex offender is prohibited from participating in a holiday event
involving children under 18 years of age, such as distributing candy or other
items to children. Holiday events in which a registered sex offender is the
parent or guardian of the children involved and nonfamilial children are not
present are exempt from this subsection. Participation is defined as actively
taking part in the event.
(5) A registered sex offender is prohibited, after having received notice from a law
enforcement officer that he/she is loitering within 500 feet of a school, library,
day-care center, park, recreational facility, elderly housing facility, school bus
stop, public transportation bus stop or facility, from continuing to so loiter or
from returning thereto to loiter. For purposes of determining the minimum
distance separation under this subsection, the distance shall be measured by
following a straight line from the location where the registered sex offender is
loitering to the prohibited area.
B. Exceptions. The prohibitions listed herein shall not be construed or enforced so as
to prohibit a registered sex offender from exercising his or her right to vote in any
federal, state or municipal election or from attending any religious service.
C. Penalties. Any violation of this section may be enforced by a noncriminal
disposition pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D, resulting in a noncriminal fine of $150
for a first violation and a noncriminal fine of $300 for each additional violation of
this section and notification to the registered sex offender's parole officer and/or
probation officer, if applicable, and the Massachusetts Sex Offender Registry Board
that the registered sex offender has violated a municipal ordinance. A registered sex
offender commits a separate offense for each and every violation of this section.
A. Permanent bulletin boards shall be installed for the purposes of posting of registered
Level 2 and Level 3 sex offenders within the main entrance of the following public
buildings: [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
(1) Quincy City Hall.
(2) Quincy Police Department.
(3) Thomas Crane Library.
(4) Administrative area of every public school and public day-care facility.
B. Official postings of registered sex offenders shall be displayed in an accessible and
prominent location on the official website of the City of Quincy/Police Department.
§ 274-3 QUINCY CODE § 274-5
274:2
describing the prohibited areas defined in this chapter as well as a map depicting the
safety zones shall be created and maintained by the Department of Public Works. The
list, maps, and a copy of this chapter shall will be available to the public at the Police
Department and the City Clerk's office and on the City of Quincy's website.
§ 274-5 SEX OFFENDERS § 274-5
274:3

Chapter 278
SHELLFISH AND SEAWORMS
§ 274-5 SHELLFISH AND SEAWORMS § 274-5
278:1

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 278-1. Authority.
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Quincy City Council and the Mayor by MGL c.
130, § 52, as amended, and by MGL c. 130, § 75, as amended, we, the City Council
and the Mayor, make and promulgate the following regulations relative to shellfish and
seaworms within the City.
§ 278-2. Hours when taking permitted.
§ 278-3. Limitations on taking during summer months.
During the months of May, June, July, August and September, no shellfish or seaworms
may be dug or taken within 150 feet of high-water mark.
§ 278-4. Use of tined clam hoes or forks.
Only tined clam hoes or forks shall be used in taking shellfish and seaworms by any
holder of a permit issued as provided by this chapter.
A. Shellfish and seaworms may be taken only during the time between one hour before
sunrise and one hour after sunset during the months of April, May, June, July,
August, September and October, and during the months of November, December,
January, February and March, shellfish and seaworms may be taken only between
the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
B. In any area determined under MGL c. 130, § 74, to be contaminated, shellfish shall
not be taken earlier than one hour before sunrise nor loaded into trucks for transport
later than 1/2 hour after sunset. In all such areas, the provisions of the Shellfish
Management and Regulation Plan for the City, together with the provisions of this
chapter, are applicable.
§ 278-1 SHELLFISH AND SEAWORMS § 278-4
278:3

ARTICLE II
Shellfish Constable
§ 278-5. Appointment; duties; compensation; Assistant Shellfish Constables.
In accordance with Chapter 79 of the Acts of 1957, accepted by the City Council,
whenever a vacancy occurs in the office, the Mayor shall appoint from the available
civil service list a resident of the City as constable who shall be designated as Shellfish
Constable, whose duties shall be the detection and prosecution of violations of the laws
of the commonwealth, or local ordinances, rules or regulations, relative to shellfish
and shell fisheries. The Mayor may appoint one or more Assistant Shellfish Constables
not to exceed four in number who shall be residents of the City and who shall serve
without compensation. The Shellfish Constable shall cooperate with all City departments
wherever and whenever necessary and with the Massachusetts Division of Law
Enforcement and with the Division of Marine Fisheries of the commonwealth and may
also hold office as a Deputy Coastal Warden of such Division. The Shellfish Constable
shall receive an annual compensation at the rate determined by the City Council and
shall be granted an allowance for the use of an automobile.
§ 278-6. Charts and reports.
In addition to the enforcement duties of the Shellfish Constable, he shall survey and
examine the shellfish areas in the City and shall prepare charts and reports from time
to time as may be necessary or at the request of the Mayor or Board of Licensing
Commissioners showing the condition of the shellfish areas. He shall also file with the
Mayor on or before January 1 of each year an annual report giving a complete and
detailed report of his activities during the year, including the number of permits issued
and the number of cases presented for court action or for suspension or revocation by
the Board of Licensing Commissioners and such other detailed information as may be
required by the Mayor.
§ 278-7. Appropriations.
Appropriations made by the City Council for the payment of salaries for the enforcement
of this chapter or for the development of the shellfish industry in the City shall be
expended by and under the direction of the Shellfish Constable.
§ 278-5 SHELLFISH AND SEAWORMS § 278-7
278:5

ARTICLE III
Permits
§ 278-8. Permit required for taking of shellfish and seaworms.
No person shall take shellfish and seaworms from the shores, flats or waters within
the City without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Board of Licensing
Commissioners of the City.
§ 278-9. Display of permit.
Permits issued as provided in this chapter shall be carried by the permittee while engaged
in the work covered by the permit and shall be shown to any public officer upon request.
§ 278-10. Issuance; qualifications; fees.
§ 278-11. Permits not transferable; suspension or revocation.
Permits issued as provided in this chapter shall not be transferable, shall be subject to all
laws of the commonwealth as well as this chapter and may be suspended for not more
than one month for a first offense as set out in § 278-12 and not more than three months
for a second offense, and for a third offense within a period of one year such permit shall
be void, and no new permit shall be issued for a period of one year from the date that
such permit became void.
§ 278-12. Grounds for suspension or revocation; hearing.
A. The Board of Licensing Commissioners shall issue a commercial shellfish and
seaworm permit to any person who has actually resided within the City for one year
next preceding the date of the application therefor, entitling the holder thereof to
take shellfish and seaworms for commercial purposes. The burden of proof of such
residence shall be upon the applicant. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
B. Fees for permits for the taking of shellfish in any area determined under MGL c.
130, § 74, to be contaminated shall be as follows:
(1) Any person who has been a bona fide resident of the City for one year next
preceding the date of the application therefor shall be assessed a fee of $100.
(2) Any person who is a resident of Massachusetts shall be assessed a fee of $400.
A. Grounds. Any violation of the laws relating to marine fish or fisheries or of this
chapter; any violation of the provisions of the Shellfish Management and
Regulation Plan for the City of Quincy; any unlawful trespass upon private
property; loud, profane or abusive language; indecent acts; mutilation or destruction
of private property; or objectionable and disturbing noises caused by the use of
trucks, equipment, or persons shall be sufficient cause for the suspension or
revocation of all permits issued as provided in this chapter.
B. Hearing. Before any permit issued as provided in this chapter is suspended or
revoked, the holder thereof shall be given a hearing, or notice of and opportunity
§ 278-8 SHELLFISH AND SEAWORMS § 278-12
278:7
§ 278-13. Expiration date.
All permits issued as provided in this chapter shall expire at 12:00 midnight on
December 31 next succeeding the date of issue.
§ 278-14. Residential permits. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
The Board of Licensing Commissioners shall issue residential permits to any resident of
the commonwealth entitling the holder thereof to take seaworms from the clean waters,
flats and creeks in the City for use of his own family, not exceeding five dozen seaworms
in any one day. The fee for such permit shall be $10 if such person is a resident of the
City for one year next preceding the date of application therefor or is a property owner
in the City, except a fee of $2 shall be charged a resident 65 years of age or older.
The Shellfish Constable shall be the duly authorized agent of the Board of Licensing
Commissioners to issue permits provided for in this section.
for a hearing, before the issuing authority.
§ 278-12 QUINCY CODE § 278-14
278:8
ARTICLE IV
Taking Shellfish from Contaminated and Closed Areas
§ 278-15. Contaminated areas. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
No person shall dig or take shellfish from areas determined under MGL c. 130, § 74, to
be contaminated except in accordance with the provisions of the Shellfish Management
and Regulation Plan for the City of Quincy.
§ 278-16. Closed areas.
No person shall take shellfish or seaworms from any area closed by the Board of
Licensing Commissioners or for any other reason permitted by law that is under
propagation.
§ 278-15 SHELLFISH AND SEAWORMS § 278-16
278:9

ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 278-17. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter may be penalized by the
initiation of criminal proceedings, in which case the penalties shall be as provided
in MGL c. 130.
B. As an alternative to the initiation of criminal proceedings, any person violating any
provision of this chapter may be penalized as provided by MGL c. 40, § 21D, which
provides for noncriminal disposition of said violations. The penalty therefor shall
be $50 for a first violation, $100 for a second violation and $200 for a third and
subsequent violations.
§ 278-17 SHELLFISH AND SEAWORMS § 278-17
278:11

Chapter 282
SHOPPING CARTS
§ 282-1. Findings and purpose.
§ 282-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ABANDONED SHOPPING CART —Any unattended shopping cart left on a public or
private property outside the premises or parking area of the retail establishment owning
the shopping cart. Any such shopping cart shall be deemed abandoned and, therefore,
a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter. For the purposes of this chapter, the parking
area of a retail establishment located in a multi-store complex, or shopping center, shall
include the entire area used by the complex.
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — Includes, but is not limited to, a grocery store,
supermarket, drugstore, pharmacy, dry goods store, department store, discount store,
variety store, or other retail establishment which supplies 20 or more shopping carts for
the use of its customers.
OWNER—The owner or retail establishment whose identification is required to appear
on the shopping cart identification sign.
PUBLIC PROPERTY —Includes, but is not limited to, all areas dedicated to the public
use, including roadways, parkways, alleys, lanes, parks, sidewalks and any public rightof-
way.
SHOPPING CART — A basket that is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally
used in a retail establishment by customers for the transporting of goods of any kind.
A. The City Council hereby finds that abandoned shopping carts or parts thereof are
unsightly and aesthetically detrimental to the community, interfere with pedestrian
and vehicular traffic, accumulate over time on private and public property causing
blight and deterioration resulting in reduction in property values, constitute an
attractive nuisance and are detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
Therefore, the presence of abandoned shopping carts or parts thereof is declared to
constitute a public nuisance that may be abated as such in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The purpose of this chapter is to promote public health,
safety and welfare by prohibiting the abandonment of shopping carts or parts
thereof upon public and private property, thereby alleviating the safety hazards,
unsafe conditions and the impairment of property values resulting from the
abandonment of such carts.
B. This chapter maintains primary responsibility for managing cart service with the
owner of the cart and provides said owners with discretion in determining their
preferred method of retention of said carts upon the owner's premises. These
sections require business establishments utilizing shopping carts or similar devices
and having more than 20 shopping carts on site to install and maintain a system to
retain shopping carts within property boundaries of the business establishment.
§ 278-17 SHOPPING CARTS § 282-3
282:1
§ 282-3. Required signs on shopping carts.
Every owner of a shopping cart shall affix to each shopping cart owned or provided by
the owner a sign that includes the following information:
§ 282-4. Abandonment prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any shopping cart to be abandoned
on or upon any public property as defined in this chapter or any private property other
than the premises of the owner of said shopping cart.
§ 282-5. Unauthorized removal prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, either temporarily or permanently, to remove a
shopping cart from the premises of the owner or be in possession of a cart that has been
removed from the premises of the owner without the written consent of the owner. This
provision shall not apply to shopping carts removed as authorized by the owner for the
purposes of repair, maintenance or disposal.
§ 282-6. Shopping cart on-site retention.
All business establishments utilizing shopping carts or similar devices on site shall
install and maintain a system to retain such shopping carts within the property
boundaries of the business. The business shall provide signage in conspicuous locations
notifying shopping cart users of the retention system in place and how said system
operates. Permitted methods of retention shall include any one of the following:
A. Identification of the owner of the shopping cart or the business to which it pertains
or both. No business shall utilize a shopping cart that does not contain its mark or
contains the mark of another business, and no owner or manager of a retail or
wholesale establishment shall allow such use.
B. Notification that the unauthorized removal of the shopping cart from the premises
of the business establishment or the unauthorized possession of the shopping cart is
a violation of the law.
C. A telephone number and address for returning the shopping cart to its owner or to
the business establishment identified thereon.
A. Each method included in this subsection shall be considered to be an example of an
on-site retention method complying with these sections. If the business
establishment has a method for retention that is not delineated as an example herein,
then an owner may submit a plan to the City Clerk that satisfies the intent of these
sections to retain shopping carts on the premises of the business establishment and/
or its parking lot or to ensure the immediate retrieval of shopping carts outside of
the business establishment and/or its parking lot; no plan submitted by an owner to
the City Clerk shall be valid until approved, in writing, by the Board of Licensing
Commissioners. Examples of methods and/or plans are as follows:
(1) A physical barrier, such as bollards, restricting shopping carts to the front
sidewalk or front portion of the business. Physical barriers shall not interfere
with fire lanes, handicap access or similar features.
§ 282-3 QUINCY CODE § 282-6
282:2
§ 282-7. Mandatory plan.
(2) Shopping carts equipped with a protruding vertical arm or similar device
prohibiting the cart from being removed from the interior of the business.
(3) A system which may be mechanical in nature requiring a deposit to use a
shopping cart; the deposit should be of a reasonable amount that would not
deter use of the cart but would encourage return of the cart.
(4) Shopping carts equipped with a wheel locking mechanism that is used in
conjunction with an electronic barrier along the perimeter of the area within
which shopping carts are allowed. The wheel locking mechanism will activate
when the shopping cart crosses the electronic barrier.
(5) An attendant or attendants whose sole responsibility is to manage and/or return
the business establishment's shopping carts from the exterior premises of the
business establishment and areas immediately adjacent thereto to the interior
premises of the business establishment or another exterior area of the business
establishment dedicated to the containment of shopping carts.
(6) Other similar methods or plans submitted by an owner for the approval of the
City Board of Licensing Commissioners which would satisfy the intent of
these sections to retain shopping carts on the premises of the business
establishment and/or its parking lot or to ensure the immediate retrieval of
shopping carts outside of the business establishment and/or its parking lot.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
B. No business establishment shall allow shopping carts to congregate or stack up in
such a manner as to impede ingress to or egress from the business establishment or
any public or private way adjacent to the business establishment.
C. Prior to the close of each business day, every business establishment shall collect
and secure its shopping carts on its premises, including its parking lot. This action
shall be commenced no sooner than 15 minutes prior to the close of each business
day.
A. Every owner of a business subject to this chapter shall prepare, implement and
submit to the City Clerk within 90 days of the adoption of this chapter, and on an
annual basis thereafter, a specific written plan to prevent the removal of shopping
carts from its premises and, if removed, to retrieve the shopping carts that have been
removed within 24 hours of the removal. A business may request an exemption
from the annual plan filing requirement if it is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the City the ability to prevent the carts from leaving the site and no carts are
found abandoned after the exemption is granted.
B. Said plan shall also include, at a minimum, the name of the business, identification
of business address contact information, the names of the persons responsible for
implementing the plan and information on who and how to contact the appropriate
individuals to resolve any plan issues or violations, an inventory of carts, and
employee training on cart removal and abandonment prevention.
C. Said plan shall also include a methodology for customer and community
§ 282-6 SHOPPING CARTS § 282-7
282:3
§ 282-8. Time frame for compliance.
Any business that is nonconforming as to on-site shopping cart retention upon adoption
of this chapter shall comply within six months.
§ 282-9. Exemption.
Any business subject to this chapter that services within 1,000 feet of its premises
a multiunit residential facility of more than 10 units housing handicapped or elderly
residents may seek a limited exemption to this chapter solely for the purposes of
servicing this facility. Said business must submit, to the City Clerk, a written plan
outlining an agreement with such residential facility detailing a methodology for the
systematic retrieval of all shopping carts utilized solely to service this facility.
§ 282-10. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order
No. 2020-012]
A determination of compliance and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall
reside with the City of Quincy Board of Licensing Commissioners, which shall receive
and review the mandatory plans previously cited (§ 282-7). Failure of an owner to
comply with the provisions of this chapter and an approved mandatory plan shall, in
the first instance, result in a written notice citing such failure and requiring forthwith
compliance. A second such failure to comply may result in the issuance of a monetary
fine of $25 per event. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate event.
notification and outreach that shall include signage on the carts, stores, shopping
bags or other outreach designed to advise its customers that they may not remove
the shopping carts from the business premises. As part of customer outreach the
City would encourage the provision to customers, at wholesale cost, the availability
to purchase foldable carts.
§ 282-7 QUINCY CODE § 282-10
282:4
Chapter 288
SMOKING AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health Department smoking regulations — See Ch. A402.
§ 282-10 SMOKING AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS § 282-10
288:1

ARTICLE I
Access of Minors to Tobacco Products
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 8.30 of the 1993 Code; amended in its entirety by
Order No. 94-024]
§ 288-1. Findings; authority. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
There exists conclusive evidence that tobacco smoke causes cancer, respiratory diseases,
negative birth outcomes, various cardiac diseases, allergies, and irritations to the eyes,
nose, and throat to both the smoker and the nonsmoker exposed to secondary smoke.
Evidence further demonstrates that tobacco is extremely addictive. More than 3,000
young people begin smoking every day in this nation. Since almost 90% of all smokers
begin smoking before age 18, the legal age to purchase cigarettes in the commonwealth,
there is an important health need to reduce the easy access to tobacco products by youths
through strict enforcement of the state law prohibiting sales to minors. Therefore, these
regulations are adopted pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31, as reasonable health regulations
designed to protect and improve the health of the residents of the City of Quincy.
§ 288-2. Free distribution prohibited.
No person or entity shall, in or upon any part of the streets, parks, public ground,
public buildings, or other public-owned places within the City of Quincy, distribute any
products containing tobacco for any promotional or other commercial purposes. Tobacco
distribution includes, but is not limited to, bonus in a game, contest or tournament
involving skill or chance, but does not include redemption of coupons distributed in
newspapers or other periodicals or affixed to packaging for products distributed to adults
by tobacco retailers.
§ 288-3. Freestanding displays.
Freestanding displays of tobacco products, from which individual packages may be
selected by the customer, must be within 10 feet and in full view of the regular location
of a person designated to supervise the purchase of tobacco products from the display.
Carton displays must be within full view.
§ 288-4. Sale by persons under age 18.
No person or entity selling tobacco products shall allow anyone under age 18 to sell
cigarettes or other tobacco products until such employee reads the Health Department
and state law regarding sale of tobacco.
§ 288-5. Tobacco sales to minors prohibited.
A. In conformance with MGL c. 270, § 6, no person or entity shall sell a cigarette,
chewing tobacco, snuff, or tobacco in any of its forms to any person under age 18.
B. All clerks selling cigarettes or tobacco products will positively establish the
purchaser's age as 18. A written note or telephone communication from a parent or
guardian will not be sufficient to allow a person under age 18 to purchase a tobacco
product.
§ 288-1 SMOKING AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS § 288-6
288:3
§ 288-6. Vending machines. [Amended by Order No. 95-023]
§ 288-7. Posting of notices.
A. The purpose of this section is to restrict access of tobacco products to minors.
Within six months of adoption of this regulation, no person, firm, corporation,
establishment or agency shall install or maintain a vending machine to distribute or
sell tobacco products in the City of Quincy unless:
(1) The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity, plain view and
control of a responsible employee, so that all purchases are observable and
controllable as if cigarettes were sold over the counter; [Amended 6-1-2020
by Order No. 2020-012]
(2) The vending machine must not be located in a coatroom, rest room,
unmonitored hallway, outer waiting area, or similar unmonitored area and
must be inaccessible to the public when the establishment is closed;
(3) The vending machine is equipped with a lock-out device approved by the
Health Department. Said device shall lock out sales from vending machines
unless an employee releases the locking mechanism. The release mechanism
must not allow continuous operations of the vending machine and must not be
accessible to customers. Vending machines should be posted with a sign
stating that the machine is equipped with a lock-out device and identifying the
person(s) to contact to purchase cigarettes from the machine. Veterans' clubs,
fraternal organizations and bars and taverns where food is not the major source
of income are exempt from installing these lock-out devices. These clubs and
bars may apply to the Board of Licensing Commissioners for this exemption;
and
(4) No sales of tobacco products are permitted from a vending machine which also
offers for sale any nontobacco product.
B. All cigarette vending machines must display a conspicuous sign stating that it is
illegal to sell cigarettes to minors, as identified in § 288-7A and B of this article.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
A. In conformance with MGL c. 270, § 7, a copy of MGL c. 270, § 6, shall be posted
conspicuously by the owner or other person in charge thereof in the shop or other
place used to sell cigarettes at retail. The notice to be posted shall be that notice
provided by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health stating that the sale of
tobacco products to persons under age 18 is prohibited. Such notice shall be at least
48 square inches and shall be posted at the cash register which receives the greatest
volume of single cigarette package sales in such a manner that it may be readily
seen by a person standing at or approaching the cash register. Such notice shall be
placed on the cash register or at a distance of no greater than two feet from the cash
register.
B. For all other cash registers that sell cigarettes and for all vending machines, the
same notice as described in Subsection A shall be attached which is no smaller than
nine square inches, which is the size of the sign provided by the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health. Such notice must be posted in a manner that it may
§ 288-6 QUINCY CODE § 288-7
288:4
§ 288-8. License for location of tobacco sales; fee. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order
No. 2020-012]
No person or entity shall sell tobacco products over the counter or in vending machines
within the City of Quincy without license for location of tobacco sales issued by the
Health Department. The fee for this license will be $50 renewable annually by July 1.
§ 288-9. Enforcement.
§ 288-10. Violations and penalties.
§ 288-11. Variance.
be readily seen by a person standing at or approaching the cash register. Such a
notice shall be placed on the cash register or at a distance of no greater than two
feet from the cash register.
A. The Health Department or its enforcement officer(s) shall enforce these regulations.
B. Whoever violates any provision of this article may be fined up to the maximum
provided for in Chapter 1, Article I, of this Code, and as specified in § 288-10 of
this article. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
C. In addition to the enforcement as described above, the provisions of this article may
also be enforced by a noncriminal complaint pursuant to the provisions of MGL c.
40, § 21D, and such penalty shall be as specified in § 288-10A, C and D.
A. Any person or entity selling tobacco to any person under age 18 shall be punished
by a fine of $100 for the first offense, $200 for the second offense and $300 for any
third or subsequent offense. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
B. Any person or entity found to be selling tobacco to any person under age 18 three
times within 12 months shall be cause, after a public hearing, for the revocation of
a license for location of tobacco sales. All tobacco must be removed from the
premises when said license is revoked. Licenses removed cannot be reinstated for
30 days following the date of removal.
C. Any person or entity found to be selling tobacco without a license for location of
tobacco sales will be subject to a fine of $200 per day. [Amended 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012]
D. Any person or entity who or which fails to comply with any of these provisions
shall be punished by a fine of $50. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
A. The Health Department may, after a public hearing, temporarily vary the
application of any provision of these regulations with respect to any particular case
when the Health Department finds the enforcement thereof would do manifest
injustice.
B. Every request for a variance shall be made in writing on a form provided by the
Health Department and shall state the specific variance sought and the reasons
therefor. The fee for a variance request shall be determined by the Health
§ 288-7 SMOKING AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS § 288-11
288:5
Department. Notice of a variance request must be published in a local newspaper at
least two weeks before the scheduled date of the public hearing.
C. Any variance granted must be in writing with a copy available to the public at all
reasonable hours in the office of the City Clerk and in the office of the Health
Department. Any variance granted must be posted on the premises in a prominent
location for the duration that the variance is in effect.
§ 288-11 QUINCY CODE § 288-11
288:6
ARTICLE II
Smoking on City-Owned Land
[Adopted 12-18-2017 by Order No. 2017-039]
§ 288-12. City Hall and Adams Green.
City-owned land in and around City Hall and the Adams Green shall be designated as a
smoke-free area.
§ 288-13. Violations and penalties.
Anyone found in violation of this article shall be subject to a fine of $25 enforceable by
the Quincy Police Department.
§ 288-12 SMOKING AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS § 288-13
288:7

Chapter 293
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recycling Commission — See Ch. 12, Art. XI.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 175.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 244.
§ 288-13 SOLID WASTE § 288-13
293:1

ARTICLE I
Garbage Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 8.12 of the 1993 Code]
§ 293-1. Unlawful accumulations; placement for collection.
§ 293-2. Dumpsters.
A. Notice to remove. No person being an owner or person in possession of real
property in the City shall suffer or allow the use of his property as a gathering place
for waste material or debris such as papers, rags, boxes, branches, cans, broken
glass, broken boards, discarded furniture or abandoned or unusable motor vehicles
for more than seven days after having received written notice from the Chief of
Police or the Health Commissioner to remove said material.
B. Regulations.
(1) No person shall place rubbish or other debris for collection by the City within
10 feet of any abutter's property or in any way interfere with abutter's access
to his property or with access to a public sidewalk.
(2) No rubbish or other debris may be placed out for collection more than one day
prior to scheduled pickup, and empty containers shall be removed within one
day of pickup.
A. Definitions. In this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CONTRACTOR — The person or legal entity owning or having legal title to the
dumpster.
DUMPSTER — Any receptacle used for the collection and storage of rubbish,
garbage, offal and other substances.
ENFORCING PERSON—The Health Commissioner and agents are designated as
the enforcing officers of the provisions of this section.
FACILITIES AFFECTED — All commercial businesses utilizing dumpsters,
except businesses using temporary construction dumpsters, and all residential
buildings having eight or more units.
OWNER — The person or legal entity having title to the land upon which a
dumpster is located and/or the person or legal entity operating on the premises
where a dumpster is located. The name and address of the owner shall be on file in
the office of the Health Commissioner.
B. Requirements.
(1) Location. Each dumpster shall be located at a distance from the lot line so as
not to interfere with the safety of or obstruct the curb and sidewalk, or the
convenience or health of abutters and the general public, or obstruct the view
of flowing traffic. The location of dumpsters shall be subject to approval of the
Health Commissioner and Department of Inspectional Services.
(2) Covers. All dumpsters shall have a cover capable of containing the contents
§ 293-1 SOLID WASTE § 293-2
293:3
therein and shall be covered and secured when not in use and at all other times
except during the actual filling of the dumpster, with the exception of a rollon/
roll-off or similar dumpster used for construction debris, auto body parts,
or recycled or bulky type materials.
(3) Size; sanitation. All dumpsters must be of sufficient size and capacity, shall
not overflow and must be free of any distasteful odors. The owner utilizing the
dumpster must take appropriate action to have the dumpster emptied of its
contents immediately when full. The owner must properly sanitize the
dumpster as often as is required and/or as deemed necessary by the Health
Commissioner.
C. Enclosures. [Amended by Order No. 1993-56; Order No. 94-042]
(1) New commercial businesses. Effective immediately, all new commercial
businesses in the City utilizing a dumpster shall be required to enclose their
dumpsters with a material capable of obscuring the view of the dumpster from
the public and shall place the dumpster on a cement or asphalt pad. The
enclosures are subject to the approval of the Health Commissioner. Owners
may apply for a waiver from this subsection if they can demonstrate that the
area is incapable of a complete enclosure, or if their location (i.e., on the
waterfront) requires placement of a dumpster on a wooden pier.
(2) Existing commercial businesses. As of June 10, 1993, all existing commercial
businesses in the City utilizing a dumpster shall be required to enclose their
dumpsters with a material capable of obscuring the view of the dumpster from
the public and shall place the dumpster on a cement or asphalt pad. The
enclosures are subject to the approval of the Health Commissioner. Owners
may apply for a waiver from this subsection if they can demonstrate that the
area is incapable of a complete enclosure, or if their location (i.e., on the
waterfront) requires placement of a dumpster on a wooden pier.
(3) Residential buildings with eight or more units. As of June 10, 1994, all
residential buildings with eight or more units utilizing a dumpster shall be
required to enclose their dumpsters with a material capable of obscuring the
view of the dumpster from the public and shall place the dumpster on a cement
or asphalt pad. The enclosures are subject to the approval of the Health
Commissioner. Owners may apply for a waiver from this subsection if they
can demonstrate that the area is incapable of a complete enclosure, or if their
location (i.e., on the waterfront) requires placement of a dumpster on a wooden
pier.
(4) Municipally owned structures. As of July 1, 1994, all municipal departments
and agencies in the City utilizing a dumpster shall be required to enclose their
dumpsters with a material capable of obscuring the view of the dumpster from
the public and shall place the dumpster on a cement or asphalt pad. The
enclosures are subject to the approval of the Health Commissioner. The
municipal department may apply for a waiver from this subsection if it can
demonstrate that the area is incapable of a complete enclosure.
D. Owner and contractor; maintenance duties.
§ 293-2 QUINCY CODE § 293-2
293:4
(1) No dumpster shall be emptied before 7:00 a.m. Within the industrial and
commercial business area of downtown Quincy Center, dumpsters may be
emptied prior to 7:00 a.m. The contractor is responsible for preventing spillage
of the contents during the emptying and transporting process.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the owner to maintain the dumpster and the
surrounding area so that it is free of odors, rodents, flies, insects, scattered
debris and any overflow on the boundaries of the owner's property lines. The
contractor or owner shall deodorize, wash, steam and sanitize the dumpster
and surrounding area as often as needed or as required by the Health
Commissioner.
(3) The contractor or owner shall conspicuously display its name and telephone
number on the dumpster.
E. Violation of provisions; penalties.
(1) Whoever violates any provision of this section may be fined up to the
maximum provided for in § 1-1 of this Code. Each day that the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) In addition to the enforcement as described above, the provisions of this
section may also be enforced by noncriminal complaint pursuant to the
provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D, and such penalty shall be $50 for each
violation. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 293-2 SOLID WASTE § 293-2
293:5

ARTICLE II
Public or Private Dumps
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 8.16 of the 1993 Code]
§ 293-3. Use of public dumps restricted to residents.
No person not a resident of the City shall make use, by depositing trash, rubbish, refuse,
offal, or any material whatsoever, of any area used or set aside by the City as a public
dump.
§ 293-4. Transporting trash into City prohibited.
§ 293-5. Prohibited materials.
No person shall deposit in any dump, public or private, any animal or vegetable material
or other material which shall become a breeding place for rodents, flies or vermin. No
person shall deposit in any dump, public or private, any material which by reason of
odor, dust or putrefaction, or otherwise, shall be deemed to be an obnoxious material by
the Health Commissioner.
§ 293-6. Prohibited areas.
No person shall use as a dumping area for the disposal of rubbish, trash, refuse, fill or
other material any area not approved as a dumping site pursuant to the provisions of
MGL c. 111, § 150A.
§ 293-7. Use of motor vehicle; owner's responsibility.
§ 293-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating § 293-6 or 293-7A shall be penalized as provided by MGL c. 40,
§ 21D. The penalty for violation of said sections shall be $200 for each offense.
A. No person shall bring any trash, rubbish, refuse, offal or any material whatsoever
from without the City limits into the City for the purpose of depositing it in any area
used or set aside as a public or private dump.
B. Whoever knowingly violates this section shall be penalized by a fine of $200 for
each offense, which may be recovered by indictment or on complaint before a
district court and shall enure to the City, and will also forfeit rights to use the dump
for a minimum of 30 days.
A. No person shall use a registered motor vehicle, nor shall the owner permit the use
of his registered motor vehicle, to carry material to be dumped in violation of
§§ 293-3 through 293-6.
B. Evidence by the records of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles of the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts of the owner of a registered motor vehicle used in carrying any
material dumped in violation of §§ 293-3 through 293-7A shall be prima facie
evidence of the identity of the violator.
§ 293-3 SOLID WASTE § 293-9
293:7
§ 293-9. False information on application for dumping permit.
The penalty for knowingly falsifying information given on applications for dumping
permits for the City shall be set at $200 for each offense, which may be recovered by
indictment or on complaint before a district court and shall enure to the City.
§ 293-9 QUINCY CODE § 293-9
293:8
ARTICLE III
Disposable Plastic Shopping Bags
[Adopted 12-2-2019 by Order No. 2019-125 (Ch. 18.30 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 293-10. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to achieve a reduction in the use of disposable plastic
shopping bags by retail establishments in the City, thereby advancing solid waste
reduction, protecting marine ecosystems, protecting waterways, and reducing
greenhouse gas emissions. This article seeks to reduce the number of plastic bags that
are being used, discarded and littered, and to promote the use of reusable checkout bags
and recyclable paper bags by retail establishments located in the City.
§ 293-11. Definitions and word usage.
The following words shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly
requires otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the singular number
include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
DISPOSABLE PLASTIC SHOPPING BAG — Any retail check-out bag made
predominantly of plastic, derived either from petroleum, natural gas, or a biologically
based source, such as corn or other plant sources, which is provided to the customer at
the point of sale.
RECYCLABLE PAPER BAG — A paper bag which is 100% recyclable and contains
at least 40% post-consumer recycled content and displays the words "Recyclable" and
"Made from 40% post-consumer recyclable content" in a visible manner on the exterior
of such bag.
RETAIL CHECKOUT BAG—Any carry-out bag provided by a retail establishment to
a customer at the point of sale. Such bags shall not include:
The term "disposable plastic shopping bag" shall include:
(1) Degradable plastic bags; and
Biodegradable plastic bags which are not commercially compostable as well
as commercially compostable plastic bags.
(2)
A.
The term " disposable plastic shopping bag" shall not include:
(1) Reusable bags;
(2) Produce bags; or
(3) Product bags.
B.
As used in the foregoing definition, the term "produce bag" or "product bag" shall
mean any bag without handles used exclusively to carry produce, meats, seafood
or other food items to the point of sale inside a retail store, or used to prevent such
items from coming into contact with other purchased items.
C.
Bags, whether plastic or not, in which loose produce or bulk products are placed
by the consumer to carry such items to the point of sale or checkout area of a retail
A.
§ 293-10 SOLID WASTE § 293-11
293:9
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Any commercial enterprise, whether for or not for
profit, including, but not limited to, restaurants, pharmacies, convenience stores, grocery
stores, liquor stores, seasonal and temporary businesses, jewelry stores, and household
goods stores.
REUSABLE BAG — A bag that is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple
re-use, and is made of either polyester, polypropylene, cotton, or other durable material
or composition, and meets the following standards:
§ 293-12. Disposal plastic shopping bags prohibited.
No retail establishment shall provide a disposable plastic shopping bag to any customer
for the purpose of enabling the customer to carry away goods from the point of sale.
No provision of this article shall be read to preclude any establishment from offering
reusable bags to customers for sale to customers or utilizing recyclable bags at checkout.
§ 293-13. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
The penalty for violation of the provisions of this article by an establishment, following
the issuance of a written warning notice to the establishment, shall be $50, and $100
for each subsequent violation. A warning notice for an initial violation shall provide
at least 14 days for correction of such violation. No fine for a second or continuing
violation shall be issued until at least 14 days after a warning is issued. This article may
be enforced by any police officer or any agent of the City's Health Department, or by the
Board of Licensing Commissioners.
establishment.
B. Laundry or dry cleaner bags.
C. Newspaper bags.
Bags used to contain or wrap frozen foods, meats or fish, whether pre-packaged or
not, to prevent or contain moisture and/or to prevent contamination.
D.
Has a minimum lifetime capability of 125 or more uses carrying 22 or more pounds;
and
A.
Is machine washable or is made of material which can be cleaned or disinfected a
minimum of 125 times.
B.
§ 293-11 QUINCY CODE § 293-13
293:10
Chapter 300
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and water — See Ch. 270.
Water bodies and waterways — See Ch. 344.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 349.
§ 293-13 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 293-13
300:1

ARTICLE I
Discharges to Storm Drain System
[Adopted 6-15-2015 by Order No. 2015-102 (Ch. 13.10 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 300-1. Findings and objectives.
§ 300-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following shall mean:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — An activity, procedure, restraint, or
structural improvement that helps to reduce the quantity or improve the quality of
stormwater runoff.
CITY ENGINEER — The City Engineer of the City of Quincy or his/her designee.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq.) as hereafter amended.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Public Works of the City of Quincy or his/
her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS or DEPARTMENT — The branch of
government as defined in Chapter 66, Articles VI, VII and XI, of this Code authorized
to enforce the provisions of this article.
DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS — The addition from any source of any pollutant or
combination of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system or into the
waters of the commonwealth or the United States from any source.
FLOW — Stormwater or groundwater.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the surface of the ground.
A. Increased and contaminated stormwater runoff is a major cause of impairment of
water quality and flow in lakes, ponds, streams, rivers, wetlands and groundwater;
contamination of drinking water supplies; alteration or destruction of aquatic and
wildlife habitat; and flooding. Regulation of illicit connections and discharges to
the municipal storm drain system is necessary for the protection of the City of
Quincy's water bodies and groundwater and to safeguard the public health, safety,
and welfare and the environment.
B. The objectives of this article are to:
(1) Prevent pollutants from entering the City's municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4);
(2) Prohibit illicit connections and illicit discharges to the MS4;
(3) Require the removal of all such illicit connections;
(4) Comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating to stormwater
discharges; and
(5) Establish the legal authority to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
article through inspection, monitoring, and enforcement.
§ 300-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-2
300:3
ILLICIT CONNECTION — A surface or subsurface drain or conveyance which allows
an illicit discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system, including without
limitation sewage, process wastewater, or wash water, and any connections from indoor
drains, sinks, or toilets, regardless of whether said connection was previously allowed,
permitted, or approved before the effective date of this article.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Direct or indirect discharge to the municipal separate storm
sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except as exempted in
§ 300-8. The term does not include a discharge in compliance with an NPDES
stormwater discharge permit or a surface water discharge permit or resulting from
firefighting or other public safety activities exempted pursuant to § 300-8 of this article.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) or MUNICIPAL
STORM DRAIN SYSTEM — The system of conveyances designed or used for
collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage system, street,
gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility, retention or detention basin,
natural or man-made or altered drainage channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure,
that together comprise the storm drainage system owned or operated by the City.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by United States
Environmental Protection Agency or jointly with the state that authorizes the discharge
of pollutants to waters of the United States.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Discharge to the MS4 not composed entirely
of stormwater.
OWNER — A person, partnership, association, company or trust with a legal or
equitable interest in real property.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, firm, company, trust, corporation,
agency, authority, department or political subdivision of the commonwealth or the
federal government, to the extent permitted by law, and any officer, employee, or agent
of such person.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, heat,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and
agricultural wastes discharged into water.[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Water which, during manufacturing or processing,
comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any material,
intermediate product, finished product, or waste product.
STORMWATER — Stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface water runoff and
drainage.
STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — A structural or
nonstructural technique for managing stormwater to prevent or reduce nonpoint source
pollutants from entering surface waters or groundwaters. A structural stormwater best
management practice includes a basin, discharge outlet, swale, rain garden, biofilter, or
other stormwater treatment practice or measure either alone or in combination, including
without limitation any discharge pipe, overflow pipe, conduit, or weir control structure
that is not naturally occurring; is not designed as a wetland replication area; and has
been designed, constructed, and installed for the purpose of conveying, collecting,
§ 300-2 QUINCY CODE § 300-2
300:4
storing, discharging, recharging, or treating stormwater. Nonstructural stormwater best
management practices include source control and pollution prevention measures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural practices
that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or
peak flow discharge rates.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT — A permit issued by the City Engineer,
after review of an application, plans, calculations, and other supporting documents,
which is designed to protect the environment from the effects of uncontrolled and
untreated stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan required as part of the application
for a stormwater management permit and which may include, but not be limited to,
narrative, calculations, hydrologic models, figures, drawings and details developed by
a qualified professional engineer (PE), which describes the structural and nonstructural
stormwater best management practices necessary to meet the requirements of the
Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook performance standards.
SURFACE WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Department
of Environmental Protection (DEP) pursuant to 314 CMR 3.00 that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR WASTE — Any material which because
of its quantity, concentration, or chemical, corrosive, flammable, reactive, toxic,
infectious or radioactive characteristics, either separately or in combination with any
substance or substances, constitutes a present or potential threat to human health, safety
or welfare or to the environment. Toxic or hazardous materials include any synthetic
organic chemical, petroleum product, heavy metal, radioactive or infectious waste, acid
and alkali, and any substance defined as toxic or hazardous under MGL c. 21C and c.
21E and the regulations at 310 CMR 30.000 and 40.0000.[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order
No. 2020-012]
WASTEWATER—Any sanitary waste, sludge, or septic tank or cesspool overflow and
water that during manufacturing, cleaning or processing comes into direct contact with
or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, by-product or waste product.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or man-made channel through which water flows or a
stream of water, including a river, brook or underground stream.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All waters within the jurisdiction of the
commonwealth, including, without limitation, rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, springs,
impoundments, estuaries, wetlands, coastal waters, and groundwater.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES — All waters within the jurisdiction of the
United States, including, without limitation, rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, springs,
impoundments, estuaries, wetlands, coastal waters and groundwater.
§ 300-3. Applicability.
This article shall apply to flows entering the MS4.
§ 300-2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-4
300:5
§ 300-4. Authority.
This article is adopted under the authority granted by the Home Rule Amendment of
the Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule Procedures Act17 and pursuant to the
regulations of the federal Clean Water Act found at 40 CFR 122.34.
§ 300-5. Administration.
The Department of Public Works shall administer, implement, and enforce this article.
Nothing in this article is intended to abrogate any enforcement authorities of the Quincy
Health Department pursuant to the Massachusetts State Sanitary Code, 105 CMR 400 et
seq., or any other public health law. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon these
Departments may be delegated in writing to employees or agents of the Department.
§ 300-6. Rules and regulations.
The Commissioner may promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of
this article. Failure by the Department of Public Works to promulgate such rules and
regulations shall not have the effect of suspending or invalidating this article.
§ 300-7. Prohibited activities.
§ 300-8. Exemptions.
Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, the following types of discharges into
the MS4 are exempt from the prohibitions set herein:
A. Illicit discharges. No person shall dump, discharge, or cause or allow to be
discharged any pollutant or nonstormwater discharge into the MS4, into a private
stormwater system that connects to the MS4, into a watercourse, or into the waters
of the commonwealth or the United States.
B. Illicit connections. No person shall construct, use, allow, maintain or continue any
illicit connection to the MS4, or into a private separate storm sewer system that
connects to the MS4, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under
applicable law, regulation or custom at the time of connection.
C. Obstruction of MS4. No person shall obstruct or interfere with the normal flow of
stormwater into or out of the MS4 without a drain permit issued by the City
Engineer.
D. Introduction of earth-type materials. No person shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the MS4 any harmful quantity of sediment, silt, earth, soil, or other
material associated with cleaning, grading, excavation or other construction
activities (or associated with landfilling or other placement or disposal of soil, rock,
or other earth materials) in excess of what could be retained on site or captured by
employing sediment and erosion control measures to the maximum extent
practicable (under the prevailing circumstances).
A. Discharge or flow resulting from firefighting or other municipal public safety
17. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 43B.
§ 300-4 QUINCY CODE § 300-8
300:6
§ 300-9. New connections and alterations to existing connections; drain permit
required.
activities.
B. The following nonstormwater discharges or flows are exempt from the prohibition
of nonstormwater discharges provided that the source is not a significant
contributor of a pollutant to the municipal storm drain system:
(1) Flow from potable water sources;
(2) Springs;
(3) Natural flow from riparian habitats and wetlands; [Amended 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012]
(4) Diverted stream flow;
(5) Rising groundwater;
(6) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005(b)(20)
or uncontaminated pumped groundwater; [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
(7) Water from exterior foundation drains and footing drains (not active
groundwater);
(8) Discharge from landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
(9) Water from individual residential vehicle washing;
(10) Discharge from dechlorinated swimming pool water (less than one part per
million chlorine), provided that the water is allowed to stand for one week
prior to draining and the pool is drained in such a way as not to cause a
nuisance;
(11) Discharge from street sweeping;
(12) Dye testing, provided that written notification is given to the Department of
Public Works prior to the time of the test;
(13) Nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or a surface
water discharge permit, waiver, or waste discharge order administered under
the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the
Department of Environmental Protection, provided that the discharge is in full
compliance with the requirements of the permit, waiver, or other applicable
order, laws or regulations; and
(14) Discharge for which advanced written approval is received from the
Department of Public Works as necessary to protect public health, safety or
welfare or the environment.
A. No unauthorized person shall uncover, excavate over, block access to, make any
connection with or opening into, alter or disturb, or in any way directly or indirectly
§ 300-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-9
300:7
§ 300-10. Annual certification of stormwater management best management
practices.
All persons owning, operating, leasing or having control over stormwater management
facilities required by a stormwater management permit under Article II of this chapter
shall demonstrate compliance with that permit as follows:
use the MS4 or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a drain permit from
the City Engineer. Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or in
any way changing the volume or character of any effluent that is to be or is being
discharged into the MS4 shall be required to notify the City Engineer at least
45 days prior to the proposed change or connection and shall be further required
to obtain all required permits and to comply with all regulations and guidance
documents promulgated by the Commissioner pursuant to the authority granted to
the Commissioner by this article and by any and all applicable federal, state and
local laws, regulations and rules and shall be responsible for all fees and charges
established by the Commissioner in said regulations.
B. This provision shall not apply in situations of flooding emergencies, abatement and
response where groundwater infiltration may cause threat to public health and
safety.
C. All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection to the MS4 and
any costs of maintenance thereof shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of any connection to the MS4. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the Commissioner may provide for connection to the mains of the
municipal separate storm sewer system in the public way at the expense of the City
when the need for a new connection stems from the correction of improperly
connected separate storm sewer system lines as required by the United State
Environmental Protection Agency, the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection, the Massachusetts Water Resources Authority, and the
Department of Public Works. The Commissioner may limit the City's assumption
of costs for correction of improperly connected building separate storm sewer
system where the Commissioner determines that the improper connection was made
negligently, knowingly, or intentionally by the owner or from the owner of the
property, their agents, or acting on their behalf.
A. All stormwater management BMPs, including but not limited to any parking areas,
catch basins, drainage swales, detention basins and ponds, pipes and conveyancerelated
structures, shall be inspected at least annually, by the owner or a qualified
third party inspector, in accordance with all inspection, cleaning and maintenance
requirements of the approved stormwater management plan.
B. The owner shall take all corrective action(s) necessary to correct all deficiencies in
the stormwater management BMPs to ensure the stormwater management system is
operating as intended and approved.
C. By December 31 of each calendar year the owner or his/her third party designee
shall provide a completed and signed certification to the City Engineer certifying
that the owner has inspected the stormwater management BMPs and that they are
§ 300-9 QUINCY CODE § 300-10
300:8
§ 300-11. Emergency suspension of storm drainage system access.
The Department may suspend MS4 access to any person or property without prior
written notice when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge of pollutants or flow that presents imminent risk of harm to the public health,
safety, or welfare or the environment. In the event any person fails to comply with an
emergency suspension order, the Department may take all reasonable steps to prevent or
minimize harm to the public health, safety or welfare or the environment.
§ 300-12. Property destruction prohibited.
In addition to all penalties and remedies available to the Commissioner pursuant to the
regulations and guidance documents promulgated pursuant to the authority of this article
and provided in any other applicable federal, state or local law, regulation or rule, no
unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part
of the municipal separate storm sewer system. Any person violating this provision shall
be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
§ 300-13. Notification and records of spills.
adequately maintained and functioning as intended by the approved stormwater
management plan or that they require maintenance or repair. All necessary repairs
and required maintenance to the stormwater management BMPs identified during
the inspection of the stormwater management system shall be described in detail
along with all corrective action(s) taken.
D. The cost for all inspections and corrective action required under this section shall
be borne by the owner.
A. Notwithstanding other requirements of local, state or federal law, as soon as a
person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of or suspects a release of
materials at that facility or operation resulting in or which may result in discharge
of pollutants to the municipal drainage system or waters of the commonwealth or
the United States, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure containment
and cleanup of the release. In the event of a release of oil or hazardous materials,
the person shall immediately notify the Department and the municipal Fire and
Police Departments.
B. In the event of a release of nonhazardous material, the reporting person shall notify
the Department and City Engineer no later than the next business day. The reporting
person shall provide to the Department of Public Works written confirmation of all
telephone, facsimile or in-person notifications within three business days thereafter.
If the discharge of prohibited materials is from a commercial or industrial facility,
the facility owner or operator of the facility shall retain on site a written record of
the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be
retained for at least three years from the date of the spill.
§ 300-10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-14
300:9
§ 300-14. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The Department shall enforce this article, regulations, orders, violation notices, and
enforcement orders and may pursue all civil and criminal remedies for such violations.
A. Civil relief. If a person violates the provisions of this article, regulations, permit,
notice, or order issued thereunder, the Department may seek injunctive relief in a
court of competent jurisdiction restraining the person from activities which would
create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation.
B. Orders.
(1) The Department may issue a written order to enforce the provisions of this
article or the regulations thereunder, which may include: elimination of illicit
connections or discharges to the MS4; elimination of excess flow causing
harm or damage to public or private property; performance of monitoring,
analyses, and reporting; annual certification of stormwater management BMPs
permitted under Article II of this chapter; that unlawful discharges, practices,
or operations shall cease and desist; and remediation of contamination in
connection therewith. If the enforcing person determines that abatement of
flow or remediation of contamination is required, the order shall set forth a
deadline by which such abatement or remediation must be completed. Said
order shall further advise that, should the violator or property owner fail to
abate or perform remediation within the specified deadline, the City may, at its
option, undertake such work after advising the owner of the cost associated
with the remediation, and expenses thereof shall be charged to the violator.
(2) Within 30 days after completing all measures necessary to abate the violation
or to perform remediation, the violator and the property owner will be notified
of the costs incurred by the City, including administrative costs. The violator
or property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount or basis
of costs with the Department within 30 days of receipt of the notification of
the costs incurred. If the amount due is not received by the expiration of the
time in which to file a protest or within 30 days following a decision affirming
or reducing the costs, or from a final decision of a court of competent
jurisdiction, the costs shall become an assessment against the property owner
and shall constitute a municipal charges lien on the owner's property for the
amount of said costs. Interest shall begin to accrue on any unpaid costs at the
statutory rate provided in MGL c. 59, § 57, after the 31st day at which the costs
first become due.
C. Criminal penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this article, regulation,
order or permit issued thereunder shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$1,000. Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
D. Noncriminal disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution or civil action,
the City may elect to utilize the noncriminal disposition procedure set forth in MGL
c. 40, § 21D, in which case the Commissioner and/or other authorized agent of the
City shall be the enforcing person. The penalty for a violation shall be $300 per
violation. Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall
§ 300-14 QUINCY CODE § 300-14
300:10
constitute a separate offense.
E. Entry to perform duties under this article. To the extent permitted by state law, or if
authorized by the owner or other party in control of the property, the Department of
Public Works and the Health Department, their agents, officers, and employees,
may enter upon privately owned property for the purpose of performing their duties
under this article and regulations and may make or cause to be made such
examinations, surveys or sampling as such Department deems reasonably
necessary.
F. Appeals. Other than those remedies listed in § 300-14C, the decisions or orders of
the Department shall be final. Further relief shall be to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
G. Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any
other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law.
§ 300-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-14
300:11

ARTICLE II
Stormwater Management and Land Disturbance
[Adopted 6-15-2015 by Order No. 2015-103 (Ch. 13.14 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 300-15. Findings and objectives.
A. The harmful impacts of polluted and unmanaged stormwater runoff are known to
cause:
(1) Impairment of water quality and flow in lakes, ponds, streams, rivers,
wetlands, and groundwater;
(2) Contamination of drinking water supplies;
(3) Erosion of stream channels;
(4) Alteration or destruction of aquatic and wildlife habitat;
(5) Flooding; and
(6) Overloading or clogging of municipal storm drain systems.
B. The objectives of this article are to:
(1) Protect groundwater and surface water from degradation;
(2) Require practices that reduce soil erosion and sedimentation and control the
volume and rate of stormwater runoff resulting from development,
construction, and land surface alteration;
(3) Promote infiltration and the recharge of groundwater;
(4) Prevent pollutants from entering the City of Quincy municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) and to minimize discharge of pollutants from the MS4;
(5) Ensure adequate, long-term operation and maintenance of structural
stormwater best management practices;
(6) Ensure that soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and stormwater
runoff control practices that are incorporated into the site planning and design
processes are implemented and maintained;
(7) Require practices to control waste such as discarded building materials,
concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the
construction site that may cause adverse impacts to water quality;
(8) Comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating to stormwater
discharges; and
(9) Establish the City of Quincy's legal authority to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this article through inspection, monitoring, and enforcement.
§ 300-15 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-16
300:13
§ 300-16. Definitions. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this
article. Additional terms that apply to issuance of a permit established by this article
shall be defined and included as part of the rules promulgated and from time to time
amended under § 300-19 of this article, a copy of which is available at the Conservation
Commission and the office of the City Clerk. Terms not defined in said regulations or
pertinent statutes shall be construed according to their customary and usual meaning.
AGRICULTURE — The normal maintenance or improvement of land in agricultural
or aquacultural use, as defined by the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act18 and its
implementing regulations.
ALTER — Any activity which will measurably change the ability of a ground surface
area to absorb water or will change existing surface drainage. "Alter" may be similarly
represented as "alteration of drainage characteristics" and "conducting land disturbance
activities."
APPLICANT — Any person, individual, partnership, association, firm, company,
corporation, trust, authority, agency, department, or political subdivision of the
commonwealth or the federal government, to the extent permitted by law, requesting a
soil erosion and sediment control permit for proposed land disturbance activity.
APPROVAL NOT REQUIRED (ANR)—A plan of land that does not require approval
under the Subdivision Control Law of Massachusetts (MGL c. 41, §§ 81K through
81GG).
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — An activity, procedure, restraint, or
structural improvement that helps to reduce the quantity or improve the quality of
stormwater runoff.
CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL IN EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL — A
certified specialist in soil erosion and sediment control.
CITY ENGINEER — The City Engineer of the City of Quincy or his/her designee.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq.), as hereafter amended.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Public Works of the City of Quincy or his/
her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT — Any announcement or piece of
documentation (including a contract, public notice or hearing, advertisement, drawing,
plan, or permit application, etc.) or physical demarcation (including boundary signs,
lot stakes, surveyor marking, etc.) indicating imminent or future plans to disturb earth
regardless of how many phases or how long it will take to complete. Under this article,
a facility is no longer considered a common plan if the following criteria are met:
The original plan, including modifications, was substantially completed with less
than one acre of the original common plan remaining (i.e., less than one acre of the
common plan was not built out at the time); and
A.
18. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 131, § 40.
§ 300-16 QUINCY CODE § 300-16
300:14
CONSTRUCTION AND WASTE MATERIALS — Excess or discarded building or
site materials, including but not limited to concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and
sanitary waste at a construction site that may adversely impact water quality.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS or DEPARTMENT — The branch of
government as defined in Chapter 66, Articles VI, VII and XI, of this Code authorized
to enforce the provisions of this article.
DEVELOPMENT —The modification of land to accommodate a new use or expansion
of use usually involving construction.
DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS — The addition from any source of any pollutant or
combination of pollutants into the MS4 system or into the waters of the commonwealth
or the United States from any source.
EROSION — The wearing away of the land surface by natural or artificial forces
such as wind, water, ice, gravity, or vehicle traffic and the subsequent detachment and
transportation of soil particles.
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN — A document containing
narrative, drawings, and details developed by a qualified professional engineer (PE)
or a certified professional in erosion and sedimentation control which includes best
management practices or equivalent measures designed to control surface runoff, erosion
and sedimentation during pre-construction and construction-related land disturbance
activities.
ESTIMATED HABITAT OF RARE WILDLIFE AND CERTIFIED VERNAL POOLS
— Habitats delineated for state-protected rare wildlife and certified vernal pools for use
with the Wetlands Protection Act Regulations (310 CMR 10.00) and the Forest Cutting
Practices Act Regulations (304 CMR 11.00).
FLOW — Stormwater or groundwater.
GRADING — Changing the level or shape of the ground surface.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the surface of the ground.
GRUBBING — The act of clearing land surface by digging up roots and stumps.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — A surface or subsurface drain or conveyance which allows
an illicit discharge into the MS4 system, including, without limitation, sewage, process
wastewater, or wash water and any connections from indoor drains, sinks, or toilets,
regardless of whether said connection was previously allowed, permitted, or approved
before the effective date of this article.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Direct or indirect discharge to the MS4 system that is not
composed entirely of stormwater, except as exempted in § 300-22. The term does not
include a discharge in compliance with an NPDES stormwater discharge permit or
a surface water discharge permit or resulting from firefighting or other public safety
activities exempted pursuant to § 300-22 of this article.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material or structure on or above the ground that
prevents water from infiltrating the underlying soil. "Impervious surface" includes,
without limitation, roads, paved parking lots, sidewalks, and rooftops.
There was clearly an identifiable period of time (two years or more) where there
was no ongoing construction, including meeting the criteria for final stabilization.
B.
§ 300-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-16
300:15
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity that causes a change in the position, location,
or arrangement of soil, sand, rock, gravel, or similar earth material. See also "alter."
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT TECHNIQUES — Stormwater management
practices that are modeled after natural hydrologic features. Low-impact development
techniques manage rainfall at the source using uniformly distributed decentralized
microscale controls. Low-impact development techniques use small cost-effective
landscape features located at the lot level.
MASSACHUSETTS ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT — Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 131A and its implementing regulations at 321 CMR 10.00 which prohibit the
taking of any rare plant or animal species listed as endangered, threatened, or of special
concern.
MASSACHUSETTS STORMWATER MANAGEMENT POLICY — The policy
issued by the Department of Environmental Protection and as amended that coordinates
the requirements prescribed by state regulations promulgated under the authority of the
Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and Massachusetts Clean
Waters Act, MGL c. 21, §§ 23 to 56. The policy addresses stormwater impacts through
implementation of stormwater management standards to reduce or prevent pollutants
from reaching water bodies and control the quantity of runoff from a site.
MASSACHUSETTS STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS — The
requirements described in the Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook, as they may be
amended from time to time, that address water quality (pollutants) and water quantity
(flooding, low base flow, and recharge) by establishing standards that require the
implementation of a wide variety of stormwater management strategies. These strategies
include environmentally sensitive site design and low-impact development techniques
to minimize impervious surface and land disturbance, source control and pollution
prevention, structural best management practices, construction period erosion and
sedimentation control, and the long-term operation and maintenance of stormwater
management systems. The Stormwater Management Standards have been incorporated
in the Wetlands Protection Act Regulations, 310 CMR 10.05(6)(k), and the Water
Quality Certification Regulations, 314 CMR 9.06(6)(a).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) or MUNICIPAL
STORM DRAIN SYSTEM — The system of conveyances designed or used for
collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage system, street,
gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility, retention or detention basin,
natural or man-made or altered drainage channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure,
that together comprise the storm drainage system owned or operated by the City.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency or jointly with the state that authorizes the discharge
of pollutants to waters of the United States.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Discharge to the MS4 not composed entirely
of stormwater.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN — A plan setting up the functional,
financial, and organizational mechanisms for the ongoing operation and maintenance of
a stormwater management system to ensure that it continues to function as designed.
§ 300-16 QUINCY CODE § 300-16
300:16
OUTFALL—A point source as defined by 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where a municipal
separate storm sewer discharges to waters of the United States and does not include open
conveyances connecting two municipal separate storm sewers or pipes, tunnels or other
conveyances which connect segments of the same stream or other waters of the United
States and are used to convey waters of the United States.
OUTSTANDING RESOURCE WATERS (ORWS) — Waters designated by the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection as outstanding resource waters.
These waters have exceptional sociological, recreational, ecological, and/or aesthetic
values and are subject to more stringent requirements under both the Massachusetts
Water Quality Standards (314 CMR 4.00) and the Massachusetts Stormwater
Management Standards. Outstanding resource waters include:
OWNER — A person, partnership, association, company or trust with a legal or
equitable interest in real property.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, firm, company, trust, corporation,
agency, authority, department or political subdivision of the commonwealth or the
federal government, to the extent permitted by law, and any officer, employee, or agent
of such person.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including
but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, or
container, from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, heat,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and
agricultural wastes discharged into water.
PRE-CONSTRUCTION — All activity in preparation for construction.
PRIORITY HABITAT OF RARE SPECIES — Habitats delineated for rare plant and
animal populations protected pursuant to the Massachusetts Endangered Species Act and
its regulations.
PROCESS WASTEWATER—Water which during manufacturing or processing comes
into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any material,
intermediate product, finished product, or waste product.
RECHARGE — The process by which groundwater is replenished by precipitation
through the percolation of runoff and surface water through the soil.
REDEVELOPMENT — The development, replacement, rehabilitation, expansion,
demolition, or phased projects that disturb the ground surface or increase the impervious
area on previously developed sites. Standards of redevelopment only apply to the
portions of the parcel that currently contain alteration by human activities.
Vernal pools certified by the Natural Heritage and Endangered Species Program of
the Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife;
A.
All Class A designated public water supplies with their bordering vegetated
wetlands; and
B.
C. Other waters specifically designated.
§ 300-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-16
300:17
RUNOFF — Rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface.
SEDIMENT — Mineral or organic soil material that is transported by wind or water
from its origin to another location; the product of erosion processes.
SEDIMENTATION — The process or act of deposition of sediment.
SITE — Any lot or parcel of land or area of property where land disturbing activities
are, were, or will be performed.
SLOPE — The incline of a ground surface expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to
vertical distance.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, rock, gravel, or similar material.
STABILIZATION — The use, singly or in combination, of mechanical, structural, or
vegetative methods to prevent or retard erosion.
STORMWATER — Stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, surface water runoff, and
drainage.
STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — A structural or
nonstructural technique for managing stormwater to prevent or reduce nonpoint source
pollutants from entering surface waters or groundwaters. A structural stormwater best
management practice includes a basin, discharge outlet, swale, rain garden, biofilter, or
other stormwater treatment practice or measure either alone or in combination, including
without limitation any discharge pipe, overflow pipe, conduit, or weir control structure
that is not naturally occurring; is not designed as a wetland replication area; and has
been designed, constructed, and installed for the purpose of conveying, collecting,
storing, discharging, recharging, or treating stormwater. Nonstructural stormwater best
management practices include source control and pollution prevention measures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural practices
that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or
peak flow discharge rates.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT — A permit issued by the City Engineer,
after review of an application, plans, calculations, and other supporting documents,
which is designed to protect the environment from the effects of uncontrolled and
untreated stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan required as part of the application
for a stormwater management permit and which may include, but not be limited to,
narrative, calculations, hydrologic models, figures, drawings, details and long-term
operations and maintenance developed by a qualified professional engineer (PE) which
describes the structural and nonstructural stormwater best management practices
necessary to meet the requirements of the Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook
performance standards.
STRIP — Any activity which removes the vegetative ground surface cover, including
tree removal, clearing, grubbing, and storage or removal of topsoil.
SURFACE WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Department
of Environmental Protection (DEP) pursuant to 314 CMR 3.00 that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR WASTE — Any material which because
§ 300-16 QUINCY CODE § 300-16
300:18
of its quantity, concentration, or chemical, corrosive, flammable, reactive, toxic,
infectious or radioactive characteristics, either separately or in combination with any
substance or substances, constitutes a present or potential threat to human health, safety
or welfare or to the environment. Toxic or hazardous materials include any synthetic
organic chemical, petroleum product, heavy metal, radioactive or infectious waste, acid
and alkali, and any substance defined as toxic or hazardous under MGL c. 21C and c.
21E and the regulations at 310 CMR 30.000 and 310 CMR 40.0000.
TSS — Total suspended solids.
VERNAL POOLS — Temporary bodies of freshwater which provide critical habitat for
a number of vertebrate and invertebrate wildlife species.
WASTEWATER—Any sanitary waste, sludge, or septic tank or cesspool overflow, and
water that during manufacturing, cleaning, or processing comes into direct contact with
or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, by-product, or waste product.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or man-man channel through which water flows or a
stream of water, including a river, brook, or underground stream.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All waters within the jurisdiction of the
commonwealth, including, without limitation, rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, springs,
impoundments, estuaries, wetlands, coastal waters, and groundwater.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES — All waters within the jurisdiction of the
United States, including, without limitation, rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, springs,
impoundments, estuaries, wetlands, coastal waters, and groundwater.
WETLAND RESOURCE AREA — Areas specified in the Massachusetts Wetlands
Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and in Chapter 349, Wetlands Protection, of this
Code.
WETLANDS — Tidal and nontidal areas characterized by saturated or nearly saturated
soils most of the year that are located between terrestrial (land-based) and aquatic (waterbased)
environments, including freshwater marshes around ponds and channels (rivers
and streams) and brackish and salt marshes; common names include marshes, swamps
and bogs.
§ 300-17. Authority.
This Stormwater Management Ordinance is hereby established in the City of Quincy,
Massachusetts. This article is adopted under authority granted by the Home Rule
Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution, the home rule statutes, and pursuant to
the regulations of the federal Clean Water Act found at 40 CFR 122.34.
§ 300-18. Scope and applicability.
A. This article shall be applicable to the following activities:
(1) Any subdivision as defined in the Massachusetts Subdivision Control Law
(MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG) requiring a definitive plan;
(2) Any activities that result in a land disturbance of one acre or greater within the
City of Quincy. "Land disturbance" shall mean any action that causes
§ 300-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-18
300:19
vegetation clearing (including tree cutting) or a change in the position,
location, or arrangement of soil, sand, rock, gravel or similar earth material;
and
(3) Any activities that result in a land disturbance less than one acre if the project
is part of a larger common plan of development which will disturb one acre or
more within the City of Quincy. Plans that do not require approval under the
Subdivision Control Law, hereafter referred to as "approval not required or
ANR lots," and meet one or more of the applicability criteria described herein
are subject to the provisions of this article and shall obtain a stormwater
management permit.
B. No person who meets the applicability of this article shall alter land within the City
of Quincy without having obtained a stormwater management permit, with the
following exemptions:
(1) Normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural or aquacultural
use, as defined by the Wetlands Protection Act Regulations, 310 CMR 10.04,
and MGL c. 40A, § 3.
(2) Ground disturbances in the course of customary cemetery use and regular
maintenance.
(3) Maintenance of existing landscaping, gardens, or lawn areas associated with a
single-family dwelling.
(4) The construction of fencing that will not substantially alter existing terrain or
drainage patterns.
(5) Construction of utilities other than drainage (gas, water, electric, telephone,
etc.) which will not alter terrain or drainage patterns.
(6) Any work or projects for which the required permit applications have been
submitted to the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, and/or
Conservation Commission before the effective date of this article. For
proposed subdivisions, a definitive plan must have been submitted to be
considered exempt from this article.
(7) Emergency repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice, such
that the original design, location, size, and technology remain the same, that
poses a threat to public health or safety or as deemed necessary by the
Conservation Commission or its authorized agent. [Amended 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012]
(8) Municipal roadway and public walkways.
(9) Any construction activity or project wholly within the jurisdiction of the
Conservation Commission, provided that an order of conditions has been
issued by the Conservation Commission under MGL c. 131, § 40, and Chapter
349, Wetlands Protection, of the Quincy Municipal Code, provided that the
order of conditions is not less restrictive than the requirements of this article.
C. Coordination with other permit and ordinance requirements.
§ 300-18 QUINCY CODE § 300-18
300:20
§ 300-19. Administration.
The City Engineer shall administer, implement and enforce this article. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the City Engineer may be delegated in writing by the
City Engineer to other Department of Public Works employees. The City Engineer or his
designee shall act as the stormwater management permit administrator.
(1) A party shall not be deemed compliant with the provisions of this article by
virtue of its obtaining a City earth removal permit, order of conditions from
the Conservation Commission, building permit, subdivision approval, and/or
special permit, variance or finding from the Zoning Board of Appeals for a
project or activity that meets the scope and applicability of this article, No
work shall commence until the site owner or his/her agent submits a complete
stormwater management permit application and the site owner and applicant
sign and certify that all land clearing, construction, and development will be
done pursuant to the approved plans and permit.
(2) This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The
requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and
where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those
imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law,
whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective
standards for human health or the environment shall take precedence.
(3) In case of conflicting requirements, applicable state statutes and regulations
shall be considered the more restrictive or more protective of human health
and the environment and shall take precedence over this article and the
regulations promulgated thereunder. These state statutes and regulations
include, but are not limited to, the following documents: the Massachusetts
Wetlands Protection Act, the Massachusetts Rivers Act, the Massachusetts
Watershed Protection Act, and the Massachusetts Stormwater Management
Standards, as amended.
A. Rules and regulations. The Department of Public Works may adopt, and
periodically amend, rules, regulations, policies or guidelines relating to the terms,
conditions, definitions, fees (including application, clerical, inspection, and/or
consultant fees), procedures, and administration of this article. Failure of the
Department to promulgate such rules and regulations shall not be deemed a waiver
by the Department or serve to suspend or invalidate the effect of this article.
B. Stormwater Management Handbook. The Department will utilize the
Massachusetts Stormwater Management Standards and Handbook, as amended
from time to time, for criteria and information including specifications and
standards for the execution of the provisions of this article. These include a list of
acceptable stormwater treatment practices, with specific design criteria for each.
Unless specifically altered in this article and regulations, stormwater management
practices that are designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the
Massachusetts Stormwater Management Standards and design and sizing criteria in
the Stormwater Management Handbook shall be presumed by the Conservation
Commission to be protective of Massachusetts water quality standards. [Amended
§ 300-18 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-19
300:21
§ 300-20. Permits and procedures.
§ 300-21. Performance standards.
Criteria for erosion and sediment control and stormwater management, including
stormwater performance standards, shall be in accordance with the standards of the
Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook and any supplemental requirements that may be
contained under the regulations of § 300-19A of this article.
§ 300-22. Waivers.
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
C. Actions by the Department. The City Engineer may take any of the following
actions as a result of an application for a stormwater management permit as more
specifically defined as part of the rules, policies, or guidelines promulgated as part
of this article: approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. Failure of the
City Engineer to take final action upon an application within the time specified in
the rules, policies or guidelines created or promulgated under Subsection A of this
section shall be deemed to be a denial of said application.
D. Appeals. The decisions or orders of the City Engineer shall be final. Further relief
shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Application. A completed application for a stormwater management permit shall be
filed with the City Engineer. While the applicant can be a representative, the
permittee must be the owner of the site.
B. The stormwater management permit application package shall include:
(1) A completed application form with original signatures of all owners;
(2) Three copies of the stormwater management plan and project description as
required by this article;
(3) Three copies of the erosion and sediment control plan as required by this
article; and
(4) Payment of the application and review fees.
C. Fee structure. Each application must be accompanied by the appropriate application
fee as established by the City. Applicants shall pay review fees sufficient to cover
any expenses connected with review of the stormwater management permit
application before the review process commences. The City Engineer is authorized
to retain a registered professional engineer or other professional consultant to
advise him/her on any or all aspects of the application.
D. Permit procedures and requirements, including permit submittals, right of entry,
and fee schedule, shall be defined and included as part of the rules and regulations
created or promulgated under § 300-19A of this article.
A. The City Engineer may grant a waiver to an applicant allowing for an exemption
from strict compliance with any requirement of this article or the rules and
§ 300-19 QUINCY CODE § 300-22
300:22
§ 300-23. Final reports.
Upon completion of the work, the permittee shall submit a report (including certified
as-built construction plans) from a professional engineer (PE), surveyor, or certified
professional in erosion and sediment control certifying that all stormwater management
BMPs have been constructed in accordance with the stormwater management plan
and approved changes and modifications have been completed in accordance with the
conditions of the approved permit. Any discrepancies should be noted in the cover letter.
§ 300-24. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
regulations promulgated hereunder after issuing a written opinion that such a
waiver is:
(1) Permitted under applicable federal, state, and local statutes and/or regulations;
(2) In the public interest; and
(3) Consistent with the purpose and intent of this article and its regulations.
B. Criteria for granting a waiver shall be defined and included as part of the rules and
regulations created or promulgated under § 300-19A of this article.
A. Orders.
(1) The Department may issue a written order to enforce the provisions of this
article or the regulations thereunder, which may include abatement, mitigation,
and compliance measures for violations of this article. The order shall set forth
a deadline by which such abatement or remediation must be completed. Said
order shall further advise that, should the violator or property owner fail to
abate or perform remediation within the specified deadline, the City may, at its
option, undertake such work after advising the owner of the cost associated
with the remediation, and expenses thereof shall be charged to the violator.
(2) Within 30 days after completing all measures necessary to abate the violation
or to perform remediation, the violator and the property owner will be notified
of the costs incurred by the City, including administrative costs. The violator
or property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount or basis
of costs with the Department within 30 days of receipt of the notification of
the costs incurred. If the amount due is not received by the expiration of the
time in which to file a protest or within 30 days following a decision affirming
or reducing the costs, or from a final decision of a court of competent
jurisdiction, the costs shall become an assessment against the property owner
and shall constitute a municipal charges lien on the owner's property for the
amount of said costs. Interest shall begin to accrue on any unpaid costs at the
statutory rate provided in MGL c. 59, § 57, after the 31st day at which the costs
first become due.
B. Civil relief. The Department of Public Works or an authorized agent of the
Department shall enforce this article and resulting rules, regulations, policies,
guidelines, orders, violation notices, and enforcement orders and may pursue all
civil and criminal remedies, including injunctive relief and monetary damages and
§ 300-22 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-24
300:23
costs of litigation and attorney fees, for such violations and for abatement and
mitigation and compliance actions taken by the Department.
C. Noncriminal disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution or civil action,
the City may elect to utilize the noncriminal disposition procedure set forth in MGL
c. 40, § 21D, in which case the Commissioner or other authorized agent of the City
shall be the enforcing person. The penalty for a violation shall be $300 per
violation. Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
D. Right to enter and inspect. To the extent permitted by state law, or if authorized by
the owner or other party in control of the property, the Department's agents,
officers, and employees may enter upon privately owned property for the purpose
of performing their duties under this article and may make or cause to be made such
examinations, surveys, or sampling the Department deems reasonably necessary to
determine compliance with a permit issued under this article. Enforcement may be
further defined and included as part of the rules, policies or guidelines created or
promulgated under § 300-19A of this article.
E. Appeals. The decisions or orders of the Department shall be final. Further relief
shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction.
F. Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any
other remedies available under any applicable federal, state, or local law.
§ 300-24 QUINCY CODE § 300-24
300:24
ARTICLE III
Fees and Charges
[Adopted 6-15-2015 by Order No. 2015-104]
§ 300-25. Drain and stormwater charges
Upon the recommendation of the Commissioner of Public Works and with the approval
of his Honor, the Mayor, the value of drain and stormwater management charges shall
be set at the following:
A. Drain permit fees: $300 per change or connection.
B. Stormwater management permit fees:
(1) Single-family residential lot: $300 (nonrefundable).
(2) Subdivision: $300 or $0.0090 per square foot of the total parcel (whichever is
larger), up to $1,500 (nonrefundable).
(3) Commercial/industrial/institutional/exempt property: $300 or $0.0090 per
square foot of the total parcel (whichever is larger), up to $1,500
(nonrefundable).
(4) Multifamily project: $300 or $0.0090 per square foot of the total parcel
(whichever is larger), up to $1,500 (nonrefundable).
(5) Other projects subject to Article II of this chapter: $300 or $0.0090 per square
foot of the total parcel (whichever is larger), up to $1,500 (nonrefundable).
(6) Permit extensions/modifications: $50 (nonrefundable).
C. Engineering and/or consultant fees associated with stormwater management
permits:
(1) Initial fee: $5,000 (held in escrow).
(2) Subsequent fees as required: actual cost (held in escrow).
D. Maintenance and inspection fees associated with:
(1) Cost of inspection and maintenance based on operations and maintenance
(O&M) plan: estimated cost for three years of inspections and maintenance as
determined by the City Engineer (nonrefundable).
E. Private infrastructure analysis: cost of analysis of drain infrastructure and/or BMPs.
F. Private infrastructure repair: cost of repair, including labor, repair and materials.
§ 300-25 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-25
300:25

Chapter 305
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public property — See Ch. 253.
Utility permits — See Ch. 319.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 325.
§ 300-25 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 300-25
305:1

ARTICLE I
Construction and Maintenance
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 12.04 of the 1993 Code]
§ 305-1. Petitions.
All petitions for laying out, widening, altering or discontinuing any street or way shall
be presented to the City Council and referred to the Planning Board.
§ 305-2. Acceptance of public streets.
No street or way shall hereafter be laid out and accepted as a public street in the City
other than under the provisions of the act authorizing the assessments of betterments,
unless such street or way shall have been previously constructed and completed in
accordance with the specifications and dimensions established in § 305-6; provided,
however, that this section shall not apply to streets or ways actually opened and used for
public travel prior to January 1, 1915.
§ 305-3. Streets constructed on private land.
No street or way constructed on private lands by the owners thereof shall hereafter be
laid out or accepted as a public street of the City unless previously constructed and
completed in accordance with the specifications and dimensions established in § 305-6.
§ 305-4. Assessments for streets.
The owner of any lot abutting on any accepted street shall be assessed betterments not
exceeding 25% of the estimated cost, including damages, of building that part of such
street abutting on such lot on the basis of the foot frontage of such lot, except that the
owner of a corner lot shall not be assessed more than 75% of the combined betterment
assessments on the intersecting streets figured as above, when and if the second street is
accepted and built.
§ 305-5. Assessments for sidewalks.
The owner of any lot of land abutting on any street upon which a sidewalk of brick,
stone, concrete or other similar permanent type is constructed shall be assessed
betterments not to exceed 50% of the cost of the sidewalk abutting on the lot.
§ 305-6. Street construction procedures and specifications.
A. Plan; filing. A plan and profile of every street shall be filed in the office of the City
Engineer, who shall fix the grade thereof.
B. Clearing. The entire area of every such street shall first be cleared of all stumps,
roots, brush and like material, and all trees not intended for preservation.
C. Loam removal. All loam and loamy material shall be removed from the limits of
the street, inclusive of sidewalks, to such depth as may be approved by the
Commissioner of Public Works, and shall be carefully deposited in piles or spread
on either side of the street, but in no case within the limits of such street.
§ 305-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 305-6
305:3
§ 305-7. Typical street sections; dimensions; class of construction. [Amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
§ 305-8. Required street width; exemptions.
No street or highway shall be laid out or accepted by the City of a width less than 40
feet unless the same shall have been actually opened and used for public travel prior to
January 1, 1915.
§ 305-9. Streets without sidewalks, curbing or drainage.
D. Excavation; embankments.
(1) All work in excavation or embankment shall be brought accurately to a
subgrade established by the Public Works Department for roadway and
sidewalk as shown on such plan and profile. All side slopes in excavation and
on adjoining land shall be at the ratio of at least two horizontal on one vertical
to a subgrade 12 inches below finished grade. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order
No. 2020-012]
(2) All rocks and boulders in excavation shall be removed from the street or used
in embankments. Embankments shall be made of clear sand, gravel, cinders,
furnace slag, sound rock or broken stone only. Under no circumstances shall
any perishable material be used for making of street embankments.
E. Finish grade construction. Above such subgrade and to finish grade, binding gravel,
crushed stone, and a wearing surface, or other similar construction, shall be used as
may be approved by the Commissioner of Public Works.
F. Curbing. All curbing installed on any street or way in the City shall be granite
curbing. The installation of all curbing shall be at the discretion of the City
Engineer, who shall choose from any of the following types of granite curbing:
Type VA-3, VB-0, VB-1, VB-2, or VB-3, or Type SA, in accordance with the
Massachusetts Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Curbing.
A. The dimensions of typical street sections shall be determined by the Public Works
Department in accordance with the Massachusetts Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges, current edition, to provide a
street capable of handling the anticipated traffic load, as may be determined by a
report from the Department of Planning and Community Development. This
determination shall indicate the class of construction required in accordance with
the following table:
(1) Class "A" streets: heavy through traffic – limited heavy traffic.
(2) Class "B" streets: heavy residential traffic – light residential traffic.
(3) Class "C" streets: limited local use.
B. There shall be on file in the Public Works Department of the City typical halfsection
drawings showing the construction of these three classes of streets. These
sections shall be used as a guide for new street construction whenever practical.
§ 305-6 QUINCY CODE § 305-9
305:4
§ 305-10. Temporary repairs to private ways.
§ 305-11. Construction and maintenance of private ways.
A. The City Council may authorize the laying out of streets and construction thereof
without sidewalks or without curbing or without drainage and construction not in
accordance with § 305-6 wherein it appears that public interest and convenience so
require. The order for such construction shall specifically state that sidewalks,
curbing or drainage is omitted.
B. These streets shall be designated as of special construction, and, where sidewalks
or curbing or drainage is omitted, the later installations shall be under the
betterment assessment law. Specially constructed streets shall be subject to
§§ 305-1 to 305-6 and 305-8 unless otherwise ordered.
A. Authorization; petition.
(1) In accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 6N, the Commissioner of
Public Works may make such temporary repairs to private ways as in his
judgment may be required by the public necessity.
(2) The Commissioner of Public Works shall determine the type and extent of the
repairs to be made and whether drainage shall be included.
(3) A majority of abutters must petition for such repairs, but no betterment charge
shall be assessed, nor shall any cash deposit be required.
(4) It shall be necessary that the private way be opened to public use, but not for
any term of years.
(5) The City shall assume no liability on account of damages caused by such
repairs except to the extent required by law.
B. Restrictions; procedures.
(1) Repairs shall only include temporary repairs, such as the filling in of holes and
depressions with suitable materials. They shall not include resurfacing or
permanent construction of said ways.
(2) Only those repairs required by public necessity, as determined by the City
Council, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Works, shall be
made.
(3) Such repairs may be made only if petitioned for by a majority of the abutters.
(4) Betterment charges may be assessed by the City Council in its discretion but
not exceed 1/2 of the cost of repairs or improvements.
(5) The City shall not be liable for damage caused by such repairs to any greater
extent than if such work were done on a public way.
(6) Repairs may be made only on private ways which have been opened to public
use for six years or more, and in such cases MGL c. 84, § 25, shall not apply.
§ 305-9 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 305-11
305:5
A. The Public Works Department may construct, reconstruct, resurface, and repair any
private way which has been used by the public for six years or more, provided that
§ 305-10B(1) through (6) shall apply to any such work.
B. Drainage may be included in any such work if the Public Works Department
determines that it is necessary for the proper completion of said work.
§ 305-11 QUINCY CODE § 305-11
305:6
ARTICLE II
Use Regulations
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 12.08 of the 1993 Code]
§ 305-12. Definition.
Whenever the word "street" is used in this article, it shall be understood as meaning to
include lanes, alleys, courts, public squares and sidewalks, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 305-13. Street openings. [Added by Order No. 94-226]
A. Permit required. No entity (person, business, utility, or government agency) shall
dig into or break up any public street in the City without first having obtained a
permit from the Commissioner of Public Works. The permit (hereafter known as a
"street opening permit") shall be in a form acceptable to the Commissioner,
consistent with this Code and other laws. The Commissioner may attach general
and specific conditions under which a permit is granted. In all cases, the permit
must be signed by the utility or property owner and contractor.
B. Fee, deposit, bond and insurance.
(1) A nonrefundable application fee of $100 is required.
(2) A refundable deposit of $500, cash or certified check, is required and will be
held until the municipal contractor completes the permanent patch and
payment is received. Interest on retained money is considered to be the
property of the municipality. Trenches not inspected due to the failure of the
permittee to properly notify the governing authority shall be subject to loss of
deposit and/or repeat of reconstruction procedures.
(3) A performance and payment bond of $5,000 is required for each street opening
permit granted. The governing authority may allow a blanket bond
commensurate with anticipated permit activity for routine excavators. Under
no circumstances will this blanket bond be less than $50,000.
(4) The contractor must furnish the municipality with a certificate of insurance for
general liability in the amount of $1,500,000.
C. Notification.
(1) The designated municipal coordinator of the governing authority shall be
notified 24 hours before the commencement of any work.
(2) Dig safe must be notified.
D. Construction procedures.
(1) The pavement shall be pre-cut and may only be disturbed within the area
requiring excavation for repair, replacement or new installation. When the
opening occurs within two feet of the curb and/or edge of the hardened surface,
the paved area between the excavation and the curb and/or edge must also be
removed.
§ 305-12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 305-13
305:7
(2) In the backfill process, the backfill shall be comprised of suitable material
(subject to approval of the governing authority or his authorized
representative). Concrete should be used around all electric and telephone
conduit in trenches. Controlled density fill (CDF) may be required.
Compaction (when CDF is not in use) will be executed in six-inch layers. Each
layer shall be 95% compacted by mechanical means. When the total surface
area of an individual opening in bituminous concrete is less than nine square
feet, all backfill material(s) will be placed to within a minimum of six inches
of the pavement surface or the thickness of the original pavement structure,
whichever is greater. For individual openings with surface areas of nine square
feet and larger, the backfill materials will be installed to within four inches of
the pavement surface or the thickness of the existing structure, whichever is
greater. "Pavement structure" will incorporate all pervious paving materials
used above the gravel subbase, including but not limited to bituminous
concrete, cement concrete, cobblestone, macadam, etc.
(3) The hardened pavement shall then be cut back and removed six inches to 12
inches from all sides of the initial excavation to the depth of the original
pavement structure, exposing the undisturbed gravel subbase. Edges will be
cut perpendicular to the surrounding surface and have a clean vertical face,
particularly in the corners. All structures shall be leveled to the adjacent
surfaces. The cut back shall be in straight lines with ninety-degree angles at
the point(s) of intersection.
(4) All surplus and/or unacceptable excavated materials shall be removed from the
job site immediately. The excavation site shall be maintained in a clean and
safe condition at all times. Sidewalks and streets shall be cleaned and opened
to traffic at the end of each working day, unless otherwise authorized by the
governing authority. Access to properties is to be maintained. The removal and
disposal of materials, including pavement, is the responsibility of the
permittee. This shall be achieved in such a manner to minimize interference
with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(5) The permittee shall be liable for the condition of the street and sidewalk
openings and protection thereof prior to the temporary repair and will be held
responsible for all damage due to any failure of barricades, barriers, warning
signs, lights or steel plates to properly protect the work from traffic,
pedestrians or other causes. Other than while work is actually being
performed, all open ditches shall be protected by uniform traffic control
devices in conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
All excavations must be properly secured to ensure the safety of the travelling
public and immediately reported to the designated municipal coordinator.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
(6) Temporary patching shall be performed by a contract representative of the
governing authority and shall be the financial responsibility of the permittee.
All barricades and/or safety devices shall be immediately removed from the
vicinity upon completion of the temporary bituminous patching application.
(7) Any improperly prepared excavations, including those left with unacceptable
backfill material or insufficient pavement depth, shall be temporarily paved by
§ 305-13 QUINCY CODE § 305-13
305:8
the municipal contract representative and charged to the refundable deposit
of the permittee. The deposit shall immediately be replenished to the original
amount. At a later date, the trench shall be re-excavated and prepared correctly
by the permittee. Under these conditions the permittee may also be subject to
permit cancellation, inspection fees, fines, and loss of deposit and bond.
(8) All excavations will be required to settle and/or consolidate for a period of
time before the contract representative of the governing authority is directed to
perform a permanent repair. This term will be defined as a minimum of 30
days when controlled density fill was used as backfill material. Compacted
gravel subbase must experience at least one seasonal freeze/thaw cycle. The
governing authority reserves the right to address any subbase deficiency
within, or adjacent to, the original excavated area with whatever measure is
deemed effective during this period. These corrective procedures will be the
financial responsibility of the permittee.
(9) Immediately after the specified settling and/or consolidation period, all
excavations shall be permanently restored by the contract representative for
the governing authority.
(a) The following procedures shall be strictly adhered to:
[1] The infrared process shall be utilized as the primary method of
permanent restoration in bituminous concrete surfaces.
[2] Temporary asphalt patches installed in cement concrete surfaces
shall be re-excavated to the extremities of the square(s) in which the
excavation is contained. The finished concrete shall be replaced to
the depth, strength, and contour of the original structure. Any
concrete surface damaged during construction shall also be replaced
in a like manner.
[3] All other surfaces, including but not limited to asphalt, brick, grass
and wood, shall be replaced consistent with the original and in strict
accordance with municipal specifications.
(b) The permittee shall also be responsible for any and all necessary
appurtenant measures, including but not limited to complete surface
reconstruction, curbing, resetting utility structures, bar holes, compatible
crack filling, tack coating and infrared integration of pavement. All the
required processes shall be determined by a site inspection with an
authorized representative of the governing authority. All restoration
procedures shall be the financial obligation of the permittee.
(10) The permittee shall be responsible for any settlement, subbase failure and
pavement cracks that develop in, or adjacent to, the original excavated area for
a period of three years from the date of the final accepted permanent repair or,
if controlled density fill is used, for a period of one year from the date of the
final accepted permanent repair. Any surface disorder caused by settlement
and/or subbase movement within the general area containing a street or
sidewalk opening shall be addressed by the municipal contract representative,
at the direction of the governing authority. All related corrective measures will
§ 305-13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 305-13
305:9
§ 305-14. Safeguarding of street construction.
be charged to the permittee, and the term of obligation will begin again.
(11) Excavations opened without the permit may be subject to cancellation and
refusal of existing and future permits and associated fines.
(12) Police protection, if required, shall be paid by the permittee either directly or
billed by the municipal representative of the municipality and billed directly to
the permittee.
(13) All surface restorations, bituminous concrete replacements, and permanent
repairs will be done by a contract representative of the municipality and billed
directly to the permittee.
E. Billing and collections.
(1) The contract representative of the municipality shall bill the permittee for the
above-mentioned services. All invoices will be paid within 30 days. On past
due invoices, a service charge of 1 1/2% per month will be allowed on
accounts 30 days past due, provided that the rate does not exceed that which is
permitted by law, in which case the highest allowable legal rate will apply.
Invoices exceeding 90 days shall be paid by the municipality from the
refundable deposit and/or bond, at which point the municipality shall fine the
permittee that cost plus $100 per day and continue to accrue the service
charges on any uncollected moneys together with all costs of collection,
including attorney's fees.
(2) The governing authority reserves the right to assume the billing function,
including assessment and conveyance of reasonable handling charges, as
provided by Massachusetts General Laws.
(a) On ninety-day past due invoices, the municipality will revoke or refuse
existing and future permits until payment of such invoices, including all
service charges and fines. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
(b) If the account is found to be uncollectible, there shall be a lien upon such
real estate in the manner provided in MGL c. 40, §§ 42A to 42F.
A. Fencing and lighting. During the progress of any work referred to in the preceding
section, the person holding the permit shall guard the area of such work by a proper
fence or railing, and by lights during the nighttime, subject to the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Works.
B. Police detail.
(1) Any person, except the Commissioner of Public Works, his agent or servant,
receiving a permit to open, occupy, obstruct, use, dig into or break up any
public street of the City, or portion thereof, in accordance with the provisions
of § 305-13, shall maintain at his or its expense such police officers of the City,
but in no event less than one police officer at each street location designated in
each permit required to be issued, as the Chief of Police may deem necessary,
to avoid, so far as reasonably possible, danger to the safety of persons and
§ 305-13 QUINCY CODE § 305-14
305:10
§ 305-15. Digging near streets; fencing required.
If any person shall dig a cellar or other cavity in the ground near to or adjoining any
street, he shall, so long as the Commissioner of Public Works may require, keep a railing
or fence on or near the line of such street sufficient to protect travelers from falling into
the place so dug or being injured thereby.
§ 305-16. Depositing trash or debris; removal of scrap metal.
interference with the free circulation of vehicular traffic. For the purposes of
this section, no emergency or like permits shall be issued granting blanket or
similar permission to open, occupy, obstruct, use, dig into or break up more
than one particular or separate street location per permit.
(2) Opening manholes. A person receiving a permit to open a manhole in any
public street of the City shall maintain at his or its expense such police officers
of the City as the Chief of Police may deem necessary, to avoid, so far as
reasonably possible, danger to the safety of persons and interference with
vehicular traffic.
(3) Failure to comply. Failure on the part of any such person to maintain such
detail shall be cause for revocation of such permit or the closing down of the
opening, obstructing, using, digging into or breaking up of any public street of
the City by police officers of the City until such detail is maintained.
(4) Emergency construction. In the event of an emergency which requires the
opening, obstructing, using, digging into, or breaking up of any public street
or private way in the City by a person not able to obtain a permit because of
the hour, such person shall immediately notify the officer in charge of Quincy
police headquarters in order that the necessary police officers, but in no event
less than one police officer, as designated by said officer, at each separate
street location or place of such opening, obstructing, using, digging into, or
breaking up of such street, shall be assigned at the expense of such person.
A. No person shall place or cause to be placed or deposited, upon any street or other
public place in this City, merchandise, ashes, shavings, house dirt, filth, offal or
rubbish which shall in any way obstruct and disfigure the same, nor suffer his wood
and coal to remain unnecessarily on any street, and no person shall place or deposit,
or cause to be placed or deposited, any newspaper, circular, card or wastepaper of
any kind or description upon any street or other public place in this City, and no
person shall saw or split wood or pile the same on any sidewalk, provided that ashes
or rubbish in suitable containers may be placed in the streets for collection, in such
manner and on such days as the Commissioner of Public Works may direct. No
person shall place or cause to be placed on the public sidewalk rubbish barrels or
rubbish containers more than one day prior to scheduled pickup. [Amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
B. No person, other than agents, servants and/or employees of the City of Quincy, or
those employed by or on behalf of a contractor working on behalf of the City, shall
pick up, transport or carry scrap metal, also known as "white goods," from a public
sidewalk or street after said metal or white goods have been placed by a resident or
§ 305-14 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 305-16
305:11
§ 305-17. Obstructions during construction.
No person, unless authorized by law, shall erect on any street any staging for building,
or place thereon any lumber, brick or other building materials, without a written permit
from the Commissioner of Public Works. Any person intending to erect or repair any
building upon land abutting on a street shall give notice to the Commissioner of Public
Works, who may, at the owner's request, set apart such portion of the street as he shall
deem expedient for such use. Such person shall, before the expiration of his permit,
remove all rubbish and restore such street, square or park to its former condition, to the
satisfaction of the Commissioner of Public Works. Every person so permitted shall, in
writing, agree to indemnify the City against all damage or loss to the City accruing from
the doing of any act or thing under such permit, and sureties may be required by the
Commissioner of Public Works, and every person who, when so permitted, shall obstruct
or render unsafe any public street shall guard the same by a proper fence or railing, and
by lights during the nighttime, subject to the approval of the Commissioner of Public
Works. Such permit may be revoked at any time by the Commissioner of Public Works
or by the City Council.
§ 305-18. Signs and awnings.
No person shall place or maintain over any street any sign, awning, shade or other
obstruction, unless permission shall have first been obtained in writing from the
Commissioner of Public Works. All such signs, awnings, shades or other obstructions
shall be safely and securely supported. No awning shall be less than seven feet from the
ground at its lowest point. All signs, awnings, shades and other obstructions, if built over
a sidewalk, shall be of such width as shall be determined by the Commissioner of Public
Works.
§ 305-19. Obstructing free passage.
No person shall stand, or remain alone, or with or near others, in any street of this City in
such a manner as to obstruct a free passage for passengers therein, or over any footway
or sidewalk.
§ 305-20. Placing obstructions on flagstones or footwalks.
No person shall place any obstruction of any kind upon any flagstone or stepping stone
or other footwalks across any street in this City.
§ 305-21. Restrictions on use of sidewalks.
No person shall wheel, push or draw any wheelbarrow, handcart or other vehicle or ride
any bicycle or tricycle on the sidewalk of any street of this City, except for the purpose of
crossing such sidewalk in order to go into or out of some adjoining enclosure, provided
that this section shall not apply to children's or invalids' carriages propelled by hand.
commercial property owner for collection. A violation of this provision shall be
punishable by a fine of $300 per offense. [Added 11-10-2008 by Order No.
2008-328]
§ 305-16 QUINCY CODE § 305-22
305:12
§ 305-22. Water running from buildings.
No person shall suffer his building to shed water upon any street in this City to the injury
or inconvenience of passengers.
§ 305-23. Property for collection by charitable, benevolent and civic
organizations.
No person shall remove from the sidewalks or curbs of the City personal property placed
there for collection by charitable, benevolent or civic organizations without the consent
of the owner.
§ 305-24. Snow and ice removal from sidewalks. [Amended 3-6-2006 by Order No.
2006-010]
§ 305-25. Snow and ice removal from overhanging roofs.
The owner or person having the care of any building so located, abutting upon or near to
any public street or way that snow or ice may fall from the roof thereof into or upon such
street or way, or upon the sidewalks thereof, shall cause all snow and ice to be removed
from such roof within 24 hours after the same shall cease falling or forming.
§ 305-26. Depositing snow and ice into streets.
Any person who shall throw or put, or cause to be thrown or put, any snow or ice into
any street in the City, except that removed from the sidewalks, shall cause the same to
be broken up and spread evenly over the surface of the street.
§ 305-27. Approval required for private street names.
No private way in the City shall hereafter be given a name or designation, or any sign
board, unless the same is approved by the Planning Board of the City.
A. Removal of snow. The owner, tenant and occupant of any building, any portion of
which is used for nonresidential purposes and bordering on any sidewalk, shall,
after the ceasing to fall of any snow, if in the daytime within five hours, and if in
the nighttime before 1:00 p.m. of the succeeding day, cause the snow to be removed
therefrom. The preceding provision shall apply to snow that falls from buildings,
other structures, trees or bushes as well as to that which falls from clouds.
B. Removal of ice. The owner, tenant and occupant of any building, any portion of
which is used for nonresidential purposes and bordering on any sidewalk, any
portion of which is encumbered by ice, within five hours after the sidewalk
becomes encumbered with ice, shall cause such sidewalk to be made safe and
convenient by removing the ice therefrom, or by keeping the same covered with
sand or some other suitable substance.
C. Penalties for violation; criminal penalty. Any person who violates this section shall
be subject to a fine of $50. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
§ 305-22 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 305-27
305:13

Chapter 311
TREE PROTECTION
§ 311-1. Statement of purpose.
§ 311-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUILDING—A structure enclosed within exterior walls or fire walls, built, erected and
framed of a combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, having a roof, to
form a structure for the shelter of persons, animals or property.
CERTIFIED ARBORIST — An arborist certified by the Massachusetts Arborists'
Association or the International Society of Arboriculture, or any successor of either
organization.
CITY ARBORIST — The City Arborist appointed by the Mayor or any other certified
arborist designated by the Commissioner of Natural Resources and approved by the
Mayor to exercise any of the authority granted to the City Arborist pursuant to this
chapter.
A. The City Council hereby finds that the preservation of existing trees and the
promotion of new tree planting is a public purpose that protects the public health,
welfare, environment and aesthetics of the City of Quincy and its citizens. This
chapter is enacted to protect both public shade trees pursuant to MGL c. 87 and
certain trees on private land.
B. The urban forest serves a wide variety of functions which promote the health, safety
and welfare of residents. These functions include:
(1) Conserving energy, by providing shade and evaporative cooling through
transpiration;
(2) Improving local and global air quality by absorbing carbon dioxide and ozone,
absorbing particulate matter, and producing oxygen;
(3) Reducing wind speed and directing air flow; conserving air conditioning
through shading and heating through wind breakage;
(4) Reducing noise pollution;
(5) Providing habitat for birds, small mammals, and other wildlife;
(6) Reducing storm runoff and the potential for soil erosion and providing natural
flood control;
(7) Increasing real property values; and
(8) Enhancing visual and aesthetic qualities that attract visitors and businesses,
contributing to the distinct character of neighborhoods while providing natural
privacy to neighbors.
§ 305-27 TREE PROTECTION § 311-2
311:1
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE — The area of undisturbed natural soil around a tree defined
by a concentric circle with a radius equal to the distance from the trunk to the outermost
drip line.
DBH (DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT) — The diameter of a tree trunk measured
in inches at a height of four feet above the ground.
DRIP LINE — Whichever is greater of:
LOT — A parcel of land in identical ownership throughout, bounded by other lots or
streets, which is designated by its owner to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
MITIGATION PLAN — A document to be included within any tree study submitted
for a project where any significant trees are proposed to be removed from a lot, stating
why any significant trees are proposed to be removed from a lot; a description of the
replacement trees proposed to replace the significant trees to be removed or the value
of which is proposed to be paid to the City to be deposited into the Tree Replacement
Fund; an estimate from a local nursery for the cost of purchasing, planting, watering and
(in the case of commercial or multiunit residential) maintaining said replacement trees
for a period of not less than five years or the value of which is proposed to be paid to the
City to be deposited into the Tree Replacement Fund; and certification from a certified
arborist that the proposed replacement trees and cost estimates for purchasing, planting,
watering and maintaining said trees are appropriate and reasonable. The Commissioner
of Natural Resources shall determine tree replacement for the significant tree(s) to be
replaced by a formula such that the replacement trees are no less than four-inch caliper
and in total approximately equal the DBH of the significant tree(s) being replaced.
Species shall be determined by the Commissioner of Natural Resources based on
favorability and survivability in light of the surrounding environment.
OWNER—Shall be defined as set forth in the City of Quincy Assessors' office records.
PROTECTED TREE — Any tree subject to the provisions of this chapter.
REPLACEMENT TREE — A tree or trees to be planted on a lot to replace any
significant trees to be removed from the lot, or whose equivalent value is proposed to
be paid to the City to be deposited into the Tree Replacement Fund instead of planting
replacement trees on the lot. The total DBH of replacement trees, or equivalent value,
as applicable, shall be equal to or exceed the total DBH of the significant trees to be
removed from the lot.
SIGNIFICANT TREE —Any tree or trees larger than eight inches DBH which are on a
lot or which have been removed from the lot within one year prior to the submission of
a tree study to the City Arborist.
TREE PROTECTION PLAN — This plan may be either a separate drawing or part of a
landscape plan and shall include the following information:
A vertical line run through the outermost portion of the canopy of a tree and
extending to the ground; or
A.
If the tree is damaged or deformed as a result of tree growth or other cause, a
circular area with a radius of 1/2 the height of the tree extending outward from the
center point of the tree.
B.
A. Drawings of tree protection measures and their location on the lot, including tree
§ 311-2 QUINCY CODE § 311-2
311:2
TREE SAVE AREA — The area surrounding a tree which must remain undisturbed so
as to prevent damage to the tree.
TREE STUDY—The information submitted to the City Arborist, which shall include a
tree survey, a tree protection plan, and, if applicable, a mitigation plan.
TREE SURVEY — A plan showing the location, type, height and DBH of all trees on a
lot.
§ 311-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all significant trees located on lots specified in the following
§ 311-4 as well as public shade trees as regulated in § 311-7. This chapter shall not apply
to any project whose purpose is solely and exclusively intended for the construction of
low- and moderate-income housing meeting the standards established pursuant to any
City, state or federal housing program designed to assist low- and moderate-income
households. For any project wherein there will be no tree displacement, the project
applicant must submit to the appropriate permit granting authority a drawing indicating
tree location on the site of the project with a written certification that no tree
displacement shall occur.
§ 311-4. Procedure for projects.
The Inspectional Services Department shall make available to an applicant a copy of this
chapter or a condensed summary of the relevant aspects pertaining to the type of permit
requested.
save areas, and the location, height and DBH of significant trees and an indication
of which significant trees would remain on the site, or in the event that any
significant trees are proposed to be removed, the location of those significant trees,
and the location, height and DBH of replacement trees which are proposed to be
planted on the lot if feasible, or in the event that replacement trees are not proposed
to be planted on the lot, the total sum, as identified in the mitigation plan, to be paid
to the City to be deposited into the Tree Replacement Fund shall be required to be
submitted together with the tree protection plan;
A schedule for planting the proposed replacement trees and a representation that
such trees will be inspected and, if necessary, treated by a certified arborist once a
year for five years; and
B.
Such other information as is required by the City Arborist pursuant to applicable
regulations.
C.
A. In any project (with significant tree displacement) which requires a variance or
special permit under the Zoning Ordinance,19 the application for the variance or
special permit shall include a tree study, which shall first have been submitted to
the City Arborist not less than 21 days prior to the submission of the application for
a variance or special permit. The tree study shall be reviewed by the City Arborist,
who shall certify that he has reviewed it, indicating whether it is complete and
complies with the applicable provisions of this chapter and regulations promulgated
19. Editor's Note: See Ch. 375, Zoning.
§ 311-2 TREE PROTECTION § 311-4
311:3
thereunder. The City Arborist shall refer the tree study with his certification and
recommendations to the Zoning Board, Planning Board, or City Council in its
capacity as PUD PGA to assist said Board or Council in establishing any conditions
that may be required as a result of the findings of the tree study in connection
with the issuance of a variance or special permit. In the absence of a City Arborist
as herein defined, the applicant shall submit a plan certified by an independent
certified arborist indicating therein that the plan is in substantial conformance with
this chapter.
B. Regarding any by-right project (with significant tree displacement) defined in Table
A which is subject to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, the materials
submitted to the Inspectional Services Department with the application for a
building permit shall include a tree study, together with a certification from the City
Arborist that the applicant has submitted the tree study for review to the City
Arborist not less than 21 days prior to the submission of the application for a
building permit, and that the tree study is complete and complies with the applicable
provisions of this chapter and regulations promulgated thereunder. The owner of
the lot shall be required to commit to comply with all provisions of the tree study
and the applicable provisions of this chapter and regulations promulgated hereunder
in the application for a building permit.
Table A
The proposed demolition of an existing residential structure and its replacement
with a new structure.
The proposed construction of an addition to the existing residential structure that
constitutes a twenty-five-percent or greater increase in the building area footprint.
The proposed demolition of an existing nonresidential structure and its
replacement with a new dwelling/structure.
The proposed construction of an addition to the existing nonresidential structure
that constitutes a twenty-five-percent or greater increase in the building footprint.
The proposed new construction of a residential or nonresidential structure on any
lot.
C. Parking area requirements; tree shading. Trees shall be planted and maintained
throughout the surface parking lot to ensure that within 15 years after establishment
of the parking lot at least 50% of the parking area will be shaded.
(1) Surface parking lot. Except as provided herein, all surface parking on which a
vehicle can drive is subject to shade calculation, including all parking stalls;
all drives within the property, regardless of length and including drive-through
lanes; and all maneuvering area, regardless of depth. The following surfaced
areas are exempt from this shade requirement:
(a) Truck loading area in front of overhead doors.
(b) Truck maneuvering and parking areas unconnected to and exclusive of
vehicle parking.
(c) Surfaced areas not to be used for vehicle parking, driving or
§ 311-4 QUINCY CODE § 311-4
311:4
§ 311-5. Tree replacement.
If significant trees are to be removed from a lot in connection with the development of a
project subject to the provisions of this chapter, upon approval of any project subject to
the provisions of § 311-4A of this chapter by grant of a variance from the Zoning Board
or special permit from the Planning Board, or submission to the Inspectional Services
Department of certification from the City Arborist under the provisions of § 311-4B of
this chapter, the owner of the lot shall either plant replacement trees on the same lot in
accordance with the schedule set forth in the tree study or he shall pay the estimated cost
of replacement trees and associated costs for the maintenance of said trees pursuant to
the mitigation plan, if applicable, to the City to be deposited into the Tree Replacement
Fund. In addition, the owner of the lot shall, prior to the issuance of a building permit,
post and file a bond with the City Clerk in the amount of the total costs set forth in the
mitigation plan with one or more sureties conditioned to the faithful observance of the
conditions and specifications of the tree protection plan and, if applicable, the mitigation
plan.
§ 311-6. Tree Replacement Fund.
There is hereby established a Tree Replacement Fund which shall be held by the
City Treasurer/Collector in an account and administered in accordance with applicable
provisions of MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2. Any payments into the Tree Replacement Fund
required by § 411-5 shall be deposited in said fund and shall be used solely for the
purpose of buying, planting and maintaining trees in the City.
§ 311-7. Public shade trees.
Local regulation of public shade trees is subject to the provisions of MGL c. 87.
maneuvering, provided that they are made inaccessible to vehicles by a
barrier such as bollards or fencing.
(d) Automobile dealerships, display, sales, service, and vehicle storage areas.
(e) Existing surfaced areas.
(f) Driveways of residential projects of one to four units.
(2) Shading. Shading should be calculated by using the diameter of the tree crown
at 15 years. Each planting area shall be of sufficient size, have sufficient
irrigation and be properly maintained so as to meet the intent of this chapter.
(3) A site plan shall be submitted to the City Arborist for review and
recommendation to the PGA (Zoning Board, Planning Board or City Council)
or Director of Inspectional Services who shall have the discretion to modify
tree shading requirements due to power lines and other obstructions which
prohibit strict compliance and to give shading credit for photovoltaic arrays,
off-site trees, sidewalk canopies, and other structures where appropriate.
A. Public utility projects. For any project conducted by a public utility, all protected
trees that must be removed in order to install utility lines within a public right-ofway
or utility easement shall be subject to the tree replacement and tree protection
§ 311-4 TREE PROTECTION § 311-7
311:5
§ 311-8. Regulations; tree protection procedures.
requirements of this chapter. All protected trees to be altered must be done in
accordance with best practices, standards and pruning procedures to be
promulgated by the City Arborist under the direction of the Commissioner of
Natural Resources. Said practices, standards and procedures shall at a minimum
conform to American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300. The public
utility's request for tree removal must be accompanied by a site plan or construction
plan and shall reasonably comply with the regulations set forth herein. There shall
be no guy wiring attachments or tethering to any City tree without the expressed
written permission of the Commissioner of Natural Resources.
B. Public works projects. The Public Works Department shall notify the Department
of Natural Resources of any application for new curb, sidewalk or driveway
installation or other improvements which might require removal of or cause injury
to any street tree or interfere with the fulfillment of the intent of this chapter.
A. The Commissioner of Natural Resources shall have the authority to promulgate
regulations to accomplish any of the provisions of this chapter and shall coordinate
with the Director of Inspectional Services and Commissioner of Public Works
where appropriate and required to facilitate compliance with this chapter.
B. Tree protection procedures.
(1) Prohibited activities in critical root zone. The following activities are
prohibited within the limits of the critical root zone of any protected tree
subject to the requirements of this chapter:
(a) Material storage. No materials intended for use in construction or waste
materials accumulated due to excavation or demolition shall be placed
within the limits of the critical root zone of any protected tree.
(b) Equipment cleaning; liquid disposal. No equipment shall be cleaned or
other liquids deposited or allowed to flow overland within the limits of
the critical root zone of a protected tree. This includes, without limitation,
paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar or similar materials.
(c) Tree attachments. No signs, wires or other attachments, other than those
of a protective nature, shall be attached to any protected tree. Fencing
attached to a tree via "U" nails or bent nails is allowed only if the fencing
is parallel to and contiguous with the tree.
(d) Vehicular traffic. No vehicular and/or construction equipment traffic or
parking shall take place within the limits of the critical root zone of any
protected tree other than on existing street pavement. This restriction does
not apply to single-incident access within the critical root zone for
purposes of clearing underbrush, establishing the building pad and
associated lot grading, vehicular traffic necessary for routine utility
maintenance, emergency restoration of utility service, or routine mowing
operations.
(e) Grade changes. No grade changes shall be allowed within the limits of
§ 311-7 QUINCY CODE § 311-8
311:6
the critical root zone of any protected tree unless adequate construction
methods are approved by the Director of Inspectional Services in
consultation with the City Arborist.
(f) Impervious paving. No paving with asphalt, concrete or other impervious
materials that may reasonably be expected to kill a tree shall be placed
within the limits of the critical root zone of a protected tree excepting
trees existing within the public ways.
(2) Prohibited activities in drip line. No heavy equipment, including but not
limited to trucks, tractors, trailers, bulldozers, bobcat tractors, trenchers,
compressors, and hoists, shall be allowed inside the drip line of any protected
tree on any construction site without the specific approval of the Director of
Inspectional Services, excepting public works projects on a public way.
(3) Procedures required prior to construction. The following procedures shall be
followed on all types of construction projects (including, without limitation,
residential, commercial, and municipal/public domain projects):
(a) Protective fencing. Prior to construction, the contractor or subcontractor
shall construct and maintain, for each protected tree on a construction
site, a protective fencing which encircles the outer limits of the critical
root zone of the tree to protect it from construction activity. All protective
fencing shall be in place prior to commencement of any site work and
remain in place until all exterior work has been completed.
(b) Bark protection. In situations where a protected tree remains in the
immediate area of intended construction, exposing the tree bark to danger
of damage by construction equipment or other activity, the contractor or
subcontractor shall protect the tree by enclosing the entire circumference
of the tree with two-inch by four-inch lumber encircled with wire or other
means that do not damage the tree. The intent is to protect the bark of the
tree against incidental contact by large construction equipment.
(4) Construction methods.
(a) Boring. Boring of utilities under protected trees shall be required in those
circumstances where it is not possible to trench around the critical root
zone of the protected tree. When required, the length of the bore shall be
the width of the critical root zone at a minimum and shall be a minimum
depth of 48 inches.
(b) Trenching. All trenching shall be designed to avoid trenching across the
critical root zone of any protected tree. The placement of underground
utility lines such as electric, phone, gas, etc., is encouraged to be located
outside of the critical root zone of protected trees. Trenching for an
irrigation system shall be placed outside of the critical root zone, except
the minimum required single head supply line is allowed to extend into
the critical root zone perpendicular to the tree trunk and in the manner
that has the least possible encroachment into the critical root zone.
(c) Root pruning. All roots two inches or larger in diameter which are
§ 311-8 TREE PROTECTION § 311-8
311:7
§ 311-9. Performance evaluation. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
The Commissioner of Natural Resources with the assistance of the City Arborist shall
collect and maintain all records and data necessary to objectively evaluate whether
progress is being made towards the intent, purpose and objectives of this chapter. An
annual summary and analysis of the evaluation and recommendations for action shall be
prepared and presented to the City Council. The City Council shall consider the report
and recommendations and take all actions deemed necessary to accomplish the goals of
this chapter. These actions may include but are not limited to revision or amendment of
this chapter.
§ 311-10. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
exposed as a result of trenching or other excavation shall be cut off square
with a sharp medium-tooth saw and covered with pruning compound
within two hours of initial exposure.
(5) Tree topping/V cutting. It shall be unlawful for any person to "V cut" or top
any tree without having written approval of the Commissioner of Natural
Resources or, under his/her direction, the City Arborist upon determination
that topping the tree is necessary and there is no feasible alternative because
the tree has been severely damaged by storms or other causes, or is under
utility wires or other obstructions, making other pruning practices impractical.
A. Notice of violations. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be notified by the City Arborist of the specific violation by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery. The notice shall set
forth the nature of the violation and a reasonable time period within which
compliance must be had.
B. Stop-work order.
(1) Upon notice from the City Arborist that work on any lot on which a significant
tree is located is being performed contrary to any applicable mitigation plan or
tree protection plan or any provision of this chapter, such work shall be
immediately stopped by the Director of Inspectional Services or his designee.
The stop-work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the
lot involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall
state the conditions under which work will be permitted to resume. [Amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
(2) Any person who shall continue any work in or about said lot after having been
served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of
not more than $300. Each day during which a violation exists shall constitute
a separate offense.
C. Injunctive relief. Whenever there exists reasonable cause to believe that a person is
violating any applicable mitigation plan or tree protection plan or any provision of
this chapter, the City may institute a civil action for a mandatory or prohibiting
injunction ordering the defendant to correct the unlawful condition or cease the
§ 311-8 QUINCY CODE § 311-10
311:8
§ 311-11. Emergencies and exemptions.
Provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 311-12. Interpretation.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the City,
its officers or employees, nor to relieve the owner of any private property from the duty
to keep any tree on his property or under his control in such condition as to prevent it
from constituting a hazard or an impediment to travel or vision upon any street, park,
boulevard, alley or public place within the City.
unlawful use of the property.
D. Failure to replace trees or make payment. Each failure to replace a significant tree
or make a payment into the Tree Replacement Fund or to post and maintain a bond
in accordance with § 311-5 shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter for
which there shall be a fine in the amount of not more than $300. Each day such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
E. Alternative penalty. As an alternative to any fine stated in this section, citations may
be issued pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D, assessing a fine of $300 for each day the
violation is committed or permitted to continue. The Director of Inspectional
Services or his designee, the City Arborist, employees of the Department of Public
Works and police officers shall be the authorized enforcement personnel.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
F. Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy (CO) shall be issued until all
civil penalties for violations of this chapter have been paid to the City. No
certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all replacement trees have been
planted or appropriate payments have been made to the Tree Replacement Fund;
provided, however, that a certificate of occupancy may be granted before all trees
have been replaced if the City retains the surety bond cited in § 311-5 or an
equivalent cash deposit.
A. Emergency projects necessary for public safety, health and welfare as determined
by the Commissioner of Public Works or the Commissioner of Natural Resources.
B. Trees that are hazardous (threat to life or property) as determined by the City
Arborist.
C. Trees identified by the commonwealth that pose a risk due to insect disease
infestation.
§ 311-10 TREE PROTECTION § 311-12
311:9

Chapter 319
UTILITY PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and water — See Ch. 270.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 300.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 305.
§ 319-1. Purpose; applicability.
§ 319-2. Permitting authority.
§ 319-3. Application procedure.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate installation and operation of various utility
systems located within the public rights-of-way through a formal permit system.
The permit system is intended to achieve an efficient use of public rights-of-way
consistent with the present and future service demands and protection of public
interests as related to safety, health, and quality of life and to minimize the potential
adverse environmental/aesthetic impacts due to uncoordinated installation of the
various utility systems.
B. This chapter shall apply to all utility systems regardless of whether these are located
underground, at surface and/or overhead.
C. The utility systems regulated by this chapter shall include water supply systems,
sanitary sewerage systems, storm drainage systems, natural gas supply systems,
electrical transmission and lighting systems, telephone systems, fire alarm systems,
cable television and other systems.
A. The final permit to install and/or to operate a utility system shall be issued by the
Commissioner of Public Works.
B. However, other City or state agencies such as the Quincy Conservation
Commission, Massachusetts Department of Transportation, Massachusetts
Environmental Protection Agency, Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities,
and City of Quincy Departments of Public Works, Planning and Community
Development, Police, Fire and Health may be involved in the review and approval
process depending on whether the proposed utility line is traversing natural
resource areas, subdivision developments, public rights-of-way or planned unit
developments. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
C. In addition to the above departments/boards/agencies, copies of the application may
also be sent to the Mayor, the City Council and the City Solicitor for their input as
required.
A. Any utility company or the public entity contemplating installation of a new or
§ 311-12 UTILITY PERMITS § 319-3
319:1
§ 319-4. Underground utility systems.
modification and/or abandonment of an existing utility system shall file 10 copies
of the complete proposed system design. The application shall include full system
description of the proposed routing, layout plan, profile, impact on resources areas,
surface, subsurface, air, habitats, noise levels, quality of life and the area
environment.
B. The application shall be filed with the Department of Public Works at least 10
weeks in advance of the anticipated construction start date. All application
processing fees shall be payable at the time of filing.
C. All reviews by the City departments, boards, and outside agencies shall be
responded to in writing. The response shall as a minimum cover the following:
(1) Easements, covenants and performance guarantees.
(2) Design, location and routing of the proposed and the existing utility systems
within the public rights-of-way, location of monuments, and utility
appurtenances as potential interferences with other utilities.
(3) Aesthetic, safety and environmental impacts.
D. Before taking any action to approve, modify and approve or disapprove, the
applicant may have to go through public hearings before the Quincy Conservation
Commission or the Planning Board or the City Council, at which time the interested
parties shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such
hearings and of the subject matter shall be published for two consecutive weeks.
The date of the first publication shall not be less than 14 days before the date of the
hearing. Copy of such advertisement shall be mailed to the applicant and to all
abutters along the route as shown on the plan.
E. The procedures followed for approval, modification or disapproval of the final
plans submitted by the applicant shall comply with MGL c. 41, § 81U, as amended.
A. Location/routing criteria.
(1) All utility lines shall be located and profiled as approved by the terms of the
permit. The approved location and profiles shall not be changed unless it is
proven to the Department of Public Works that it is impracticable to install as
shown for a particular stretch because of conditions such as extended ledge or
other reasons or upon recommendation of the utility system supplier that it is
not feasible and/or is not in the best interest of the City.
(2) Cables, conduits, ducts, poles and the appurtenances for the fire alarm,
telephone, electric transmission and streetlighting, traffic control, and cable
television systems shall be installed underground and/or overhead as
approved.
(3) All other utility services shall be located underground as approved. All
underground utility services shall comply with the minimum vertical and/or
the horizontal separation distances as mandated by applicable codes and
regulations.
§ 319-3 QUINCY CODE § 319-4
319:2
(4) All the required utility services shall be provided to each lot and on each street.
Streetlight should be installed before the associated electrical switch gear and
equipment is placed in/on the ground. All transformers, switches and other
such equipment shall be placed on the ground at approved locations and only
when screened from view with evergreen shrubbery and other forms of
treatment in a manner acceptable to the City. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order
No. 2020-012]
(5) Location, installation and operation of all utilities within the public rights-ofway
shall be governed by the applicable portions of all federal, state and the
City codes and regulations. Some of the major applicable codes and
regulations are listed under § 319-9 of this chapter.
(6) All underground utilities along the newly established public rights-of-way
shall be typically installed and located as shown on the roadway cross section
in the sketches in file in the engineering office. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order
No. 2020-012]
(7) Routing location and profiles for the new underground utility services to be
installed in the existing rights-of-way shall be approved by the Department of
Public Works to avoid conflicts, to achieve judicious utilization of rights-ofway
and to minimize adverse aesthetic/environmental impacts before they are
presented to other departments/agencies for review and/or approval.
(8) The owner utility company shall not lease or allow other utilities to use its
underground facilities, lines, ducts or systems without approval by the City.
Such a case shall be treated as a new application and shall be subject to a full
review and approval cycle.
(9) If a utility company or public entity decides to replace, upgrade and/or
abandon an existing utility system, it would be treated as a new application
and shall be subject to a new application and a full review and approval cycle.
(10) Also, under these circumstances, the utility company may be ordered to
remove the existing, abandoned and/or a redundant stretch of the utility system
and clear the right-of-way for future use.
B. Installation requirements.
(1) All water mains shall have a minimum of four feet of cover, laid to line and
grade with all necessary fittings, valves, blowoffs, hydrants, service
connections, curb stops, and other necessary features as required by the latest
codes and regulations.
(2) Sanitary sewers and storm drains shall have a minimum of three feet of cover.
However, depth will be as required to achieve a gravity flow at non-silting
velocities and leakage rate as per the applicable codes. Sewers shall be laid to
true line and grade.
(3) Water supply lines shall be located at least 1 1/2 feet above (vertically) and 10
feet apart (horizontally) from the nearest sanitary sewer lines.
(4) Electric, telephone, cable, television, traffic control and fire alarm conduits/
§ 319-4 UTILITY PERMITS § 319-4
319:3
§ 319-5. Aboveground utility systems.
cables installed underground shall have a minimum cover of 2 1/2 feet.
(5) Minimum trench width for the underground utilities shall be equal to fourthirds
diameter of the conduit plus 18 inches.
(6) Sheeting, if used, shall be cut off a minimum of 18 inches below the finished
grades.
(7) All conduits shall be bedded in a minimum six inches of compacted screen
gravel if set in soils and minimum 12 inches if set in rock.
(8) Backfill shall be compacted to 95% of the maximum dry density of the
materials as determined by the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials, Designation T-180D. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order
No. 2020-012]
(9) No backfilling or covering of any utility pipe shall be permitted until approved
by the Engineer. Select materials shall be compacted in six-inch layers.
(10) All underground utilities shall be installed as soon as the subgrade is
completed and before any gravel is placed. Utility services shall be tested as
required or as applicable and approved by the Engineer prior to installation of
base and top pavement courses.
(11) All service connections shall be installed to the right-of-way line and marked
so as to be easily located in the future.
A. Location and routing criteria.
(1) All utility poles, transmission lines, towers and pylons shall be located at
inconspicuous locations and placed at maximum feasible distances from each
other. If the poles, etc., had to be located at a locale with high visibility, these
would be treated or screened to blend with the local environment/background.
(2) While designing an overhead utility system, serious consideration must be
given to preserving area/neighborhood aesthetics, scenic views, historic
features, monuments and other points of public interest. The type of
construction materials and methods used must be compatible with the
physiographic, ecological/environmental and the socioeconomic
characteristics of the area being traversed.
(3) The height of the poles, towers, pylons, and the overhead wires/cables strung
between the poles or attached to the buildings shall meet all applicable
requirements by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
and the National Fire and the National Electrical Codes for access and safety.
(4) The height of the wires/cables strung between the poles, towers, and pylons
shall not be so as to block scenic/open views or other points of interest. The
City, acting in the best interest of itself and its citizens and for the preservation
of its resources and quality of life, may require the owner utility companies to
correct such situations at locations where the existing wires/cables create such
§ 319-4 QUINCY CODE § 319-5
319:4
§ 319-6. Environmental assessment report.
conditions.
(5) The owner utility companies shall not lease, sublet or allow other utilities to
use their overhead pole system to string additional wires/cables without
permission from the City. Such a case shall be treated as a new application and
shall be subject to a full new review and approval cycle.
(6) The above approval process shall also apply if an owner utility wanted to
mount additional wires/cables on the existing poles. When applying for such
approvals, the utility company shall show definitive project limits with plans,
profiles, and justification for this addition along with a complete
environmental and aesthetic impact on area neighborhoods traversed and the
public in general.
(7) Installation of overhead lines, appurtenances and poles, etc., should be done
according to National Electrical Safety Code requirements.
(8) The City prefers that all utility services be installed underground. However,
overhead new wiring installation can be allowed if sufficient justification for
such an action is presented by the utility companies.
(9) Replacement of existing poles and cables/wires and installation of additional
wires/cables on existing poles shall be subject to approval by the City.
B. Installation requirements.
(1) All poles, towers and pylons must have a proper foundation and anchorage for
hurricane velocities up to 120 miles per hour.
(2) All end and corner poles must be adequately gauged to keep plumb.
(3) Separation distances between the conductors/cables must be maintained as per
the applicable codes.
(4) The maximum height of the pole and wires/cables shall comply with
applicable codes, standards and the requirements of this chapter.
(5) The poles, towers and pylons must not interfere with the pedestrian and/or
vehicular traffic. Also these poles must not be located within 15 feet of the
driveways. The City acting in the best interests of itself and its citizens may
require the owner utility companies to correct such situations wherever these
exist.
(6) The pole spacing shall be the maximum allowed under the codes consistent
with the location and the criteria stated in this chapter.
A. Criteria.
(1) Application for permit for installation of new or modification/upgrade or
abandonment or a change in existing use or a multiple use of the existing utility
systems shall be accompanied by an environmental assessment report (EAR)
and would require a full review and approval cycle.
§ 319-5 UTILITY PERMITS § 319-6
319:5
(2) The EAR shall be sufficiently detailed to enable the reviewing agencies to
evaluate the short- and long-term impacts on the area aesthetics, natural
resources, ecology, quality of life and other environmental factors due to the
facilities and/or design/construction methods.
(3) During the review cycle, particular attention shall be given to issues of
recycling or reuse of existing facilities/resources; the maintenance and
improvement of the natural water flow and quality of surface waters; the
preservation of scenic views, natural resource areas, wildlife refuges, historic
sites, unique geological, botanical, archaeological and aesthetic features,
jogging/biking trails, and accesses to open space areas; and the health, safety
and socioeconomic well-being of the area inhabitants.
B. General requirements. The environmental assessment report shall include but not
necessarily be limited to the following factors as applicable to the proposed project.
This does not preclude any other issues pertinent to the project but not stated herein.
(1) Physiography.
(a) Describing the general physical conditions of the site, including varieties
of vegetation, general topography, unusual geologic, scenic and historical
features, trails and open space links and indigenous wildlife.
(b) Describing as to how the project will affect these features.
(c) Providing a complete physical description of the project and the
relationship to surrounding area.
(2) Surface water and soils.
(a) Describing location, extent and type of existing water bodies, wetlands,
floodplains and other resource areas, including existing surface drainage
characteristics both within and adjacent to the project.
(b) Describing both the short-term (during construction) and the long-term
(post construction) methods of erosion and sedimentation control,
including the proposed methods, details and descriptions of the applicable
features, such as areas subject to flooding or ponding; drainage and flood
control facilities and the estimated increase of peak runoff caused by
altered surface conditions and methods proposed to return water to the
soils; mulches and vegetative cover; protection of existing vegetation;
compatibility of the development to the topography; proposed alterations
of open spaces, shorelines, and other resources areas; and habitats
impacted.
(3) Subsurface conditions.
(a) Describing any limitations on the proposed project caused by subsurface
soils and geological and water conditions and the corrective methods
proposed to be used.
(b) Evaluation of the impact of sewage disposal methods on quality of
subsurface water.
§ 319-6 QUINCY CODE § 319-6
319:6
§ 319-7. Protection and maintenance; easements; extensions.
§ 319-8. Inspections.
(4) Aboveground conditions.
(a) Describing the existing air quality (level of atmospheric pollutants and
contaminants) and the proposed methods to preserve the minimum
required standards of the air quality.
(b) Describing the existing level noise pollution and the methods proposed to
keep the noise level at the minimum required levels.
(c) Describing the area aesthetic consideration factored into the project
design/development, including preservation of existing scenic views,
vantage points, open views, landmarks, and other points of recreational
and/or aesthetic value important for the quality of life and socioeconomic
well-being of the area residents.
(d) Describing the impact of the proposed project on the vehicular and
pedestrian traffic flow condition and circulation patterns, police and fire
protection services, public work activities and the education and civic
services.
A. Protection and maintenance of utilities. For the purpose of protecting the safety,
convenience and welfare of the City's inhabitants; for the provision of adequate
access that will be safe and convenient for travel; for reducing the danger to life and
limb in the operation of motor vehicles; and for securing safety in the case of fire,
flood, panic and other emergencies, the applicant or his successor shall provide for
the proper maintenance and repair of all roads, sidewalks, other public areas,
facilities and amenities, including the cleaning of drainage basins, oil/water
separators, manholes and pipelines from siltation or other accumulated material for
the entire construction period and until acceptance of the works by the City.
B. Easements. Easements for utility lines located across lots or in the rear or within the
side offsets shall be provided where necessary and shall be no less than 10 feet. The
minimum easement widths shall be located so as not to preclude the full
development of the land parcels. More than one utility may be allowed in one
easement with the approval of the Department of Public Works.
C. Terminating utility systems. Where adjacent property is not subdivided or where all
the property of the applicant is not being subdivided at the same time, provision
shall be made for the extension of the utility system by continuing the utility lines
the full length of streets and to the exterior limits of the property at such grade and
size which will permit their proper extension at a later date.
A. Inspections of the work shall be conducted by the Department of Public Works
prior to the construction of streets and during the installation of utilities at regular
intervals or as required.
B. All inspections shall be requested, in writing, at least 48 hours in advance and shall
consist of monitoring for the following items as per the approved drawings:
§ 319-6 UTILITY PERMITS § 319-8
319:7
§ 319-9. Codes and standards. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
Utilities under this chapter shall be subject to federal, state and City codes and
regulations, including but not limited to the following:
§ 319-10. Installation of small cell wireless facilities. [Added 4-22-2019 by Order
No. 2018-101]
(1) Trench excavation, backfilling, compaction and pavement restoration work.
(2) Location and construction of water, sewer and drainage systems and the
related equipment/appurtenances.
(3) Location and construction of natural gas supply systems and related
equipment/appurtenances.
(4) Location and installation of conduits and wire/cables for traffic control,
electrical transmission and distribution, telephone, fire alarm and cable
television systems and the associated equipment and facilities.
A. Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities standards, including 220 CMR.
B. Standard Specifications for Highway and Bridges.
C. Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
D. City of Quincy Design Criteria.
E. National Fire Protection Code.
F. National Electrical Code.
G. American Water Works Association standards.
H. American National Standards Institute.
I. City of Quincy Health Commissioner regulations.
J. American Society for Testing and Materials.
K. Federal specifications.
L. National Institutes of Health.
M. Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
N. Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish specific standards and
procedures to authorize the installation of small cell wireless facilities on utility
poles located in the public way or in the utility easement area adjacent to the public
way. Notwithstanding any provision in the Quincy Municipal Code to the contrary,
this section shall govern such installations.
B. Definitions.
§ 319-8 QUINCY CODE § 319-10
319:8
(1) As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
SMALL CELL FACILITY — The antenna, radio, power source and meter,
disconnect switch, fiber-optic cable, and supporting equipment, if any,
installed on a utility pole.
UTILITY POLE — A privately owned or publicly owned utility pole located
in the public right-of-way or in the utility easement area adjacent to the public
right-of-way.[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-052]
(2) When not inconsistent with the context, words in the singular number include
the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
C. Authority. Consistent with MGL c. 166, by amending the general ordinances to
include this section, the City Council has voted to authorize the Director of
Inspectional Services to issue permits for small cell facilities that satisfy the criteria
identified in Subsection E and authorizes the Director of Inspectional Services to
ensure that petitions to install small cell facilities comply with such criteria.
D. Petitions. All petitions submitted pursuant to this section shall include the
information described below. A petition may seek permits for small cell facilities at
multiple locations and, if so, shall include the following information for each such
location:
(1) Application stating: petitioner's name and address; name and address of the
owner(s) of the utility pole; name, address, telephone number, and e-mail
address of petitioner's attorney or agent; utility pole number; and address of
nearest property and address of nearest property, if different, which contains a
residential structure or fire station.
(2) Plan, signed by a professional engineer, showing the subject utility pole and
the proposed small cell facility.
(3) Letter or license from the owner(s) of the utility pole authorizing the
installation of the small cell facility. Such a letter or license shall be deemed to
constitute a structural certification by the owner(s) of the utility pole attesting
to the integrity of the utility pole to support the small cell facility.
(4) Evidence sufficient to reasonably satisfy the Director of Inspectional Services
that the utility pole has an existing grant of location. Utility poles that support
existing wires and cables shall be deemed to have an existing grant of location
for purposes of this section.
(5) License(s) from the Federal Communications Commission evidencing
petitioner's authority to transmit and receive wireless telecommunications,
unless such license is already on file with the City.
(6) Proof of liability insurance, including completed operation coverage or its
substantial equivalent.
(7) Radio frequency (RF) affidavit, signed by a professional radio frequency
engineer, that includes a brief explanation of how the proposed small cell
facility addresses a significant gap in coverage, or capacity, or both, and why
§ 319-10 UTILITY PERMITS § 319-10
319:9
the proposed utility pole is the most feasible to install the small cell facility.
(8) Radio frequency (RF) emissions report demonstrating that the proposed small
cell facility complies with the maximum permissible exposures adopted by the
Federal Communications Commission, unless such a report has previously
been filed with the City for the specific equipment to be used in the small cell
facility
(9) A fee equal to $500 for a single petition including up to five locations and a
fee of $100 for each additional location, with check payable to the City of
Quincy.
(10) Certification by petitioner that all members of the City Council have been
notified, at the time the petition is filed, of said petition, such notification to
include the location and number of the utility pole where the proposed small
cell facility is to be installed, the address of the nearest property, and the
address of the nearest property, if different, which contains a residential
structure, and that, at the expense of the applicant, a public notice of the
petition has been advertised, that an abutters list of direct abutters has been
pulled through the Assessor's office, and that notification to those abutters has
been made through certified mail.
E. Standard of review.
(1) The small cell facility does not interfere with the safety and convenience of
ordinary travel over the public right-of-way.
(2) The small cell facility does not exceed 60 feet in height above the ground.
(3) The appearance of the small cell facility is similar to the existing equipment
on the utility pole or on other nearby utility poles, the color of the utility pole,
or another color reasonably requested by the Director of Inspectional Services
or his designee.
(4) The dimensions of the antenna do not exceed 16 inches in diameter or 40
inches in height.
(5) No part of the small cell facility projects from the utility pole further than four
feet if installed 20 feet or higher above the ground or further than two feet if
installed below 20 feet above the ground.
(6) No part of the small cell facility shall extend below eight feet above ground
level.
(7) No other small cell facility is installed on a utility pole within 180 feet of the
subject utility pole, including the subject utility pole.
(8) The subject utility pole does not measure more than 20° out of plumb in any
direction.
(9) The subject utility pole is not a double pole.
(10) A small cell facility has not already been installed on, or approved for
installation on, the subject utility pole.
§ 319-10 QUINCY CODE § 319-10
319:10
(11) The proposed small cell facility complies with the maximum permissible
exposures adopted by the Federal Communications Commission.
(12) The proposed small cell facility shall not be installed at any location which is
within 20 feet of any residential structure, school building, child day-care
structure or fire station.
(13) The subject utility pole is not within five feet of another utility pole.
(14) The Director of Inspectional Services (DIS) shall notify the Ward Councillor
in whose ward the proposed small cell facility is to be located of the intention
of the DIS to grant a permit; such notification shall occur at least 14 days prior
to the issuance of said permit.
F. Effect of permit. Upon the issuance of a permit to install a small cell facility, or
after the passage of 90 days from filing with no action on the petition, a petitioner
shall be authorized to commence installation. Any proposed changes to the
dimensions or specifications detailed in Subsection E shall require a new petition,
except that:
(1) No approval is required for the refurbishment, repair, or replacement of any
small cell facility component; and
(2) In the event that a petitioner proposes, or is required, to change the approved
position of a small cell facility component, the petitioner shall submit revisions
to the approved plan for such small cell facility to the Director of Inspectional
Services, who may approve the change so long as the change does not reduce
ground clearance to less than eight feet above ground level or cause the height
of the small cell facility to exceed 60 feet in height above the ground.
G. Effect of denial; appeal. In the event that the Director of Inspectional Services
denies a petition to install a small cell facility, he or she shall provide a written
explanation for the denial to the petitioner. Following issuance of such denial and
explanation, the petitioner may:
(1) Submit a new petition that satisfactorily addresses the reasons for denial, at
which time the Director of Inspectional Services shall consider the new
petition pursuant to this section; or
(2) Within 30 days of issuance of such denial, appeal the denial to the City
Council. Upon receipt of an appeal under this section, the City Council shall
consider the matter as a new application (i.e., de novo) at a publicly noticed
hearing and allow the petitioner to appear before the City Council to support
the appeal, submit further evidence to rebut the written explanation provided
by the Director of Inspectional Services, and demonstrate that it has satisfied
the standard of review established in Subsection E and demonstrated that the
relevant criteria contained in Subsection E have been met. The City Council
shall reach a final decision and act on any appeal within 60 days. The
petitioner has the right of further appeal available under law.
H. Removal of small cell facilities.
(1) Any small cell facility approved pursuant to this section shall be removed and
§ 319-10 UTILITY PERMITS § 319-10
319:11
the relevant permit terminated if the City requires the removal of the utility
pole where the small cell facility is located.
(2) The permit holder shall notify the City if the small cell wireless facility ceases
to be used for its intended purpose and shall remove all the permitted
equipment no later than 60 days following cessation of use.
(3) Except as otherwise provided for in this section, the City may remove small
cell facilities approved pursuant to this section and terminate the relevant
permit(s) by using the procedures established for the removal of overhead
structures and equipment contained in MGL c. 166, §§ 22A to 22N.
(4) The Director of Inspectional Services, or his designee, is authorized under this
section to order the removal of any small cell facility installed on a utility pole
that has not been authorized pursuant to this section. Any party installing any
such small cell facility shall be subject to penalties consistent with Chapter 1,
Article I, General Penalty, of this Code.
I. Relationship to Zoning Code. This section shall govern the installation of small cell
facilities on utility poles located in the public right-of-way or in the public utility
easement area adjacent to the public right-of-way. Except as otherwise stated
herein, the provisions of Chapter 375, Zoning, do not govern such installations.
§ 319-10 QUINCY CODE § 319-10
319:12
Chapter 325
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Commission — See Ch. 12, Art. VII.
Department of Traffic, Parking, Alarm and Lighting — See
Ch. 25, Art. IV.
Gas stations — See Ch. 163.
School grounds — See Ch. 266.
Vehicles for hire — See Ch. 330.
§ 319-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 319-10
325:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 325-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases used herein shall have the
following meanings, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
BUS STOP—An area in the roadway set aside for the boarding of or alighting from and
the parking of buses.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle being used in the transportation of goods,
wares or merchandise for commercial purposes.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE, HEAVY — Any commercial vehicle 2 1/2 tons' capacity
or over.
CROSSWALK—That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation
or connection of curblines and property lines at intersections, or at any portion of a
roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines on the road surface or by other
markings or signs.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Vehicles of the Fire Department (fire patrol), police
vehicles, ambulances and emergency vehicles of federal, state and municipal
departments or public service corporations when the latter are responding to an
emergency in relation to the Police or Fire Department.
FUNERAL — Any procession of mourners properly identified as such accompanying
the remains of a human body.
HOSPITAL — An institution or place, whether public or private, in which sick or
injured human beings are given medical or surgical care.
INTERSECTION — The area embraced within the extensions of the lateral curblines
or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of intersecting ways as defined in MGL c.
90, § 1, including divided ways. The rules and regulations herein contained governing
and restricting the movement of vehicles at and near intersecting ways shall apply at
any place along any way at which drivers are to be controlled by traffic control signals,
whether or not such place is an intersection as herein defined.
LANE — A longitudinal division of a roadway into a strip of sufficient width to
accommodate the passage of a single line of vehicles.
OFFICER —Any police officer, any investigator, examiner or inspector of the Registry
of Motor Vehicles, any constable or special officer, provided that he is in uniform and
has his badge of office displayed over his left breast and upon his outer garment.
OFFICIAL CURB MARKING — That portion of a curbing, the painting of which
has been authorized by the City Council, and which has the written approval of the
Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
OFFICIAL STREET MARKING—Any painted line, legend, marking or marker of any
description painted or placed upon any way which purports to direct or regulate traffic
and which has been authorized by the City Council and which has the written approval
of the Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
§ 325-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-1
325:3
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS — All signals, conforming to the standards as
prescribed by the Massachusetts Department of Transportation, not inconsistent with
these regulations, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction for the purpose of directing or warning traffic.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS—All signs, markings and devices, other than signals, not
inconsistent with these regulations, and which conform to the standards prescribed by
the Massachusetts Department of Transportation and placed or erected by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of guiding, directing, warning
or regulating traffic.
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than
temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading, or
in obedience to an officer or traffic signs or signals, or while making emergency repairs
or, if disabled, while arrangements are being made to move such vehicle.
PEDESTRIAN—Any person afoot or riding on a conveyance moved by human power,
except bicycles or tricycles.
RAILROAD CROSSING — Any intersection of ways with a railroad right-of-way.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway between the regularly established
curblines or that part, exclusive of shoulders, improved and intended to be used for
vehicular traffic.
ROTARY TRAFFIC — Counterclockwise operation of a vehicle around an object,
structure, or island in the roadway.
SAFETY ZONE—Any area or space set aside within a roadway for the exclusive use of
pedestrians and which has been indicated by signs, lines or markings having the written
approval of the Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
SERVICE ZONE — An area in the roadway set aside for the accommodation of
commercial and transient vehicular traffic.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street or highway set aside for pedestrian travel.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between property lines of every way open
to the use of the public for purposes of travel.
TAXICAB STAND — An area in the roadway in which certain taxicabs are required to
park while waiting to be engaged.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, street cars or other
conveyances either singly or together while using any street or highway for the purpose
of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL AREA — Any area along any way other than an intersecting
way, at which drivers are to be controlled by traffic control signals.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device using colored lights which conforms to
the standards as prescribed by the Massachusetts Department of Transportation, whether
manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic may be alternately
directed to stop and to proceed.
TRAFFIC ISLAND — Any area or space set aside, within a roadway, which is not
intended for use by vehicular traffic.
§ 325-1 QUINCY CODE § 325-1
325:4
U-TURN — The turning, by backing or otherwise, of a vehicle on a street or way so as
to head or drive the vehicle along the same street or way in the opposite direction.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, including bicycles when the provisions of
these rules are applicable to them, except other devices moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks and devices which derive their power for
operation from stationary overhead wires.
§ 325-2. Enforcement; emergencies.
It shall be the duty of officers designated by the Chief of Police to enforce the provisions
of this chapter. Such officers are authorized to direct all traffic, either in person or by
means of visible or audible signal, in conformance with the provisions of this chapter,
provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency, to expedite traffic or safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police or Fire Department may direct traffic, as conditions
may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.
§ 325-3. Compliance with lawful orders or directions.
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of an
officer, as defined in § 325-1, relating to the direction, control, or regulation of traffic.
Any person acting in conformity with any such order or direction shall be relieved from
the observance of any provision of this chapter with which it conflicts.
§ 325-4. Authority to close streets.
The Chief of Police is authorized to close temporarily any street or highway in an
impending or existing emergency or for any lawful assemblage, demonstration or
procession, provided that there is reasonable justification for the closing of such street.
§ 325-5. Authority to temporarily prohibit parking.
The Chief of Police is authorized to temporarily prohibit parking on any street or
highway or part thereof in an impending or existing emergency or for a lawful
assemblage, demonstration or procession, provided that there is a reasonable justification
for such prohibition. Vehicles parked in places where parking is temporarily prohibited
may be moved by or under the direction of an officer.
§ 325-6. Experimental regulations; time limit.
For the purpose of trial, the City Council may make temporary rules regulating traffic
or test under actual conditions traffic signs, signals, markings or other devices. No such
experimental rule regulating traffic shall remain in effect for a period of time longer than
60 days.
§ 325-7. Pushcarts; riding animals.
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle.
§ 325-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-8
325:5
§ 325-8. Vehicles used for advertising.
No person shall drive or propel any vehicle used primarily for the display of advertising
signs without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Chief of Police.
§ 325-9. Accident reports.
§ 325-10. Bus stops, taxicab stands and service zones.
§ 325-11. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to drivers actually engaged in work upon
a street or highway closed to travel, or under construction or repair, to officers when
engaged in the performance of public duties, nor to drivers of emergency vehicles while
operating in an emergency and in performance of public duties when the nature of the
work of any of these necessitates a departure from any part of these regulations. These
exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any vehicle from the consequences
of a reckless disregard of the safety of others.
§ 325-12. Responsibility of vehicle owner.
If any vehicle is found upon any street or highway in violation of any provisions of
this chapter and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner, or person
in whose name such vehicle is registered, shall be held prima facie responsible for such
violation.
§ 325-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
Any person violating any provision of any rule, regulation or order regulating the
A. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in the injury or death of
any person or property damage to an apparent extent of $200 or more shall, within
24 hours, make a full and complete report in writing of such accident to the police
headquarters in this City. A driver who has been incapacitated as a result of such
accident, and to such extent as to make reporting impossible or unfavorable to his
recovery, shall not be required to report such accident until he has recovered
sufficiently to be able to do so. The report shall be made on a form furnished by the
Police Department, copies of which shall be available at the police station.
Compliance with this section, however, shall not relieve such driver from the
additional responsibility of reporting to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles any
accident in which a person is killed or injured.
B. The Police Department may require any driver of a vehicle involved in an accident,
of which report must be made as provided in this section, to file supplementary
reports whenever the original report is insufficient in the opinion of the department.
A. Location. The location of all bus stops, taxicab stands and service zones shall be
specified by the City Council, and in the case of taxicab stands the City Council
may designate the location thereof and who shall use them as such.
B. Bus stops designated. Bus stops in the City shall be designated in accordance with
§ 325-76 by Council order which will be placed on file in the City Clerk's office.
§ 325-8 QUINCY CODE § 325-13
325:6
parking of motor vehicles made by any body authorized to make the same shall be
dealt with as provided in MGL c. 90, § 20A, and any person violating any of the rules
and regulations applicable to state highways made by the Massachusetts Department
of Transportation under authority of MGL c. 85, § 2, shall be subject to the penalty
provided in such rules and regulations. Any person convicted of a violation of any other
regulation made hereunder, except as otherwise provided, shall be punished by a fine of
$20 for each offense.
§ 325-13 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-13
325:7

ARTICLE II
Rules of the Road
§ 325-14. Unlawful operation of motor vehicles.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle, including but not limited to automobiles,
dune buggies, motorcycles, dirt bikes, motor scooters or any other motorized vehicle,
on any publicly owned lands within the City which have not been laid out as a way or
designated by the Park and Recreation Board for the use by such vehicles. Any violation
of this section may be disposed of in a noncriminal disposition as appropriate.
§ 325-15. Riding restrictions.
§ 325-16. Material falling onto public ways.
Whoever drops or lets fall or permits or allows to drop or fall, upon any way or highway
of the City, from any truck, cart or vehicle, any piece of stone or granite or other article
of such a size or character as may endanger public travel shall immediately cause the
same to be removed from the limits of the way or highway.
§ 325-17. Cargo weight limits.
No person shall carry or cause to be carried upon any public streets on any two-wheeled
vehicle a load the weight whereof exceeds one ton, unless the tires of the wheels of such
vehicle are four inches or more in width; nor any four-wheeled vehicle unless the tires
of the front wheels of such vehicle are three inches or more in width and the tires on
the rear wheels thereof are four inches or more in width; provided, however, that at such
seasons of the year when the ground is frozen and covered with snow, heavy loads on
runners may be allowed on the streets.
§ 325-18. Horse-drawn vehicles.
No person shall operate through any public street any horse-drawn vehicle which, with
its load, exceeds 10 feet in width, or 24 feet six inches in length, measured from the end
of the shaft to the extreme end of the side, nor any horse-drawn vehicle with a trailer,
except in accordance with a permit from the Chief of Police.
A. Restrictions generally; exceptions. No person shall ride upon any portion of a
vehicle not designed or intended for use of passengers. This subsection shall not
apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of his duty or to a person
riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
B. Riding on handlebars prohibited. No operator of any motorcycle or bicycle when
upon the street shall carry any other person upon the handlebar, frame, mudguard
or tank of any such vehicle nor shall any person so ride upon any such vehicle.
C. Clinging to moving vehicles. No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle,
coaster, sled, roller skates, or any toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any
moving vehicle upon any roadway.
§ 325-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-19
325:9
§ 325-19. Funeral processions.
A funeral composed entirely or partly of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as
such by means of black pennants bearing a purple cross attached to both the first and last
vehicles.
§ 325-20. Sounding of horn.
§ 325-21. Roller skates and toy vehicles.
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or
similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street at a crosswalk.
§ 325-22. Coasting.
No person shall coast or slide down, across or along any of the streets or sidewalks of the
City, upon any sled, board, or other vehicle for coasting or sliding, except as provided in
this section.
§ 325-23. Roadway divisions.
Upon such roadways as are divided by a parkway, grass plot, reservation, viaduct,
subway or by any structure or area, drivers shall keep to the right of such a division,
except when otherwise directed by an officer, signs, signals or markings.
§ 325-24. Overtaking and passing; crosswalks.
A. The driver of a vehicle shall give an audible warning with his horn or other suitable
warning device whenever necessary to ensure safe operation.
B. No person shall sound any automobile horn between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. anywhere in the City except in cases of extreme emergencies.
A. The Chief of Police is authorized to erect, on those days when conditions are
suitable and upon such streets as he may deem best, official traffic signs indicating
that such streets or parts of streets are reserved for coasting. Vehicular traffic is
prohibited from using such streets during the time such signs are displayed.
B. The prohibition in Subsection A shall not apply to drivers of vehicles having
business within such reserved areas or to drivers of vehicles whose residences are
within such reserved areas.
A. The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass a vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless there is sufficient clear space ahead on the right side of the roadway
to permit the overtaking to be completed without impeding the safe operation of
any vehicle ahead.
B. The driver of a vehicle, when about to be overtaken and passed by another vehicle
approaching from the rear, shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking
vehicle, on suitable and audible signal being given by the driver of the overtaking
vehicle, and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by
the overtaking vehicle.
§ 325-19 QUINCY CODE § 325-24
325:10
§ 325-25. Obstructing traffic.
§ 325-26. Safe following distances.
The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable
and prudent, having due regard to the speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon and
condition of the street or highway.
§ 325-27. Starting, stopping, turning and backing; signals.
The driver of any vehicle, before starting, stopping, turning from a direct line or backing,
shall first see that such movement can be made in safety. If such movement cannot
be made in safety or if it interferes unduly with the normal movement of other traffic,
such driver shall wait for a more favorable opportunity to make such movement. If the
operation of another vehicle should be affected by a stopping or turning movement, the
driver of such other vehicle shall be given a plainly visible signal.
§ 325-28. U-turns.
No operator shall turn a vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction, unless such
can be made without backing, and without causing any approaching operator to slacken
speed or change his course, except that the preceding provisions shall not apply on any
dead-end street, nor to applicants for drivers' licenses while being tested by examiners
of the Registry of Motor Vehicles and in accordance with specific directions of such
examiners.
§ 325-29. Prohibited U-turns.
A list of City streets on which U-turns are prohibited or restricted is on file in the office
of the City Clerk.
C. The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass any other vehicle proceeding in
the same direction at any intersection of streets, except that this subsection shall not
apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic stop and go signals or by
police officers.
D. Whenever any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk, or at any intersection, to
permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, no operator of any other vehicle
approaching from the rear shall overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
A. No person shall drive in such a manner as to obstruct unnecessarily the normal
movement of traffic upon any street or highway. Officers are authorized to require
any driver who fails to comply with this section to drive to the side of the roadway
and wait until such traffic as has been delayed has passed.
B. No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk on the right half of the
roadway to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed.
§ 325-24 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-30
325:11
§ 325-30. Prohibited left turns.
A list of City streets where left turns are prohibited or restricted is on file in the office of
the City Clerk.
§ 325-31. Emerging from alley, driveway or garage.
The operator of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or a garage shall stop such
vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending
across the alleyway or driveway.
§ 325-32. Garage exits; warnings.
Where buildings are used for the keeping of more than four vehicles and the exits
therefrom are within 10 feet of the line of a public street, warning by mechanical or
electrical device visible from a distance of 15 feet on either side of such exits, or by a
bell or gong audible for a distance of 15 feet on either side of the exits, or by a person
stationed at such exits, shall be given when vehicles are about to leave such building.
§ 325-33. Traffic ramps and islands.
At any junction or crossing of ways where the roadway grades have been separated and
where the ways are connected by ramps, and at any intersection of ways in which there
are traffic islands, drivers of vehicles shall proceed only as indicated by official signs,
signals or markings.
§ 325-34. Roads under construction or repair.
No operator shall enter upon the road surface of any street or highway or section thereof
when, by reason of construction, surface treatment, maintenance or the like, or because
of some unprotected hazard, such road surface is closed to travel, and one or more signs,
lights or signals have been erected to indicate that all or part of the road surface of the
street or highway is not to be used, or when so advised by an officer, watchman, member
of a street or highway crew or employee of the City, either audibly or by signals.
§ 325-35. Driving on sidewalks.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon any sidewalk except at a permanent or
temporary driveway.
§ 325-36. Driving through safety zones.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle, except on signal from a police officer, to
drive the same over or through a safety zone.
§ 325-37. Duties of drivers in processions.
A. It shall be the duty of each driver in a funeral or other procession to keep as near to
the right edge of the roadway as is feasible and to follow the vehicle ahead as
closely as is practicable and safe.
B. At an intersection where a traffic control signal is operating, the driver of the first
§ 325-30 QUINCY CODE § 325-37
325:12
§ 325-38. Driving through processions.
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other
authorized procession, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated.
§ 325-39. Buses.
No operator of an omnibus or other vehicle capable of carrying eight or more passengers
from whom fare is collected shall stand such vehicle in a street unless to take on or let
off a passenger, and then only at such places as may be designated by the City Council
and for such time as may be sufficient to enable the passenger to take his seat or to leave
such omnibus or vehicle, and provided, further, that no operator of such vehicle shall
operate it in a street other than those designated by the City Council.
§ 325-40. Condition of vehicles.
No person shall operate any vehicle in such condition or so constructed or so loaded as
to be likely to cause delay in traffic or accident or injury to any person or property.
§ 325-41. Heavy commercial vehicles.
vehicle in a funeral or other procession shall be the only one required to stop for a
red or yellow indication.
C. At an intersection where a lawful stop sign exists, the driver of the first vehicle in a
funeral or other procession shall be the only one required to stop before proceeding
through the intersection.
A. Restricted streets. The use and operation of heavy commercial vehicles are
restricted on the following streets or parts of streets, in the manner outlined and
during the period of time set forth:
Name of Street Restriction
Crescent Street At all times
Edison Park At all times
Edison Street At all times
Hall Place At all times
Harvard Street At all times
Hilda Street At all times
Hillsboro Street At all times
Intervale Street, from Centre Street to Brooks
Avenue
At all times
Samoset Avenue At all times
Upland Road At all times
Whitney Road At all times
B. Exceptions. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to heavy commercial
§ 325-37 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-41
325:13
§ 325-41.1. Private passenger motor vehicle restrictions; exceptions; signs. [Added
5-21-2018 by Order No. 2018-080]
§ 325-42. Turning movements.
Where official traffic control devices are erected directing specific traffic to use a
designated lane or designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular
direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, or to prohibit a turn or to make a
required turn at an intersection of roadways, drivers of vehicles shall obey the direction
of every such device.
§ 325-43. Streets with restricted turning movements.
A list of City streets where turning movements are restricted is on file in the office of the
City Clerk.
vehicles going to or coming from places upon said streets for the purpose of making
deliveries of goods, materials or merchandise to or similar collections from abutting
land or buildings or adjoining streets or ways to which access cannot otherwise be
gained; or to vehicles used in connection with the construction, maintenance and
repair of said streets or public utilities therein; or to federal, state, municipal or
public service corporation owned vehicles.
C. Signs. Subsection A of this section shall be effective only during such times that
official traffic signs are displayed setting forth its provisions.
A. The use and operation of motor vehicles along Dorchester Street running from its
intersection with Shoreham Street to its intersection with Moon Island Road, and
along Moon Island Road running from its intersection with Dorchester Street to the
City of Boston Access Gate approximately 200 yards to the east, shall be restricted
at all times to private passenger motor vehicles, as that term is defined in 540 CMR
2.05(a) and (b).
B. Subsection A above shall not apply to:
(1) Motor vehicles owned and/or operated by the City of Boston Police
Department or the City of Boston Fire Department traveling to or from Moon
Island;
(2) Vehicles going to or coming from places located upon the two streets in the
restricted area defined in the preceding subsection for purposes of making
deliveries of goods, materials or merchandise; and/or
(3) Vehicles providing municipal or emergency services.
C. Official traffic signs setting forth the foregoing provisions shall forthwith be
installed and maintained at each end of the restricted area.
§ 325-41 QUINCY CODE § 325-43
325:14
ARTICLE III
Signs, Signals and Markers
§ 325-44. Placement and maintenance.
The Chief of Police is authorized and, as to those signs and signals required in this
article, it shall be his duty to place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained,
all official traffic signs, signals, markings and safety zones. All signs, signals, markings
and safety zones shall conform to the standards as prescribed by the Massachusetts
Department of Transportation.
§ 325-45. Obedience required; exceptions.
No driver of any vehicle of any description shall disobey the instructions of any official
traffic control signal, sign, marking, marker or legend unless otherwise directed by a
police officer.
§ 325-46. Stop signs; duty to obey; exceptions.
Every driver of any vehicle, railway car or other conveyance approaching an intersection
of ways where there exists facing him an official sign bearing the word "Stop," or a
flashing red signal indication, such signs or signal having, apart from these rules and
orders, the written approval of the Massachusetts Department of Transportation, and
such approval being in effect, shall, before proceeding through the intersection, bring
such vehicle, railway car or other conveyance to a complete stop at such point as may
be clearly marked by a sign or line, or if a point is not so marked, then at the nearer
line or crosswalk of such intersection. In the case of a line of two or more vehicles
approaching such stop sign, or flashing red signal indication, the drivers of the second
and third vehicles in any group shall not be required to stop more than once before
proceeding through the intersection. This section shall not apply when the traffic is
otherwise directed by an officer or by a lawful traffic regulating sign, signal or device.
§ 325-47. Stop sign locations.
A list of locations where stop signs are authorized is on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 325-48. Right turn on red light.
A list of locations where right turns on red lights are prohibited is on file in the office of
the City Clerk.
§ 325-49. Traffic whistles.
Whistles used by any police officer in directing traffic shall have the following
meanings:
A. One blast of a police officer's whistle at an intersection means all moving vehicular
traffic shall come to a stop, at which time pedestrians may cross the street.
B. Two blasts of a police officer's whistle followed by a warning hand signal shall
indicate termination of the pedestrian crossing interval, and vehicular traffic shall
§ 325-44 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-49
325:15
§ 325-50. Traffic control signals.
proceed on receiving a hand signal from a police officer.
C. Three or more blasts of a whistle given by a police officer shall indicate the
approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, when both vehicular and pedestrian
traffic shall immediately stop or proceed as directed by the police officer.
A. Colors and arrow indications in traffic control signals shall have the commands
ascribed to them in this section and no other meanings, and every driver of a
vehicle, railway car or other conveyance shall comply therewith, except when
otherwise directed by an officer or by a lawful traffic-regulating sign (other than a
stop sign), signal or device, or except as provided in § 325-37B.
B. In no case shall a driver enter or proceed through an intersection without due regard
to the safety of other persons within the intersection, regardless of what indications
may be given by traffic control signals.
C. Definitions.
(1) Green. While the green lens is illuminated, drivers facing the signal may
proceed through the intersection but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
and vehicles lawfully within a crosswalk or the intersection at the time such
signal was exhibited. Drivers of vehicles making a right or left turn shall yield
the right-of-way to pedestrians crossing with the flow of traffic.
(2) Right, left and vertical green arrows. When a right green arrow is illuminated,
drivers facing the signal may turn right. When a left green arrow is
illuminated, drivers facing the arrow may turn left. When a vertical green
arrow is illuminated, drivers facing such signal may go straight ahead. When
a green arrow is exhibited together with a red or yellow lens, drivers may enter
the intersection to make the movement permitted by the arrow but shall yield
the right-of-way to vehicles and pedestrians proceeding from another direction
on a green indication.
(3) Yellow. While the yellow lens is illuminated, waiting drivers shall not proceed
and any driver approaching the intersection or a marked stop line shall stop at
such point unless so close to the intersection that a stop cannot be made in
safety; provided, however, that if a green arrow is illuminated at the same time,
drivers may enter the intersection to make the movement permitted by such
arrow.
(4) Red. While the red lens is illuminated, drivers facing the signal shall stop
outside of the intersection, or such point as may be clearly marked by a sign or
line; provided, however, that if a green arrow is illuminated at the same time,
drivers may enter the intersection to make the movement permitted by such
arrow.
(5) Red and yellow. While the red and yellow lenses are illuminated together,
drivers shall not enter the intersection, and during such time the intersection
shall be reserved for the exclusive use of pedestrians.
§ 325-49 QUINCY CODE § 325-50
325:16
§ 325-51. Quiet zones.
§ 325-52. Interference with or damaging signs.
Any person who wilfully defaces, injures, moves, obstructs or interferes with any official
traffic sign, signal or marking shall be subject to the penalty provided in Chapter 1,
Article I, of this Code.
§ 325-53. Unauthorized signs prohibited; removal.
No person or corporation shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street
any unofficial device, sign, signal, curb marking or street marking which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic device, sign, signal, curb marking or
street marking or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from
view any official sign, signal, marking or device. The Chief of Police is empowered to
remove every such prohibited sign, signal, marking or device or cause it to be removed
without notice.
§ 325-54. Official signs must be posted for regulations to be effective.
(6) Flashing red. When a red lens is illuminated in a traffic control signal by rapid
intermittent flashes, and its use has been specifically authorized by the
Massachusetts Department of Transportation, drivers shall stop before
entering the nearer line or crosswalk of the street intersection, or at a stop line
when marked, and the right to proceed shall then be governed by provisions of
MGL c. 89, § 8.
(7) Flashing yellow. A flashing yellow lens shall indicate the presence of a hazard
and drivers may proceed only with caution.
(8) Flashing green. A flashing green lens shall indicate an intersection or
pedestrian crosswalk in use or subject to use by entering or crossing traffic.
Drivers may proceed only with caution and shall be prepared to comply with a
change in the signal to red or yellow indication.
A. All of the territory within 200 feet of the premises of each hospital in this City is
created and established as a zone of quiet. The Chief of Police is authorized to erect
and maintain in a conspicuous manner within this area such signs and markings as
are necessary to designate it as a zone of quiet.
B. The Chief of Police may temporarily establish a zone of quiet upon any street where
a person is seriously ill. Such temporary zone of quiet shall embrace all territory
within a radius of 200 feet of the building occupied by the sick person. Such
temporary zones of quiet shall be designated by the Chief of Police by placing at a
conspicuous place in the street a sign or a marker bearing the words "Illness —
Quiet Zone."
A. Sections 325-3, 325-4, 325-29, 325-30, 325-41, 325-69, 325-73, 325-75, 325-76
and 325-79 of this chapter shall be effective only during such time as official signs
are erected and maintained in each block designated in the provisions of such
sections and located so as to be easily visible to approaching drivers.
§ 325-50 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-54
325:17
B. Regulations relating to one-way streets shall be effective only during such time as
a sufficient number of official signs are erected and maintained at each of the exits
for each one-way street, so that at least one sign will be clearly visible for a distance
of at least 75 feet to drivers approaching such an exit.
§ 325-54 QUINCY CODE § 325-54
325:18
ARTICLE IV
Pedestrians
§ 325-55. Obedience to police officers and traffic signals; crosswalk defined.
Pedestrians shall obey the directions of police officers directing traffic and, whenever
there is an officer directing traffic, a traffic control signal or a marked crosswalk, shall
remain within the limits of a marked crosswalk and as hereinafter provided in this article.
For the purpose of these regulations, a marked crosswalk shall only be construed to be
that area of a roadway reserved for pedestrian crossing located between two solid white
reflectorized twelve-inch pavement markings in rural areas or markings not less than six
inches wide in urban areas, said markings or lines being no less than six feet apart.
§ 325-56. Traffic control signal indications for pedestrians.
Traffic control signal color indications and legends shall have the commands ascribed to
them in this section and no other meanings, and every pedestrian shall comply therewith,
except when otherwise directed by an officer.
§ 325-57. Actuation of traffic control signals.
At a traffic control signal location where pedestrian indications are provided but which
A. Red and yellow or the word "Walk." Whenever the red and yellow lenses are
illuminated together or the single word "Walk" is illuminated, pedestrians facing
such indication may proceed across the roadway and in the direction of such signal
only.
B. Red alone or "Don't Walk." Whenever the words "Don't Walk" or any indication
other than red and yellow shown together is illuminated in a traffic control signal
where pedestrian indications are provided, pedestrians approaching or facing such
indication shall wait on the sidewalk, edge of roadway or in the pedestrian refuge
area of a traffic island and shall not enter upon or cross a roadway until the proper
indication is illuminated in the traffic control signal, but any pedestrian who has
partially completed his crossing on the walk indication shall proceed or return to
the nearest sidewalk or safety island on the yellow indication, the red indication or
when the words "Don't Walk" are illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes.
C. Green alone. At traffic control signal locations where no pedestrian indication is
given or provided, pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway
within any marked crosswalk in the direction of the green indication.
D. Yellow alone, red alone or flashing "Don't Walk." Pedestrians approaching or
facing a yellow, red or flashing "Don't Walk" illuminated indication shall not start
to cross a roadway.
E. Flashing red, yellow or green. At any traffic control signal locations where a
flashing red, flashing yellow or flashing green indication is being given facing a
crosswalk, pedestrians shall actuate, where provided, the pedestrian signal
indication and cross the roadway only on the red-yellow or "Walk" indication when
such indication is in operation. If no pedestrian signal is provided, pedestrians shall
cross within crosswalks with due care.
§ 325-55 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-57
325:19
are shown only upon actuation by means of a pedestrian push button, no pedestrian
shall cross a roadway unless or until the pedestrian control signal push button has been
actuated, and then cross only on the proper pedestrian signal indication. At traffic control
signal locations where no pedestrian indication is provided, pedestrians shall cross only
on the green indication. If necessary, the green indication shall be actuated by the
pedestrian by means of a push button.
§ 325-58. Emergency vehicles and processions; right-of-way.
At a traffic control signal location, pedestrians shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles of
a funeral or other procession or authorized emergency vehicle while in performance of
emergency duties regardless of the signal indication given, and they shall not attempt to
cross the roadway until such vehicles or procession has passed at which time pedestrians
shall then cross the roadway only as provided in these regulations.
§ 325-59. Improper use of traffic control signals.
It is unlawful for any person to actuate a pedestrian control signal or to enter a marked
crosswalk unless a crossing of the roadway is intended.
§ 325-60. Duties; use of sidewalks and crosswalks.
§ 325-61. Crossing outside of crosswalks; use of tunnels and overpasses.
Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. At a point where a
pedestrian tunnel or overpass has been provided, pedestrians shall cross the roadway
only by the proper use of the tunnel or overpass.
§ 325-62. Hitchhiking and soliciting.
No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, employment or
A. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a sidewalk or safety island and walk or run into
the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield the
right-of-way.
B. Pedestrians shall at all times attempt to cross a roadway using the right half of
crosswalks.
C. Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along
and upon an adjacent roadway whenever the sidewalk is open to pedestrian use.
D. Sidewalks not provided. Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking
along and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the
roadway on its unfinished shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the
opposite direction.
E. Alighting from vehicles. Persons alighting from the roadway side of any vehicle
parked at the curb or edge of roadway shall proceed immediately to the sidewalk or
edge of roadway adjacent to the vehicle and shall cross the roadway only as
authorized by these regulations.
§ 325-57 QUINCY CODE § 325-62
325:20
business from the operator or occupant of any vehicle without the written permission of
the board or officer having control of such roadway or highway.
§ 325-63. Provisions not exclusive; vehicle operators to exercise due care.
The provisions of this article shall in no way abrogate the provisions of MGL c. 90, §§ 14
and 14A, which provide precautions for safety of other travelers and for the protection of
blind persons crossing ways. Furthermore, notwithstanding the provisions of this article,
every operator of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian
upon the roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall
exercise proper precautions which may become necessary for safe operation.
§ 325-64. Operation of vehicles at crosswalks.
§ 325-65. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by all officers of the City on and after December 6, 1965.
§ 325-66. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article governing the use of ways by pedestrians shall not apply
to pedestrians actually engaged in work upon a roadway closed to travel or under
construction or repair; municipal, state, federal or public service corporation employees
while in the performance of their duties; officers engaged in the performance of their
public duties; or to pedestrians acting in an emergency when such emergency
necessitates departure from any part of this article.
§ 325-67. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
Any person who violates the provisions of this article which deal with the proper use of
ways by pedestrians shall be punished as provided in MGL c. 90, § 18A. Any person
convicted of a violation of any other provisions of this article relative to the operation of
vehicles shall be punished by a fine of $20 for each offense.
§ 325-68. Effect of regulations.
All existing rules and regulations governing the operation of vehicles or the use of ways
A. When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a
vehicle, which for the purpose of this article shall include bicycles, shall yield the
right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be so to yield, to a pedestrian
crossing the roadway within a marked crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the
half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is travelling or when the pedestrian
approaches from the opposite half of the roadway to within five feet of that half of
the roadway upon which the vehicle is travelling.
B. No operator of a vehicle shall pass any other vehicle which has been stopped at a
marked crosswalk to permit a pedestrian to cross a way, nor shall any operator enter
a marked crosswalk until there is sufficient space on the other side of the crosswalk
to accommodate the vehicle he is operating, notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed.
§ 325-62 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-68
325:21
by pedestrians which are inconsistent herewith are expressly repealed. This repeal shall
not, however, affect any punishment or penalty imposed or any complaint or prosecution
pending at the time of passage hereof for any offense committed under any of said rules
and regulations hereby repealed.
§ 325-68 QUINCY CODE § 325-68
325:22
ARTICLE V
Stopping, Standing and Parking
§ 325-69. Parallel parking.
§ 325-70. Angle parking.
§ 325-71. Standing and parking; general prohibitions.
A. Upon a roadway where parking is permitted, both wheels on the right side of the
vehicle are to be within 12 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except upon
those streets which are designated as one-way streets. On such one-way streets, a
vehicle shall be parked in the direction in which such vehicle is moving and with
both wheels on one side of the vehicle within 12 inches of the curb. This shall not
apply to streets or parts of streets where angle parking is required by this article.
B. No person shall stop any automobile, truck, or other vehicle in or upon any street in
this City in such a manner as to hinder or obstruct the travel over such street, nor at
the side of or so near to another vehicle as to obstruct public travel.
A. The City Council shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted
and shall mark or sign such streets or cause the same to be marked or signed.
B. Upon the streets or parts of streets which have been marked or signed for angle
parking, vehicles shall be parked with one wheel within 12 inches of the curb and
at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks or official signs. The vehicle shall
be parked wholly within the painted lanes provided.
A. No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to stand
or park in any street, way, highway, road or parkway under the control of the City
in violation of any of the provisions of this article or other traffic ordinances of the
City and in particular in any of the following places, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police
officer or traffic sign or signal:
(1) Within an intersection.
(2) Upon any sidewalk.
(3) Upon any crosswalk.
(4) Upon the roadway in a rural or sparsely settled district.
(5) Upon any roadway where parking of such vehicle will not leave a clear and
unobstructed lane at least 10 feet wide for passing traffic.
(6) Upon any street or highway within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
(7) In front of any private road or driveway.
(8) Upon any street or highway within 20 feet of an intersecting way, except
alleys.
(9) Within 15 feet of the wall of a fire station or directly across the street from
§ 325-69 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-71
325:23
§ 325-72. Standing and parking; general prohibitions on types of vehicles. [Added
9-25-2000 by Order No. 2000-188]
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article or other traffic ordinance of the City,
no person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle, as described below, to stand or park
in any street, way, public way, highway, road or parkway under the control of the City
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or when in compliance with
the direction of a police officer or traffic control device:
such station, provided that signs are erected acquainting the driver of such
restrictions.
(10) Within the limits of private ways furnishing means of access for fire apparatus
to any part of a tenement house or apartment house.
(11) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street in such manner as to constitute double-line or multiple-line parking.
(12) Adjacent to any center division strip or island placed upon or being a part of
any public way.
(13) Within areas designated as reserved for funeral and church parking in front of
churches, funeral homes, memorial chapels and places of worship while
church services, funeral services or visiting hours are being conducted.
B. No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his or her name to
stand or park within the yard between the exterior front wall of the residence and
front boundary of the lot upon which it stands unless upon an established driveway
or residential parking facility, as provided for in § 5.1, Off-street parking, of the
Zoning Ordinance.20 [Added 6-19-2006 by Order No. 2006-019A]
(1) No vehicle shall be parked on the landscaped portion of any front yard.
(2) Whoever violates any provision of this regulation may be penalized by a
noncriminal disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D.
(3) For the purposes of this section, Quincy police officers, the Director of
Inspectional Services, and local building inspectors shall in all cases be
considered enforcing persons.
(4) Violation of this regulation shall be subject to a penalty of $25 for the first
offense and $50 for each subsequent offense. Each day on which any violation
exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
(5) After three consecutive days on which an offense has occurred, any motor
vehicle found in violation of this regulation shall be deemed abandoned and
thereby subject to the provisions of MGL c. 90, §§ 22B and 22C.
A. A commercial bus;
B. A tractor-trailer truck;
20. Editor's Note: See Ch. 375, Zoning.
§ 325-71 QUINCY CODE § 325-72
325:24
§ 325-73. Parking prohibited and restricted locations.
A list of specific locations where parking is prohibited or restricted is on file in the office
of the City Clerk.
§ 325-74. Parking in handicapped spaces; curb access; applicability.
§ 325-75. Safety zones.
No person shall park a vehicle within 20 feet of either end of a safety zone which is
located within 30 feet of the curb or edge of the roadway.
§ 325-76. Bus stops.
No person shall park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop.
C. A semitrailer truck;
D. A trailer, including but not limited to those used for the transport of boats,
motorcycles, construction equipment, landscaping equipment and materials, and the
transport of goods and wares of any sort;
E. An auto home, camper or mobile home;
F. A taxi;
G. An ambulance;
H. A hearse;
I. A livery vehicle;
J. A bus, motor bus, school bus or school pupil transport vehicle; and
K. A commercial vehicle, meaning any vehicle which is larger than a one-ton vehicle;
any vehicle which has five or more wheels on the ground; a cargo van; a tow truck
or flatbed used for the transport of vehicles; any vehicle not used exclusively for
personal or commuting purposes; and/or any vehicle used for hire or in connection
with any employment or business, to transport persons, employees or customers,
goods, wares or merchandise.
A. No person may park a vehicle in a parking space which has been reserved for a
handicapped person unless his or her vehicle bears a distinctive number plate issued
to either a disabled veteran or handicapped person as authorized by MGL c. 90, § 2.
B. No person may park a vehicle in a manner as to obstruct a curb ramp designed for
use by handicapped persons as a means of egress to a sidewalk.
C. This section shall apply to all public areas as well as private parking spaces within
the City where the public has a right of access as invitees or licensees.
D. The penalty for violating this section shall be contained in the schedule of fines
contained in § 325-85.
§ 325-72 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-77
325:25
§ 325-77. Buses.
No person shall park a bus upon any street within a business district at any place other
than a bus stop, when a nearby bus stop is available for use.
§ 325-78. Vehicles for sale.
It is unlawful for any person to park upon a street or highway any vehicle displayed for
sale.
§ 325-79. Passenger loading and unloading.
No operator shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except for the purpose of, or for a period
of time longer than is necessary for, the loading or unloading of passengers, and in no
event longer than three minutes at any curb adjacent to the entrance of a school, church,
theater, hotel, hospital, public building, or any place of public assemblage, during the
hours and between the points designated by official signs, provided that this regulation
shall not apply to the shipping or service entrances to any such building.
§ 325-80. Maintenance and storage.
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle or other conveyance upon any public
way in order to repair, wash or clean such vehicle or other conveyance or cause it to be
repaired, washed or cleaned in or upon any public way of the City, nor shall any person
occupy any part of any public way as storage room for any vehicle except that in an
emergency temporary repairs may be made.
§ 325-81. Removal of illegally parked vehicles.
Vehicles found standing or parked in violation of any of the provisions of this article
may be removed by or under the direction of any officer and at the expense of the owner
to a place where parking is allowed.
§ 325-82. Vehicles interfering with snow removal; overnight parking; snow
emergencies. [Amended by Order No. 94-225]
Any vehicle which is left on any street or roadway so that it obstructs the plowing
or removal of snow from that street or roadway may be removed from that street or
roadway by direction of the Chief of Police or Commissioner of Public Works, provided
that temporary signs are erected. Any vehicle which is left on any street or roadway
under any of the following conditions shall be subject to established fines for blocking
snow removal and may be removed from that street or roadway by direction of the Chief
of Police or Commissioner of Public Works. The owner of any vehicle found in violation
of any of these provisions shall be liable to the City in the sum of fines and penalties
authorized in § 325-85 of this article and to the City's authorized towing company for
removal and storage of the vehicle in accordance with MGL c. 40, § 22D.
A. Parking overnight without a resident parking permit authorizing a vehicle to park in
excess of two hours between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any day.
Vehicle must bear a distinctive permit issued by the Quincy Police Department.
Said permits shall be valid for one year from date of issue and shall cost $20. Said
§ 325-77 QUINCY CODE § 325-82
325:26
permit may be revoked for cause at any time. Such permit does not allow parking of
any vehicle in violation of any other rule or regulation, including restrictive parking
for street sweeping. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
B. Parking on the following emergency arteries during a declared snow emergency,
provided that signs are posted:
Adams
Atlantic
Beach
Beale
Bellevue
Billings
Brooks Street
Brooks Road
Burgin Parkway
Centre
Chestnut
Clay
Cliveden
Coddington
Commander Shea Boulevard
Common
Copeland
Cottage
DesMoines
Dimmock
Dorchester
East Howard
East Squantum
Elm Street and Avenue
Faxon Park
Fenno
Foster
Franklin Street and Avenue
Garfield
Granite
Greenwood
Hall
§ 325-82 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-82
325:27
Hancock
Harvard
High
Holbrook
Huckins
Independence
Kendrick
Liberty
Maple
McGrath
Mechanic
Newbury
Newport
Palmer
Parkingway
Penn
Quarry
Rawson
Revere
Robertson
Russell
School
Sea
South
Southern Artery
Standish
Stedman
Sumner
Temple
Washington
Water
West
West Elm
West Squantum
Whitwell
Willard
Wilson
§ 325-82 QUINCY CODE § 325-82
325:28
§ 325-83. Vehicle towing.
C. Parking during a declared snow emergency on any street or roadway where parking
is ordinarily prohibited in accordance with §§ 325-71 through 325-76 of this article.
D. Parking during a declared snow emergency on the odd-numbered side of the street
in an even-numbered winter year. [Note: A winter year is the year in which the
winter season begins (i.e., the winter year for the snow season beginning on October
1, 1993, and ending in the spring of 1994 is 1993). Thus, parking is not allowed on
the even-numbered side of the street during a declared snow emergency for the
1993-1994 winter.]
E. Parking during a declared snow emergency on the even-numbered side of the street
in an odd-numbered winter year. [Note: A winter year is the year in which the
winter season begins (i.e., the winter year for the snow season beginning on October
1, 1993, and ending in the spring of 1994 is 1993). Thus, parking is not allowed on
the even-numbered side of the street during a declared snow emergency for the
1993-1994 winter.]
A. Authority. In accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 22D, the City Council
enacts the regulations set out in this section authorizing the removal to a convenient
place of vehicles parked or standing in such manner or in such areas as set out in
Subsections E and F on any way under the control of the City. Vehicles specifically
exempted by MGL c. 40, § 22D, shall not, however, be subject to such removal.
B. Chief of Police; powers. The moving or towing of any vehicle under the provisions
of § 325-82 and this section shall be by and at the direction of the Chief of Police
or such other officer(s) of the rank of sergeant or higher as he may from time to
time designate.
C. Fees. The City Council imposes upon the owner of any vehicle moved or towed to
a convenient place, under the provisions of this article, the following fees:
(1) Removal or towing fee not to exceed that which is provided in or as authorized
by statute law.
(2) Storage fee not to exceed that which is provided in or as authorized by statute
law.
D. Damage to vehicle; liability. The contractor shall be liable to the owner for any
damage arising out of negligence caused to a vehicle in the course of removal and
storage.
E. Tow-away zones; generally.
(1) No person shall stand or park or allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered
in his name to stand or park in any of the following places:
(a) Upon any way in such a manner as to impede the removal or plowing of
snow or ice.
(b) Upon any sidewalk.
§ 325-82 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-83
325:29
(c) Upon any crosswalk.
(d) Upon any way within 20 feet of an intersecting way, except alleys.
(e) Upon a way within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
(f) On a roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb
of the way.
(g) In front of a public or private driveway.
(h) Upon any way where the parking of a vehicle will not leave a clear and
unobstructed lane at least 10 feet wide for passing traffic.
(2) Vehicles found in violation of the provisions of this subsection, except those
specifically exempted by law, shall be removed to a convenient place under
the direction of an officer of the Police Department as specified in Subsection
A, and the owner of the vehicle so removed or towed away shall be liable to
the cost of such removal and storage, if any, as set forth in Subsection C. The
owner of any vehicle removed or towed away under the provisions of this
section shall also be subject to the penalties provided in MGL c. 90, § 20A.
F. Tow-away zones; specific locations.
(1) No person shall stand or park or allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered
in his name to stand or park on any of the ways or parts of ways hereinafter
described and during the periods of time set forth:
(a) All-day parkers on the following streets. All-day parkers using MBTA
can be detected if police stripe their tires.
Arlington Street
Chapman Street
Chester Street
Clay Street
Cushing Street
Farrington Street
Fayette Street
Greenwood Street
Stafford Street
Wayland Street
Woodbine Street
(b) Berlin Street on both sides.
(c) Brook Street, Arlington Street to Newport Avenue (southerly side).
(d) Cleverly Court on both sides.
(e) DesMoines Road on the southerly side.
§ 325-83 QUINCY CODE § 325-83
325:30
(f) East Howard Street on the easterly side.
(g) Greenwood Street on both sides.
(h) Newport Avenue on the easterly side.
(i) Newport Avenue on the westerly side (between Brook and Beale Streets).
(j) South Street, both sides from Washington Street to East Howard Street.
(k) Winter Street on both sides.
(l) Woodbine Street on both sides.
(2) Vehicles found in violation of the provisions of this subsection, except those
specifically exempted by law, shall be removed to a convenient place under
the direction of an officer of the Police Department as specified in Subsection
A, and the owner of the vehicle so removed or towed away shall be liable to
the cost of such removal and storage, if any, as set forth in Subsection C. The
owner of any vehicle removed or towed away under the provisions of this
subsection shall also be subject to the penalties provided in MGL c. 90, § 20A.
G. Tow-away zones; specific locations; posting required. The provisions of Subsection
F shall be effective only during such time as a sufficient number of official traffic
signs bearing the legend "Tow-Away Zone" are installed, erected, maintained and
located so as to be visible to approaching drivers, said signs to be appended above
or incorporated into the legend of parking prohibition signs.
H. Recordkeeping requirements. The Police Department shall keep a record of all
vehicles towed or removed under the provisions of Subsections E and F. Such
record shall be retained for one year and shall contain the following information:
(1) The registration of the vehicle.
(2) The location from which it was towed and time and date of the tow order.
(3) The location to which it was moved.
(4) The fee charged for towing.
(5) Name of towing contractor, if any.
(6) Name and rank of officer who authorized towing.
I. Recovery. If a vehicle is removed pursuant to Subsections E and F, such vehicle
shall be held until all charges lawfully imposed for such removal and storage
following the same have been paid, and if in the calendar year in which such vehicle
is so removed and in the preceding calendar year five or more notices, in the
aggregate, have been affixed to said vehicle as provided in MGL c. 90, § 20C, until
due notice has been received that either the fines provided in such notices have been
paid or security for the payment thereof has been deposited. In addition, a motor
vehicle may, in any calendar year, if in such year and in the calendar year
immediately preceding five or more notices in the aggregate have been affixed to
said vehicle as provided in said MGL c. 90, § 20C, and have not been disposed of,
§ 325-83 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-83
325:31
§ 325-84. Parking prohibited on private ways.
Upon the following private ways, parking is hereby prohibited:
§ 325-85. Parking violations; fines and penalties. [Amended by Order No. 97-080;
9-25-2000 by Order No. 2000-189; 9-25-2000 by Order. No. 2000-190; 6-19-2006
by Order No. 2006-019A; 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
Pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 90, § 20A, the following schedule of fines is
enacted:
be removed to, and stored in, a convenient place in the City until all charges
lawfully imposed for such removal and storage have been paid and due notice
has been received that either the fines provided in such notices have been paid or
security for the payment thereof has been deposited.
A. Hershey Place, on both sides.
A. Five-dollar fines. The following offenses shall be subject to a fine of $5 if paid
within 21 days of issue, $10 if paid thereafter but before the Parking Clerk reports
said violation to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, and $15 if paid after notification
to said Registrar:
(1) Vehicle on crossing.
(2) Restricted place other than space designated for handicapped.
(3) Registration plate.
(4) Defiance of corner law.
(5) Right wheels not to curb.
(6) Meter expired.
(7) Not fully parked in lines.
(8) Not parked facing curbs in space so designated.
B. Ten-dollar fines. The following offenses shall be subject to a fine of $10 if paid
within 21 days of issue, $15 if paid thereafter but before the Parking Clerk reports
said violation to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, and $20 if paid after notification
to said Registrar:
(1) Within 10 feet of fire hydrant.
(2) Blocking driveway.
(3) Double parking.
C. Fifteen-dollar fines. The following offenses shall be subject to a fine of $15 if paid
within 21 days of issue, $20 if paid thereafter but before the Parking Clerk reports
said violation to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, and $25 if paid after notification
to said Registrar:
§ 325-83 QUINCY CODE § 325-85
325:32
(1) A vehicle which blocks snow removal.
(2) Overtime parking.
(3) All-night parking.
(4) Nonconforming vehicle parking.
D. One-hundred-dollar fines. A vehicle which parks in a space designated for handicap
plate while not having such handicap plate shall be subject to a fine of $100 if paid
within 21 days of issue, $105 if paid thereafter but before the Parking Clerk reports
said violation to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, and an additional $125 if paid
after notification to said Registrar.
E. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each two-hour period during which
a violation occurs, or continues to occur, as to all violations set forth in this section,
except for a violation under Subsection C(3).
F. A vehicle which is found in violation of the provisions of § 325-71B of this article
shall be subject to a fine of penalty of $25 for the first offense and $50 for each
subsequent offense. Each day on which any violation exists shall be deemed to be a
separate offense.
§ 325-85 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-85
325:33

ARTICLE VI
Parking Meters
§ 325-86. Purpose.
It is declared to be the purpose of this article that the fees to be charged and collected
by the operation of parking meters are levied as a police regulation to cover the costs of
providing parking space, parking meters and their installation and maintenance, the cost
of regulation and inspection, the cost of operation and control of traffic moving in and
out of and parking in such parking spaces and parking meter areas and for the cost of
traffic administration expenses resulting from the establishment of such parking meter
areas and that it is not the purpose of the installation of such parking meters to recover
any further moneys for the City or to engage in the operation of such parking spaces and
meters for profit.
§ 325-87. Establishment of parking meter zones.
The City Council may establish, immediately and from time to time hereafter, as traffic
and parking conditions require, zones or areas to be known as "parking meter zones,"
or areas upon such streets and public parking areas in the City as are selected for the
location of such zones or areas, and in such parking meter zones or areas the City
Council may cause parking meters to be installed and may cause parking meter spaces
to be designated as provided in this article and shall fix the time limitations for legal
parking in such zones or areas.
§ 325-88. Installation and maintenance.
§ 325-89. Location, time limitations and hours of operation.
A list of parking meter zones, their time limitations and hours of operation is on file in
the office of the City Clerk.
§ 325-90. Municipal off-street parking areas.
The provisions of § 325-73 pertaining to the parking time limit on municipal off-street
parking areas shall be inapplicable on Sundays, holidays and daily.
§ 325-91. Deposit of funds required.
A. The Chief of Police is authorized, with the approval of the Mayor, to install, in such
parking meter zones or areas as may be established under § 325-87, parking meters,
including curb or street or area marking lines, and to have charge of the regulation
and operation thereof, to maintain such meters in good workable condition, and to
collect or cause to be collected moneys deposited in the meters in the presence of
the Treasurer/Collector or a person designated by him and turn such moneys over
to the Treasurer/Collector.
B. The meters shall be placed upon the curb next to the individual parking spaces and
they shall be so constructed as to display a signal, marking or symbol showing legal
parking upon deposit therein of proper coins, indicated by instructions on the
meters.
§ 325-86 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-91
325:35
§ 325-92. Vehicle to be parked in designated area; exception.
It is unlawful to park any vehicle across any such lines or marks as may be established
hereunder or to park such vehicle in such way that the same shall not be within the area
so designated by such lines or markings, unless such vehicle be too large to be confined
in one such place, in which latter instance only the meter nearest the hood or front end
of such vehicle need be operated.
§ 325-93. Extending time prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter
additional coins for the purpose of extending the parking time beyond the maximum time
as determined under §§ 325-73 and 325-89.
§ 325-94. Rates.
The maximum fee for parking meter areas shall be as follows:
§ 325-95. Exemption for temporary loading and unloading.
The placing of coins in such meters as may be established hereunder shall not be
required of the owner or operator of any vehicle while actually engaged in the loading or
unloading of persons or merchandise therefrom, provided that the parking for loading or
unloading persons is restricted to such length of time as is absolutely necessary therefor,
and provided further that such loading and unloading of merchandise is restricted to such
length of time as is absolutely necessary therefor and to places of business where it is
not possible to so load, unload, receive or deliver merchandise at a rear entrance.
A. Whenever any vehicle is parked next to a parking meter, the operator of the vehicle
shall park within the area designated by the curb or street or any marking lines as
indicated for parallel parking and upon entering the parking space shall
immediately deposit in the meter the coins in United States legal tender stipulated
on the face of the meter. Where parking is indicated to be at right angles to the
curbing, the vehicle shall be parked facing the curb.
B. It is unlawful for any person to fail or neglect to deposit such coin or coins or to fail
to park within the limits designated. Such parking space may then be used by such
vehicle during the time delimited therefor according to the sum thus deposited, and
such vehicle shall be unlawfully parked if it remains in such space beyond the
period of time for which the operator shall have deposited such coin or coins in the
meter. It is unlawful for any person to cause any vehicle to be unlawfully parked as
provided in this section.
A. Ten cents per hour in one-hour and two-hour zones within the City except as
provided in Subsections B and C of this section.
B. Ten cents per 12 minutes for parking meters located on the easterly side of Hancock
Street from Huntly Road to a point 116 feet in a northerly direction.
C. Ten cents per hour in all off-street parking areas, except those areas designated as
ten-hour zones, where the maximum charge shall be $0.25 for two hours and 30
minutes.
§ 325-91 QUINCY CODE § 325-96
325:36
§ 325-96. Bus stops, taxicab stands and service zones.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prohibit the City Council from
making adequate and necessary provisions for bus stops, taxicab stands and service
zones, as authorized by other articles of this chapter, on any street or portion of any street
which has been or may hereafter be designated herein as a parking meter zone.
§ 325-97. Tampering with meters.
It is unlawful for any person not authorized so to do to tamper with, open, break, injure
or destroy any parking meter.
§ 325-98. Removal of meters. [Added by Ord. No. 95-043]
Upon the recommendation of the Traffic Engineer and Councillor-at-large Timothy P.
Cahill all parking meters in the Parkingway are removed.
§ 325-96 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-98
325:37

ARTICLE VII
Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled and Discarded Vehicles
§ 325-99. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article:
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
PROPERTY — Any real property within the City which is not a street or highway.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE—A machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel
along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and transport persons or
property, or pull machinery, and shall include, without limitation, automobile, truck,
trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon.
§ 325-100. Abandonment of vehicles prohibited.
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the City and no person shall leave any
vehicle at any place within the City for such time and under such circumstances as to
cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned.
§ 325-101. Leaving of wrecked or nonoperating vehicle on street.
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle
on any street or highway within the City.
§ 325-102. Leaving of wrecked or nonoperating vehicle on property.
No person in charge or control of any property within the City, whether as owner,
tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating,
wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle to remain on such property longer than 48 hours,
and no person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the City for a longer
time than 48 hours, except that this section shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in
an enclosed building, a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a
lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, or
a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and
manner by the City.
§ 325-103. Impoundment of vehicles; recovery or disposal; time limits. [Amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
The Chief of Police, Commissioner of Public Works or other appropriate official or any
member of his department designated by him is authorized to remove or have removed
any vehicle left at any place within the City which reasonably appears to be in violation
of this article or lost, stolen or unclaimed. Such vehicle shall be impounded, and if not
lawfully claimed or disposed of by the lawful owner within 48 hours it shall be hauled
off to a junkyard and disposed of forthwith.
§ 325-99 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-104
325:39
§ 325-104. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined $50. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 325-104 QUINCY CODE § 325-104
325:40
ARTICLE VIII
One-Way Streets
§ 325-105. List of one-way streets.
A list of one-way streets in the City is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 325-105 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-105
325:41

ARTICLE IX
Hazardous Materials Transportation
[Added 12-19-2005 by Order No. 2005-246]
§ 325-106. Routes.
§ 325-107. Marking of ways.
The Commissioner of Public Works shall identify and mark those ways under the control
of the City of Quincy which he determines go through or near heavily populated areas,
places where crowds are assembled, tunnels, narrow streets or alleys upon which such
motor carriers are prohibited from travelling unless pursuant to the exceptions identified
in § 325-106A(1) to (3) above.
§ 325-108. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
Any motor carrier subject to this article who violates § 325-106 shall be subject to a fine
from the Quincy Police Department of $300 per violation.
A. A motor carrier carrying hazardous material required to be placarded or marked in
accordance with 49 CFR 177.823 shall, on all public ways within the control of the
City of Quincy, operate the vehicle over routes which do not go through or near
heavily populated areas, places where crowds are assembled, tunnels, narrow
streets or alleys, except where the motor carrier determines that: [Amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
(1) There is no practicable alternative;
(2) A reasonable deviation is necessary to reach terminals, points of loading and
unloading, or facilities for food, fuel, repairs, rest or a safe haven; or
(3) A reasonable deviation is required by emergency conditions, such as a detour
that has been established by a highway authority, or a situation exists where a
law enforcement official requires the driver to take an alternative route.
B. Operating convenience is not a basis for determining whether it is practicable to
operate a motor vehicle in accordance with Subsection A of this section.
§ 325-106 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-108
325:43

ARTICLE X
Neighborhood Parking
[Added 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2006-270; amended 10-15-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-147]
§ 325-109. Purpose and statement of public policy.
The City of Quincy acknowledges there are densely populated residential areas within
the City that are near nonresidential uses that generate significant demand for parking.
The City finds that persons employed by or who use these nonresidential facilities
frequently park their vehicles on nearby residential streets, negatively affecting the
general well-being of residents by way of heavy congestion. This residential permit
parking ordinance aims to regulate parking in designated residential areas to:
§ 325-110. Designation and establishment of residential parking areas.
A. Reduce hazardous traffic conditions resulting from residents competing with
nonresidents to park in certain residential areas.
B. Promote traffic safety and safety of children and other pedestrians.
C. Protect residents of such areas from unreasonable burdens of obtaining parking and
accessing their residences.
D. Preserve the character of such areas and neighborhoods as residential.
E. Preserve values of property.
F. Encourage the use of public transportation.
G. Promote efficiency of maintenance to ensure clean, safe streets.
H. Promote the peace, comfort, convenience and welfare of all inhabitants of the City.
I. Ensure reasonable access for visitor parking in areas regulated by residential
parking restrictions.
A. The City Council may by ordinance establish residential parking areas.
B. Residential parking may be limited or restricted in such areas to certain locations,
hours and time.
C. Designation of a residential permit parking area may be initiated by the City Traffic,
Parking, Alarm and Lighting (TPAL) Department, the City Council or by petition
signed by at least 60% of property owners in any requested area, filed with the City
TPAL Department. The request must specify the area affected and issues caused by
nonresidential parking, including identification of peak times and locations. Such
an area must be at least one street block in length.
D. The TPAL Department may investigate the requested area to determine the
feasibility of residential permit parking. This investigation may include but shall
not be limited to observations, surveys, studies, community meetings or any other
method deemed appropriate.
§ 325-109 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-110
325:45
§ 325-111. Residential parking permit program.
E. After completing its investigation, the TPAL Department will submit a
recommendation to the City Council for designation or rejection of a residential
parking permit area. The following shall be considered when making a
recommendation:
(1) That the proposal is consistent with the policy and goals set forth in this article.
(2) That the proposed area primarily consists of residential streets.
(3) That the size of the proposed area is appropriate to adequately address the
identified issues.
(4) That no other reasonable alternatives should be pursued.
(5) Any other factor deemed relevant under the circumstances.
A. Program administration.
(1) The residential parking permit program will be administered by the City of
Quincy TPAL Department. Residential permits shall identify the area to which
they apply and shall be of a design specified by the City TPAL Department.
(2) One such permit will be issued to an owner of a motor vehicle who meets the
requirements set forth in this article and is principally garaged at an address
contiguous to a designated residential parking district.
(3) Stickers shall be affixed to front passenger side window.
(4) Resident parking permits shall expire one year from the date of issuance.
(5) A residential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve a parking spot in a
designated area, and the City reserves the right to align the number of passes
issued with the amount of available parking in the designated area.
(6) A residential parking permit shall not authorize the standing or parking of any
vehicle in such places and times previously restricted.
(7) Residential parking rules will be in effect in locations designated through the
process above between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 2:00 p.m., Sunday through
Friday, unless otherwise decided and displayed.
B. Application process.
(1) Applications must be made either online or in person with the City of Quincy
TPAL Department using official form designed by TPAL.
(2) Each applicant must submit proof of residency and current motor vehicle
registration issued by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Registry of Motor
Vehicles. Registration must be for the vehicle for which an application is being
made which is principally garaged in the City of Quincy.
(3) A valid motor vehicle registration with an address within a designated
residential zone and any one of the following documents will be accepted as
§ 325-110 QUINCY CODE § 325-111
325:46
proof of residency:
(a) A valid driver's license with address within a residential zone.
(b) A tax, municipal water or utility bill with the applicant's name and
address issued within the last 90 days.
(c) A rental or lease agreement signed within the last 90 days.
(4) All applicants must have paid their motor vehicle excise tax and all parking
tickets before a permit is issued.
(5) Upon receipt of application, a representative of the TPAL Department will
conduct a review to verify the need for off-street parking. Permits will only be
granted to applicants who can demonstrate need for on-street parking.
C. Visitor parking.
(1) Visitors planning on parking in residential parking areas during the restricted
hours must obtain a visitor parking pass.
(2) Visitor parking passes will be obtained either online or in person from the City
of Quincy TPAL Department.
(3) Visitor parking passes will be granted for a time period not to exceed 14 days.
(4) Should a visitor parking pass be needed for a period of time greater than 14
days, an application for a long-term visitor pass must be made in person at the
offices of the City of Quincy TPAL Department.
(a) A letter from the resident stating the reason for the extended permit and a
copy of vehicle registration must be included in the application.
(b) Long-term visitor passes will be issued on a case-by-case basis at the
discretion of the TPAL Department.
(5) The City of Quincy reserves the right to restrict the issuance of visitor permits
based on the availability of parking in any residential zone.
D. Business parking.
(1) Business owners located within designated residential areas that have
demonstrated insufficient off-street parking are eligible to apply for business
permit parking.
(2) Business permits will be valid Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(3) Business permits shall identify the area to which they apply and shall be of a
design specified by the TPAL Department.
(4) Applications must be made online or in person with City of Quincy TPAL
Department.
(5) If application is made by employers, a list of employee license plates on
company letterhead and copies of applicable vehicle registrations must be
§ 325-111 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-111
325:47
§ 325-112. Violations and penalties; revocation of permit.
provided.
(6) Permits will only be issued after a site visit is conducted by City designee and
need for on-street parking is confirmed.
(7) Cost of business permit is $85 a year per vehicle up to five passes. If additional
passes are needed there is an additional fee of $17.
(8) Business permits expire one calendar year after date of issuance.
(9) Business permits are nonrefundable.
(10) All applicants must have paid their motor vehicle excise tax and all parking
tickets.
(11) All applicants must be employed by a business validly registered and licensed
with the City, and all real estate property taxes and personal property paid.
E. Exemptions, exclusions and special considerations.
(1) Any vehicle bearing veteran or handicap plates, or bearing a properly
displayed special parking placard, shall be exempt from residential parking
restrictions.
(2) Students from out of state who can demonstrate active full-time student status
at local college or university may obtain a resident parking permit subject to
the same terms and conditions as Quincy residents. Students at other area
colleges living in Quincy can apply for a resident parking permit if they
provide proof of active full-time student status and a local lease.
(3) Visiting nurses or caretakers who can demonstrate active service to a Quincy
resident in a residential parking district may apply for temporary visitor
parking on an as needed basis and at the discretion of the TPAL Department.
(4) The following vehicles will not be eligible for a residential parking permit:
(a) Taxicabs or any vehicles bearing livery plates.
(b) Any vehicle with a gross vehicle weight over 2 1/2 tons bearing
commercial plates.
(c) Any vehicle with a gross vehicle weight under 2 1/2 tons bearing
commercial plates for which the owner cannot clearly demonstrate need
for residential permit.
(d) Any vehicle bearing dealer or repair plates.
(e) Any vehicle registered to an address identified as a transit-oriented
development.
(f) Any nonmotorized equipment, including but not limited to trailers,
campers, boats or other recreational equipment deemed inappropriate by
the TPAL Department.
§ 325-111 QUINCY CODE § 325-112
325:48
§ 325-113. Modification or elimination of parking permit areas.
The right is reserved to modify or eliminate residential parking permit areas under the
same process for review as the original petition as set forth above.
A. It shall be a violation of this article to:
(1) Park in a designated parking area without a residential permit or visitor/
business pass.
(2) Display a permit on any vehicle other than for which it was issued.
(3) Sell, copy or otherwise transfer a permit.
(4) Provide false information while applying for permit.
B. The City may revoke any permit issued under this article upon finding the permit
was issued under false pretenses or a finding of violation of this article by the
permittee.
C. The fine for violating the residential parking permit program shall be $50 for each
violation for up to two violations and shall increase to $100 per violation over two
violations; further violations will be subject to towing at the owner's expense.
§ 325-112 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-113
325:49

ARTICLE XI
Designated Residential Parking Areas
[Added 10-15-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-160]
§ 325-114. Neighborhood parking: Penn's Hill - Independence Avenue area.
A. Residential parking shall be limited or restricted in the following areas and
locations for the hours and times listed.
B. The area outlined in Figure 1 shall be resident only parking Monday through Friday
from 10:00 p.m. to 2:00 p.m. unless otherwise posted.
Figure 1
C. Changes to the existing signage shall include:
(1) No parking any time shall be changed to no parking/standing/stopping from
the Independence Avenue Gate to 500 feet south of the gate on both sides of
the street.
(2) The Independence Gate to 300 feet north of the gate shall become no parking/
standing/stopping on both sides of the street.
(3) Verchild Street shall become no parking/standing/stopping from Independence
Ave to Pembroke Street (140 feet).
(4) The south side (odd numbered) of Presidents Avenue shall become no parking
any time.
(5) The north side (even numbered) of Presidents Avenue shall become two-hour
parking for 425 feet from Independence Avenue.
(6) Goddard Street shall become one way from Independence Avenue to Federal
§ 325-114 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 325-114
325:51
Avenue.
§ 325-114 QUINCY CODE § 325-114
325:52
Chapter 330
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 325.
§ 325-114 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 325-114
330:1

ARTICLE I
Hackney Carriages
[Adopted 5-17-1993 as Ch. 5.12 of the 1993 Code]
§ 330-1. Definition.
Every carriage or vehicle, however drawn or propelled, seating not more than six people,
exclusive of the driver or chauffeur, which shall be used for the conveyance for hire of
persons from place to place within the City shall be deemed a hackney carriage within
the meaning of this article.
§ 330-2. License required.
No person shall set up, use or drive any hackney carriages in the City for the conveyance
for hire of persons from place to place within the City without a license therefor from
the Board of Licensing Commissioners.
§ 330-3. License issuance; number limited. [Amended by Order No. 94-029;
Order No. 95-084]
§ 330-4. Licenses restrictions.
No license granted as set out in § 330-3 shall apply to any carriage except to the
particular one designated therein by its number, or otherwise made certain, nor shall such
license be transferable without the consent of the Board of Licensing Commissioners,
endorsed thereon by the City Clerk.
A. The Board of Licensing Commissioners may, from time to time, grant licenses to
such persons as it deems expedient to set up, use, or drive hackney carriages for the
conveyance for hire of persons within the City and may revoke such licenses at its
discretion. Every person so licensed shall pay to the City Clerk for the use of the
City the sum of $45 for each carriage so licensed. All such licenses shall expire on
the first day of May next after the date thereof and shall be recorded by the City
Clerk before being delivered to the licensee; however, licenses may be granted in
April to take effect on the first day of May then next ensuing. [Amended 6-1-2020
by Order No. 2020-012]
B. The Board of Licensing Commissioners shall fix a limit on the number of hackney
carriage licenses to be issued under this section, which limit shall be based upon the
number of licenses issued and outstanding, but shall not be in excess of 88, and the
Board may, from time to time, after reasonable notice and a hearing, decrease the
limit so fixed but in no event to a number less than 60. If an applicant is refused a
license by reason of the fact that the maximum number of licenses limited
hereunder has been issued, the Board of Licensing Commissioners on petition of
such applicant may, after a hearing, determine that public convenience and
necessity require a higher limit than that previously established and shall establish
the limit so required, in which case the limit set by the Board of Licensing
Commissioners shall be considered final until again changed as herein provided.
However, at no time shall there be more than one hackney license per 1,000
population.
§ 330-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 330-5
330:3
§ 330-5. Posting of license number and rates.
Every person licensed as required by § 330-2 shall cause his carriage to be conspicuously
marked with the license number, in figures not less than 1 1/2 inches long. The name
of the licensee and the number of the carriage, together with the rates of fare, shall be
conspicuously posted on a printed card in every such carriage. Meter carriage rates may
be posted on the face of the meter, and the meter shall be illuminated at night.
§ 330-6. Rates of fares. [Amended by Order No. 98-030; 11-8-2004 by Order No.
2004-146; 11-10-2008 by Order No. 2008-269]
§ 330-7. Charge for baggage.
The charge for ordinary baggage weighing not more than 150 pounds shall not be more
than $0.75.
§ 330-8. Soliciting passengers; standing in streets.
No person shall solicit passengers for hire in any street or way of the City, and no
carriage used for the conveyance for hire of passengers shall stand in any street or way
of the City, except by permission of the City Council, as provided in § 325-10 of this
Code.
A. The fare for the conveyance of passengers in metered and unmetered hackney
carriages shall not exceed the following rates: for the conveyance of one or more
passengers from one place to another within the City, not more than $2.60 for the
first 1/7 of a mile and $0.40 for each additional 1/7 of a mile; use time at the rate of
$28; a charge of $0.10 may be charged for each additional passenger carried.
B. When a carriage is engaged to carry a passenger a distance of less than that from
the carriage stand to the place where the passenger enters the carriage, the passenger
may be charged the fare from the carriage stand to the place where the passenger
entered the carriage.
C. Special flat rates for metered and unmetered hackney carriages may be arranged for
mileage covered under the direction of any passengers not to exceed the rate.
D. These provisions are to be posted in a conspicuous location inside or outside all
licensed cabs in the City at all times. This posting is to take place within one week
of passage.
§ 330-5 QUINCY CODE § 330-8
330:4
ARTICLE II
Liveries and Limousines
[Adopted 3-2-2009 by Order No. 2008-381 ( Ch. 5.14 of the 1993 Code)]
§ 330-9. Definition.
The term "livery" or "limousine" shall mean any motor vehicle used to transport
passengers for hire which is not subject to the provisions of Article I, Hackney Carriages,
of this chapter.
§ 330-10. Required licenses.
§ 330-11. Fare restrictions.
No driver and/or owner of a motor vehicle as defined in § 330-9 shall accept a fare for
the transportation of a passenger unless such transportation was arranged by reservation
at least two hours prior thereto.
§ 330-12. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Drivers. No person shall operate a motor vehicle as defined in § 330-9 unless
licensed annually by the Board of Licensing Commissioners, which may delegate
such authority to the Chief of Police. The Board of Licensing Commissioners shall
determine the qualifications necessary to obtain such license. The annual fee for
said license shall be equal to the fee charged for a license issued pursuant to
§ 330-2.
B. Motor vehicles. No person shall operate a motor vehicle as defined in § 330-9
unless the owner of such motor vehicle has obtained an annual license for such
motor vehicle from the Board of Licensing Commissioners. The fee for such annual
license shall be $100 for the first motor vehicle and $50 for each additional motor
vehicle.
A. The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this article. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined $300 for each offense.
Each day a violation exists shall be deemed a separate violation. In addition to the
fine, any person violating this article may be subject to forfeiture by the Board of
Licensing Commissioners of any licenses issued herein.
B. The Police Department may also enforce the provisions of this article in accordance
with the noncriminal procedure as set forth in Chapter 1, Article I, of this Code.
§ 330-9 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 330-12
330:5

Chapter 344
WATER BODIES AND WATERWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boats and boating — See Ch. 120.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 222.
Shellfish and seaworms — See Ch. 278.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 300.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 349.
§ 344-1. Obstruction or changing of watercourses.
No person shall obstruct, cover or change the grade, course or width of any stream, brook
or other watercourse on public or private land in the City without written permission of
the Commissioner of Public Works, after a petition with diagram showing the proposed
change has been filed with such Commissioner.
§ 344-2. Pollution of watercourses.
No person shall allow to flow from his or their premises, into any stream, brook or other
watercourse in the City, any refuse or other objectionable matter capable of polluting the
stream.
§ 344-3. Dumping of garbage or refuse in or near water. [Amended 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012]
The dumping or throwing or disposing of garbage or refuse of any type into any water
or on any beaches or land adjacent to any waters under the jurisdiction of the City is
prohibited. Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $20 for each offense.
§ 330-12 WATER BODIES AND WATERWAYS § 344-3
344:1

Chapter 349
WETLANDS PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 300. Water bodies and waterways — See Ch. 344.
§ 349-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the wetlands, related water resources, and
adjoining land areas in the City of Quincy by prior review and control of activities
deemed by the Quincy Conservation Commission likely to have a significant or
cumulatively adverse effect upon wetland values, including but not limited to the
following: public or private water supply, groundwater, flood control, erosion and
sedimentation control, storm damage prevention, water pollution, fisheries, shellfish,
wildlife habitat, recreation, aesthetics (the visual quality and appearance of a project and/
or quiet enjoyment of undisturbed resource areas), and aquaculture values (collectively,
the "wetland values protected by this chapter").
§ 349-2. Jurisdiction. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
Except as permitted by the Conservation Commission or as provided in this chapter,
no person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon, or alter the following resources or
land under said resources or land within a buffer zone as defined by the Department of
Environmental Protection in 310 CMR: any freshwater wetland, including any marsh,
wet meadow, bog or swamp; any saltwater wetland; any lake, river, pond, stream,
drainageway, canal, estuary or the ocean; any bank, beach, dune, or flat bordering on
said water or wetlands; or any land subject to flooding or inundation by groundwater,
surface water, tidal action or coastal storm flowage.
§ 349-3. Definitions.
A. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and implementation of
this chapter:
ALTER — Includes but is not limited to the following activities when undertaken
to, upon, within or affecting resource areas protected by this chapter:
Removal, excavation, or dredging of soil, sand, gravel, or aggregate materials
of any kind.
(1)
Changing of preexisting drainage characteristics, flushing characteristics,
salinity distribution, sedimentation patterns, flow patterns or flood retention
characteristics.
(2)
(3) Drainage or other disturbance of water level or water table.
(4) Dumping, discharging or filling with any material which may degrade water
§ 344-3 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 349-3
349:1
§ 349-4. Applications for permits and requests for determination.
PERSON—Includes any individual, group of individuals, association, partnership,
corporation, company, business organization, trust, estate, the commonwealth or
political subdivision thereof, to the extent subject to City ordinances, administrative
agency, public or quasi-public corporation or body, this municipality, and any other
legal entity, its legal representatives, agents or assigns.
quality.
(5) Placing of fill, or removal of material, which would alter elevation.
(6) Driving of piles; erection or repair of buildings or structures of any kind.
(7) Placing of obstructions in water.
(8) Destruction of plant life, including cutting of trees.
Changing water temperature, biochemical oxygen demand, or other physical
or chemical characteristics of water.
(9)
Any activities, changes or work which may cause or tend to contribute to
pollution of any body of water or groundwater.
(10)
B. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or regulations which may be
promulgated thereunder, resources shall be defined as appearing in MGL c. 131,
§ 40, and in 310 CMR 10, effective April 1983.
A. Written application shall be filed with the Quincy Conservation Commission to
perform activities regulated by this chapter and protected by this chapter. The
application shall include such information and plans as are deemed necessary by
the Commission to describe proposed activities and their effects on the
environment. No activities shall commence without receiving and complying with
a permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
B. The Commission, in an appropriate case, may accept as the application and plans
under this chapter the notice of intent and plans filed under the Wetlands Protection
Act, MGL c. 131, § 40.
C. Any person desiring to know whether or not a proposed activity or an area is subject
to this chapter may in writing request a determination of applicability from the
Commission. Such a request for determination shall contain data and plans
specified by the published regulations of the Commission.
D. At the time of an application or request the applicant shall pay a filing fee specified
in regulations of the Commission. This fee is in addition to that required by the
Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40. In addition, the Commission is
authorized to require the applicant to pay the costs and expenses of any expert
consultant deemed necessary by the Commission to review the application or
request. The Commission may waive the filing fee and costs and expense for an
application or request filed by a government agency and shall waive them for a
request for determination filed by a person having no financial connection with the
property which is the subject of the request. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
§ 349-3 QUINCY CODE § 349-4
349:2
§ 349-5. Notice and hearings. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
§ 349-6. Coordination with other agencies and officials.
Any person filing a permit application or a request for determination with the
Commission shall provide a copy thereof at the same time, by certified mail or hand
delivery, to the City Council, Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, Health
Commissioner and Director of Inspectional Services.
§ 349-7. Issuance or denial of permit; term; conditions.
2020-012]
(1) Permit fees are payable at the time of application and are nonrefundable.
(2) Permit fees shall be calculated by the Commission per Subsection E below.
(3) City, county, state or federal projects are exempt from fees.
(4) No fee is charged for requests for determination under the law or extensions of
orders of conditions.
(5) Failure to comply with the law after official notification shall result in fees
twice those normally assessed.
E. Fees. Fees shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Quincy
Conservation Commission (QCC) and the Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP). [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
A. Any person filing an application or a request for determination with the
Commission concurrently shall give written notice to all abutters in accordance
with CMR 310. The notice to the abutters shall include a copy of the application or
information where a copy of the application may be obtained and examined by
abutters free of charge.
B. When a person requesting a determination is other than the owner, the request, the
notice of the hearing and the determination itself shall be sent by the Commission
to the owner as well as to the person making the request.
C. The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on any application or request for
determination, with written notice given at the expense of the applicant seven
business days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality.
D. The Commission shall commence the public hearing within 21 days from receipt of
a completed application or request for determination.
E. The Commission shall issue its permit or determination in writing within 21 days
of the close of the public hearing thereon.
F. The Commission in an appropriate case may combine its hearing under this chapter
with the hearing conducted under the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40.
§ 349-4 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 349-7
349:3
§ 349-8. Rules and regulations.
After public notice and public hearing, the Commission may promulgate rules and
regulations to effectuate the purposes of this chapter. Failure by the Commission to
promulgate such rules and regulations or a legal declaration of their invalidity by a court
of law shall not act to suspend or invalidate the effect of this chapter.
§ 349-9. Exceptions. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
A. If the Commission, after a public hearing, determines that the activities which are
the subject of the application are likely to have a significant or cumulatively adverse
effect upon the wetland values protected by this chapter, the Commission, within
21 days of the close of the hearing, shall issue or deny a permit for the activities
requested. If it issues a permit, the Commission shall impose conditions which the
Commission deems necessary or desirable to protect those values, and all activities
shall be done in accordance with those conditions.
B. The Commission is empowered to deny a permit for failure to meet the
requirements of this chapter; for failure to submit necessary information and plans
requested by the Commission; for failure to meet design specifications,
performance standards, and other requirements in regulations of the Commission;
for failure to avoid or prevent unacceptable, significant, or cumulatively adverse
effects upon the wetland values protected by this chapter; and where no conditions
are adequate to protect those values.
C. A permit shall expire three years from the date of issuance. Notwithstanding the
above, the Commission, in its discretion, may issue a permit expiring five years
from the date of issuance for recurring or continuous maintenance work by a public
agency, provided that annual notification of time and location of work is given to
the Commission. Any permit may be renewed once for an additional year period,
provided that a request for a renewal is received in writing by the Commission prior
to expiration.
D. For good cause the Commission may revoke or modify a permit issued under this
chapter after public notice and public hearing and notice to the holder of the permit.
E. The Commission in an appropriate case may combine the permit or other action on
an application issued under this chapter with the order of conditions issued under
the Wetlands Protection Act.
A. The permit and application required by this chapter shall not be required for
maintaining, repairing, or replacing, but not substantially changing or enlarging, an
existing and lawfully located structure or facility used in the service of the public to
provide electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph, or other telecommunication
services, provided that the structure or facility is not substantially changed or
enlarged, provided that written notice has been given to the Commission prior to
commencement of work, and provided that the work conforms to performance
standards in any regulations adopted by the Commission.
B. The permit and application required by this chapter shall not apply to emergency
projects necessary for the protection of the health or safety of the public, provided
§ 349-7 QUINCY CODE § 349-9
349:4
§ 349-10. Security.
As part of a permit issued under this chapter, in addition to any security required by any
other municipal or state board, agency or official, the Commission may require that the
performance and observance of the conditions imposed hereunder be secured wholly or
in part by one or more of the methods described below:
§ 349-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
that the work is to be performed by or has been ordered to be performed by
an agency of the commonwealth or a political subdivision thereof, provided that
advance notice, oral or written, has been given to the Commission prior to
commencement of work or within 24 hours after commencement, provided that
the Conservation Commission or its agent certifies the work as an emergency
project, provided that the work is performed only for the time and place certified
by the Conservation Commission for the limited purposes necessary to abate the
emergency, and provided that within 21 days of commencement of an emergency
project a permit application shall be filed with the Commission for review as
provided in this chapter. Upon failure to meet these and other requirements of
the Commission, the Commission may, after notice and a public hearing, revoke
or modify an emergency project approval and order restoration and mitigation
measures.
A. By a proper bond or deposit of money or negotiable securities or other undertaking
of financial responsibility sufficient in the opinion of the Commission.
B. The Commission may also accept as security a conservation restriction, easement,
or other covenant enforceable in a court of law, whether temporary or permanent,
executed and duly recorded by the owner of record.
A. The Commission, its agents, officers, and employees shall have the authority to
enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under
this chapter and may make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or
sampling as the Commission deems necessary.
(1) The Commission shall have the authority to enforce this chapter, its
regulations and permits issued thereunder by violation notices, enforcement
orders and civil and criminal court actions.
(2) Upon request of the Commission, the City Council and the City Solicitor shall
take legal action for enforcement under civil law. Upon request of the
Commission, the Chief of Police shall take legal action for enforcement under
criminal law.
B. Municipal boards and officers, including any police officer or other officer having
police powers, and also including but not limited to the City of Quincy
Conservation Enforcement Officer, shall have the authority to assist the
Commission in enforcement.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or regulations thereunder, or
permits issued thereunder, shall be punished by a fine of $100. Each day or portion
thereof during which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 349-9 WETLANDS PROTECTION § 349-11
349:5
§ 349-12. Burden of proof.
The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the
credible evidence that the work proposed in the application will not have unacceptable
significant or cumulatively adverse effect upon the wetland values protected by this
chapter. Failure to provide adequate evidence to the Commission supporting this burden
shall be sufficient cause for the Commission to deny a permit or grant a permit with
conditions.
§ 349-13. Relation to Wetlands Protection Act.
This chapter is adopted under the Home Rule Amendment of the Massachusetts
Constitution and the home rule statutes, independent of the Wetlands Protection Act,
MGL c. 131, § 40, and regulations thereunder.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
D. In the alternative to criminal prosecution the Commission may elect to utilize the
noncriminal disposition procedure set forth in MGL c. 40, § 21D.
§ 349-11 QUINCY CODE § 349-13
349:6
Chapter 375
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 12, Art. I.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 180.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 300.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 349.
§ 349-13 ZONING § 349-13
375:1

SECTION 1.0
Purpose and Authority
1.1. Title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter, enacted pursuant to and under the authority of
MGL c. 40A, as amended, shall be known and may be cited as the "Quincy Zoning
Ordinance" or "this chapter." The adoption of this chapter nullifies and replaces all
previous versions of the Zoning Ordinance.
1.2. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted to promote the purposes set forth in 1975 Massachusetts Acts
Chapter 808, Section 2A, which include, but are not limited to, the following: to
lessen congestion in the streets; to conserve health; to secure safety from fire, flood,
panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding
of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to encourage housing for persons
of all income levels; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, water
supply, drainage, sewerage, schools, parks, open space and other public requirements;
to conserve the value of land and buildings, including the conservation of natural
resources and the prevention of blight and pollution of the environment; to encourage
the most appropriate use of land throughout the City, including consideration of the
recommendations of the master plan, if any, adopted by the Planning Board and the
comprehensive plan, if any, of the regional planning agency; and to preserve and
increase amenities by the promulgation of regulations to fulfill said objectives. Said
regulations may include but are not limited to restricting, prohibiting, permitting or
regulating:
1.3. Authority.
This chapter is authorized by, but not limited by, the provisions of the Zoning Act, MGL
c. 40A, as amended, Section 2A of 1975 Massachusetts Acts Chapter 808, and by Article
1. Uses of land, including wetlands and lands deemed subject to seasonal or periodic
flooding;
2. Size, height, bulk, location and use of structures, including buildings and signs,
except that billboards, signs and other advertising devices are also subject to the
provisions of MGL c. 93, §§ 29 through 33, inclusive, and to MGL c. 93D;
3. Uses of bodies of water, including watercourses;
4. Noxious uses;
5. Areas and dimensions of land and bodies of water to be occupied or unoccupied by
uses and structures, courts, yards and open spaces;
6. Density of population and intensity of use;
7. Accessory facilities and uses, such as vehicle parking and loading, landscaping and
open space; and
8. The development of the natural, scenic and aesthetic qualities of the community.
1.1 ZONING 1.3
375:3
89 of the Amendments to the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
1.4. Scope.
For these purposes, the construction, repair, alteration, reconstruction, height, number of
stories, and size of buildings and structures, the size and width of lots, the percentage
of lot area that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the
density of population, and the location and use of buildings, structures, and land in the
City of Quincy are regulated as hereinafter provided.
1.5. Applicability.
All buildings or structures hereinafter erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, or
moved, and the use of all premises in the City of Quincy, shall be in conformity
with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. No building, structure or land shall be
used for any purpose or in any manner other than is expressly permitted within the
district in which such building, structure or land is located. Where the application of
this chapter imposes greater restrictions than those imposed by any other regulation,
permit, restriction, easement, covenant, or agreement, the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
1.6. Amendments.
This chapter may from time to time be changed by amendment, addition, or repeal by the
City Council in the manner provided in MGL c. 40A, § 5, and any amendments thereto.
1.7. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate any other
section or provision herein.
1.5.1. Commencement of construction or operation. Construction or operations under a
building permit or special permit shall conform to any subsequent amendments to
this chapter, unless the use or construction is commenced within a period of not
more than six months after the issuance of the permit and, in any case involving
construction, unless such construction is continued through to completion as
continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable.
1.3 QUINCY CODE 1.7
375:4
SECTION 2.0
Districts
2.1. Establishment.
2.2. Zoning Map; district boundaries.
2.1.1. General. For the purpose of this chapter, the City of Quincy is divided into the
types of zoning districts set forth below:
District Purpose
Residence Districts:
Residence A Single-family
Residence B Multifamily, low-density
Residence C Multifamily, medium-density
Business Districts:
Business A Local business
Business B General business
Business C Central business
Industrial Districts:
Industrial A Light industry
Industrial B Heavy industry
2.1.2. Special districts. The following special districts are also hereby established and
described in Section 8.0 of this chapter:
Floodplain Overlay District (Section 8.1)
Open Space District (Section 8.2)
Quincy Center District 10 (QCD-10) and Quincy Center District 15 (QCD-15)
(Section 8.3)
Planned Unit Development (Section 8.4)
Planned Unit Development 1 (Section 8.4)
2.2.1. Establishment. The boundaries of the districts established in Section 2.1 are
established as shown on the map titled "Zoning Map of the City of Quincy," as
amended from time to time, which map, with all explanatory matter thereon, is
attached to and made a part of this chapter. The Zoning Map shall be on file in the
office of the Director of Inspectional Services of the City.
2.2.2. District boundaries; uncertainties and resolution. The boundaries between districts
are as shown on the Zoning Map. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the
boundaries of districts, the following rules shall apply:
1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets and
waterways shall be construed as following such center line.
2.1 ZONING 2.2
375:5
2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following plotted lot lines shall be
construed as following such lot lines, unless they are otherwise indicated on
the map.
3. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed as following
such shorelines at mean low water level.
4. Boundaries indicated as following railroad or rapid transit lines shall be
construed to be midway between the main tracks.
5. Boundaries indicated as being approximately parallel to the center lines of
streets or other features indicated in Subsections 1 through 4 of this section
shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as
indicated on the Zoning Map. Distances not specifically given on the Zoning
Map shall be determined by the scale of the Zoning Map.
6. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground differ from those
shown on the Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by
Subsections 1 through 5 of this section, the Director of Inspectional Services
shall interpret the district boundaries.
2.2 QUINCY CODE 2.2
375:6
SECTION 3.0
Use Regulations
3.1. Principal uses.
No land shall be used and no structure shall be erected or used except as set forth in
the following Table of Use Regulations, including the notes to the table, or as otherwise
set forth herein, or as exempted by General Laws. Any building or use of premises not
herein expressly permitted is hereby prohibited. Not more than one principal use shall be
allowed on any lot, except as otherwise may be provided herein.
3.2. Accessory uses and structures.
3.1.1. Symbols. Symbols employed in the Table of Use Regulations shall mean the
following:
Y A permitted use.
N An excluded or prohibited use.
PB A use authorized under special permit from the Planning Board as
provided under Section 9.4.
BA A use authorized under special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals
as provided under Section 9.4.
CC A use authorized under special permit from the City Council as provided
under Section 9.4.
3.1.2. Applicability. When an activity might be classified under more than one of the
following uses, the more specific classification shall govern; if equally specific, the
more restrictive shall govern.
3.1.3. Major nonresidential use. Notwithstanding the entries in the Table of Use
Regulations for a specific nonresidential use in Subsections C to J, inclusive, a
major nonresidential use shall require a special permit from the Planning Board;
provided, however, that an urban renewal use shall be exempt from this
requirement. For example, a business or professional office in the BC District shall
be allowed as of right as long as it does not exceed 9,999 gross square feet in floor
area; thereafter, the use shall be classified as a major nonresidential use and shall
require a special permit from the Planning Board. The special permit requirement
for a major nonresidential use shall supersede the requirement for site plan review
set forth in Section 9.5; it shall not supersede the requirement of a variance, when
applicable.
3.1.4. Table of Use Regulations. See Appendix A.21
3.2.1. General. The following provisions shall apply to all accessory uses and structures:
1. An accessory use shall be permitted only on the same lot as the building or use
to which it is accessory, except as otherwise provided herein.
21. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
3.1 ZONING 3.2
375:7
2. No accessory use shall occupy more than 25% of the gross floor area of the
principal structure located on the lot, whether such accessory use is located in
the principal structure or not.
3. No accessory use is permitted which involves the maintenance of a stock-intrade
or the use of signs, show windows, illumination or displays except as
permitted in Section 5.3.
3.2.2. Accessory uses; all districts. The following accessory uses are specifically
permitted in all districts as of right or by special permit:
1. Temporary construction trailers. The Director of Inspectional Services may
grant a temporary occupancy permit for temporary buildings and trailers
during building construction where reasonably required for such construction.
Such permit may be issued for an initial period of not more than one year.
Permits may be renewed by the Director of Inspectional Services for
successive periods of not more than one year each.
2. Accessory scientific uses. Uses, whether or not on the same parcel as activities
permitted as a matter of right, which are necessary in connection with
scientific research or scientific development or related production may be
permitted upon the issuance of a special permit by the Zoning Board of
Appeals, provided that the Board finds that the proposed use does not
substantially derogate from the public good.
3. Family child care homes. Family child care homes and large family child care
homes are allowed as set forth in the Table of Use Regulations. [Amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
4. Adult day care homes. Adult day care homes are allowed in all districts as an
accessory use only upon the issuance of a special permit by the Zoning Board
of Appeals.
3.2.3. Accessory uses in the residence districts. The following provisions shall apply to
accessory uses and structures in the residence districts:
1. Certain buildings. Toolsheds, garden sheds, storage sheds, or other like
buildings not more than 10 feet in height shall be allowed as accessory uses in
the residence districts. Garages are allowed up to a maximum of 16 feet in
height. Any such building shall meet the minimum front yard requirements;
however, the minimum rear and side yard setback shall be six feet. No such
building shall be higher than one story, which for the purposes of this section
only shall be measured from the floor to the peak of the roof, nor shall such
building exceed 25% of the gross floor area of the principal structure on the
lot. Any such building shall be located at least 10 feet away from any other
building or structure. Such buildings shall be properly anchored for wind
loading. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
2. Parking of commercial vehicles. The following regulations shall govern the
off-street parking of commercial vehicles in the residence districts:
a. Not more than one commercial vehicle of not more than 10,000 gross
3.2 QUINCY CODE 3.2
375:8
3.3. Home occupations.
vehicle weight (gvw) may be parked or garaged on the premises.
b. Not more than one commercial vehicle of 10,000 to 20,000 gvw may be
garaged on the premises; no outdoor parking of such vehicles is
permitted.
c. The outdoor parking or garaging of a commercial vehicle of more than
20,000 gvw is prohibited.
3. Private garage or parking area. A private garage or parking area for not more
than four noncommercial motor vehicles accessory to a single-family dwelling
or a permitted nonresidential use in any residence district, for not more than
two noncommercial motor vehicles for each dwelling unit for a two-family or
multifamily dwelling in Residence A, B, and C Districts, or for not more than
10 motor vehicles in any other district shall be allowed as of right; provided,
however, that more than the limits specified above may be authorized by
special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals. [Amended 6-1-2020 by
Order No. 2020-012]
4. Prohibited accessory uses. In the residence districts, the following accessory
uses are prohibited:
a. Kennels.
b. Contractor's yard for the storage of building materials or equipment.
c. The storage or keeping of commercial landscaping equipment, materials,
supplies, or piles.
d. Commercial auto repair or service.
3.2.4. Accessory uses in the business and industrial districts. In the business and
industrial districts, any use permitted as a principal use is also permitted as an
accessory use provided such use is customarily incidental to the main or principal
building or use of the land. Any use authorized as a principal use by special permit
may also be authorized as an accessory use by special permit provided such use is
customarily incidental to the main or principal building or use of the land. Any use
not allowed in the district as a principal use is also prohibited as an accessory use.
Accessory uses are permitted only in accordance with lawfully existing principal
uses. In all instances where site plan review and approval is required for a principal
use, the addition of any new accessory use to the principal use, where such addition
exceeds the thresholds established in Section 9.5, shall also require site plan review
and approval.
1. Parking of commercial vehicle. The garaging or parking of not more than one
commercial vehicle, not to exceed 20,000 gvw, shall be allowed as of right in
the business and industrial districts, except in the BA District.
3.3.1. Home occupation as of right. One home occupation may be allowed on any
premises as of right, provided that the home occupation:
3.2 ZONING 3.3
375:9
3.4. Nonconforming uses and structures.
1. Is conducted solely within a dwelling and solely by the person(s) occupying
the dwelling as a primary residence.
2. Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the premises for residential
purposes.
3. Does not produce offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, lighting,
electrical interference, radioactive emission or environmental pollution.
4. Does not utilize exterior storage of material or equipment (including the
parking of commercial vehicles).
5. Does not exhibit any exterior indication of its presence or any variation from
residential appearance.
6. Does not produce any customer, pupil, or client trips to the occupation site and
has no nonresident employees.
7. Is registered as a business with the City Clerk.
3.3.2. Home occupation by special permit. One home occupation may be allowed on any
premises by special permit issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals, provided that:
1. The home occupation complies with the pertinent provisions of Section 3.3.1,
above.
2. The home occupation is conducted within a dwelling solely by the person(s)
occupying the dwelling as a primary residence and, in addition to the residents
of the premises, by not more than three additional employees.
3. The home occupation does not exhibit any exterior indication of its presence
or any variation from residential appearance, except for a sign or nameplate in
compliance with Section 5.3.
4. A special permit for such use is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals,
subject to conditions including, but not limited to, restriction of hours of
operation, maximum floor area, off-street parking, and maximum number of
daily customer vehicle trips. Such special permit shall be limited to three years
or the transfer of the property, whichever first occurs, and may be renewed by
the Zoning Board of Appeals.
3.4.1. Applicability. This chapter shall not apply to structures or uses lawfully in
existence or lawfully begun or to a building or special permit issued before the first
publication of notice of the public hearing required by MGL c. 40A, § 5, at which
this chapter, or any relevant part thereof, was adopted. Such prior, lawfully existing
nonconforming uses and structures may continue, provided that no modification of
the use or structure is accomplished, unless authorized hereunder.
1. Certain changes to nonconforming uses and structures are allowed by finding
from the Director of Inspectional Services. See the list of such authorized
changes in the Department of Inspectional Services.
3.3 QUINCY CODE 3.4
375:10
3.4.2. Nonconforming uses. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a finding to change
a nonconforming use in accordance with this section only if it determines that such
change or extension shall not be substantially more detrimental than the existing
nonconforming use to the neighborhood. The following types of changes to
nonconforming uses may be considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals:
1. Change or substantial extension of the use.
2. Change from one nonconforming use to another, equally detrimental or less
detrimental, nonconforming use.
3.4.3. Nonconforming structures. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a finding to
reconstruct, extend, alter, or change a nonconforming structure in accordance with
this section only if it determines that such reconstruction, extension, alteration, or
change shall not be substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming
structure to the neighborhood. The following types of changes to nonconforming
structures may be considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals:
1. Reconstructed, extended or structurally changed.
2. Altered to provide for a substantially different purpose or for the same purpose
in a substantially different manner or to a substantially greater extent.
3.4.4. Variance required. Except as provided in Section 3.4.5, below, the reconstruction,
extension or structural change of a nonconforming structure in such a manner as to
increase an existing nonconformity or create a new nonconformity, including the
extension of an exterior wall at or along the same nonconforming distance within a
required yard, shall require the issuance of a variance from the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
3.4.5. Nonconforming single- and two-family residential structures. Nonconforming
single- and two-family residential structures may be reconstructed, extended,
altered, or structurally changed upon a determination by the Director of
Inspectional Services that such proposed reconstruction, extension, alteration, or
change does not increase the nonconforming nature of said structure. The following
circumstances shall not be deemed to increase the nonconforming nature of said
structure:
1. Horizontal extensions. Horizontal extensions may be authorized by the
Director of Inspectional Services subject to the following conditions:
a. The proposed extension follows in line with the existing nonconforming
structure where such structure is encroaching on a required rear or side
yard setback.
b. The proposed extension does not encroach any further forward in a
required front yard.
c. The proposed extension complies with all other provisions of this chapter.
2. Vertical extensions. Vertical extensions may be authorized by the Director of
Inspectional Services subject to the following conditions:
3.4 ZONING 3.4
375:11
a. Reconstructed structures shall be built on the original footprint.
b. The height restriction of the respective areas in which these structures are
located will be observed.
Any other type of proposed reconstruction, extension, alteration, or
change may be authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals by a finding,
upon a determination that the proposed modification will not be
substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming
structure to the neighborhood.
3.4.6. Abandonment or nonuse. A nonconforming use or structure which has been
abandoned, or not used for a period of two years, shall lose its protected status and
be subject to all of the provisions of this chapter.
3.4.7. Catastrophe or demolition. Any nonconforming structure may be reconstructed
after a fire, explosion or other catastrophe, or after voluntary demolition, provided
that such reconstruction is completed within 12 months after such catastrophe or
after such voluntary demolition, and provided that the building(s) as reconstructed
shall be only as great in volume or area as the original nonconforming structure and
located on the original building footprint, unless a larger volume or area or a new
building footprint is authorized by finding from the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such
finding shall be obtained prior to the voluntary demolition of a nonconforming
structure. The time for reconstruction may be extended by the Zoning Board of
Appeals for good cause.
3.4.8. Reversion to nonconformity. No nonconforming use shall, if changed to a
conforming use, revert to a nonconforming use.
3.4 QUINCY CODE 3.4
375:12
SECTION 4.0
Dimensional Regulations
4.1. Table of Dimensional Requirements.
4.1.1. Conformance. No building or structure shall be built nor shall any existing
building or structure be enlarged which does not conform to the Table of
Dimensional Requirements, except as may be otherwise provided.
District
Max.
Floor
Area
Ratio
Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
Min. Lot
Area Per
D.U.
(sq. ft.)
Min. Yard
(ft.)
Min. Lot
Front-age
and Lot
Width
(ft.)
Green Area
Open Space
Per D.U.
(sq. ft.)
Max. Number
Stories
Front Side Rear
Res. A None 7,650 7,650 251 13 20 85 None 2.5
Res .B
1 to 3 units 0.4 6,750 3,000 25 13 25 75 700 3
4 to 5 units 0.4 6,750 4,000 25 25 25 75 700 3
6 to 16 units 0.5 6,750 4,500 25 25 25 75 1,000 3
17 units and
up
0.5 6,750 4,500 25 25 25 75 1,000 3
Res. C 1 14,000 2,000 1/2 the height of the building
but in no case less than 25
100 400 6
Bus. A2 0.75 5,000 None 15 15 15 40 None 3
Bus. B2 1.5 5,000 None 153 15 20 60 None 4
Bus. C2 3.5 5,000 None None None 20 60 None 6
Ind. A 1 None None 253 253 253 50 None 4
Ind. B 2 None None 253 253 253 50 None 8
4.1.2. Notes to table. The Table of Dimensional Requirements does not contain any
requirements for the Open Space, Planned Unit Development, Planned Unit
Development 1, and Downtown Districts. See Section 8.0 for these requirements.
1. In Residence A Districts buildings shall be set back so as to conform to the
average alignment of dwellings already erected on the same side of the street
within 300 feet on each side of the lot, except that no building shall be set back
less than 25 feet and no building shall be set back more than 55 feet.
2. Multifamily residence and mixed use of a building are permitted within a
Business A and B District with the issuance of a special permit in accordance
with the standards and procedures of Section 9.4 by the Zoning Board of
Appeals. Residential buildings and uses within Business A Districts obtaining
special permit, as provided herein, shall conform to all requirements of
4.1 ZONING 4.1
375:13
4.2. General requirements.
Residential B Districts. Residential buildings and uses within Business B
Districts obtaining special permits, as provided herein, shall conform to all the
requirements of Residence C Districts. Multifamily residences and mixed use
of a building are permitted within a Business C District with approved site
plan from the Planning Board in accordance with Section 9.5, provided that
residential buildings and uses within a Business C District have a maximum
floor area ratio (FAR) of 3.5, minimum lot size of 42,000 square feet,
minimum lot area per dwelling unit of 500 square feet, minimum front, rear
and side yards of 1/4 the height of the building, minimum lot frontage and lot
width of 100 feet and minimum open space per dwelling unit of 100 square
feet. The site plans of a building containing 12 units or more must be reviewed
by the Planning Board. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
3. Applies only to buildings hereafter constructed.
4. Notwithstanding the number of allowable stories, no residential building shall
be more than 60 feet above the existing average grade; buildings with
commercial uses shall not be more than 80 feet above existing average grade.
In no case shall any building exceed six stories. Any commercial building with
residential housing will be subject to the six-story above-grade limitation.
These amendments shall not apply to any buildings for which a permit to
construct a foundation was issued prior to January 1, 1987. [Amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
5. In a Residential A and B District, no residential building, notwithstanding the
number of allowable stories, shall exceed 35 feet in height, measured from the
highest point of the structure to the average existing finished grade at the
footprint of the building, notwithstanding the definition of "height."
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
4.2.1. Urban renewal use. An urban renewal use is exempt from the provisions of Section
4.2.
4.2.2. Lot or yard areas. The lot or yard areas required for any new building or use may
not include any part of a lot that is required by any other building or use to comply
with any requirements of this chapter.
4.2.3. Dwelling unit equivalents. For residential uses permitted in residence and business
districts which are not divided into dwelling units, each 100 square feet of gross
floor area of the building shall be considered equivalent to one dwelling unit for the
purposes of computing minimum lot area and requirements.
4.2.4. Building bulk. For any building or group on a lot, the ratio of gross floor area to
lot area shall not exceed the maximum specified in the Table of Dimensional
Requirements.
4.2.5. Lot size, area and width. Where minimum lot requirements are established in the
Table of Dimensional Requirements, no building or use shall be erected or
established on any lot of lesser size.
4.1 QUINCY CODE 4.2
375:14
4.3. Yards.
1. Multifamily dwelling units. Where a multifamily dwelling unit provides
required parking pursuant to Section 5.1 within the principal structure or
within an accessory parking structure, the lot area required for one dwelling
unit may be reduced by 10%.
4.2.6. Minimum frontage and width. Where a minimum lot frontage and lot width is
specified in the Table of Dimensional Requirements, no principal structure shall be
erected on any part of a lot which has a width less than is specified in said table.
4.2.7. Open space. Every lot in a Residence B and C District shall include usable open
space having not less than the minimum area for each residence district as specified
in the Table of Dimensional Requirements.
1. Minimum dimension for eligible open space. Open space shall be deemed
eligible for calculating the open space requirement as specified above only if
each dimension is at least five feet.
2. Patios and balconies. The minimum requirement for open space per each
dwelling unit in a Residence C District having a patio or exterior balcony may
be reduced by 50% of the total area of such balcony, but in no case more than
50 square feet.
4.2.8. Fences and hedges. Fences shall not be higher than six feet. Fences and hedges
shall not be higher than three feet within 10 feet of the front lot line.
4.3.1. Urban renewal use. An urban renewal use is exempt from the provisions of Section
4.3.
4.3.2. Minimum requirements. Where a minimum front, side and rear yard is specified in
the Table of Dimensional Requirements, an open area of at least the specified
dimensions shall be provided between the front, side and rear lot lines and the
nearest point of any building or structure except as may be permitted hereafter.
Every part of the required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed except for
the ordinary projection of the belt courses, sills, skylights and ornamental features
projecting from the building not more than 12 inches, and of cornices and gutters
projecting from the building not more than 24 inches. Awnings, arbors, and fences
shall not be considered obstructions when located within a required yard.
4.3.3. Appurtenances projecting into yards. Projecting eaves, chimneys, bay window,
balconies, open fire escapes and like projections which do not project more than
three feet, and unenclosed steps, unroofed porches and the like which do not project
more than six feet beyond the line of the foundation wall and which are not over
four feet above the average level of the adjoining ground, may extend into the
minimum yard otherwise required for the district in which the structure is built.
4.3.4. Certain structures. Swimming pools shall not be considered structures for the
purpose of compliance with minimum yard requirements and shall otherwise be
regulated by the State Building Code. Laundry drying equipment shall not be
allowed within any required yard or in front of the principal structure. Poolappurtenant
landings, decks, machinery and accessories must meet yard
4.2 ZONING 4.3
375:15
4.4. Special requirements.
requirements. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
4.3.5. Front yard requirements for lots abutting more than one street. On lots abutting
streets on more than one side, the front yard requirements of each of the abutting
streets shall apply regardless of designated front lot lines. The remaining sides shall
be subject to side yard requirements.
4.3.6. Exceptions to yard regulations.
1. Residence A District. In a Residence A District, for lots less than 75 feet in
width at the time of the enactment of this chapter, the sum of the width of both
side yards for a single-family dwelling may be reduced by one foot for each
five feet that the lot is less than 75 feet in width. In no case shall any side yard
be less than 10 feet.
2. Residence B District. In a Residence B District, for a multifamily dwelling of
between four units and 16 units, no side yard shall be less than 15 feet. For a
multifamily dwelling in excess of 16 units, each side yard shall be not less than
20 feet.
3. Wall. Where a wall of a building is not parallel with its corresponding lot line,
the average width or depth of any yard or setback shall not be less than the
dimension specified in the Table of Dimensional Requirements for the
required width or depth, provided that said yard or setback shall not be less at
any point than 3/4 the required width or depth.
4.4.1. Urban renewal use. An urban renewal use is exempt from the provisions of Section
4.4.
4.4.2. Exceptions to height requirements. The provisions of this chapter governing the
height of buildings and structures in all districts shall not apply to chimneys, water
towers, air-conditioning equipment, elevator bulkheads, skylights, ventilators and
other necessary features appurtenant to buildings which are usually carried above
roofs and are not used for human occupancy, provided that these features are
located or screened so as to be not visible from any point on grade within 500 feet
of a lot line of a building so equipped; nor to domes, towers, or spires above
buildings if such features are not used for human occupancy; nor to wireless or
broadcasting towers and other like unenclosed structures; nor to accessory parking
facilities completely located under ground level.
4.4.3. Certain districts abutting residence districts. In a business or industrial district
which abuts a residence district at a street lot line, the front yard of the residence
district shall apply to any building constructed within a distance of 100 feet from
the residence district boundary line along said street lot line except where such
building is separated by a street from the residence district.
4.3 QUINCY CODE 4.4
375:16
SECTION 5.0
General Regulations
5.1. Off-street parking.
5.1.1. Location. Required off-street parking facilities shall be provided on the same lot
as the principal use they are required to service, with the following exceptions:
1. In the case of multifamily apartments having more than 16 dwelling units, the
required parking facilities may be provided on lots any part of which is not
more than 500 feet away from an entrance to the building to be served.
2. In Industrial A and B Districts, and in the case of institutional uses in any
district, the required parking facilities may be provided on lots not more than
1,000 feet away from an entrance to the building to be served.
3. In the case of a dormitory of a nonprofit educational institution, the required
parking facilities may be provided on lots not more than 1,000 feet away,
measured along a walkway, from the dormitory to be served.
4. In Business B and C Districts, the required parking facilities may be provided
on lots any part of which is not more than 300 feet away from the building to
be served. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
5.1.2. Ownership or control. Off-street parking facilities shall be under the same
ownership or control as the building or buildings which they serve. Where an
occupancy permit has been issued conditional to the maintenance of off-street
parking facilities, such occupancy permit shall lapse in the event of the sale or
conveyance of the land used for such parking facilities for the required parking.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
1. In the case of control (not ownership), the applicant shall demonstrate that
control is conclusive for the period of intended use.
5.1.3. Ownership; two or more buildings. Parking required for two or more buildings or
uses under the same ownership may be provided in combined facilities on the same
or adjacent lots, subject to approval by the Planning Board pursuant to Section 9.5,
where it is evident that such facilities will continue to be available for the several
buildings or uses.
5.1.4. Setbacks. Parking facilities shall be at least 10 feet from a street line, except that
Residence A and Residence B Districts shall have no setback requirement from the
street line. Parking facilities in a Residence A and in a Residence B District shall be
at least three feet from any other lot line, except that unenclosed parking facilities
shall be at least three feet from lot lines and at least five feet from that part of a
building having windows of habitable rooms. Means of egress shall not be
obstructed. Parking facilities in all other districts shall be at least 10 feet from any
other lot line and shall be at least 10 feet from any building and shall not be located
between the street line and the required setback line. In Residence A and Residence
B Districts, enclosed parking facilities shall not be located in a front yard.
1. Driveways/parking facilities shall not exceed, in Residence A and Residence
5.1 ZONING 5.1
375:17
B districts, 30% of the front yard setback and in no event shall exceed 20 feet
in width. Parking facilities in said districts shall not exceed 40% of the rear
yard.
5.1.5. Prohibited uses. Parking areas shall not be used for automobile sales, gasoline
sales, dead storage, repair work, dismantling or servicing of any kind.
5.1.6. Lighting. Lighting for parking facilities shall be installed in a manner that will
prevent direct light from shining onto any street or adjacent property.
5.1.7. Parking space requirements. Buildings and uses in existence prior to the effective
date of this chapter shall not be subject to the requirements stated herein. All other
buildings and uses shall comply with the requirements of this section.
1. Two or more uses. Where a building or land area is used by two or more
activities that fall into different classes of use, the facilities required shall be
the sum of the requirements for the individual establishments.
2. Required spaces; rounding of fractions. Where the computation of required
parking spaces results in a fractional number, the fraction shall be counted as
one.
3. Parking space requirements for urban renewal uses. The provisions of Section
5.1 shall not apply to parking spaces developed in connection with urban
renewal uses. In lieu thereof, the number of parking spaces and the design,
ownership and location of parking facilities developed in connection with
urban renewal uses shall be reviewed by the Planning Board as part of the
certification of consistency granted pursuant to the Urban Renewal Plan.
5.1.8. Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements. Parking shall comply with the
following: [Amended 4-22-2019 by Order No. 2019-034]
Table of Parking Requirements
Residence (1,2,8) Assembly (3,4)
Institution
(5,6,7) Retail Office
Factory and
Warehouse
Minimum number of
spaces per dwelling
unit
Number of seats
requiring 1 space
Number of square feet of gross floor area requiring 1 space, by type of
use
Residence A 2 per dwelling with
1-2 bedrooms; 3 per
dwelling with 3-4
bedrooms; 4 per
dwelling with 5 or
more bedrooms
5 600 — — —
Residence B 2.0 per 1.0 5 600 — — —
Residence C 2.0 per 1.0 8 1,000 — — —
Business A 1.5 per 1.0 4 1,000 200 300 —
Business B 1.5 per 1.0 4 1,000 200 300
5.1 QUINCY CODE 5.1
375:18
Table of Parking Requirements
Residence (1,2,8) Assembly (3,4)
Institution
(5,6,7) Retail Office
Factory and
Warehouse
Business C 1.5 per 1.0 4 2,000 400 600 —
Industrial A — 10 1,000 500 500 2,000
Industrial B — 10 1,000 500 500 2,000
Marina 0.50 per approved slip and/or mooring
5.1.9. Notes to Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements. For parking requirements in
the Quincy Center Districts and the Planned Unit Development Districts, see
Section 8.0.
1. One space for each sleeping room in a lodging house, bed-and-breakfast, or
motel. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
2. One space for each two sleeping rooms in a hotel.
3. Place of public assembly, including school and church auditoriums but
excluding places of worship, where no fixed seats are utilized, each 20 square
feet of public floor area shall equal one seat.
4. Bowling alleys shall provide four spaces for each alley.
5. Institutions shall include public and private schools, colleges and all
institutional uses listed in the Table of Use Regulations. Schools intended
primarily for children under 16 years of age need not provide more than 1/2
the requirements specified in the above table. Where an institution provides
dormitory residence accommodations, the number of parking spaces furnished
for that purpose may be deducted from the requirements established for the
educational buildings normally used by students in residence.
6. Hospitals shall provide one space for each 2 1/2 patient beds.
7. Nursing or convalescent homes primarily providing long-term custodial care
for patients need not provide more than one space for each five patient beds.
8. In Residence B and C Districts, the parking requirements for two-family and
multifamily dwellings shall be increased by 1/4 parking space per dwelling
unit for guest parking. Guest parking must be clearly marked or striped to the
satisfaction of the Director of Inspectional Services.
5.1.10. Driveway grades. No permit shall be issued to construct a two-family or
multifamily dwelling in Residence B or C Districts showing a proposed driveway
or accessway with a grade exceeding 10% or less than 1/2 of 1%. Transition from
one grade to another shall be accomplished by means of a vertical curve.
5.1.11. Parking spaces. The minimum size for parking spaces shall be in accordance with
the Table of Parking Dimensions; provided, however, that for parking facilities with
a minimum of 50 parking spaces or more, up to 10% of parking spaces may be
allocated to compact car parking with minimum dimensions of 8.5 feet by 17 feet.
5.1 ZONING 5.1
375:19
Table of Parking Dimensions
Type of Parking Requirements
90-degree parking 9 feet wide, 18 feet long with a 24-foot
turning radius
Parallel parking 8 feet wide, 22 feet long with a 20-foot
turning radius
45-degree parking 9 feet wide, 19 feet deep with a 22-foot
turning radius.
60-degree parking 9 feet wide, 20 feet deep with a 22-foot
turning radius
5.1.12. Construction. Required off-street parking facilities may be enclosed in a structure
or may be open. Parking facilities shall be graded, surfaced with tar, asphalt,
concrete or other nondusting paving, drained and suitably maintained to the extent
necessary to avoid the nuisance of dust, erosion or excessive water flow onto public
ways or adjoining property.
5.1.13. Landscaping requirements for parking areas. Parking facilities for more than five
automobiles shall be screened, except as limited by Section 6.3, by plantings which
shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition. Such plantings shall not be less
than 2 1/2 feet in height and shall not be less than 50% opaque when viewed from
directly in front.
5.1.14. Paving permit. No part of any yard or premises shall be paved or repaved for
parking facilities unless a paving permit is first issued by the Director of
Inspectional Services.
1. Permit application. Application for a paving permit shall be made to the
Department of Inspectional Services and shall include a plan to be approved
by the Director of Inspectional Services showing:
a. The dimension of each side of the lot.
b. The boundaries, with dimensions, of existing and proposed paving on the
lot and the location and dimensions of parking spaces.
c. The location and dimensions of any buildings or other structures on the
lot.
d. The nature of the paving material or materials to be used and the nature
of adjacent ground cover.
e. A landscape plan, if requested by the Director of Inspectional Services.
f. A drainage plan, if requested by the Director of Inspectional Services.
2. Permit issuance. The paving permit shall identify the property upon which the
paving is to be done and describe the specific area which is to be paved and
the type of surface to be used. The paving permit shall be posted in a
conspicuous location on the lot during the paving operation. No paving permit
5.1 QUINCY CODE 5.1
375:20
shall be issued to place new paving, or paving expansion, unless all parking
and access facilities on the property and the construction thereof meet the
standards of this section of the Quincy Zoning Ordinance. [Amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
3. Nonconforming paving. A paving permit may be issued to reconstruct a
driveway/parking facility which legally exists at the time of adoption of this
provision. When such paving, or any portion thereof, can feasibly be done in
greater conformity with the Zoning Ordinance in the opinion of the Director
of Inspectional Services, the Director shall so require in any paving permit. In
determining such feasibility, the following provisions shall apply:
a. The reconstruction shall not increase or extend any existing
nonconformity;
b. The reconstruction shall not cause or permit a change in the occupancy or
use of the property; and
c. The reconstruction shall not increase the number of parking spaces
provided on the property.
5.1.15. Paving contractor licensing. Any contractor engaging in the installation of any
paving of a yard or premises as defined within this section of the Quincy Zoning
Ordinance must register with the Director of Inspectional Services and be licensed
by the City to provide such services within the geographic boundaries of the City.
The fee for such license shall be established at $50 per annum. [Amended 6-1-2020
by Order No. 2020-012]
1. Each such contractor shall be provided with a copy of the City of Quincy
Zoning Ordinance governing paving and parking facilities at the time of
licensing. Each such contractor shall have an affirmative obligation to provide
a copy of its license to any prospective client within the City of Quincy and to
provide services as defined within the provisions and limitations of the Zoning
Ordinance governing paving and parking facilities.
2. No paving of any yard or premises shall be permitted in any residential zone
except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through
Saturday.
3. Violations. Any contractor who violates any provision of this Section 5.1.15
shall be liable for a fine of $100 per offense, each day to be considered a
separate offense, and shall be liable for any costs entailed to correct any
violation of the provisions established by this Section 5.1.15.
4. Enforcement. For the purpose of this section, the Director of Inspectional
Services, local building inspectors, the Code Enforcement Officer, or Quincy
police shall have enforcement authority.
5.1.16. Paving of yards. Except when required for facilities to serve a resident governed
by the Architectural Access Board under 521 CMR 1.00 et seq., the amount of
paving in a front yard shall not exceed in Residence A and Residence B Districts
30% of the front yard setback. The amount of paving in a rear yard shall not exceed
5.1 ZONING 5.1
375:21
5.2. Loading facilities.
in Residence A and Residence B Districts 40% of the rear yard. Any paving in the
front yards of any property in Residence A and Residence B Districts, except for
the paving of walkways not to exceed 48 inches in width, regardless of whether
such paved area is to be used as driveway/parking facility, shall require a permit in
accordance with the provisions of Section 5.1.14 and shall be graded, drained and
suitably maintained to the extent necessary to avoid the nuisances of dust, erosion
or excessive water flow onto public ways or adjoining property.
5.1.17. Special permit. These off-street parking requirements under Section 5.1 may be
varied by the Planning Board as per Section 9.4 by the grant of a special permit
upon a finding that substantial detriment will not result.
5.2.1. Requirements. Each required loading bay shall be no less than 10 feet in width, 40
feet in length, and 14 feet in height, such requirements to be exclusive of drives and
maneuvering space, and all required bays, drives and maneuvering space shall be
located entirely on the lot with immediate and direct ingress to the building
intended to be served.
1. A bay need not be enclosed in a structure, provided that any yard used as a
loading bay shall not infringe on front, side and rear yard requirements as
indicated in Section 4.0.
2. All such facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access
to a street as well as maneuvering area.
3. Where a building or land area is used by two or more activities that fall into
different classes of use under the Table of Loading Requirements, the facilities
required shall be the sum of the requirements for the individual establishments.
4. Where the computation of required loading bays results in a fractional number,
only the fraction of 1/2 or more shall be counted as one.
5. Loading facility requirements for urban renewal uses. The provisions of
Section 5.2 shall not apply to loading facilities developed in connection with
urban renewal uses. In lieu thereof, the number of loading bays and the design,
ownership and location of loading facilities developed in connection with
urban renewal uses shall be reviewed by the Planning Board as part of a
certification of consistency granted pursuant to the Urban Renewal Plan.
Number of Loading Bays Required by Gross Floor Area Structures
5,000 to 15,000
square feet
15,001 to 30,000
square feet
Each additional
15,000 square feet
Retail trade 1 2 1
Consumer
services
1 2 1
Wholesale and
jobbing
establishments
1 2 1
5.1 QUINCY CODE 5.2
375:22
5.3. Signs.
Number of Loading Bays Required by Gross Floor Area Structures
5,000 to 15,000
square feet
15,001 to 30,000
square feet
Each additional
15,000 square feet
Warehouses 1 2 1
8,000 to 20,000
square feet Each additional 50,000 square feet
Office buildings 1 1
Hotels and motels 1 1
Restaurants 1 1
Manufacturing 1 1
5.2.2. Proximity to residence districts. Required off-street loading bays may be enclosed
in a structure and must be so enclosed if located within 100 feet of a residence
district where the use involves regular night operation, such as that of a bakery,
restaurant, hotel or similar uses. Any lighting provided shall be installed in a
manner that will prevent direct light from shining onto any street or adjacent
property.
5.2.3. Accessory driveways. All accessory driveways and entranceways shall be graded,
surfaced, drained and maintained to the extent necessary to avoid nuisances of dust,
erosion or excessive water flow across public ways.
5.2.4. Serving two or more facilities. Required off-street loading space may be provided
by facilities designed to serve jointly two or more buildings on adjoining lots,
provided that the number of berths in such joint facilities is not less than the number
required for the total combined floor area of such buildings under the Table of
Loading Requirements.
5.2.5. Reduction in size. Loading facilities shall not be reduced in total extent or usability
after their installation, except when such reduction is in conformity with the
requirements of this section.
5.2.6. Special permit. These loading requirements under Section 5.2 may be varied by
the Planning Board as per Section 9.4 by the grant of a special permit upon a finding
that substantial detriment will not result.
5.3.1. Definitions. See Section 10.0, definition of "sign."
5.3.2. Applicability. This Section 5.3 shall apply to all signs and their supporting devices,
including signs located in the historic commercial districts. Signs in the historic
district will require an additional approval by the Historical Commission.22 Unless
exempted below, all permanent signs require a permit.
22. Editor's Note: Throughout this chapter, references to the "Historic District Commission" were amended to "Historical
Commission" 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012.
5.2 ZONING 5.3
375:23
5.3.3. Exemptions. The following signs are exempt from the permit requirements of this
Section 5.3:
1. Signs with a size of two square feet or less, except if such sign conflicts with
the location, number of signs allowed or other requirements specified in this
Section 5.3.
2. Public safety devices or signs erected by government agencies for the safety
and direction of the public.
3. The provisions of Section 5.3 shall not apply to signs provided in connection
with urban renewal uses. In lieu thereof, the location, size, design and
installation of signs developed in connection with urban renewal uses shall be
reviewed for approval by the Planning Board as part of a certification of
consistency granted pursuant to the Urban Renewal Plan.
5.3.4. Prohibited signs; performance standards. The following signs are prohibited:
1. Any sign which may be confused with or construed as a public safety device
or sign or traffic light, either because of its color, shape or design.
2. Any sign which indicates a business, activity, trade, product or service no
longer conducted on the premises on which the sign is located or any related
frame, structure, or mounting device.
3. Any sign which incorporates moving, flashing, animated or intermittent
lighting, excluding public service signs such as those that specifically display
time and temperature.
4. Any sign which obstructs any door, window or fire escape of a building or
poses a danger to building occupants or pedestrians.
5.3.5. Prohibited signs; by type. The following types of signs are prohibited:
1. Animated sign.
2. Outdoor easel signs.
3. Projecting signs. Those projecting signs still remaining at the time of the
adoption of this revised Section 5.3 shall be ordered to be removed within one
year of the effective date of this revision. If the owners or landlords of such
signs are able to produce a valid sign permit issued by the Department of
Inspectional Services for such signs, then they will have two years from the
adoption of this Section 5.3 to remove them. The responsibility for removing
such signs shall fall upon either the store or business owner if they are the sign
owner of record; if not, it will be the responsibility of the property owner to
remove the sign(s). The permit fee for the removal or replacement of
projecting signs will be waived during the two-year period mentioned above.
When the projecting signs are removed, it is not necessary to replace them with
any other of the permitted types of signs in this Section 5.3.
4. Off-premises sign. The construction of new off-premises signs, including
billboards, is prohibited throughout the City, and the City may not issue
5.3 QUINCY CODE 5.3
375:24
permits for their construction or relocation. No use variance shall be granted
to vary this provision.
5. Portable sign.
6. Revolving sign.
7. Outdoor sandwich board sign.
8. Signs mimicking the appearance or copy of traffic signs or signals. Any sign
which imitates an official traffic signal or uses the words "stop," "look,"
"danger," "go slow," "caution" or "warning" is prohibited.
9. Under canopy sign.
10. Under marquee sign.
5.3.6. Signs authorized by special permit. The following signs may be authorized by
special permit from the Planning Board:
1. Permanent wind signs such as banners, pennants, spinners, streamers or other
wind-activated signs.
2. Signs, such as a mural, painted or mounted directly upon the exterior surface
of any wall.
3. Signs constructed or maintained upon the roof of any building.
4. Changeable sign with rotating messages on a scheduled basis.
5. Neon signs.
5.3.7. General sign standards. The following standards shall apply to all signs:
1. Sign copy, including logos or symbols, may indicate the name and type of
establishment and the major product(s), goods or services offered.
2. A street or mailing address must be displayed for each ground floor premises
and at the main entry for multi-tenant buildings. The address sign may be
erected without permit if the sign copy and/or sign panel is not greater than
two square feet. If the street name is included in the sign address copy, then
the maximum size allowed increases to four square feet.
3. All signs erected in conjunction with this Section 5.3 and requiring a building
permit shall clearly display the number of said permit permanently attached to
the sign as required by the State Building Code. The letters and numbers of
said permit shall be no less than one inch in height and shall be in a contrasting
color.
4. No sign shall be mounted in a manner which may obstruct traffic or public
safety devices or signs.
5. No signs shall be affixed to trees, utility poles, fences fronting on a public
right-of-way, lampposts or any public street furniture or placed in the public
right-of-way, except public safety devices and signs.
5.3 ZONING 5.3
375:25
6. All signs shall be securely affixed to a building facade or ground structure.
7. No sign shall be mounted on or attached to or obstruct a movable door or
window except as allowed in this Section 5.3.
8. All sign faces shall be parallel to the horizontal plane of the building except
for allowed awning and canopy signs and marquees. All existing signs which
do not conform to the provisions of this Section 5.3 shall be removed or
brought into compliance within 30 days of the property owner being notified
by the Department of Inspectional Services that a sign is noncompliant.
9. Copy. No copy lettering is to be larger than two feet in height, unless it is
individual channel set lettering or graphics which may be a maximum of three
feet high. Where individual letters, symbols, messages, or designs are attached
to or painted on a building face or window, the area shall be the smallest
imaginary rectangle, circle, square or other geometric shape which
encompasses and fully contains the extremities of all copy and graphics.
10. All appurtenances shall meet the requirements of the State Building Code.
5.3.8. Specific types of signs; standards.
1. Awning signs. May be the following:
a. Retractable/nonrigid/crank-out. Shall extend no more than 72 inches from
the front of the building if used as a sign; otherwise consult State Building
Code 780 CMR. Sign copy is permitted on the slope, side or front fascia
of the awning. Copy may include the type of services offered or the name
of the business or establishment. If a business also has a storefront sign,
the name of the business is allowed on the front slope or side valances of
the awning. The front valance may not repeat any of the same sign copy
that is on the storefront sign. Sign copy may be affixed by epoxy or other
gluing agent or painted on.
b. Nonretractable/rigid/permanent. Shall extend no more than 48 inches
from the front of the building if used as a sign; otherwise consult State
Building Code 780 CMR. Sign copy is permitted on the front or side
fascia. Copy may include the type of services offered or the name of the
business or establishment. If a business also has a storefront sign, the
name of the business is allowed on the front slope or side valances of the
awning. The front valance may not repeat any of the same sign copy that
is on the storefront sign. This type of awning may be lit by electric/neon/
gas light. (See "backlit awning.") Sign copy may be either painted on or
affixed to the awning.
2. Banner signs. All banner signs are to be considered temporary signs, and a
permanent structure shall be allowed only by special permit from the Planning
Board, with approval of the understructure by the Department of Inspectional
Services.
3. Canopy sign. The surface(s) and/or soffit of an attached canopy may be
illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light, similar to a
5.3 QUINCY CODE 5.3
375:26
marquee. If used as a sign, it may project no more than six feet from the
front of the building. If a business also has a storefront sign, the name of the
business is allowed on the front slope or side valances of the canopy. The front
valance may not repeat any of the same sign copy that is on the storefront
sign. Canopies used as physical shelters, such as at gas stations, may be larger
than set forth above and may contain sign copy on the sign belt. For further
information, see the State Building Code.
4. Changeable sign. A changeable sign shall not be construed to be an animated
sign. Such sign is allowed as long as the content does not change on a
scheduled basis, such as a flashing, programmed or other continuous
movement sign. The message copy must remain stationary.
5. Commercial outdoor advertising sign. This type of sign requires a state permit
and is also referred to as a "billboard sign."
6. Mural. Murals, whether used for business advertising or as an art display, will
require the proponent to obtain a special permit from the Planning Board.
7. Signs of religious institutions. Churches, synagogues, mosques, temples and
other religious buildings may have two signs, one on each street frontage
should that be the case. One sign may be a maximum of 20 square feet and the
other a maximum of 10 square feet. One sign may be a standing or bulletin
board sign used for notices and announcements of events at the institution.
8. Signs for membership clubs, funeral homes, community buildings, and
extended care facilities. Each of these may have two signs. One may be a
maximum of 30 square feet and the other a maximum of 10 square feet. If one
of the signs is a ground sign on a lawn or frontage area it must be set back no
less than half the distance of the frontage.
9. Roof sign. Roof signs are not allowed in the City of Quincy. Mansard facades,
pent eaves, and architectural projections shall not be considered to be roof
signs. The only exception for a roof sign is if its building has no sign band as
part of the structure and as such is a hardship and said building meets the
criteria to be located in a commercial arterial area as provided in Section
5.3.11 and the proponent receives a permit from the Planning Board.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
10. Illuminated sign. Signs shall be illuminated by steady, stationary, shielded
light sources directed solely to the sign or internal to it. They shall not cause
glare for motorists, pedestrians or neighboring premises. Such signs shall be
turned off at night, 1/2 hour after the last employee leaves the premises.
11. Temporary sign. The design and location of temporary signs and banners must
receive a permit from the Department of Inspectional Services before put in
place. The date for removal shall be noted by the Department of Inspectional
Services when it approves the temporary sign or banner desired by the
businesses owner. That owner will clearly post the date of expiration of that
temporary sign or banner on the back or side of it so that the inspector can
clearly see the date upon a site visit. Not more than one temporary sign per
window shall be allowed at one time per business. Temporary signs shall cover
5.3 ZONING 5.3
375:27
no more than 15% of the total window space per window. The following limits
shall apply to the following types of temporary signs and displays:
a. Festivals and special events, thirty-day maximum.
b. Grand openings, sixty-day maximum.
c. Identification sign (while permanent sign being made) must meet City
good repair and safety standard definition, sixty-day maximum.
d. New product or service, thirty-day maximum.
e. Promotional sales, thirty-day maximum.
12. Political signs.
a. No political signs may be affixed to any public property, including utility
poles, City trees, bushes, shrubs, fences, lampposts, mailboxes, or any
public street furniture. In the case of such violations, the Department of
Public Works or other appropriate City department may remove such
violating signs and be held harmless in doing so.
b. All political signs located on private property shall be installed only with
the permission of the property owner(s).
13. (Reserved)
14. City or nonprofit signs. Temporary signs or banners used by the City or for a
nonprofit corporation for holidays, public demonstrations or promotions of
civic welfare or charitable purposes or civic events shall be exempt from these
regulations as long as they meet safety considerations as determined by the
Department of Inspectional Services.
15. Real estate signs. "For sale" or "for lease" signs on commercial property must
be in accordance with the provisions of this section.
16. Signs on businesses and storefronts without windows. Up to a maximum of
25% or 50 square feet is allowed for main signage per the current sign code.
For example, a storefront of 10 feet by 50 feet equals 500 square feet by 25%
equals 125 square feet for the main sign which would still be allowed a
maximum of 50 square feet for the largest main sign. For storefronts without
windows, using the above example, the 500 feet minus the fifty-square-foot
maximum leaves 450 square feet allowed for additional signs for a store or
business with no windows. With no windows, a store or business may then
have additional signs equal to 10% of the remaining space. In the example
given, then, 45 more square feet of signs would be allowed for additional
exterior signs. It could be either one sign of 45 square feet or two secondary
wall signs of 22.5 square feet, for example.
17. Business parking area signs. Where a business or store has its own private
parking lot, a sign or signs may be erected to alert the general visitor that the
parking space(s) is reserved for that business's use only. These signs may be
handled in two ways: by individual signs at each designated parking space or
5.3 QUINCY CODE 5.3
375:28
by one large wall sign which is meant to be read by all potential parkers. For
individual spaces, a sign with a maximum size of 12 by 18 inches is allowed
per space, such sign either wall mounted or in a freestanding mounting, such as
found in a parking meter. For one large wall sign, the amount of space allowed
is one square foot of sign per parking space to a maximum of 50 square feet.
18. Supermarket temporary paper signs. Supermarkets may have the following
temporary paper signs per each window:
a. A sign or signs of any dimension and shape which comprise no more than
60% of the total area of each window are allowed. In each window,
supermarkets will be permitted to use the largest paper sign or
combination of signs which comes closest to but does not exceed 60% of
the total window surface. However, they must still remain within the total
allowable sign area permitted for the building.
19. Signs for businesses with more than one main entrance. Where a business has
more than one main entrance (a regular facade or doorway for the use of the
general public or specific customers to enter to do business at that
establishment, but not incidental side door, employee entrance, or a casual rear
entrance), the business owner may erect another main business sign at the
other main entrance as long as the business follows the general rules and size
guidelines for main business signs.
20. Signs for businesses with rear wall(s) facing arterial roadways/state highways/
public parking lots/public ways. Where a business is located in such a way that
the rear or side of the business faces state highways, major arterial roadways,
public parking lots, or public ways, such business shall be permitted to install
signs that meet the requirements of this Section 5.3 on said facades. Businesses
wishing to apply for such signs must obtain a special permit from the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
5.3.9. Special regulations; contiguous commercial areas. Contiguous commercial areas
are those characterized by a majority of the buildings having (1) continuous
building fronts or continuous frontage from lot line to lot line; and (2) zero lot lines
for the primary facade; and (3) a pedestrian orientation, that is, buildings which
have entrances directly on a public way. Signs shall, wherever possible, be mounted
so as to either hide the supporting structure or incorporate the mounting device or
structure into the overall design of the sign. Within a contiguous commercial area,
the following permanent ground floor, wall and freestanding signs and upper floor
signs are allowed by right or by special permit, as set forth herein:
1. Ground floor sign. In addition to the main sign, no more than two permanent
business name signs may be erected on the premises to which it (they)
pertain(s). It (they) shall be located so as to leave visible all major architectural
features of the storefront. The sign panel(s) shall fit within the framing
elements of that portion of the storefront to which it (they) is (are) attached.
Signs shall be designed to be compatible in scale, proportion and materials
with the storefront. The sign copy shall cover no more than 70% of the sign
panel.
2. Window sign. Permanent window signs may be affixed to, painted on or hung
5.3 ZONING 5.3
375:29
inside storefront display windows. Those hung inside shall be composed only
of permanent type materials, that is, they shall not be made from paper or
cardboard products but rather of regular durable sign materials such as glass,
signage tubing, neon tubing, metal, plastic or other such materials. (Also see
temporary signs.)
a. For safety purposes and security reasons, signs should be located so that
visibility into the interior is unobstructed.
b. Sign copy, panels and backgrounds may cover no more than 25% of the
total glass area of display windows.
3. Door sign. Door signs may be painted on glass doors or affixed to or painted
on solid doors. Door signs on glass doors may not obscure visibility into or out
of the door and may cover no more than 10% of the glass area. Door signs on
solid doors may cover no more than 15% of the door surface.
4. Entry sign. In cases where the entry to a ground or upper floor premises is set
back at least two feet from the plane of the facade, a sign may be hung above
the doorway provided it meets appropriate Building Code and safety
standards, the bottom of the sign is a minimum of seven feet above the
sidewalk, and it is no larger than four square feet.
5. Ground sign. Within historic commercial districts, no ground sign is allowed
except where:
a. The principal facade of the building is set back from the property line at
least 10 feet; and
b. The design of the sign has been approved by the Quincy Historical
Commission.
6. Other ground signs. Within other commercial districts covered by this
subsection, ground signs are allowed if:
a. The principal facade of the building is set back from the property line at
least 20 feet.
b. The sign contains a maximum of two faces, and each face contains no
more than 24 square feet and is a maximum of eight feet above the surface
of the ground. Any larger sign requires a special permit from the Zoning
Board of Appeals. In no case may the sign be higher than 25 feet or more
than 50 square feet in size. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
7. Directory sign. Multi-tenant buildings shall be allowed a directory sign listing
the names and/or locations of the tenants. It shall be located at the entry and
affixed flat to a wall surface or be freestanding. If affixed to the wall, the tenant
directory shall not exceed eight square feet in area. If it is freestanding, it shall
adhere to the provisions of Section 5.3 pertaining to freestanding signs. The
owners of multistory, multi-tenant buildings shall provide building
identification using a building name and street number to assist pedestrians
and motorists in finding the location.
5.3 QUINCY CODE 5.3
375:30
8. Awning sign. Awnings and canopies that extend over a public way shall be a
maximum of six feet in depth and must be at least one foot behind a plane
extending vertically from the face of the curb.
a. Signs may be located only on the slope or valance of awnings and the
fascia and returns of canopies. Sign copy or panels may cover no more
than 30% of the slope or 50% of the valance of awnings and no more than
70% of canopy fascia and returns.
9. Marquee sign. Marquee signs may be authorized by a special permit from the
Zoning Board of Appeals. Marquee signs are not allowed in historic
commercial districts without the approval of the Quincy Historical
Commission.
10. Upper floor sign.
a. Window sign. Signs on upper floor windows shall pertain to the
businesses located on upper floors of buildings. Upper floor window
signs must be painted on the glass, covering no more than 25% of the
glass area per window opening with a letter height maximum of nine
inches. Signs shall be limited to two per business, per floor.
b. Wall sign. Signs on walls are allowed. Wall signs must be designed to be
compatible with the architectural character of the facade to which they
are attached. Wall signs may be a maximum of 50 square feet.
c. Cornice sign. Signs located on a building cornice must fit within the
framing elements of the cornice and be designed to be compatible with
the architectural character of the cornice.
11. Multistory/multi-tenant building identification signs. Any building of four
stories or higher, located in business parks or on business or contiguous
commercially zoned parcels, may have: two ground or wall signs of permitted
size within the permissible setbacks; one directory sign of permitted size
listing tenants and retail or commercial users; one entry sign, if building entry
is recessed; and one address sign.
a. Signs mounted upon the upper fascia of such buildings must be horizontal
to the building face and be located within some architectural element of
the building constructed to accommodate such signs. No roof signs shall
be permitted. The total amount of signage allowed upon a face of any
such building shall not exceed 25% of the total area of the face of the
building or 75 square feet, whichever is smaller.
b. No ground or wall sign on a multistory building shall exceed 75 square
feet in total area, nor shall it exceed 25 feet in overall height. The copy on
any such ground sign shall be 24 inches above grade level. No more than
one ground sign visible to the major artery or street front shall be
permitted. The ground sign shall contain the name and address of the
building or user. One ground sign visible to the road or motorist and
pedestrian at the entryway which provides direct access to the property
shall be permitted, provided that it is no larger than 50 square feet and no
5.3 ZONING 5.3
375:31
more than 20 feet in total height. The copy on any such ground sign shall
be no less than 24 inches above grade level. The total of all ground signs
visible to arteries and access roads shall not exceed 150 square feet. In
the case of a building, such as a hotel, other outside signs designating
parking, lobby, pickup and delivery areas, function room entries, health
clubs and so forth shall be permitted as such design is submitted to the
Planning Board.
c. Signs located inside such buildings will not be subject to this Section 5.3,
but they will be subject to all other applicable regulations as enforced by
the Department of Inspectional Services.
12. New construction or alteration of existing building facades. When a permanent
sign is to be erected in conjunction with a newly constructed building, the
design and location of the signs and sign panels shall be considered an integral
part of the facade design.
a. When a building is undergoing exterior alterations to its facade, the
design and location of the signs and sign panels shall be considered an
integral part of the facade design.
b. All new and altered buildings intended for retail and/or commercial use
shall provide appropriate storefront sign bands and other appropriate
facade areas to allow for the safe, reusable and proper installation of signs
in conformance with requirements of this section.
5.3.10. Design standards; contiguous commercial areas. The following design standards
shall apply in contiguous commercial areas and supersede all other requirements:
1. Sign copy. Permanent business name signs covered in this section may contain
the following information: the name of the establishment and/or identification
of the primary product or service; appropriate symbols, slogans or logos may
be used.
a. A trademark may be used where its coverage of the sign panel does not
constitute more than 25% of the total sign panel.
b. The same sign copy, slogan, logo, symbol or trademark shall not be
repeated on a single sign panel or series of panels on the same or similar
architectural element unless it is repeated ordinarily as part of the usual
business identification, or unless it contributes to the overall design of the
facade.
c. Signs for businesses above the ground floor are to be used for onpremises
identification purposes only and may include the business name
and that of the primary product or service provided.
2. Number of signs. Each ground floor business establishment shall be allowed a
maximum of three business name signs as follows: one storefront, wall,
awning or window sign which is meant to be the main name sign for the
business; two additional signs of the following types may also be mounted by
the establishment: awning, sign belt, box, ground, freestanding, canopy, flag,
5.3 QUINCY CODE 5.3
375:32
V, window, door, entry, directory, product, logo, time/temperature,
changeable, electronic, electronic message, business hours/goods/services
sign.
a. Whatever combination of the above sign styles a business establishment
chooses to use, all signs must conform to the size, materials and copy
requirements of this Section 5.3.
b. A maximum of two temporary signs per business establishment shall be
allowed. Those signs shall conform to the rules for temporary signs.
3. Size of signs. Signs covered in this section shall be regulated according to the
size of the sign copy and the panel or size requirements established in previous
sections. Where no constraining architectural features otherwise exist, the
maximum sign copy or sign panel area shall be 25% of the building facade
area.
5.3.11. Special regulations; commercial arterial areas. Commercial arterial areas are
highway-type establishments, set back on what is called an arterial roadway. An
arterial roadway is normally one which is characterized by having at least four lanes
of two-way traffic, generally with a street width of at least 60 feet. Such areas
generally possess the following attributes: (1) a deep setback from the property line,
usually at least 20 feet; and (2) a highway orientation with provision for onpremises,
off-street parking, generally for a minimum of cars; and (3) buildings on
these ways are usually freestanding, that is, they are generally separated from each
other and not physically connected with lot lines normally allowing for space
between the individual buildings; and (4) building frontage on a commercial arterial
way normally does not extend fully to the edges of the entire lot frontage. Signs in
commercial arterial areas shall conform to all of the other sign regulations for the
entire City as previously listed in this Section 5.3 except as may be superseded
below:
1. For a single business located in one building on a lot:
a. One freestanding sign (ground, pole or like type sign) per building, such
sign set back a minimum of six feet from the property line. Such
freestanding sign may have a maximum of two faces. No freestanding
sign on a building shall exceed 75 square feet in total area, nor shall it
exceed 25 feet in overall height from the top of the sign to the pavement.
The copy on any such sign shall be a minimum of 24 inches above grade
level. No more than one ground sign visible to the major artery is
allowed. Each single business may have up to three additional other signs
(from the approved list) affixed directly to the building. If the business
chooses not to erect a freestanding sign, it shall however be limited to the
maximum of three signs referred to above.
2. For multiple businesses located in one building:
a. One freestanding sign (ground, pole or like type sign) per building. Such
freestanding sign may have a maximum of two faces. No freestanding
sign on a building shall exceed 75 square feet in total area, nor shall it
exceed 25 in overall height from the top of the sign to the pavement. The
5.3 ZONING 5.3
375:33
copy on any such sign shall be a minimum of 24 inches above grade level.
No more than one ground sign visible to the major artery is allowed. Each
individual business may have its own recognition on the pole sign.
b. Each individual business may also affix up to the three signs (from the
approved list) allowed in commercial contiguous areas; however, these
businesses being located in the same physical building must have the
same type of sign design for the entire building structure. All signs on the
main building sign band or comparable architectural feature must be of
the same type. The determination of the main sign type on such buildings
will be the decision of the building owner/landlord.
3. For multiple businesses located in more than one building:
a. One freestanding sign (ground, pole or like type sign) per business center.
Such freestanding sign may have a maximum of two faces. No
freestanding sign on a building shall exceed 75 square feet in total area,
nor shall it exceed 25 feet in overall height from the top of the sign to the
pavement. The copy on any such sign shall be a minimum of 24 inches
above grade level. No more than one ground sign visible to the major
artery is allowed. Each individual business may have its own recognition
on the pole sign.
b. Each individual business may also affix up to three signs (from the
approved list) as allowed in commercial contiguous areas. The main sign
band type allowed on each building shall be the decision of the landlord/
building owner.
5.3.12. Administration and enforcement.
1. Maintenance of signs. All signs and their appurtenances shall be kept in good
repair and safe condition. Low-maintenance materials shall be used for
permanent signs. The surface to which the sign is affixed shall be properly
maintained. It shall be repaired so as to provide a safe, structurally sound,
noneroding, nondeteriorating surface, with no loose or dangling parts. If any
sign is deemed to be unsafe by the Department of Inspectional Services, it shall
be repaired, or removed immediately by the property owner.
2. Inspection. The Department of Inspectional Services shall require compliance
with the standards and conditions set forth in this Section 5.3. If a sign is found
to be in noncompliance, the owner shall be so notified by the Department of
Inspectional Services and the owner shall bring the sign into compliance
within 30 days of notification. In the case of abandoned signs, the current
property owner of record shall be responsible for removing the sign.
3. Temporary signs. If a business owner or landlord does not remove temporary
signs as required by this Section 5.3, then the Department of Inspectional
Services will issue a warning ticket to that person regarding removal. If there
is no action taken by the owner or landlord to remove the sign within two
business days, the Department of Inspectional Services may then issue a ticket
for violation of this Section 5.3 for $50. If no action is taken within two further
business days, another ticket may be issued for $100 and each day thereafter
5.3 QUINCY CODE 5.3
375:34
5.4. Performance standards.
until the business is in compliance. Should there then be no action by the
owner or landlord after the second ticket, the Department of Inspectional
Services will be empowered to issue an order to the owner or landlord for
immediate removal of the temporary sign. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
4. Good repair. Signs shall be kept in good repair or they shall be ordered to be
removed by the Department of Inspectional Services, which is the signage
enforcement department.
5. Abandonment. Any sign or any related frame, structure, or mounting device
deemed to be abandoned by the Department of Inspectional Services must be
removed from the premises by the owner of the premises upon cessation of the
business, activity, trade, product or service unless the sign has been declared
historic by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Historic Commission. After
three months, the sign and its attachments and/or appurtenances must be taken
down immediately or made to blend in with the existing building facade. In
the event that the owner fails to comply, the City may enter onto the property
to implement the measures set forth above. In the event the City incurs
expense, the owner shall promptly reimburse the City for all reasonable
expenses associated therewith; if the owner fails to so reimburse the City, the
City may place a lien on the property or any improvement thereon to secure
such payment.
5.3.13. Special permit. By special permit pursuant to Section 9.4, the Planning Board
may authorize signs of greater size or number than otherwise set forth in this
Section 5.3, provided that such relief shall not result in substantial detriment. Signs
of a different type than that otherwise allowed shall require a variance.
5.4.1. Lighting. In a residence district, no outdoor decorative or floodlighting shall be
permitted except lighting primarily designed to illuminate walks, driveway, parking
areas, doorways, outdoor living areas or outdoor recreational facilities, and except
temporary holiday lighting, except decorative floodlighting of institutional, public
or historic buildings. Any such permanent lighting shall be continuous indirect light
installed in such a manner that will prevent direct light from shining onto any street
or adjacent property. No neon type or exposed illuminated gas tube type light shall
be allowed.
5.4.2. Fencing and screening in the industrial and business districts. In an industrial or
business district, the outdoor storage of goods, products, materials or equipment
shall, if visible at normal eye level from any point beyond the boundaries of the
premises and less than 500 feet distant, be screened from such view. Screening, as
defined herein, shall be an ornamental lattice, opaque fence, plantings or sightobscuring
screening which shall not be less than six nor more than 10 feet high and
not less than 50% opaque. Plantings shall be at least 10 feet in width and contain at
least two rows of alternate live deciduous and evergreen trees. Said trees shall not
be more than five feet apart, shall have an original planting height of at least six
feet, shall be able to attain a height of at least 10 feet, and shall be maintained in a
healthy growing condition by the property owner. Any existing open storage in any
5.3 ZONING 5.4
375:35
district shall within one year of the effective date of this Section 5.4 be properly
screened or removed.
5.4.3. Screening adjacent to residential districts. Where an industrial district or business
district is located adjacent to a residence district or a public park or playground and
is not separated therefrom by a public way, a compact planting screen as defined in
Section 5.4.2 along the property or lot line adjoining said district boundary shall be
provided and maintained by the owners of said premises. Said screening shall
contain no structures or parking and shall not be devoted to any other use or purpose
and shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition by the property owner.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
5.4.4. Maintenance and replacement. Required landscaping shall be maintained in a
healthy condition. In the event that such required landscaping dies, it shall be
replanted forthwith or at the start of the next growing season.
5.4.5. Urban renewal use. An urban renewal use is exempt from the provisions of Section
5.4.
5.4 QUINCY CODE 5.4
375:36
SECTION 6.0
Special Regulations
6.1. Motor vehicle service stations.
6.1.1. Dimensional requirements. Motor vehicle service stations shall conform to the
following dimensional requirements:
1. The minimum lot area shall be 12,000 square feet.
2. The minimum frontage on a street shall be 120 feet.
3. The maximum width of driveways and sidewalk openings measured at the
street lot line shall be 30 feet and the minimum shall be 20 feet.
4. The minimum setback of any building from all street lot lines shall be 40 feet.
5. The minimum setback of gasoline pumps and service appliances shall be 25
feet from all street lines.
6.1.2. Driveways. The minimum distance of driveways measured at lot line shall be as
follows:
1. From corner lot line, 20 feet.
2. From interior side of lot line, 10 feet.
3. From other driveway on same lot, 20 feet.
4. No driveway to or from any filling station shall be within 50 feet (measured
along the street line on that side of the street which such driveway would cross)
of any public or private school, church, playground, hospital, public library or
institution for dependents or children.
6.1.3. Standards. Motor vehicle service stations shall conform to the following standards:
1. All illumination shall be shielded so as to not to shine on any adjacent
property.
2. All washing, lubricating and repairing shall be carried on inside the building.
3. The area of the lot not landscaped shall be graded, surfaced with asphalt or
other suitable material and drained to the extent necessary to prevent nuisances
of erosion or excessive water flow across public ways.
4. Signs and other advertising devices shall conform to Section 5.3.
5. No service station shall be used for residential purposes or for the rental, sales
or leasing of vehicles, trailers or other merchandise, except as may otherwise
be authorized by the Board of Licensing Commissioners or City ordinance.
6. A raised curb at least six inches in height shall be constructed along all street
frontage except at driveway openings.
7. Any motor vehicle service station which abuts a residence district shall
6.1 ZONING 6.1
375:37
6.2. Earth removal.
provide a strip at least five feet wide along each such abutting line, densely
planted with shrubs or trees which are at least four feet high at the time of
planting and which are of a type that may be expected to form a year-round
opaque screen at least six feet high within three years. Such plantings shall be
maintained in good condition at all times and shall not be permitted to exceed
seven feet in height. Such screening or barrier may be interrupted by normal
entrances or exits and shall have no signs or other advertising devices hung or
attached thereto.
6.2.1. General. No soil, loam, sand, gravel or stone shall be removed from any lot not in
public use in the City without first obtaining a special permit from the Zoning Board
of Appeals except as exempted herein.
1. An urban renewal use is exempt from the provisions of Section 6.2.
6.2.2. Procedures. Each application for a special permit for earth removal shall be
accompanied by a plan, submitted in triplicate, prepared at the expense of the
applicant by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer, showing:
1. The existing contours of the land.
2. The contours after completion of the operation.
3. All public roads and private means of vehicular access.
4. Proposed drainage.
5. Any other information as may be required by the Zoning Board of Appeals,
pursuant to Section 9.4.3.
6.2.3. Conditions and restrictions. In granting a permit hereunder, the Zoning Board of
Appeals may impose reasonable conditions and restrictions as it deems to be in the
public interest, including but not limited to:
1. Method of removal.
2. Type and location of temporary structures.
3. Hours of operation.
4. Operations of removal trucks.
5. Area, depth and contours of excavations.
6. Distance of excavation to street and lot lines.
7. Reestablishment of ground lands and grades.
8. Provisions for temporary and permanent drainage.
9. Disposition of boulders and tree stumps.
10. Replacement of loam over the area of removal.
6.1 QUINCY CODE 6.2
375:38
6.3. Traffic visibility across corners.
6.4. Adult uses.
11. Planting of the area to suitable cover.
12. Cleaning, repair and/or resurfacing of streets used in removal activities which
have been adversely affected by the removal activity.
6.2.4. Time limits; performance guarantee. No permit for removal shall be issued for a
period of more than three years, although such a permit may be renewed for
additional periods in the same manner. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall require
a cash bond or surety company bond to insure compliance with its conditions of
authorization unless in a particular case it specifically finds that such security is not
warranted and so states in its decision, giving the reason for its finding.
6.2.5. Exceptions. The following activities shall be exempt from this Section 6.2:
1. The removal of less than 10 cubic yards of material in the aggregate in any
year from one premises.
2. The transfer of material from one part of a premises to another part of the same
premises for immediate use in such other part of the premises.
3. The removal of material necessarily excavated in connection with the lawful
construction of a building or structure, a sidewalk or path incidental to any
such building or structure as indicated on plans and profiles prepared by a
registered engineer and approved by the Director of Inspectional Services, or
any driveway/parking facility permitted in accordance with Section 5.1.14.
4. The removal of material necessarily excavated in connection with the lawful
construction of public or private ways as indicated on plans and profiles
prepared by a registered engineer and approved by the Planning Board.
6.3.1. General. In any district, no structure, fence or sign shall be constructed and no
vegetation shall be planted or maintained in the plane above curb level so as to
interfere with traffic visibility across a corner within that part of the lot which is
within a triangle formed by the street lines and a third line joining points on the
street lot lines 25 feet from their intersection.
6.3.2. Urban renewal use. An urban renewal use is exempt from the provisions of Section
6.3.
6.4.1. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to address and mitigate the secondary
effects of the adult uses and sexually oriented businesses that are referenced and
defined herein. Secondary effects have been shown to include increased crime,
adverse impacts on public health, adverse impacts on the business climate of the
City, adverse impacts on the property values of residential and commercial
properties, and adverse impacts on the quality of life in the City. All of said
secondary impacts are adverse to the health, safety and general welfare of the City
and its inhabitants. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
1. The provisions of this Section 6.4 have neither the purpose nor intent of
6.2 ZONING 6.4
375:39
6.5. Body art establishments.
6.6. Wireless communications facilities (WCF).
imposing a limitation on the content of any communicative matter or
materials, including sexually oriented matter or materials. Similarly, it is not
the purpose or intent of this Section 6.4 to restrict or deny access by adults
to adult uses or to sexually oriented matter or materials that are protected by
the Constitution of the United States of America or of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, nor to restrict or deny rights that distributors or exhibitors of
such matter or materials may have to sell, rent, distribute or exhibit such matter
or materials. Neither is it the purpose or intent of this Section 6.4 to legalize
the sale, rental, distribution or exhibition of obscene or other illegal matter or
materials.
6.4.2. General. Adult uses may be authorized by special permit as set forth in the Table
of Use Regulations. The following regulations shall apply to adult uses as defined
in this chapter. An urban renewal use is exempt from the provisions of Section 6.4.
[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
6.4.3. Prohibition. No adult use special permit shall be issued to any person convicted of
violating the provisions of MGL c. 119, § 63, or MGL c. 272, § 28.
6.4.4. Separation. No adult use shall be located within 1,500 linear feet of:
1. Any residential district as designated herein;
2. Any other adult use; or
3. Any establishment licensed under the provisions of MGL c. 138, § 12.
6.5.1. General. Body art establishments may be authorized by special permit in the IA
and IB Districts, as set forth in the Table of Use Regulations. [Amended 6-1-2020
by Order No. 2020-012]
6.5.2. Conditions. Body art establishments shall conform to all applicable regulations of
the Health Commissioner and ordinances of the City of Quincy.23
6.6.1. Purpose. This section is intended to make the permitting of wireless
communications facilities a public process that allows adequate personal wireless
services to be developed while contemporaneously protecting the City of Quincy's
character and appearance, protecting the public safety and general welfare of the
community, and minimizing any adverse impacts of such facilities. This shall be
accomplished by requiring that wireless communications facilities be authorized by
special permit while being configured so as to minimize and mitigate adverse visual
impact and by providing requirements and standards for regulation, placement,
location, construction, monitoring, design, modification and removal of such
facilities.
6.6.2. Location. Wireless communications facilities may be located as set forth in the
23. Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Body Art, of this Code.
6.4 QUINCY CODE 6.6
375:40
Table of Use Regulations.
6.6.3. Special permit. No wireless communications facility shall be constructed or
maintained without the issuance of a special permit by the Zoning Board of Appeals
(hereafter referred to as the "Board") or the Planning Board if the wireless
communications facility shall be located within the QCD-10 or QCD-15 District, or
in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.4 and other applicable sections and
subject to a determination by the Board that the proposed wireless communications
facility will not cause substantial detriment to the City or the neighboring area. Said
determination shall include but not be limited to consideration of the
communications needs to be served by the wireless communications facility, impact
on the neighborhood character, including aesthetics, impact on the natural
environment, including visual impacts, impact on traffic flow and safety, and
potential fiscal impact, including impact on City services, tax base and
employment.
6.6.4. Contents of application. Each applicant for a special permit under this section shall
include in the application, at a minimum, the following information:
1. A copy of the owner's deed to the lot or parcel where a proposed facility is to
be located or evidence of the applicant's right to possession and/or control of
the premises where the applicant is not the owner of record. Without limiting
the foregoing, every application must be joined by a personal wireless service
provider who will be an immediate user of the proposed personal wireless
facility.
2. A narrative description of the proposed facility, including the location and
identification of all components together with a statement describing the
purpose of each component and its intended function together with
photographs or other graphic illustrations fairly depicting the physical
appearance of the proposed facility equipment when installed. Said description
shall include the capacity of the facility, the number and types of antennas and
the basis for the calculation of the capacity.
3. A locus plan prepared and certified by a licensed professional engineer
depicting all property lines, the exact location and dimension of all
components of the proposed facility, including all structures, streets,
easements, rights-of-way, landscape features, including contours, residential
dwellings and all buildings within 500 feet of the proposed facility and also
elevations showing details of the installation.
4. A map showing an itemized description of all personal wireless facilities
currently existing within 10 miles of the proposed installation and in addition
those facilities which the applicant expects to install and/or reasonably knows
will be proposed or installed by itself and/or other personal wireless service
providers within the next 24 months.
5. A description and copies of all federal, state and local licenses, permits or
other approvals obtained by the applicant to date or to be obtained by the
applicant prior to construction of the proposed facility. This shall include an
affidavit by the applicant and supporting documentation that the proposed
facility complies with or is exempt from applicable regulations administered
6.6 ZONING 6.6
375:41
by the Federal Communications Commission, Federal Aviation
Administration, Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission and the Department
of Public Health.
6. A statement as to whether an environmental assessment (EA), a draft
environmental impact statement (DEIS) or environmental impact statement
(EIS) is or will be required under the National Environmental Protection Act
or the National Historic Preservation Act and, if so, a copy of said EA, DEIS,
or EIS.
7. A description in both geographic and radio frequency terms of the scope and
quality of the service currently available and being provided to the City by the
applicant's existing facilities, the need to be addressed by the proposed facility,
and the manner in which the proposed facility addresses the perceived needs
identified.
8. A statement describing the current state of technology available to provide
wireless telecommunications services and whether any such technology is
available and feasible for the purpose of addressing the perceived need
described in Subsection 7 above. Included in this statement the applicant shall
address whether the most current system optimization software available has
been employed so as to improve spectrum usage and capacity and whether
such software might address the perceived need.
9. A description of the terms of any co-location agreements between the
applicant and any other personal wireless service provider.
10. A statement as to whether the applicant considered any alternatives to a
freestanding facility, including but not limited to co-locating on an existing
facility, and, if so, the reason(s) such alternatives are not being proposed.
11. A statement as to why there exists no feasible alternative to a freestanding
facility to address the need identified herein.
12. A statement as to whether the need identified herein may be adequately met by
siting a facility on other property.
13. A statement from the applicant as to whether the proposed facility will have
any impact on an environmentally, historically or archaeologically significant
area in the vicinity of the proposed facility.
14. A description of the radio frequency testing procedures conducted by the
applicant in connection with the proposed facility and the results thereof.
15. A statement setting forth the applicant's projected future needs for wireless
telecommunications facilities within the City of Quincy.
16. A statement as to whether the applicant is seeking approval of co-location
facilities on the proposed facility and, if so, a detailed description in
compliance with the preceding subsections of all components of the colocation
facility for which the applicant is seeking approval.
6.6.5. Procedures; balloon test. After the notice of public hearing has been published as
6.6 QUINCY CODE 6.6
375:42
provided by MGL c. 40A, § 11, but prior to the hearing for which notice has been
given thereunder, the applicant shall, with not less than 48 hours' written notice
to the Board and all immediate abutters, and owners of land directly opposite on
any public or private street or way, and abutters to abutters within 300 feet of the
property line of the applicants as they appear on the most recent applicable tax
list, conduct a balloon test or crane test, or such other reasonable equivalent, of
the height of the freestanding facility and submit to the Board prior to the hearing
photographic representation from a suitable number of locations (the cardinal
points, N, S, E, W, as a minimum) so as to depict the visual impact of the proposed
facility on the City, the neighborhood and the abutters.
6.6.6. Independent review. Upon receipt of an application for a special permit under this
section, the Board may hire independent consultants whose services shall be paid
for by the applicant for the purposes of evaluating any aspect of the proposed
facility, review of the application and review of current service coverage. The
applicant shall cooperate with the independent consultant selected by the Board and
shall provide all information reasonably requested by the independent consultant,
including but not limited to radiological testing of the site in question and the
surrounding area as the Board determines.
6.6.7. Criteria; special permit. The Board shall issue a special permit for the construction
of a freestanding wireless communications facility only where it finds that:
1. Existing facilities do not adequately address the need for service as determined
by evidence supplied by the applicant (and through independent review,
above) in accordance with these requirements;
2. There exists no feasible alternative to the proposal that would adequately
address the need in a less intrusive manner; and
3. The proposed use is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
Section 6.6.
6.6.8. Conditions. The Board may attach to the issuance of a special permit issued
hereunder such terms and conditions deemed appropriate in order to safeguard the
safety and welfare of the City and to mitigate the impact of any attached or
freestanding facility to be constructed pursuant to a special permit issued hereunder,
including but not limited to the following conditions:
1. New freestanding wireless communication facilities shall be limited to
monopoles. No lattice towers shall be permitted. Monopoles shall be designed
so as to structurally accommodate other potential users where technically
practicable. No new monopole shall be erected if there is technically suitable
space available on an existing monopole within the geographic area to be
served. The applicant shall make accommodation and shall agree to rent or
lease space on the monopole under the terms of fair market lease, without
discrimination, to other personal wireless service providers. Monopole height
shall not exceed 100 feet above mean finished ground elevation at the base of
the mounting structure. The Board may waive this height restriction, not to
exceed 140 feet above mean finished ground elevation at the base of the
mounting structure, to allow for co-location which will reduce the need for
other facilities.
6.6 ZONING 6.6
375:43
2. Wireless communications service providers shall, to the maximum extent
possible, co-locate on a single facility.
3. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent
practicable. The Board may require the planting of screening vegetation
around the perimeter of the proposed site and around communication
equipment shelters and any other proposed buildings.
4. The wireless communication facility shall minimize, to the maximum extent
feasible, adverse visual effects on the environment. The Board may impose
reasonable conditions to ensure this result, including painting and lighting
standards, landscaping and screening.
5. Any communication equipment shelter or accessory building for support of
communication equipment, as well as any fencing installed to control access
to it, shall be designed to be architecturally similar to and compatible with the
surrounding area, and, whenever feasible, the structure shall be constructed
underground. Accessory buildings shall be screened so as to minimize
visibility from adjacent premises.
6. Antennas and related equipment on existing structures shall be camouflaged,
that is, disguised, shielded, hidden or made to appear as an architectural
component of the structure.
7. Facade-mounted antennas shall not extend above the face of any wall or
exterior surface of the existing structure.
8. No roof-mounted wireless communications equipment shall extend vertically
more than eight feet for any building up to 15 feet in height, 10 feet for any
building 15 feet to 36 feet, or 12 feet for any building more than 36 feet. Such
equipment shall be set back from the edge of the roof one foot for every foot
of equipment height.
9. The area surrounding the personal wireless facility and accessory buildings
shall be completely secure from trespass and vandalism. Fencing may be
required to control unauthorized entry. A sign not larger than one foot square
shall be posted adjacent to the entry gate/accessway to the facility indicating
the name of the facility's owner and a twenty-four-hour emergency telephone
number.
10. No commercial signage or advertising shall be affixed to any wireless
communication monopole.
11. Traffic associated with the wireless communication facility shall not adversely
affect public ways.
6.6.9. Abandonment. Any wireless communications facility that is not operated or that is
not in compliance with City ordinance for a continuous period of 30 days shall be
considered abandoned, and the Director of Inspectional Services may, by written
notice sent by certified mail, order that such facility be removed. Upon such
determination and notification all structures and equipment and any associated
debris associated with the wireless communications facility shall be removed within
6.6 QUINCY CODE 6.6
375:44
30 days. The Board may require that the proper dismantling and removal of such
structures and equipment and the lawful disposal thereof be secured by a bond or
other form of surety sufficient in the opinion of the Board to secure performance
under this subsection. Such bond or other surety shall be maintained throughout
the period of construction, location, operation and use of the subject wireless
communications facility. The Director of Inspectional Services shall receive 30
days' advance written notice of any cancellation, nonrenewal or material
amendment of such bond or other surety. In the event that the posted amount does
not cover the cost of such removal and disposal, the City may place a lien upon the
premises covering the difference in costs.
6.6.10. Term. Unless an earlier expiration date is specified by the Board, all special
permits issued under this section shall automatically expire five years from the date
of issuance. Prior to the expiration the applicant may apply for successive five-year
renewals subject to the public hearing process. In determining whether the special
permit shall be renewed, the Board may take into consideration whether there then
exists any structure or technology available to the applicant which would enable the
applicant to provide functionally equivalent services in a less intrusive manner.
Upon expiration of a special permit that has not been renewed, the applicant shall
disassemble and remove the entire facility forthwith at its expense, and any such
facility not removed in its entirety within 30 days of the expiration of the special
permit shall be deemed abandoned within the meaning of Section 6.6.9 above.
6.6.11. Insurance. The wireless communications provider shall continuously insure its
equipment and facilities against damages to persons and property in an amount
established by the Board, in conjunction with the Director of Inspectional Services,
based upon the nature and extent of the proposed facility. On an annual basis said
provider must deliver to the Director of Inspectional Services a certificate of
insurance, in which the City shall be listed as an additional insured.
6.6.12. Compliance with other laws. Monopoles, equipment, and facilities must be
installed, erected, maintained and used in compliance with all applicable federal
and state laws and regulations. To this end, the wireless communications provider
shall monitor emissions annually and file annually with the Director of Inspectional
Services a written statement with the results of such monitoring. Said statement
shall indicate that the facility is in compliance with any applicable laws and
government regulations, including but not limited to the Federal Communications
Commission and Federal Aviation Administration. In the event that said facility is
not in compliance with such laws and regulations, the wireless service provider
shall come into compliance within 15 days of the date of any such noncompliance
or cease all wireless communication services until full compliance is attained.
6.6.13. Maintenance. All wireless communications equipment, facilities and monopoles
must at all times be maintained in good and safe condition. The wireless
communications provider shall arrange for a Massachusetts licensed professional
structural engineer to review the wireless facility and any accessory buildings every
five years to certify these structures and facilities are in sound condition. A report
of the engineer's findings shall be filed with the Director of Inspectional Services at
the completion of construction and every five years thereafter. Should the engineer
deem the facility not to be sound, the wireless communications provider in
conjunction with the owner of the facility shall submit to the Director of
6.6 ZONING 6.6
375:45
6.7. Wind facilities.
Inspectional Services within 10 business days a plan to remedy the structural
defect(s). Upon approval of the plan by the Director of Inspectional Services, the
remediation plan shall be completed as soon as is reasonably possible.
6.6.14. Indemnification. Any permit issued pursuant to this Section 6.6 shall require that
the holder of such permit indemnify and hold harmless the City of Quincy and its
boards, commissions, committees, officers, employees, agents and representatives
from and against all claims, causes of action, suits, damages, costs and liability of
any kind which arise out of the construction, location, operation, or use of the
subject wireless communications facility in the City of Quincy.
6.6.15. Exemptions. The provisions of this Section 6.6 shall not apply to:
1. Wireless communication facilities providing safety or emergency services for
any federal, state, or municipal body.
2. Amateur radio antennas licensed by the Federal Communications Commission
and subject to MGL c. 40A, § 3, provided that such antennas are not used for
any commercial purpose and do not exceed 35 feet.
3. Home television or internet access antennas.
4. Medical facilities for transmittal of clinical medical information.
5. An urban renewal use.
6.7.1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide by either a special permit or site
plan approval for the construction and operation of wind facilities, whether as the
primary use or accessory use, and to provide standards for the placement, design,
construction, monitoring, modification and removal of wind facilities that address
public safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources of the City
and provide adequate financial assurance for decommissioning.
6.7.2. Applicability.
1. Site plan approval is required for the construction and/or modification of wind
facilities where the height of the wind turbine(s) is less than 250 feet.
2. A special permit is required for the construction and/or modification of wind
facilities where the height of the wind turbine(s) equals or exceeds 250 feet.
3. An urban renewal use is exempt from the provisions of Section 6.7.
6.7.3. Application procedures. The application for a wind facility shall be filed in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Planning Board, the Quincy Zoning
Ordinance, and MGL c. 40A, § 9. All plans and maps shall be prepared, stamped
and signed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in Massachusetts.
Included in the application shall be:
1. General.
a. Name, address, phone number and signature of the applicant, as well as
6.6 QUINCY CODE 6.7
375:46
all co-applicants and property owners.
b. Name, contact information and signature of any agents representing the
applicant.
c. Documentation of the legal right to use the wind facility site, including
the requirements set forth herein.
2. Siting and design. The applicant shall provide a description of the property,
which shall include:
a. Copy of a portion of the most recent United States Geological Survey
(USGS) quadrangle map, at a scale of 1:25,000, showing the proposed
facility site, including turbine sites, and the area within at least two miles
from the facility. Zoning district designation for the subject parcel should
be included; however a copy of a zoning map with the parcel identified is
suitable.
b. A plan, one inch equals 200 feet, of the proposed wind facility site, with
contour intervals of no more than 10 feet, showing the following:
1. Property lines for the site parcel and adjacent parcels within 500
feet.
2. Outline of all existing buildings, including purpose (e.g., residence,
garage, etc.), on site parcel and all adjacent parcels within 500 feet.
Include distances from the wind facility to each building shown.
3. Location of all roads, public and private, on the site parcel and
adjacent parcels within 500 feet and proposed roads or driveways,
either temporary or permanent.
4. Existing areas of tree cover, including average height of trees, on the
site parcel and adjacent parcels within 500 feet.
5. Proposed location and design of wind facility, including all turbines,
ground equipment, appurtenant structures, transmission
infrastructure, access, fencing, exterior lighting, etc.
6. Location of viewpoints referenced herein.
3. Visualizations. The applicant shall provide at least six sight lines, including
from the nearest building with a view of the wind facility, for pre- and postconstruction
view representations. Sites for the view representations shall be
selected from populated areas or public ways within a two-mile radius of the
wind facility. View representations shall be in color and have the following
characteristics:
a. Include actual pre-construction photographs and accurate postconstruction
simulations of the height and breadth of the wind facility by
superimposition of the wind facility onto photographs of existing views.
b. Include existing or proposed buildings or tree coverage.
6.7 ZONING 6.7
375:47
c. Include description of the technical procedures followed in producing the
visualization, such as distances, angles, and lens.
4. Landscape plan. The applicant shall submit a landscape plan indicating all
proposed changes to the landscape of the site, including temporary or
permanent roads or driveways, grading, vegetation clearing and planting,
exterior lighting, other than FAA lights, screening vegetation or structures.
Lighting shall be designed to minimize glare on abutting properties and except
as required by the FAA be directed downward with full cutoff fixtures to
reduce light pollution.
5. Operation and maintenance plan. The applicant shall submit a plan for
maintenance of access roads and stormwater controls, as well as general
procedures for operational maintenance of the wind facility.
6. Compliance documents. If required under other subsections herein, the
applicant will provide the compliance documents with the application.
7. Independent consultants. Upon submission of an application for a special
permit, the Planning Board may hire outside consultants, pursuant to MGL c.
44, § 53G. As necessary, the applicant may be required to pay not more than
50% of the consultant's costs.
6.7.4. Zoning districts. The construction of a wind facility as a primary use is not
permitted in Residence A, Residence B, or Residence C Zoning Districts. The
construction of a wind facility as an accessory use in Residence A, Residence B, or
Residence C Zoning Districts or as either an accessory use or primary use in all
other zoning districts is permitted subject to the issuance of a permit in accordance
with the provisions of this Section 6.7. In addition to any other requirements of the
Quincy Zoning Ordinance, such permits may also impose reasonable conditions to
ensure that wind facilities shall be constructed and operated in a manner that
minimizes any adverse visual, safety, and environmental impacts; require
safeguards and limitations on time and use; and may require the applicant to
implement all reasonable measures to mitigate unforeseen adverse impacts of the
wind facility, should they occur.
1. Wind monitoring or meteorological towers are not permitted in Residence A,
Residence B, or Residence C Zoning Districts. Wind monitoring or
meteorological towers are permitted in all other zoning districts subject to
issuance of a building permit for a temporary structure for a period of no
longer than 12 months and subject to other provisions of this section.
6.7.5. Compliance with laws, ordinances and regulations. The construction and operation
of all such proposed wind facilities shall be consistent with all applicable local, state
and federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable safety,
construction, environmental, electrical, communications and aviation requirements
and industry standards.
6.7.6. Insurance. The applicant shall provide evidence of liability insurance in an amount
and duration sufficient to cover loss or damage to persons and structures occasioned
by the failure of the facility.
6.7 QUINCY CODE 6.7
375:48
6.7.7. Site control. The applicant shall submit documentation of actual or prospective
control of the project site sufficient to allow for installation and use of the proposed
facility. Documentation shall also include proof of control over setback areas and
access roads, if required. Control shall mean the legal authority to prevent the use
or construction of any structure for human habitation within the setback areas.
6.7.8. General siting standards.
1. Ground clearance. The minimum distance between the ground and any part of
a rotor or a turbine blade shall be 30 feet.
2. Setbacks. Wind turbines shall be set back a distance equal to 1.5 times the
overall blade tip height of the wind turbine from the nearest nonparticipating
residential or commercial structure and from the nearest property line and
public or private right-of-way line.
6.7.9. Lighting, signage, utilities and other structures.
1. Lighting. Wind turbines shall be lighted only if required by the Federal
Aviation Administration. Lighting of other parts of the wind facility, such as
appurtenant structures, shall be limited to that required for safety and
operational purposes and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting
properties.
2. Signage. Signs on the wind facility shall be limited to:
a. Signs necessary to identify the owner, provide a twenty-four-hour
emergency contact phone number, and warn of any danger, which shall
not exceed four square feet.
b. Educational signs providing information about the facility and the
benefits of renewable energy if, and only if, the wind facility is on public
land.
3. Advertising. Wind turbines shall not be used for displaying any advertising
except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the
wind energy facility.
6.7.10. Utility connections. Reasonable efforts shall be made to locate utility connections
from the wind facility underground, depending on appropriate soil conditions,
shape and topography of the site and any requirements of the utility provider.
Electrical transformers for utility interconnections may be above ground if required
by the utility provider.
6.7.11. Appurtenant structures. All appurtenant structures to such wind facilities shall be
subject to reasonable regulations concerning the bulk and height of structures and
determining yard sizes, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking and building
coverage requirements. All such appurtenant structures, including but not limited to
equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and substations, shall be
architecturally compatible with each other and shall be contained within the turbine
tower whenever technically and economically feasible. Structures shall only be
used for housing of equipment for this particular site. Whenever reasonable,
structures should be shaded from view by vegetation and/or located in an
6.7 ZONING 6.7
375:49
underground vault and joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts.
6.7.12. Ancillary structures. No telecommunications dishes, antennas, cellular telephone
repeaters, or other similar devices shall be attached externally to wind turbine
towers.
6.7.13. Support towers. Monopole towers are the required type of support for the wind
turbine.
6.7.14. Safety, aesthetic and environmental standards.
1. Emergency services. The applicant shall provide a copy of the project
summary to the Police and Fire Departments and shall cooperate with these
Departments in developing an emergency response plan.
2. Unauthorized access. Wind turbines or other structures part of a wind facility
shall be designed to prevent unauthorized access, and wind turbines shall not
be climbable up to 15 feet above ground surface.
3. Shadow/flicker. Wind facilities shall be sited in a manner that minimizes
shadowing or flicker impacts. The applicant has the burden of proving that this
effect does not have significant adverse impact on neighboring or adjacent
uses through either siting or mitigation.
4. Noise. The wind facility and associated equipment shall conform to the
provisions of the Department of Environmental Protection's (DEP) Division of
Air Quality Noise Regulations (310 CMR 7.10), unless the DEP and the
special permit granting authority agree that those provisions shall not be
applicable.
a. A source of sound will be considered to be violating these regulations if
the source increases the broadband sound level by more than 10 dB above
ambient or produces a "pure tone" condition, when an octave band center
frequency sound-pressure level exceeds the two adjacent center
frequency sound-pressure levels by three decibels or more. These criteria
are measured both at the property line and at the nearest inhabited
residence. "Ambient" is defined as the background A-weighted sound
level that is exceeded 90% of the time measured during equipment hours.
The ambient may also be established by other means with consent from
DEP. An analysis prepared by a qualified engineer shall be presented to
demonstrate compliance with these noise standards. The special permit
granting authority, in consultation with the DEP, shall determine whether
such violations shall be measured at the property line or at the nearest
inhabited residence.
b. Methods for measuring and reporting acoustic emissions from wind
turbines and the wind facility shall be equal to or exceed the minimum
standards for precision described in the American Wind Energy
Association Standard 2.1, 1989, titled "Procedures for the Measurement
and Reporting of Acoustic Emissions from Wind Turbine Generation
Systems Volume 1: First Tier" as revised.
6.7 QUINCY CODE 6.7
375:50
5. Color and finish. The Planning Board shall have discretion over the turbine
color, although a neutral, nonreflective exterior color designed to blend with
the surrounding environment is encouraged.
6. Land clearing, soil erosion and habitat impacts. Clearing of natural vegetation
shall be limited to that which is necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance of the wind facility and is otherwise prescribed by applicable
laws, regulations, and ordinances.
6.7.15. Waiver of setbacks, sound and shadow flicker provisions. The Planning Board,
in its discretion, is authorized to waive the setback provisions of this Section 6.7 to
no less than 1.1 times the overall blade tip height and the sound and shadow flicker
provisions of this Section 6.7 to the extent these three provisions affect a
nonparticipating property, provided that the applicant submits the request in
writing, and if the applicant is not the property owner, the property owner's written
consent to the waiver shall also be submitted. The application shall contain the
nonparticipating property owner's acknowledgement of the setback, sound or
shadow flicker requirements of this Section 6.7 and what is proposed in lieu thereof,
describe the impact on the nonparticipating property owner, and state the
nonparticipating property owner's support for the applicant's waiver request. A
nonparticipant property owner's affidavit shall be made part of the permit decision
and shall be separately recorded with the Norfolk County Registry of Deeds at the
same time that the permit decision is recorded to provide notice to all subsequent
purchasers of the nonparticipating property of the waiver granted.
6.7.16. Facility conditions. The applicant shall maintain the wind facility in good
condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural
repairs, and integrity of security measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level
acceptable to the Fire and Police Departments. The project owner shall be
responsible for the cost of maintaining the wind facility and any access road, unless
accepted as a public way, and the cost of repairing any damage occurring as a result
of operation and construction.
6.7.17. Abandonment or decommissioning.
1. Removal requirements. Any wind facility which reaches the end of its useful
life or is abandoned shall be removed. When the wind facility is scheduled for
decommissioning, the applicant shall notify the Director by certified mail 30
days prior to the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for
removal. The owner/operator shall physically remove the wind facility no
more than 150 days after the date of discontinued operations. At the time of
removal, the wind facility site shall be restored to the state it was in before the
facility was constructed or any other legally authorized use. More specifically,
decommissioning shall consist of:
a. Physical removal of all wind turbines, structures, equipment, security
barriers and transmission lines from the site.
b. Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local and
state waste disposal regulations.
c. Stabilization or revegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion.
6.7 ZONING 6.7
375:51
The Director may allow the owner to leave landscaping or designated
below-grade foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption to
vegetation.
2. Abandonment. Absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning, the
facility shall be considered abandoned when the facility fails to operate for
more than one year without the written consent of the Director. The Director
shall determine what proportion of the facility is inoperable for the facility to
be considered abandoned. If the applicant fails to remove the wind facility in
accordance with the requirements of this section within 150 days of
abandonment or the proposed date of decommissioning, the City shall have the
authority to enter the property and physically remove the facility. The costs
incurred by the City shall constitute a debt due to the City upon completion of
the decommissioning activities and the rendering of an account to the facility
owner, operator and the landowner, if applicable, and shall be recoverable
from such parties in an action of contract.
6.7.18. Financial surety. The Planning Board shall require the applicant to provide
annually to the Director evidence of surety, either through an escrow account, bond
or otherwise, with the City as the named obligee/payee, to insure 100% of the cost
of compliance with Section 6.7.17 herein. The applicant shall also submit annually
to the Director a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with such
compliance prepared by a qualified engineer. Such surety will not be required for
municipal or state-owned facilities.
6.7.19. Term of special permit. A special permit issued for a wind facility shall be valid
for 25 years, unless extended or renewed. The time period may be extended or the
permit renewed by the Planning Board upon determination by the Planning Board
of the satisfactory operation of the facility. Request for renewal must be submitted
at least 180 days prior to expiration of the special permit. Submitting a renewal
request shall allow for continued operation of the facility until the Planning Board
acts. At the end of that period, including extensions and renewals, the wind facility
shall be removed as required by this Section 6.7.
6.7.20. Notice of operation. The applicant shall notify all abutters within 500 feet of the
facility prior to the operation and testing of any wind facility. The wind facility
owner/operator shall post an emergency telephone number so that the appropriate
people may be contacted should any wind turbine need immediate attention. This
telephone number shall be clearly visible on a permanent structure(s) or post(s)
within a reasonable distance from the facility.
6.7.21. Public inquiries and complaints. The wind facility owner shall maintain a phone
number and identify a person for the public to contact with inquiries and complaints
throughout the life of the project. The wind facility owner and operator shall make
reasonable efforts to respond to the public's inquiries and complaints. Upon receipt
by the Director of a complaint regarding sound, shadow, or flicker from an existing
wind facility, the Director shall investigate the complaint. If the Director determines
the complaint reasonably demonstrates inconsistency with the permit granted, the
wind facility owner or operator may be required, at its expense, to have prepared by
an independent authority, approved by the Director, a study that demonstrates
compliance with this section.
6.7 QUINCY CODE 6.8
375:52
6.8. Satellite receiving antenna.
6.9. Bridges. [Added 6-18-2018 by Order No. 2018-094]
6.8.1. Small dishes. A satellite receiving antenna with a receiving dish with a diameter
equal to or less than three feet may be installed in any district.
6.8.2. Large dishes. A satellite receiving antenna with a receiving dish with a diameter
greater than three feet may not be erected in a residential district unless it is
accessory to a residential or institutional use and it is located in a rear yard.
6.8.3. Requirements for large dishes. A satellite receiving antenna with a receiving dish
with a diameter greater than three feet is subject to the following conditions:
1. The antenna is located in a rear yard but not within the required minimum
setback.
2. The antenna shall be permanently secured to the ground. No antenna shall be
installed on a building or on a portable or movable structure, such as a trailer.
3. No antenna shall exceed an overall diameter of 12 feet or a height of 15 feet
above the natural grade when measured to its uppermost point when in an
upright position.
4. The base of the antenna shall be screened from view from any abutting lot or
from the street by an opaque fence, at least six feet high, or by planting
providing comparable screening and opacity.
5. The antenna shall be of a nonreflecting and inconspicuous color and
compatible with the appearance and character of its surroundings. No
advertising material shall be permitted.
6. The antenna shall not be used for commercial purposes except where
accessory to a use permitted in the district by special permit, provided that the
antenna is subject to the conditions of the special permit.
6.8.4. Abandonment. An antenna no longer in use shall be removed within 30 days. In
the event that the owner fails to comply, the City may enter onto the property to
implement the measures set forth above. In the event the City incurs expense, the
owner shall promptly reimburse the City for all reasonable expenses associated
therewith; if the owner fails to so reimburse the City, the City may place a lien on
the property or any improvement thereon to secure such payment.
6.9.1. General. A bridge shall be defined as a structure built to span physical obstacles
without closing the way underneath, such as a body of water, valley, or road, for the
purpose of providing passage over the obstacle. Vehicular traffic shall be defined
as any use which included transportation by machine that transports people or
cargo.
6.9.2. Special permit. Any bridge, or portion of a bridge, to be constructed or
reconstructed in the City of Quincy, to be utilized for vehicular traffic, shall require
a special permit from the Planning Board.
6.8 ZONING 6.9
375:53
6.9.3. Criteria. Criteria to be considered for issuance of a special permit for the
construction or reconstruction of a bridge will be those outlined in Section 9.4,
Special permits. The procedure to be followed for the special permit process will be
that outlined in Section 9.4.2, Criteria.
6.9 QUINCY CODE 6.9
375:54
ARTICLE 7.0
Special Residential Regulations
7.1. Affordable housing.
7.1.1. Applicability. This Affordable Housing Ordinance, Section 7.1, and all of the
provisions contained herein, shall apply to all projects where a special permit and/
or variance and/or site plan approval is sought from any City of Quincy board or
body to construct a residential building project of 10 units or more. For the purposes
of this Affordable Housing Ordinance, such projects shall be referred to as
"inclusionary projects." The provisions of this Section 7.1 shall apply to all
inclusionary projects in all zoning districts of the City.
1. The provisions of Section 7.1 shall not apply to urban renewal uses.
7.1.2. Requirements. A developer of an inclusionary project shall, concurrent with filing
any application for any special permit, variance or site plan approval within the City
of Quincy, file with the Affordable Housing Trust Committee (AHTC) a
description of the inclusionary project and the special permit(s) and/or variance(s)
and/or site plan approval(s) sought. Filing such descriptions with the Department of
Planning and Community Development shall be considered filing with the AHTC.
Within 35 days of receipt of such descriptions by the Department of Planning and
Community Development and/or the AHTC, the AHTC shall provide, to any
special permit granting or variance granting or site plan approval granting authority
(hereinafter, the "granting authority") considering the inclusionary project, the
AHTC's recommendations for conditions on the inclusionary project. The granting
authority receiving such recommendations shall give great weight to the
recommendations of the AHTC in determining what conditions shall be applied to
the inclusionary project and any relevant special permits or variances or site plan
approval.
1. If the Affordable Housing Trust Committee fails to provide a recommendation
to the granting authority within 35 days of the AHTC receiving an inclusionary
project description, such granting authority may proceed in acting upon the
special permits and/or variances and/or site plan approval sought without the
recommendation of the AHTC. In all cases, the granting authority shall retain
the ultimate authority to determine what, if any, conditions shall be placed on
an inclusionary project pursuant to this Affordable Housing Ordinance.
7.1.3. Affordable Housing Trust Committee. The AHTC may consider any plans,
presentations, or requests of developers in determining what conditions should be
applied to inclusionary projects. However, the AHTC shall not be bound by such
plans, presentations, or requests. Although the AHTC may recommend any
conditions that it deems appropriate based on the description of each individual
inclusionary project, the AHTC shall consider the following guidelines in making
its recommendations for conditions on inclusionary projects:
1. Projects that consist in total of fewer than 10 dwelling units shall not be
considered inclusionary projects and no contribution to City affordable
housing shall be required.
7.1 ZONING 7.1
375:55
2. Rental inclusionary projects. Any inclusionary project that creates or is
designed to create residential rental units shall be designated a "rental
inclusionary project" under this Section 7.1. Although the AHTC shall use its
judgment to recommend appropriate conditions in each individual case, when
a developer presents a rental inclusionary project to the AHTC, the AHTC will
give particular consideration to the following conditions. The developer may
be required to:
a. Create or cause to be created affordable housing units for occupancy
exclusively by eligible households;
b. Donate land to be used exclusively for the development of affordable
housing units; or
c. Undertake such other reasonable creation of affordable housing units or
donation in lieu of such creation as may be recommended by the AHTC.
3. When the AHTC chooses to proceed under Section 7.1.3.2.a, the developer
will generally be required to provide as affordable housing units 10% of all of
the housing units contained in the rental inclusionary project.
4. When the AHTC chooses to proceed under Section 7.1.3.2.b, the developer
will generally donate land of at least an equal appraised value to the value of
10% of all of the housing units contained in the rental inclusionary project.
5. When the AHTC chooses to proceed under Section 7.1.3.2.c, the developer
will generally be required to create affordable housing units, or donate cash in
lieu of such creation, at a cost to the developer no greater than an amount equal
to 50% of the total construction costs of 10% of the total units developed. Such
a contribution or donation shall be determined and administered as described
below.
6. For-sale inclusionary projects. Any inclusionary project that creates or is
designed to create residential units for owner occupancy shall be designated a
"for-sale inclusionary project" under this Section 7.1.3. Although the AHTC
shall use its judgment to recommend appropriate conditions in each individual
case, when a developer presents a for-sale inclusionary project to the AHTC,
the AHTC will give particular consideration to the following conditions:
a. The developer of a for-sale inclusionary project may be required to
contribute to the Affordable Housing Trust Fund, in cash, an amount
equal to 50% of the total construction costs of 10% of the total units
developed. This contribution shall be designated the "fee in lieu of
dwelling units."
b. When a developer is required to comply with Subsection a above as part
of the issuance of a variance or a special permit, the developer shall
deliver the fee in lieu of dwelling units to the Chairperson of the City of
Quincy AHTC or his/her designee to be added to the Affordable Housing
Trust Fund. The fee in lieu of dwelling units shall be determined as
follows.
7.1 QUINCY CODE 7.1
375:56
c. As the basis for determining the amount of the fee in lieu of dwelling
units and for determining the building construction cost data, the
Department of Inspectional Services shall use the methods used at that
time by the Department of Inspectional Services to calculate building
permit fees. The Department of Inspectional Services shall calculate 50%
of the total construction cost of 10% of the total units constructed in the
inclusionary project by using total construction cost data appropriate for
the relevant type of unit construction. The resulting dollar value, rounded
to whole dollars, shall be the fee in lieu of dwelling units. The payment
of the fee in lieu of dwelling units shall be made in accordance with the
completion schedule contained in Subsection 7.1.6 of this Section 7.1. All
building permits related to inclusionary projects shall be reviewed by the
Director of Inspectional Services.
7.1.4. Monitoring compliance with AHTC conditions.
1. Any condition placed on any special permit or variance or site plan approval
pursuant to a recommendation of the AHTC or pursuant to this Affordable
Housing Ordinance shall be deemed an affordable housing condition.
2. Prior to issuance of an occupancy permit.
a. The AHTC shall oversee and monitor compliance with all affordable
housing conditions. In order to facilitate this process, until an occupancy
permit has been issued for any inclusionary project subject to an
affordable housing condition, the recipient of the special permit(s) and/or
variance(s) and/or site plan approval containing the affordable housing
condition(s) shall periodically, on January 1 and July 1 of each year,
report to the AHTC regarding compliance with any and all affordable
housing conditions. Such reporting shall continue until an occupancy
permit has been issued for the inclusionary project.
b. Periodic reports to the AHTC shall be designed to inform the AHTC on
the general progress of development on the inclusionary project and to
specifically inform the AHTC regarding compliance with any affordable
housing condition. Based upon these periodic reports, or upon any other
information, and prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for the
inclusionary project, the AHTC shall report to the granting authority
regarding the status of the implementation of such affordable housing
condition. The granting authority shall require and enforce compliance
with all affordable housing conditions. The granting authority shall
consider the reports and recommendations of the AHTC in considering
whether or not a developer has complied with conditions placed on an
inclusionary project. When the granting authority determines that an
inclusionary project is not in compliance with an affordable housing
condition, the granting authority shall have all of the remedies available
to it in the case of violation of any other type of condition, including
revocation of the variance or special permit or site plan approval.
c. Prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit for any inclusionary project
subject to an affordable housing condition, the Affordable Housing Trust
7.1 ZONING 7.1
375:57
Committee shall designate, consistent with any affordable housing
conditions, which properties or property interests contained in the
inclusionary project are subject to continuing affordable housing
requirements after the issuance of the occupancy permit. Such properties
or property interests shall be known as the "designated property," and any
entity having any ownership interest in any designated property shall be
known as a "designated owner."
d. Prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit for any inclusionary project
subject to an affordable housing condition, the AHTC shall notify each
designated owner that his property is a designated property. The
inclusionary project permit and/or variance and/or site plan approval
recipients shall be responsible for providing the AHTC with a list of all
designated owners, at the AHTC's request. Failure of the AHTC to give
such notice, however, shall not affect the validity of any affordable
housing condition. Such notice shall notify the designated owner of the
affordable housing condition of any obligations under the affordable
housing condition and this Affordable Housing Ordinance.
3. After the issuance of an occupancy permit.
a. The AHTC shall oversee and monitor compliance with all affordable
housing conditions. In order to facilitate this process, after an occupancy
permit has been issued for any inclusionary project subject to an
affordable housing condition, all designated owners of designated
property contained within the inclusionary project shall report annually,
on July 1, to the AHTC regarding compliance with the relevant affordable
housing condition. This reporting obligation shall attach to the owner of
any designated property. When designated property, or any interest in
designated property, is transferred, the transferee shall assume the
reporting obligations described herein and any other obligations
contained in the affordable housing condition.
b. Annual reports to the AHTC shall be designed to inform the AHTC
regarding compliance with any affordable housing condition. Based upon
these annual reports, or upon any other information, the AHTC may
report to the granting authority regarding compliance with the affordable
housing condition. The granting authority shall require and enforce
compliance with all affordable housing conditions. The granting authority
shall consider the reports and recommendations of the AHTC in
considering whether or not a developer has complied with conditions
placed on an inclusionary project. When the granting authority
determines that an inclusionary project is not in compliance with an
affordable housing condition, the granting authority shall have all of the
remedies available to it in the case of violation of any other type of
condition, including revocation of the variance or special permit or site
plan approval.
4. Pursuant to an affordable housing condition, and prior to the issuance of an
occupancy permit, the AHTC, with the approval of the Mayor of the City of
Quincy, may enter into any agreements with the designated owners, or with
7.1 QUINCY CODE 7.1
375:58
any other party, that it deems necessary to comply with the affordable housing
condition, including agreements regarding mortgages, deed restrictions, rental
limitations, or any other limitation contained in the affordable housing
condition.
5. The AHTC may, at any time, remove any property or property interest from
the list of designated properties and may terminate the obligations of any
designated property or designated owner under any affordable housing
condition, as long as such removal and termination is in the public interest and/
or consistent with the purposes of this Affordable Housing Ordinance. Such
removal and termination shall be reported to the relevant granting authority
and shall be considered incorporated into the relevant affordable housing
condition.
7.1.5. Fractional dwelling unit. Where the application of any formula contained in this
Section 7.1 results in a fractional dwelling unit, a fraction of 1/2 of a dwelling unit
or more shall be considered as one full dwelling unit. A fraction of less than 1/2 of
a dwelling unit shall not be considered a dwelling unit. Each affordable housing
unit shall meet the standards established in Subsection 7.1.7 of this Section 7.1.
7.1.6. Construction of affordable housing units. For any construction of affordable
housing units under this Affordable Housing Ordinance in which affordable
housing units are part of a project containing market-rate units, the affordable
housing units may be required to be provided coincident with the development of
the market-rate units, but in no event shall the development of the affordable units
be delayed beyond the schedule below. In addition, any land, moneys or property
(or any other housing units) to be provided under this Section 7.1 shall be provided
at least at the rate described below:
Percent of Completed Market
Rate Units
Minimum Percentage of Completed
Affordable Units
(or minimum percentage of land, property
or moneys to be provided)
Up to 30% None required
30% + 1 unit 10%
50% + 1 unit 30%
65% + 1 unit 50%
75% + 1 unit 70%
90% + 1 unit 100%
7.1.7. Standards for construction and occupancy of affordable units. Affordable units
shall be generally comparable in size, number of bedrooms, and materials to
dwelling units in the neighborhood or in the project in which they are located and
shall be consistent with local needs for affordable housing. Preference for
affordable housing units shall be given to Quincy residents whenever possible.
7.1.8. Occupancy. Solely for the purposes of this Affordable Housing Ordinance,
"occupancy" shall mean the inhabiting and use of a housing unit, including change
7.1 ZONING 7.1
375:59
of tenants or residents in a housing unit.
7.1.9. Affordable Housing Trust Committee. The City shall establish an Affordable
Housing Trust Committee (AHTC).
1. The AHTC shall consist of 13 members, as follows, one of whom shall be a
permanent member and 12 of whom shall be appointed for staggered terms of
five years:
a. One permanent member. The Director of Planning and Community
Development or his/her designee shall serve ex officio as permanent
Chairperson of the AHTC and shall serve ex officio as the Trustee of the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
b. Members appointed for staggered five-year terms. The Mayor of the City
of Quincy shall appoint to the AHTC 12 members for staggered five-year
terms. The Mayor shall appoint:
1. One member with a background in banking;
2. One member with a background in residential development;
3. One member from the executive board of the Quincy and south
shore building trades;
4. Two members from faith-based organizations;
5. Two members from City of Quincy designated community housing
development organizations;
6. Two community members of the Mayor's choosing; and
7. Three members consisting of the Quincy City Councilors serving on
the City Council Housing Committee.
All nonpermanent members of the Affordable Housing Trust
Committee shall be considered special municipal employees. At all
times at least 10 of the 12 nonpermanent members of the AHTC
shall be residents of the City of Quincy. The AHTC may seek
technical and administrative assistance from the Department of
Planning and Community Development, the Director of Inspectional
Services, and the City Solicitor's office.
2. The AHTC shall have the following authority:
a. The AHTC shall administer the Affordable Housing Ordinance and shall
have all of the power and authority granted to it under this Affordable
Housing Ordinance. The AHTC shall review descriptions of inclusionary
projects and may make recommendations to permit granting and variance
granting authorities regarding conditions to be placed on inclusionary
project permits and variances. Such recommendations shall be made by
the AHTC upon the vote of a majority of the AHTC members attending
any AHTC meeting at which there is a quorum. The AHTC shall
additionally monitor compliance with conditions placed on inclusionary
7.1 QUINCY CODE 7.1
375:60
projects pursuant to this Affordable Housing Ordinance and/or on
recommendation of the AHTC and shall report to the granting authority
on compliance with those conditions. Such reports shall be approved by
the AHTC by a vote of a majority of the AHTC members attending any
AHTC meeting at which there is a quorum.
b. The AHTC shall seek, through its recommendations to permit granting
and variance granting authorities, and through its administration of
affordable housing and the Affordable Housing Trust Fund, to provide
affordable housing to low- and moderate-income families. In furtherance
of this goal, on July 1 of each year the AHTC shall define "income
eligible households" and such definition shall remain in place until July 1
of the following year. The AHTC shall seek, through this Affordable
Housing Ordinance, to provide affordable housing to qualifying income
eligible households.
7.1.10. Income eligible households. When affordable housing conditions are placed on
inclusionary projects that require occupancy of any housing unit by an income
eligible household, the definition of "income eligible household" in place at the
time of the initial occupancy by each successive household shall be the controlling
definition. When such conditions are placed on inclusionary projects, the following
requirements shall apply:
1. Rental inclusionary projects. When any designated property is used as a rental
unit, and when any affordable housing condition requires occupancy of that
rental unit by an income eligible household, the affordable housing unit shall
be administered in the following way:
a. The AHTC shall annually, on July 1, establish guidelines setting the
minimum and maximum rent that may be charged to an income eligible
household occupying a designated property.
b. As part of the designated owner's annual report to the AHTC after the
issuance of an occupancy permit, the designated owner shall report on the
income eligible status of the occupant(s) of the designated property.
Based on such reports, or on any other information, and consistent with
the definition of "income eligible household" in place at the time of such
report, the AHTC shall determine annually whether or not the occupant(s)
of a designated property used as a rental unit continue(s) to qualify as an
income eligible household. In cases where the occupant(s) no longer
qualify(ies) as an income eligible household, the occupant(s) shall be
given no less than 12 months to vacate the designated property. In cases
where the occupant(s) continue(s) to qualify as an income eligible
household, the occupant(s) may remain the occupant(s) of the designated
property, so long as such occupancy is consistent with the affordable
housing condition.
2. For-sale inclusionary projects. When any designated property is used as an
owner-occupied unit, and when any affordable housing condition requires
occupancy of that for-sale inclusionary project unit by an income eligible
household, the affordable housing unit shall be administered in the following
7.1 ZONING 7.1
375:61
way:
a. The AHTC shall annually, on July 1, establish guidelines setting the
minimum and maximum purchase price that may be charged for any
designated property that is to be owner occupied.
b. In no case shall the purchase price of such for-sale designated property be
more than 70% of the fair market value of the designated property. When
a designated property is sold to an income eligible household, the seller
shall report to the AHTC the fair market value of the designated property
at the time, the purchase price of the designated property, and the
percentage difference between the fair market value and the purchase
price (the "affordable housing percentage").
7.1.11. Subsequent sales. Once the designated property has been purchased by an income
eligible household (the "initial purchase"), the income eligible household shall then
be free to sell the designated property for fair market value (the "second sale"). The
income eligible household shall not sell the designated property for less than fair
market value, however, at the second sale. Upon the second sale of the designated
property for fair market value, the seller shall pay a percentage, equal to the
affordable housing percentage, of the purchase price to the Affordable Housing
Trust Fund, unless the fair market value of the designated property at the time of
the second sale is less than the fair market value of the designated property at the
time of the initial purchase, in which case no money shall be due to the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund. Once a second sale has taken place on a designated property,
all affordable housing conditions and all limitations and obligations upon the
designated property pursuant to this Affordable Housing Ordinance shall terminate.
1. As part of the designated owner's annual report to the AHTC after the issuance
of an occupancy permit, the designated owner shall report on any deed
restrictions and mortgages on the designated property and on any potential sale
of the designated property. The designated owner shall ensure, in the case of a
transfer of the designated property, through deed restrictions that the
requirements of this Affordable Housing Ordinance are adhered to. Once a
second sale has taken place on a designated property, however, all affordable
housing conditions, deed restrictions, and all limitations and obligations upon
the designated property pursuant to this Affordable Housing Ordinance shall
terminate.
2. The AHTC may promulgate, upon a vote of 2/3 of the AHTC members present
at any AHTC meeting at which there is a quorum, guidelines, for distribution
to developers, regarding the requirements of the Affordable Housing
Ordinance and the provision of affordable housing units within the City of
Quincy. Although these guidelines will not be binding upon developers, the
guidelines will be considered by the AHTC and the granting authority in
determining what, if any, conditions should apply to each inclusionary project.
3. The AHTC will be deemed to have a quorum whenever seven or more of the
13 members of the AHTC are present at a meeting.
4. Once the Affordable Housing Trust Fund is established, the AHTC shall
administer the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
7.1 QUINCY CODE 7.1
375:62
5. Upon a vote of 2/3 of the members of the AHTC present at any meeting at
which there is a quorum, the AHTC may vote to accept funds, housing units,
land, or property conveyed to the City of Quincy pursuant to this Affordable
Housing Ordinance. However, in the case of the acceptance or purchase of any
housing units, land or property under this Affordable Housing Ordinance such
acceptance or purchase shall not become effective until such acceptance or
purchase is referred to the City Council and approved consistent with all of the
requirements of law.
6. Upon a vote of 2/3 of the members of the AHTC present at any meeting at
which there is a quorum, the AHTC may vote to disburse or sell any or all of
the funds, housing units, land or property contained within the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund. However, in the case of the sale or disbursement of any
housing units, land or property under this Affordable Housing Ordinance, such
sale or disbursement shall not become effective until such sale or disbursement
is referred to the City Council and approved consistent with all of the
requirements of law. Any sale or disbursement of funds, housing units, land or
property from the Affordable Housing Trust Fund must be, in the reasonable
judgment of the AHTC, consistent with and pursuant to the goals contained in
this Affordable Housing Ordinance. The AHTC may vote to disburse or sell
any funds, housing units, land or property contained within the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund for any other purpose only upon a finding by the AHTC
that such a sale or disbursement is in the public interest, a unanimous vote of
all of the AHTC board members in favor of such a disbursement or sale, and
approval by the Mayor of the City of Quincy. In addition, such sale or
disbursement shall not become effective until such sale or disbursement is
referred to the City Council and approved consistent with all of the
requirements of law.
7. Unless specifically stated otherwise in this Affordable Housing Ordinance, all
actions of the AHTC shall be taken upon the vote of a majority of the members
of the AHTC present at any meeting at which there is a quorum.
7.1.12. Affordable Housing Trust Fund. The City shall establish an Affordable Housing
Trust Fund for the deposit of any funds, housing units, land or property generated
by this Affordable Housing Ordinance. Until and unless such an Affordable
Housing Trust Fund is established, any funds, housing units, land or property
acquired by the City pursuant to this Section 7.1 shall be acquired through and
placed into the City's general fund, and the general fund shall function in place of
the Affordable Housing Trust Fund for the purposes of this Affordable Housing
Ordinance. Acquisition and distribution of any funds, housing units, land, or
property acquired by the City pursuant to this Section 7.1 and placed in the City's
General Fund shall be subject to all of the usual requirements of law regarding
acquisition and disbursement of funds, housing units, land or property by the City.
Funds, housing units, land, and property deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund may be used for any purpose pursuant to and consistent with this Affordable
Housing Ordinance, including the following:
1. Creation of affordable housing units through a variety of means, including but
not limited to the provision of favorable financing terms or direct write down
of costs for either nonprofits or for-profit developers or to subsidize the
7.1 ZONING 7.1
375:63
7.2. Sober houses. [Added 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-139]
purchase of sites, existing structures, or affordable units within a larger
development.
2. Multifamily rehabilitation programs.
3. Limited equity cooperatives.
4. Condominium conversions.
7.1.13. Adoption of prior acts of the AHTC. All votes, decisions, and other actions of the
Affordable Housing Trust Committee taken prior to February 17, 2004, shall
continue in full force and effect unless specifically rejected by the Affordable
Housing Trust Committee after that date, by a vote of 2/3 of the AHTC members
present at any meeting at which there is a quorum.
7.2.1. Purpose.
1. The purpose of this section is to address issues relating to sober houses in
Quincy. Structured sober houses provide housing for individuals in recovery
from addiction to drugs and/or alcohol, including people who may have cooccurring
mental health issues, as they transition from the treatment setting to
life in the community. This housing assists individuals to return to the
community through support in an alcohol- and drug-free, home-like
environment.
2. This section is intended to protect the residents of sober houses from operators
who engage in abuse, neglect, mistreatment, fraud, and/or inadequate
supervision of this vulnerable population as well as to protect the residents of
structured sober living homes and the neighboring community from operators
who fail to provide a supportive, residential family-like living environment
necessary for the residents to achieve and maintain sobriety, in a manner
consistent with the reasonable expectations of residents living where sober
houses are located in regard to their quality of life.
7.2.2. Definitions. As used herein, the following terms shall have the following
meanings.
OPERATOR—A company, business or individual who provides services to or for
a sober house, including the placement of individuals in a residence, setting house
rules, and/or governing the behavior of occupants while residents of the home. An
operator does not include a property owner or property manager that exclusively
handles real estate contracting, property management, and leasing of the property
and who does not receive compensation for services under the first sentence, above.
PARKING PLAN—A plan that provides for adequate off-street parking to ensure
that residents of the sober house and abutting residents can safely and conveniently
park their vehicle(s).
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION — A change, adaptation or modification
of Quincy zoning regulations to allow a person seeking to take advantage of sober
housing to reasonably do so in the City of Quincy.
7.1 QUINCY CODE 7.2
375:64
SOBER HOUSE — A dwelling unit occupied by more than four persons, all of
whom are in recovery from chemical dependency and considered handicapped
under the Federal Fair Housing Act Amendments of 1988, that provides a
noninstitutional residential environment in which the residents willingly subject
themselves to written rules and conditions, including prohibition of alcohol and
drug use (except for prescription medications obtained and used under medical
supervision), intended to encourage and sustain their recovery.
7.2.3. Regulation and oversight.
1. Registration required. No sober house may operate within the City without
first obtaining a registration as provided in this section. No person shall open
or operate a sober house or work for a sober house in the City until the
information required in this section has been provided to the City Clerk. The
operator of any sober house in the City shall be responsible for updating all
required information on a monthly basis, as necessary. Application for this
registration shall be made within 60 days of the effective date of this section
by any current operator, and within 30 days of the date of application for an
occupancy permit for all new operators.
2. Registration application.
a. Every applicant for a registration to operate a sober house shall provide
the following information and documentation:
1. The name and full street address of the structured sober living home;
2. The name, full street address, mobile and land phone numbers, email
address, and driver's license or government-issued
identification number of the property owner and the operator;
3. After a house manager is hired, each house manager's name, full
home living street address, mobile and land phone numbers, e-mail
address, and driver's license or government-issued identification
number;
4. If the operation of the sober house involves a lease, a copy of the
lease then currently in effect;
5. The operation plan for the sober house, including supervisory roles
and responsibilities, all plans that facilitate the rehabilitative process
and those that address the maintenance and control of the property,
including parking, noise abatement and the like, all consistent with
local ordinances;
6. The tenant rules and regulations, written intake procedures and
relapse policy, and discharge plan;
7. An affirmation by the operator that only residents [other than the
house manager(s)] who have the disability of addiction to drugs and/
or alcohol as defined by state and federal law are eligible to reside at
the sober house and the home will not admit persons who pose a
direct threat to the health or safety of others such as persons on the
7.2 ZONING 7.2
375:65
sex offender registry or prison pre-parolee;
8. A blank copy of every form that residents and potential residents are
required to complete; and
9. A signed and dated safety certification that the following safety
devices are installed and fully functional as well as a schedule for
self-inspecting each device:
[a] Functioning smoke detectors in the sleeping rooms and
common areas.
[b] Functioning carbon monoxide detectors.
[c] Functioning fire extinguishers in plain sight and/or clearly
marked locations.
[d] Interior and exterior of the property is in a functional, safe and
clean condition and free of fire hazards.
b. A voluntary fire safety inspection of the property shall be offered as part
of the registration process by the Quincy Fire Department.
c. Contact information shall be provided on an annual basis and updated
within 30 days of any change.
3. Registration issuance. Upon receipt of the foregoing information, the City
Clerk shall issue the registration required by this section as an administrative/
ministerial matter. The City Clerk may deny the registration for a sober house
and may deny any transfer of a current registration or revoke a current
registration only under the following circumstances:
a. The owner or operator has provided materially false or misleading
information on its application or omitted any pertinent information.
b. Any owner or operator has an employment history in which he or she was
terminated during the prior five years, or any staff person has an
employment history in which he or she was terminated in the prior year,
due to physical assault, sexual harassment, embezzlement, theft,
falsifying a drug test, or selling or furnishing illegal drugs or alcohol.
c. Any operator of a sober house who is in recovery from drug and/or
alcohol addiction who has been clean and sober for fewer than two full
years as of the date of application for this registration or the date of
employment.
d. Repeated violations of the operating rules and regulations submitted as
part of the application for the registration and/or the supervision
requirements in the sober house for the residents during hours of
operation, the structured sober living home's rules and regulations,
written intake procedures, relapse policy, or discharge procedure and
policy.
4. Parking plan. The operator of a sober house shall provide a parking plan for
7.2 QUINCY CODE 7.2
375:66
review and approval by the Director of Inspectional Services or his designee
providing for off-street parking to accommodate residents and to address
parking impacts of the residence on the abutters.
7.2.4. Council review. Recognizing that this section necessarily implicates an
individual's rights of privacy and association, various competing interests of
residents in the community, and federal and state regulations that govern housing
and/or sober houses, the City Council shall annually, at its first meeting in March,
schedule a committee review of this section so as to ensure that it is both lawfully
and effectively achieving its purpose.
7.2 ZONING 7.2
375:67

SECTION 8.0
Special Districts
8.1. Floodplain Overlay District (FPOD). [Amended 6-25-2012 by Order No.
2012-107]
8.1.1. Purpose. The purposes of the Floodplain Overlay District (FPOD) are:
1. To provide that the lands in the City subject to seasonal or periodic flooding
shall not be used for residence or other purposes in such a manner as to
endanger the health or safety of the occupants thereof.
2. To assure the continuation of the natural flow pattern of the watercourses
within the City in order to provide adequate and safe floodwater storage
capacity to protect persons and property against the hazards of flood
inundation.
8.1.2. The FPOD includes all flood hazard areas within the City of Quincy designated as
Zones A, AE, and VE on the Norfolk County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the
administration of the National Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the
Norfolk County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the City of Quincy are
panel numbers 25021C0202E, 25021C0204E, 25021C0206E, 25021C0207E, and
25021C0208E dated July 17, 2012, and panel numbers 20521C0066F,
25021C0067F, 25021C0068F, 25021C0069F, 25021C0086F, 25021C0088F,
25021C0089F, 25021C0226F, and 25021C0227F dated June 9, 2014. The exact
boundaries of the district may be defined by the one-hundred-year base flood
elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Norfolk County Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) report dated June 9, 2014. The FIRM and FIS report are
incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the City Clerk, Planning
Board, and the Director of Inspectional Services. [Amended 6-3-2014 by Order
No. 2014-103]
8.1.3. Overlay district. The FPOD shall be considered as overlying other districts. Any
uses permitted in the portions of the districts so overlayed shall be permitted subject
to all the provisions of this Section 8.1. Where the provisions of the FPOD are more
stringent or otherwise adjust the requirements of the underlying district, the FPOD
shall govern.
8.1.4. Use regulations. In the FPOD, the following regulations shall apply:
1. No new building or structure shall be erected, constructed, altered, enlarged or
moved and no dumping, filling or earth transfer or relocation shall be
permitted unless in conformance with Section 8.1.7.
2. The following activities shall be permitted:
a. Conservation of soil, water, plants and wildlife.
b. Recreation, including play and sporting areas, education and nature study,
golf, skating, boating, swimming and fishing, where otherwise legally
permitted.
8.1 ZONING 8.1
375:69
c. Forestry, including tree nurseries.
d. Storage of materials and/or equipment for cemetery, parks or playground
purposes.
e. Dwellings lawfully existing prior to the adoption of these provisions may
be enlarged in area up to 25% of ground coverage.
8.1.5. Coastal high-hazard areas. In the FPOD, some areas are designated as coastal highhazard
areas (Zone VE). Since these areas are extremely hazardous due to highvelocity
waters from tidal surges and hurricane wash, all new construction shall be
located landward of the reach of the mean high tide. Man-made alteration of sand
dunes within Zone VE which would increase potential flood damage is prohibited.
8.1.6. Floodway. In the floodway, as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the
following provisions shall apply:
1. All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements
to existing structures and other development, are prohibited unless
certification by a registered professional engineer is provided by the applicant
demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the one-hundred-year flood, in a floodway.
2. Any encroachment meeting the above standard shall comply with the
floodplain requirements of the State Building Code.
3. In Zones A and AE, along watercourses that have not had a regulatory
floodway designated, the best available federal, state, local, or other floodway
data shall be used to prohibit encroachments in floodways which would result
in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of
the base flood discharge.
8.1.7. Special permit. In the FPOD, the Zoning Board of Appeals (or, in the case of the
QCD-10 or QCD-15 District, the Planning Board) may grant a special permit for
any use or structure allowed in the underlying district, subject to the following;
provided, however, that urban renewal uses and TOD permitted uses are exempt
from this requirement: [Amended 11-21-2016 by Order No. 2016-249]
1. The FPOD is established as an overlay district to all other districts. All
development in the district, including structural and nonstructural activities,
whether permitted by right or by special permit, must be in compliance with
MGL c. 131, § 40, and with the following:
• Sections of the Massachusetts State Building Code (780 CMR) which
address floodplain and coastal high-hazard areas
• Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) (currently 310 CMR 10.00)
• Inland Wetlands Restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 13.00)
• Coastal Wetlands Restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 12.00)
• Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary
Sewage, DEP (currently 310 CMR 15, Title 5)
8.1 QUINCY CODE 8.1
375:70
Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the above-referenced
state regulations may only be granted in accordance with the required
variance procedures of these state regulations.
2. The request has been referred to the Planning Board, the Health
Commissioner, the City Engineer and the Conservation Commission and
reported upon by all, or 35 days shall have elapsed following such referral
without receipt of such reports.
3. The proposed use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and
welfare.
4. The proposed use and/or structure will be built in accordance with the onehundred-
year flood elevation within the City of Quincy as defined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency Flood Insurance Rate Map for the
Norfolk County.
5. The Massachusetts State Building Code regulates construction in the flood
zone.
6. In a riverine situation, the Director of Inspectional Services shall notify the
following of any alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
• Adjacent communities
•
NFIP State Coordinator
Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation
251 Causeway Street, Suite 600-700
Boston, MA 02114-2104
• NFIP Program Specialist
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region I
99 High Street, 6th Floor
Boston, MA 02110
8.1.8. Variances. Where the Zoning Board of Appeals grants a variance to the regulations
set forth in the FPOD, the following additional procedures will be adhered to:
1. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall only issue a variance upon:
a. A showing of good and sufficient cause.
b. A determination that failure to grant said variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant.
c. A determination that the granting of the variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances or conflict with existing
local law.
8.1 ZONING 8.1
375:71
8.2. Open Space District.
d. A determination that the issuance of the variance is the minimum
necessary considering the flood hazard to afford relief.
2. Variances may be issued for structures to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level. Variances may also be issued for a
structure listed on a national register of historic places or a state inventory of
historic places that is to be restored or reconstructed.
3. If a variance is granted, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall notify the applicant
in writing over its signature that the issuance of such variance to construct
below the one-hundred-year base flood elevation will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of
insurance coverage and such construction below the one-hundred-year base
flood elevation increases risks to life and property.
4. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall maintain a record of all variance actions,
including justifications for issuance, and report such variances in the annual
report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration.
5. Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision proposals or other
developments greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, within
unnumbered A Zones.
6. Within Zone AO on the FIRM, adequate drainage paths must be provided
around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures.
8.1.9. Director of Inspectional Services; duties in the Floodplain Overlay District. In
order to ensure the proper administration of the FPOD, the Director of Inspectional
Services shall:
1. Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
or are in the process of being obtained from those governmental agencies from
which approval is required by state or federal law.
2. Review subdivision design proposals to assure that:
a. Such proposals minimize flood damage;
b. All public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage; and
c. Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
3. Obtain and maintain records of the elevation to which any structure has been
floodproofed, the floodproofing certificates required under said district, and
whether or not the structure has a basement.
8.2.1. Purpose. The purpose of the Open Space District is to identify those areas
dedicated or used for public or semipublic uses, such as parks and recreation areas,
8.1 QUINCY CODE 8.2
375:72
8.3. Quincy Center Districts.
cemeteries and open space reservations. Lands acquired and used for public or
semipublic open space purposes by a private organization may be included in the
Open Space District.
8.2.2. Regulations. Within an Open Space District, no building or premises shall be used
and no building or structure shall be permitted for other than one of the following
specified purposes:
1. Conservation of soil, water, plants and wildlife.
2. Recreation, including play and sporting areas, education and nature study,
golf, skating, boating, swimming and fishing where otherwise legally
permitted.
3. Forestry, including tree nurseries.
4. Storage of materials and/or equipment for boat, cemetery, park or playground
purposes.
8.2.3. Public agencies. No structure or building shall be erected, altered or used by a
public agency, except as permitted above.
8.3.1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is:
1. To facilitate and provide incentives for new development of under-utilized
sites within the Quincy Center Districts;
2. To encourage mixed-use development; to encourage new development in
areas accessible to public transit;
3. To provide a predictable, clear and understandable process for the review of
new development within the Quincy Center Districts;
4. To promote and create jobs, housing inventory and affordable housing in
conformance with Section 7.1 of this chapter;
5. To enhance the architectural character of the Quincy Center Districts;
6. To encourage ground floor uses within the Quincy Center Districts that serve
the public; and
7. To improve traffic access and circulation, and to create active pedestrian and
street life in the Quincy Center Districts.
8.3.2. Available uses; special permit required. Within the Quincy Center Districts, no
buildings or premises shall be used for other than one of the following uses, and,
except for urban renewal uses, such uses shall require the issuance of a special
permit from the Planning Board. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
1. Retail business and consumer services, provided that no more than 25% of the
building gross floor area is retail business and consumer services and provided
further that the remaining building gross floor area is either multifamily
8.2 ZONING 8.3
375:73
dwelling or general office for commercial or professional use or both.
2. All other uses permitted by right or by special permit in Appendix A24 shall be
allowed in the Quincy Center Districts except as provided below in the List of
Prohibited Uses in Quincy Center Districts.
List of Prohibited Uses in Quincy Center Districts
Principal Use
A. Residential Use
• Lodging house
B. Exempt and Institutional Use
• Municipal waste disposal area operated by the City or under contract
to the City
C. Retail Uses
• None
D. Restaurant Uses
• None
E. Miscellaneous Commercial Uses
• Adult use
• Body art establishment
• Nonexempt commercial nursery or greenhouse
F. Motor Vehicle Uses
• Motor vehicle service station
• Motor vehicle general repair
• Motor vehicle sales, service and rental establishments
• Motor vehicle body or paint shop
G. Drive-in Uses
• None
H. Warehouse, Wholesale and Storage Uses
• Wholesale business and storage in roofed structure
• Distribution center, parcel delivery center or delivery warehouse
• Storage warehouse/building or cold storage plant, but not including
storage or bailing of junk, scrap metals, rags, wastepaper or used
rubber
• Open lot storage of new building materials, but not including junk,
scrap metal, rags, wastepaper and similar materials
• Open lot storage of lumber and building materials
• Open lot storage of construction equipment
24. Editor's Note: Appendix A, Table of Use Regulations, is included as an attachment to this chapter.
8.3 QUINCY CODE 8.3
375:74
List of Prohibited Uses in Quincy Center Districts
Principal Use
I. Industrial Uses
• Food and beverage manufacturing, bottling or processing or
commissary
• Assembly or packaging of articles not exceeding 200 pounds,
provided no manufacturing or processing is carried out
• Manufacture, processing, assembly or other industrial operations
• Processing of sand and gravel and the manufacture of bituminous
concrete
• Stonecutting, shaping and finishing in completely enclosed building
• Waste recovery facility (resource recovery plants, solid waste
recovery plants, any transfer station for solid waste or any other
similar facility)
J. Transportation-Related Uses
• Rail freight terminal/storage and yard accessory to railroad
operations, provided that such freight terminals are not less than 300
feet from any residence district
• Water freight terminal, including docks, piers, wharves and the like,
provided that such port facilities are not less than 300 feet from any
residential district
• Truck terminal, yard or building for storage or servicing of cargo
trailers, trucks/buses and parking lot for trucks/buses
Accessory Uses
K. Residential Accessory Uses
• None
L. Nonresidential Accessory Uses
• Repair garage accessory to motor vehicle sales
M. Other Uses
• None
3. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, mixed
uses within a single building or structure (i.e., retail/residential; retail/
commercial office) shall be allowed within the Quincy Center Districts if the
structure conforms to the dimensional requirements set forth in Section 8.3.3
below.
8.3.3. Dimensional requirements. Within the districts, the following dimensional
requirements shall apply:
1. Minimum lot size (square feet): 15,000; 7,500 for urban renewal use.
2. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit, QCD-10 and QCD-15 (square feet): 325;
not applicable to urban renewal use.
8.3 ZONING 8.3
375:75
3. Maximum number of stories, QCD-10: 10.
4. Maximum number of stories, QCD-15: 15, but 20 by special permit for urban
renewal use.
5. Urban renewal use. For an urban renewal use where air rights parcels are
utilized, common ownership of a lot shall not be required.
8.3.4. Off-street parking. For purposes of these requirements, a residential studio unit
and each room in a lodging house shall be considered to be a one-bedroom dwelling
unit. Off-street parking facilities in the Quincy Center Districts shall be provided as
follows:
1. Residential. Minimum number of parking spaces per bedroom within a
dwelling unit where 80% or more of building gross floor area is residential:
1.0.
2. Residential. Minimum number of parking spaces per bedroom within a
dwelling unit where less than 80% of building gross floor area is residential:
0.75 for the first bedroom in a dwelling unit and 0.5 for each additional
bedroom.
3. Assembly. One space per 10 seats.
4. Institutional. One space per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area.
5. Office. One space per 600 square feet of gross floor area; provided, however,
that for new construction with a net increase in gross floor area of 10,000
square feet, parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space for every 400
square feet of office or retail use and at a ratio of one space for every 300
square feet of restaurant use.
6. Urban renewal use other than residential condominium/cooperative units. The
number of spaces shall be as determined by the Planning Board in accordance
with the certification of consistency.
7. Urban renewal use comprised of one or more residential condominium/
cooperative units. One space per dwelling unit.
8.3.5. (Reserved)
8.3.6. Site plan review. Except for urban renewal uses and as provided below, all uses
and all structures within the Quincy Center Districts shall require a special permit.
When the proposed change, addition, alteration or renovation is less than 20% of
the gross square foot area of an existing structure or less than 5,000 square feet of
floor area or lot area, whichever is less, only site plan review shall be required.
8.3.7. Special permit granting authority. The Quincy Planning Board is hereby
designated the special permit granting authority for all matters within the Quincy
Center Districts. The Planning Board is authorized to approve or disapprove:
1. All special permits for uses;
2. All site plans;
8.3 QUINCY CODE 8.3
375:76
3. All applications seeking a finding pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 6; and
4. All special permits for a use or structure in the Floodplain Overlay District.
8.3.8. Special permit and site plan approval criteria. The Planning Board shall not
approve a special permit or site plan unless it finds that all of the following
additional criteria are met:
1. The Planning Board has adopted the Quincy Center District Design
Guidelines, dated November 2005, and the Quincy Center Districts Urban
Revitalization and Redevelopment Plan, dated May 7, 2007, both as may be
amended, for use in implementing this subsection. Those guidelines shall be
provided to every permit applicant, who shall be required to show compliance
with these guidelines as part of its application. The Planning Board shall
include as a part of any permit decision a statement addressing compliance
issues with these guidelines.
2. For mixed-use projects, the applicant must establish that the proposed uses are
to be located within structure(s) in a manner that promotes ease of use and
access and consistency with the surrounding uses/architecture; e.g., retail uses
should front onto a street and new housing shall be consistent with any
adjacent existing residential use in terms of density, style of architecture, etc.
3. Any development should be pedestrian friendly, as the Quincy Center Districts
will have limited vehicular access, and should be consonant with the
development goals for the district. Indicators of compliance with this criterion
include:
a. Ground floors, particularly where they face public streets, public parks,
and publicly accessible pathways, consist of spaces that are actively
inhabited by people, such as retail stores, consumer service businesses
and restaurants, general office, educational or residential uses. Where a
mix of activities is accommodated in a building, the more active uses are
encouraged facing public streets, parks and pathways.
b. Covered parking on the lower floors of a building and on-grade open
parking shall be discouraged where the parking faces a public street,
public park, or publicly accessible pathways.
c. Ground floors should be generally 25% to 50% transparent. The greatest
amounts of glass would be expected for retail uses with lesser amounts
for office, institutional or residential use.
d. Entries to buildings shall be located so as to ensure safe pedestrian
movement across streets, encourage walking as a preferred mode of travel
within the City and to encourage the use of public transit for employment
and other trips. Relating building entries as directly as possible to
crosswalks and to pathways that lead to bus stops and transit stations is
encouraged; buildings shall be located and developed to encourage
pedestrian pathways over the lot and through the districts.
4. Where appropriate, housing shall be a component of any large commercial
8.3 ZONING 8.3
375:77
development.
5. The common areas, both internal and external, shall, where appropriate, be
accessible to the pedestrian public. Restrictions on this access can be
established by the applicant or its successor in interest.
6. The location, dimensional and aesthetic features of the proposed development
shall not be detrimental to the architectural character of the downtown, to the
improvement of traffic access and circulation, and to the creation of active
pedestrian and street life within the districts.
7. There will be no nuisance or serious hazard to vehicles or pedestrians.
8. Adequate and appropriate facilities (including but not limited to parking and
loading) will be provided for the proper operation of the proposed use. Said
facilities shall be located and designed so as to be compatible with neighboring
developments.
9. Historical buildings and places within the Quincy historical district are to be
respected and protected. Special consideration shall be given to the
preservation of historical buildings and places within the Quincy Center
Districts.
8.3.9. Public Art and Place-Making Program. It is the purpose of this subsection to lessen
the visual impact of development and to create a Public Art and Place-Making
Program for new development and redevelopment in the Quincy Urban
Redevelopment District and the Quincy Center Zoning Districts on plots greater
than 1/4 acre. The Public Art and Place-Making Program, through the requirements
of this subsection, shall further the commitment of the City of Quincy to the
aesthetic enrichment of the community through the creation, preservation and
protection of works of art.
8.3.10. Public Art Commission. There is hereby established a Commission to be known
as the "Public Art Commission." The Public Art Commission shall consist of five
members plus an additional two alternates and one nonvoting high school student,
all of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor. A quorum shall consist of three
voting members. The Public Art Commission members shall be nominated as
follows:
1 nomination by the President of the City Council
3 nominations by the Mayor
1 nomination by the Planning Board
2 alternates nominated by the Mayor
1 nonvoting student nominated by the Mayor
8.3.11. Powers and duties of Commission. The Public Art Commission powers and
duties shall include but not be limited to:
1. Adoption of Public Art and Place-Making Program guidelines and
amendments thereto.
8.3 QUINCY CODE 8.3
375:78
2. Authorizing expenditures of $20,000 or less in furtherance of the public art
program.
3. Recommending to the Mayor other expenditures of the Public Art Fund in
excess of $20,000.
4. Establishing an annual administrative budget for the Commission.
5. Establishing an annual calendar which shall include not fewer than six open
public meetings of the Commission.
8.3.12. On-site and off-site contributions. All development, redevelopment, remodeling
or converting greater than 20,000 square feet in gross floor area which is in
nonresidential districts, or within mixed-use or multifamily districts on plots greater
than 1/4 acre within the Quincy Urban Redevelopment District of the Quincy
Center Zoning Districts, shall participate in the Public Art and Place-Making
Program. When construction is phased, the aggregate gross square footage of the
entire project or development shall be added together to determine whether the
twenty-thousand-square-foot threshold is reached. Owners have the three choices
for participating in the Public Art and Place-Making Program as follows:
1. Off-site option. The owner of a development or redevelopment may pay as
mitigation 1% of the development hard costs, exclusive of land acquisition
expenses, to the Commission's Public Art Fund prior to the issuance of a
building permit;
2. On-site option. The owner of a development or redevelopment project may
provide artwork located at the development site equal to or greater than 1% of
the development hard costs, exclusive of land acquisition expenses, for the
project; or
3. The owner of the development and the Public Art Commission may agree to
allocate part of the funding to pay for on-site art and place the remainder of the
contribution into the off-site Public Art Fund.
8.3.13. Public Art Fund. There is hereby created a Public Art Fund administered by the
Public Art Commission which shall consist of all contributions received from
projects as defined under Section 8.3.12. The Public Art Fund shall also include
cash grants and donations to the City for public art and place-making projects from
governmental or private resources and all other funds allocated by the City through
DIF funding or any budgetary process for the provision of public art. The Public
Art Fund shall be used solely for the Commission's administrative budget and
expenses associated with the selection, commissioning, acquisition, transportation,
maintenance, public education, promotion, administration, removal and insurance
of the works of art or in relation thereto.
8.3.14. Public Art and Place-Making Program Guidelines. The Public Art Commission
shall prepare, and from time to time revise, Public Art and Place-Making Program
Guidelines, as part of the Quincy Center District Design Guidelines, which shall
provide guidance for program organization; organizational governance and staffing
responsibilities; procedures for project planning; artist selection; art selection
criteria; art placement criteria; donation; loans and memorials; collection
8.3 ZONING 8.3
375:79
8.4. Planned Unit Development Districts.
management; and administration of the Public Art Fund. Such guidelines shall be
made available to the public.
8.4.1. Permitted uses. Within any Planned Unit Development and Planned Unit
Development 1 District, no buildings or premises shall be used, and no building or
structure shall be permitted, for other than one of the following specified purposes:
1. Detached dwellings occupied by not more than one family, conforming to the
requirements of Residence A Districts, shall be permitted by right.
2. Planned communities under unified ownership or control in those areas of the
City provided with sanitary sewers, disposal facilities, adequate highway
access and public water supply shall be allowed by special permit by the City
Council. Within such planned communities, the location of all residential,
commercial, industrial and governmental uses, school sites, parks,
playgrounds, recreation areas, parking areas and other open spaces shall be
controlled in such a manner as to permit a variety of housing accommodations
and land uses in orderly relationship to one another. All uses permitted by right
or by special permit shall be allowed in a Planned Unit Development District.
3. Public ways and private accessways, with Planning Board approval of a
definitive subdivision plan, of at least fifty-foot width, to land in any district
which is isolated or landlocked or which has inadequate access.
4. The redevelopment of a hospital site. [Added 12-18-2017 by Order No.
2017-189]
8.4.2. Dimensional requirements. In any Planned Unit Development District and Planned
Unit Development 1 District, the following dimensional requirements shall apply
for any development except single-family dwellings which shall conform to the
dimensional requirements of Residence A Districts:
Minimum PUD/PUD 1 size (square feet) 100,000
Minimum PUD/PUD 1 area per dwelling unit (square
feet)
2,000
Minimum open space per dwelling unit (square feet) 100
Maximum floor area ratio 4.0
Maximum number of stories 8
8.4.3. Off-street parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as follows (see
also Section 5.1):
Residence - minimum number of spaces per dwelling
unit
1.25
Assembly - number of seats requiring 1 space 10
Institution - number of square feet requiring 1 space 1,000
Retail - number of square feet requiring 1 space 400
8.3 QUINCY CODE 8.4
375:80
Office - number of square feet requiring 1 space 400
Factory and warehouse - number of square feet requiring
1 space
2,000
8.4.4. Off-street loading. Off-street loading requirements shall be as set forth in Section
5.2.
8.4.5. Location of structures; open space. The proposed location and arrangement of
structures shall not be detrimental to existing or prospective adjacent land uses or
to existing or prospective development of the neighborhood. Open spaces,
including those between structures, shall be protected where necessary by adequate
restrictions or covenants, running with land conveyances or dedications. Every
single-family dwelling shall have access to a public court, walkway or other area
dedicated to public use.
8.4.6. Special permit required. Planned communities as set forth in Section 8.4.1.2 shall
be permitted after submission to the Planning Board in accordance with MGL c.
40A, § 11, and the issuance of a special permit by the City Council. The plans and
descriptions, when approved by a two-thirds vote of all the members of the City
Council in conformance with the standards and regulations set forth in this section,
should constitute the controls placed on the special permit. Any change or
amendment in the plan or written description shall require after submission to the
Planning Board in accordance with MGL c. 40A, § 11, the approval of 2/3 of the
members of the City Council.
8.4.7. Age-restricted housing. In any Planned Unit Development District and Planned
Unit Development 1 District, an age-restricted senior housing facility may be
permitted under this section, provided that the facility satisfies the application and
submittal requirements of this section, and for such age-restricted senior housing
facility the revised dimensional requirements applicable shall be as follows:
Minimum PUD/PUD 1 size 5 acres
Minimum PUD/PUD 1 area per dwelling unit (square
feet)
1,250
The City Council shall approve the form or forms of ownership and management
controls which limit the occupancy to residents who have attained the age of 55
years and which forms may be altered or modified from time to time during the
useful life of the facility so long as the age-restricted limitation is not altered and
so long as no temporary or permanent overnight occupancy for a period in excess
of 14 days by any person who has not attained the age of 55 years, related or not, is
permitted. The spouse of a qualified resident who has attained the age of 55 years
may be exempted from the age-restricted limitation hereby imposed.
8.4.8. Congregate elderly facility. In any Planned Unit Development District and
Planned Unit Development 1 District, a congregate elderly facility may be
permitted, provided that the facility satisfies the application and submittal
requirements of this section.
8.4.9. Congregate elderly facility; dimensional requirements. In addition to the
8.4 ZONING 8.4
375:81
requirements of this section and for such congregate elderly facility, the revised
dimensional requirements applicable shall be as follows:
Minimum PUD/PUD 1 size (square feet) 38,000
Minimum PUD/PUD 1 area per dwelling unit (square
feet)
500
Maximum floor area ratio 2.0
Maximum number of stories 6
Minimum number of parking spaces per dwelling unit 0.5
8.4.10. Congregate elderly facility; special permit. Congregate elderly facilities shall be
permitted after submission to the Planning Board in accordance with MGL c. 40A,
§ 11, and the issuance of a special permit by a two-thirds vote of all members of the
City Council. Any change or amendment in the plan or conditions shall require
approval by a two-thirds vote of all members of the City Council.
1. Each application shall include a development plan with a building profile and
site plan, including existing and proposed topography, public utilities, parking,
streets or ways, landscaping and other site-development-related information.
2. Each application also shall include a vicinity map showing the proposed use in
relation to transit services, grocery stores, parks and open space, community
facilities, medical facilities and a description of proposed management of the
facility and the number and types of services to be provided to the residents.
3. Each application shall also include a market survey performed by a reputable
marketing firm that outlines the need for the proposed elderly housing facility.
8.4.11. Congregate elderly facility; required facilities. Community space and related
equipment shall be required to provide social and recreational opportunities for
facility occupants. Included may be such facilities as game rooms, meeting rooms,
or music or craft rooms. All facilities must provide a doctor's examining room.
8.4.12. Congregate elderly facility; transportation. Each complex must provide a
transportation management plan that should demonstrate private transportation for
all residents of the complex. This may include, but not be limited to, private van
service and taxicab voucher system.
8.4.13. The redevelopment of a site now or formerly serving as a hospital facility shall
be permitted as of right, provided only that the redevelopment includes the reuse of
existing structures, the construction of new structures and related improvements for
the same or similar medical purposes, assisted living, long-term care, senior
independent living or residential uses subject to the provisions herein. Such
redevelopment shall be subject to site plan review by the Planning Board under
Section 9.5, acting as permit granting authority for such redevelopment purposes
hereunder. Any residential component shall be subject to the provisions of Section
7.0 relating to affordable housing. Except as provided in this section, any
redevelopment shall be subject only to the provisions of Section 8.4.14 in regard to
dimensional, parking and loading requirements. [Added 12-18-2017 by Order No.
2017-189]
8.4 QUINCY CODE 8.4
375:82
8.5. Transit-oriented districts. [Added 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-249]
8.4.14. Dimensional, parking and loading requirements. The following requirements
shall be applicable to the redevelopment of a lot under the provisions of this and the
previous section: [Added 12-18-2017 by Order No. 2017-189]
1. Maximum floor area ratio: 2.50.
2. Maximum number of stories: six.
3. Open space: minimum of 20% of the aggregate land area.
4. Off-street parking:
a. Residential: 1.25 spaces per dwelling unit.
b. Senior independent living: 1.00 space per dwelling unit.
c. Assisted living: 0.35 space per unit.
d. Skilled nursing facilities/long-term care: 0.25 space per unit.
e. Institutional: 1.00 space per 1,000 gross square feet of building area.
5. Off-street loading. Off-street loading shall be provided as set forth in Section
5.2.
8.5.1. Purpose.
1. The purpose of this section is:
a. To provide greater opportunity for the construction of quality
developments on and adjacent to land used for transit facilities by
providing flexible guidelines which allow the integration of a variety of
land uses consistent with and taking advantage of such transit uses in one
development;
b. To encourage mixed-use development in areas accessible to public
transit;
c. To provide a predictable, clear and understandable process for the review
of new development within the transit-oriented districts;
d. To promote and create jobs, housing inventory and affordable housing in
conformance with Section 7.1 of this chapter;
e. To enhance the architectural character of the transit-oriented districts;
f. To improve traffic access and circulation;
g. To promote uses within the transit-oriented districts which are
complementary with the nearby transit uses; and
h. To identify and engage in opportunities to collaborate with the public, in
a robust and through public process.
8.4 ZONING 8.5
375:83
2. Transit-oriented districts shall be overlay districts on the Zoning Map and, for
any land within a transit-oriented district, a developer may choose to conform
either to all the controls which govern the underlying zoning district or to the
transit-oriented district, and if electing the transit-oriented district, such
development shall be subject to the development controls and processes set
forth in this Section 8.5.
3. The following transit-oriented district overlay districts provided for by this
Section 8.5 and shown on the maps attached to and adopted with this Section
8.5 are hereby established: at the North Quincy Station of the Massachusetts
Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA).
4. This Section 8.5 does not establish a transit-oriented district at the Quincy
Center Station, Wollaston Station or Quincy Adams Station of the MBTA.
8.5.2. Uses. Within transit-oriented districts, buildings and premises may be used for
TOD permitted uses subject to compliance with the requirements of Section 8.5.3.
TOD prohibited uses shall be prohibited in transit-oriented districts. Any other use
may be permitted in a transit-oriented district with a special permit from the
Planning Board pursuant to Section 8.5.6.
8.5.3. Dimensional requirements. Within transit-oriented districts, the following
dimensional requirements shall apply:
1. Minimum lot size: one acre.
2. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 325 square feet.
3. Maximum number of stories: eight.
4. A development parcel may consist of multiple legal parcels which may be
owned by different parties and which are not required to be contiguous.
5. There shall be no minimum or maximum dimensional requirements in transitoriented
districts other than as set forth in this Section 8.5.3. Upon the issuance
of a certification of consistency for a proposed development in a transitoriented
district, the dimensions reflected on the reviewed site plan shall be
deemed to be in compliance with this section.
6. The dimensional requirements in a transit-oriented district may be reduced or
modified as permitted by the Quincy Planning Board in accordance with its
consistency review, if the Quincy Planning Board determines that such a
reduction or modification is consistent with the purpose of transit-oriented
districts and this Section 8.5.
8.5.4. Off-street parking. For purposes of these requirements, a residential studio unit
shall be considered to be a one bedroom dwelling unit. Off-street parking facilities
in transit-oriented districts shall be provided at the following minimum amounts:
1. Residential: one per dwelling unit.
2. Retail: three per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
3. Restaurant: one per 10 seats.
8.5 QUINCY CODE 8.5
375:84
4. Assembly: one per 10 seats.
5. Institutional: one per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area.
6. Office: one per 600 square feet of gross floor area; provided, however, that for
new construction with a net increase in gross floor area of 10,000 square feet,
parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space for every 400 square feet.
7. Shared parking. Because of the proximity of an MBTA transit station in a
transit-oriented district, where a mix of uses is proposed within a development
parcel and where the uses in question have peak user demands at different
times, up to 50% of the required amount of minimum parking set forth in this
Section 8.5.4 may be provided via a shared parking arrangement.
8.5.5. Consistency review. All development and redevelopment of all uses and all
structures within transit-oriented districts (if the owner or developer of the proposed
development or redevelopment has elected to permit such development or
redevelopment in a transit-oriented district and Sections 8.5.1 through 8.5.4 rather
than the underlying zoning district) shall require a determination by the Quincy
Planning Board of consistency with this Section 8.5. Development or
redevelopment in a transit-oriented district is exempt from the requirements of
Section 8.1 of this chapter regarding development in the Floodplain Overlay
District, including any requirement for a special permit; the treatment of impacts on
the floodplain shall instead be taken into consideration by the Planning Board
during its consistency review of the applicable transit-oriented district
development.
8.5.6. Special permit granting authority. Where the following is otherwise required for a
development in a transit-oriented district (which development or redevelopment is
being permitted pursuant to the transit-oriented overlay district and Sections 8.5.1
through 8.5.4), the Quincy Planning Board is hereby designated as the special
permit granting authority for such matters within transit-oriented districts:
1. All applications seeking a finding pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 6; and
2. All applications for special permits for use pursuant to Section 8.5.2 above.
8.5.7. Special permit and consistency review criteria. The Planning Board shall not
approve a special permit or make a determination of consistency for a project in a
transit-oriented district proceeding under a transit-oriented district and this Section
8.5 unless it finds that all of the following criteria have been met:
1. The project conforms with the TOD design guidelines.
2. For mixed-use projects, the applicant must establish that the proposed uses are
to be located within structure(s) in a manner that promotes ease of use and
access.
3. Where appropriate, housing shall be a component of any large-scale
commercial development.
4. Where appropriate, the common areas of the development, both internal and
external, shall be accessible to the public. Reasonable restrictions on public
8.5 ZONING 8.5
375:85
access as appropriate can be established by the applicant or its successor in
interest. This concept shall not apply to common areas exclusively serving the
residents of residential developments.
5. The location of buildings and features, dimensions of the site and the
development, traffic impacts and aesthetic features of the proposed
development shall not be detrimental to vehicular access and circulation within
the site and the area leading to and surrounding the development parcel.
6. There will be no nuisance or serious hazard to vehicles or pedestrians.
7. Adequate and appropriate facilities (including but not limited to trash, snow
storage or removal, parking and loading) will be provided for the proper
operation of the proposed use.
8.5.8. Prevailing wage. Any development under this transit-oriented district shall be
required to compensate workers no less than the current prevailing wage.
8.5 QUINCY CODE 8.5
375:86
SECTION 9.0
Administration and Procedures
9.1. Enforcement; permits; violations and penalties.
9.1.1. Director of Inspectional Services. The Director of Inspectional Services shall
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, including the receiving of
applications, the inspection of premises and the issuing of building permits for the
construction, alteration or relocation of building and structures.
9.1.2. Building permit. No building or structure shall be erected, added to or structurally
altered until a building permit therefor has been issued by the Director of
Inspectional Services. The Director of Inspectional Services shall return to the
applicant one set of the plans submitted for a building permit, after marking such
copy either as approved or disapproved. One set of the plans and application for a
building permit shall be retained in the office of the Director of Inspectional
Services and shall be available during the normal working hours of said Department
for public inspection. Whenever such permit is refused, because of some provision
of this chapter, the reason for such refusal shall be clearly stated in writing by the
Director of Inspectional Services. In the event of doubt whether a building permit
should be issued in any particular case, the Director of Inspectional Services shall
deny the application therefor.
1. Pursuant to the State Building Code, the Director of Inspectional Services may
require such plans and specifications as may be necessary to determine
compliance with all pertinent laws of the commonwealth and may request
advisory reviews by other municipal boards and officials.
9.1.3. Enforcement. The Director of Inspectional Services shall not grant a permit for the
construction, alteration or relocation of any building or structure except where the
provisions of this chapter have been complied with, nor shall any municipal officer
issue any permit or license for a new use of a building, structure or land which use
would be in violation of this chapter or amendments thereof. If the Director of
Inspectional Services shall find that any of the provisions of this chapter are being
violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation,
indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it.
He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures, or work
related thereto, or removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions,
alterations or structural changes, or shall take any other action authorized by this
chapter to ensure compliance with its provisions.
9.1.4. Occupancy permit. No land shall be occupied or used and no building or structure,
erected or structurally altered, shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any
purpose until an occupancy permit has been issued by the Director of Inspectional
Services stating that all buildings and use of premises comply with the provisions
of this chapter and the Building Code of the City. An occupancy permit becomes
void immediately upon termination of the use for which it was issued. [Amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
1. A record of all occupancy permits shall be kept on file by the Director of
Inspectional Services and certified copies shall be furnished on request to any
9.1 ZONING 9.1
375:87
9.2. Zoning Board of Appeals.
person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the premises affected, upon
payment of the required fee.
9.1.5. Grievances. Any person aggrieved by a violation of any portion of this chapter
may formally request the Director of Inspectional Services in writing to enforce the
provisions hereof, and the Director of Inspectional Services shall act upon such
request pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 7.
9.1.6. Appeal to Zoning Board of Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any action taken or
determination made by the Director of Inspectional Services in the administration
of this chapter may appeal within 30 days thereafter to the Zoning Board of Appeals
by filing with the City Clerk a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof and
filing an application to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
9.1.7. Penalties. The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter, of any of the
conditions under which a permit is issued, or of any decision rendered by the
Zoning Board of Appeals, any special permit granting authority, or the site plan
approval board shall be $300 for each offense. Each day that each violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
9.2.1. Establishment. There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals as provided by MGL c.
40A, § 12, as amended, which shall act on all matters within its jurisdiction under
this chapter in the manner prescribed in such section. The Board shall consist of
five members to be appointed by the Mayor. All members of the Board shall be
residents of the City; one member shall be an attorney at law and one shall be either
an architect, engineer or master builder. The terms shall be arranged so that one
member is appointed on the first Monday of each February for a term of five years.
Any vacancy in the Board shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term.
There shall also be three associate members of the Zoning Board of Appeals who
shall be appointed in like manner and have the same qualifications as the regular
members of the Board, but for a term of three years. In case of an unfilled vacancy,
inability to act, or interest on the part of a member of such Board, the Chairperson
shall designate one of the associate members to take the place of such member.
9.2.2. Powers. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall exercise the powers and perform the
duties prescribed for a Zoning Board of Appeals under the provisions of MGL c.
40A and c. 40B, or any amendments thereto. Any action of such Board, under such
sections, shall be in accordance with and subject to the terms thereof. The Board's
powers are as follows:
1. To hear and decide applications for special permits and findings. Unless
otherwise specified herein, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall serve as the
special permit granting authority, to act in all matters in accordance with the
provisions of Section 9.4, or as otherwise specified.
2. To hear and decide appeals or petitions for variances from the terms of this
chapter, with respect to particular land or structures, as set forth in MGL c.
40A, § 10. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant use variances in all
districts.
9.1 QUINCY CODE 9.2
375:88
9.3. Planning Board.
9.4. Special permits.
3. To hear and decide appeals taken by any person aggrieved by reason of his
inability to obtain a permit or enforcement action from any administrative
officer under the provisions of MGL c. 40A, §§ 7, 8 and 15.
4. To hear and decide comprehensive permits for construction of low- or
moderate-income housing by a public agency or limited dividend or nonprofit
corporation, as set forth in MGL c. 40B, §§ 20 to 23.
9.2.3. Procedures. Applications shall be filed in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Zoning Board of Appeals. An application shall not be deemed
complete until all copies of required information and documentation have been filed
with the Zoning Board of Appeals.
9.2.4. Conditions. Special permits and variances may be granted with such reasonable
conditions, safeguards, or limitations on time or use, including performance
guarantees, as the special permit or permit granting authority may deem necessary
to serve the purposes of this chapter.
9.2.5. Regulations. The Zoning Board of Appeals may adopt rules and regulations for the
administration of its powers.
9.2.6. Fees. The Zoning Board of Appeals may adopt reasonable administrative fees and
technical review fees for petitions for variances, administrative appeals, and
applications for comprehensive permits.
9.3.1. Establishment. An appointed Planning Board of five members is hereby
established.
9.3.2. Powers. The Planning Board shall have the following powers:
1. When so designated, to hear and decide applications for special permits as
provided in this chapter, subject to any general or specific rules therein
contained and subject to any appropriate conditions and safeguards imposed
by the Board.
2. To review applications for site plan approval pursuant to Section 9.5 of this
chapter.
3. To issue a certificate of consistency pursuant to Section 8.3 of this chapter.
9.3.3. Rules and regulations. The Planning Board shall adopt rules and regulations not
inconsistent with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance for conduct of its business
and otherwise carrying out the purposes of said MGL c. 40A and shall file a copy
of such rules in the office of the City Clerk.
9.3.4. Fees. The Planning Board may adopt reasonable administrative fees and technical
review fees for applications for special permits and site plan approval.
9.4.1. Special permit granting authority. The City Council, Zoning Board of Appeals, or
9.2 ZONING 9.4
375:89
the Planning Board, where designated herein, shall serve as the special permit
granting authority.
9.4.2. Criteria. Special permits shall be granted by the special permit granting authority,
unless otherwise specified herein, only upon its written determination that the
proposed use or structure(s) shall not cause substantial detriment to the
neighborhood or the City, taking into account the characteristics of the site and of
the proposal in relation to that site. In addition to any specific factors that may be
set forth in this chapter, such determination shall include consideration of each of
the following:
1. Community needs served by the proposal;
2. Traffic and pedestrian flow and safety, including parking and loading;
3. Adequacy of utilities and other public services;
4. Neighborhood character and social structures;
5. Impacts on the natural environment; and
6. Potential fiscal impact, including impact on City services, tax base, and
employment.
9.4.3. Procedures. Applications shall be filed in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the special permit granting authority. An application shall not be
deemed complete until all copies of required information and documentation have
been filed with the special permit granting authority.
9.4.4. Conditions. Special permits may be granted with such reasonable conditions,
safeguards, or limitations on time or use, including performance guarantees, as the
special permit granting authority may deem necessary to serve the purposes of this
chapter.
9.4.5. Plans. An applicant for a special permit shall submit a plan in substantial
conformance with the requirements of Section 9.5 herein.
9.4.6. Lapse. Special permits shall lapse if a substantial use thereof or construction
thereunder has not begun, except for good cause, within 24 months following the
filing of the special permit approval (plus such time required to pursue or await the
determination of an appeal referred to in MGL c. 40A, § 17, from the grant thereof)
with the City Clerk.
9.4.7. Regulations. The special permit granting authority may adopt rules and regulations
for the administration of this section.
9.4.8. Fees. The special permit granting authority may adopt reasonable administrative
fees and technical review fees for applications for special permits.
9.4.9. Minimum mandatory conditions. In addition to any other conditions that may be
required pursuant to Section 9.4.4 it shall be a material condition of this special
permit that any construction manager, general contractor or other lead or primary
contractor, or any entity functioning in any such capacity, and any other contractor
or subcontractor of any tier or other person or entity that is engaged to perform the
9.4 QUINCY CODE 9.4
375:90
9.5. Site plan review.
construction work on the property that is the subject of this special permit shall
comply with all laws applicable to the compensation of workers, including but not
limited to the provisions of MGL c. 149, MGL c. 152 and Chapter 58 of the Acts of
2006. [Added 2-6-2017 by Order No. 2016-074]
9.4.10. Compliance/remedies. If any person or entity that is subject to the foregoing fails
to comply with any such laws applicable to work on the project and the Director of
Inspectional Services is notified of, and confirms, such failure, the Director of
Inspectional Services or his designee shall take such steps as are reasonably
necessary, up to and including the issuance of a stop-work order directed to the
party so failing, or to the general contractor relative to all work on the project, in
order to achieve expedited compliance. Such stop-work order shall remain in effect
until full compliance is achieved. [Added 2-6-2017 by Order No. 2016-074]
9.5.1. Applicability. Except in the Quincy Center Districts, the following types of
activities and uses require site plan review by the Planning Board:
1. All multifamily or apartment development in any zoning district which results
in a dwelling with three or more dwelling units.
2. All construction of a new nonresidential structure or expansion of an existing
nonresidential structure which results in a total of more than 5,000 gross
square feet but less than 9,999 gross square feet.
3. Construction or expansion of a parking lot which results in a total of more than
10 spaces for a municipal, institutional, commercial, industrial, or multifamily
structure or purpose.
4. Any new structure or alteration of an existing structure or change of use in any
structure for an entity claiming exemption under MGL c. 40A, § 3; provided,
however, that site plan review shall not be applicable to any municipally
owned or operated preschool, elementary school, middle school, or high
school. Site plan review shall be limited in such circumstances to the
imposition of reasonable regulations concerning the bulk and height of
structures and determining yard sizes, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking
and building coverage requirements.
5. Wind facilities that do not exceed 250 feet in height as set forth in Section 6.7
herein.
6. Commercial storage of boats, unenclosed.
9.5.2. Procedures. Site plan review shall require a public hearing in accordance with the
procedures set forth in MGL c. 40A, §§ 9 and 11. Applicants shall submit eight full
and 10 reduced copies of the site plan to the Planning Board for review and
circulation by the Planning Board to the City Council, Health Commissioner,
Department of Public Works Commissioner, Director of Inspectional Services, City
Engineer, and Conservation Commission for their advisory review and comments.
The Planning Board shall review and act upon the site plan, with such conditions as
may be deemed appropriate, within 90 days of its receipt and notify the applicant of
9.4 ZONING 9.5
375:91
its decision. The decision of the Planning Board shall be upon a majority of the
Board as constituted, shall be in writing, and shall be filed in the office of the City
Clerk. No building permit or occupancy permit shall be issued by the Director of
Inspectional Services without the written approval of the site plan by the Planning
Board, or unless 90 days lapse from the date of the submittal of the site plan without
action by the Planning Board. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
1. Application for building permit. An application for a building permit to
perform work as set forth in Section 9.5.1 available as of right shall be
accompanied by an approved site plan.
2. Where the Planning Board serves as the special permit granting authority for
proposed work, it shall consolidate its site plan review and special permit
procedures.
3. The applicant may request, and the Planning Board may grant by majority
vote, an extension of the time limits set forth herein.
4. No deviation from an approved site plan shall be permitted without
modification thereof.
9.5.3. Preparation of plans; contents. Applicants are invited to submit a pre-application
sketch of the proposed project to the Planning Board and to schedule a comment
period at a regular meeting of the Planning Board. Site plans shall be submitted on
sheets 24 inches by 36 inches. Plans shall be prepared by a registered professional
engineer, registered land surveyor, architect, or landscape architect, as appropriate.
Dimensions and scales shall be adequate to determine that all requirements are met
and to make a complete analysis and evaluation of the proposal. All plans shall have
a minimum scale of one inch equals 20 feet. The contents of the site plan are as
follows:
1. Six separate plans prepared at a scale of one inch equals 20 feet or such other
scale as may be approved by the Planning Board. The plans are as follows:
a. Locus plan, at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, showing the entire
project and its relation to existing areas, buildings and roads for a distance
of 1,000 feet from the project boundaries or such other distance as may
be approved or required by the Planning Board.
b. Site layout, which shall contain the boundaries of the lot(s) in the
proposed development, proposed structures, drives, parking, fences,
walls, walks, outdoor lighting, loading facilities, areas for snow storage
after plowing, and all proposed recreational facilities and open space
areas.
c. Topography and drainage plan, which shall contain the existing and
proposed final topography at two-foot intervals and plans for handling
stormwater drainage, and all wetlands including floodplain areas.
d. Utility plan, which shall include all facilities for refuse and sewage
disposal or storage of all wastes, the location of all hydrants, fire alarm
and fire-fighting facilities on and adjacent to the site, and electric, water,
9.5 QUINCY CODE 9.5
375:92
gas, telephone, and cable.
e. Architectural plan, which shall include the ground floor plan and
architectural elevations of all proposed buildings and a color rendering.
f. Landscaping plan, showing the limits of work, existing tree lines, and all
proposed landscape features and improvements, including screening,
planting areas with size and type of stock for each shrub or tree, and
including proposed erosion control measures.
2. The site plan shall be accompanied by a written statement indicating the
estimated time required to complete the proposed project and any and all
phases thereof. There shall be submitted a written estimate showing in detail
the costs of all site improvements planned.
3. A written summary of the contemplated projects shall be submitted with the
site plan indicating, where appropriate, the number of dwelling units to be built
and the acreage in residential use, the evidence of compliance with parking
and off-street loading requirements, the forms of ownership contemplated for
the property and a summary of the provisions of any ownership or
maintenance thereof, identification of all land that will become common or
public land, and any other evidence necessary to indicate compliance with this
chapter.
4. The site plan shall be accompanied by drainage calculations by a registered
professional engineer. Storm drainage design must conform to City of Quincy
Stormwater Ordinance.25
5. Certification that the proposal is in compliance with the provisions, if
applicable, of the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Massachusetts
Architectural Access Board. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
9.5.4. Waiver. The Planning Board, at its discretion, may waive any technical
requirement of this Section 9.5 for a project which is unusually simple or small.
Such waiver may be granted prior to submittal or after submittal during the public
hearing. The Planning Board may define a minor site plan in its rules and
regulations and specify waivers to be granted therein.
9.5.5. Approval. Site plan approval shall be granted upon determination by the Planning
Board that the plan meets the following objectives. The Planning Board may
impose reasonable conditions at the expense of the applicant, including but not
limited to those set forth in Section 9.5.6, to promote these objectives. Any new
building construction or other site alteration shall provide adequate access to each
structure for fire and service equipment and adequate provision for utilities and
stormwater drainage consistent with the functional requirements of the Planning
Board's Subdivision Rules and Regulations and/or the Quincy Stormwater
Ordinance.26 New building construction or other site alteration shall be designed in
the site plan, after considering the qualities of the specific location, the proposed
land use, the design of building form, grading, egress points, and other aspects of
25. Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Stormwater Management.
26. Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Stormwater Management.
9.5 ZONING 9.5
375:93
the development, so as to:
1. Minimize the volume of cut and fill, the number of removed trees six inches
caliper or larger, the length of removed stone walls, the area of wetland
vegetation displaced, the extent of stormwater flow increase from the site, soil
erosion, and threat of air and water pollution.
2. Maximize pedestrian and vehicular safety both on the site and egressing from
it.
3. Minimize obstruction of scenic views from publicly accessible locations.
4. Minimize visual intrusion by controlling the visibility of parking, storage, or
other outdoor service areas viewed from public ways or premises residentially
used or zoned.
5. Minimize glare from headlights and lighting intrusion.
6. Minimize unreasonable departure from the character, materials, and scale of
buildings in the vicinity, as viewed from public ways and places; minimize
interference with architectural details in the placement or installation of
fixtures, including signs; maximize orientation of the main facade of buildings
to the street providing frontage.
7. Minimize contamination of groundwater from on-site wastewater disposal
systems or operations on the premises involving the use, storage, handling, or
containment of hazardous substances.
8. Ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including parking and
landscaping.
9.5.6. Existing residential structures. All new construction, or construction of any
addition where the gross floor area of an existing residential structure is increased
by no less than 50%, shall be subject to and in conformance with the following
guidelines:
1. The structure shall be oriented to the main street.
2. Primary massing of building should be located along the street facade.
3. The structure shall not have any blank exterior walls.
4. Wherever possible, garage doors shall be oriented away from the main street.
5. Window and door treatments shall be rhythmic in design.
6. Roofs shall not be excessively pitched.
7. Wherever possible, parking areas shall be located to the rear and side of the
structure.
8. Parking areas and HVAC equipment shall be appropriately screened.
9. Materials shall be subject to the review of the Director of Inspectional Services
and compatible with the general character of the neighborhood and subject to
9.5 QUINCY CODE 9.5
375:94
9.6. Zoning Administrator.
The City of Quincy hereby authorizes the appointment of a Zoning Administrator,
who unless otherwise provided by Charter shall be appointed by the Zoning Board of
Appeals, subject to confirmation by the City Council, to serve at the pleasure of the
Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to such qualifications as may be established by the
City Council. The Zoning Board of Appeals may delegate to said Zoning Administrator
some of its powers and duties by a concurring vote of all except one member. Any person
aggrieved by a decision of order of the Zoning Administrator, whether or not previously
a party to the proceeding, or any municipal office or board, may appeal to the Zoning
Board of Appeals, as provided in MGL c. 40A, § 14, within 30 days after the decision
of the Zoning Administrator has been filed in the office of the City Clerk. Any appeal,
application or petition filed with said Zoning Administrator as to which no decision has
issued within 35 days from the date of filing shall be deemed denied and shall be subject
to appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals as provided in MGL c. 40A, § 8. The Zoning
Administrator shall serve without compensation.
any design guidelines subsequently adopted by the Quincy City Council and
approved by the Mayor, in effect at the time of the filing of an application for
a building permit.
9.5.7. Lapse. Site plan approval shall lapse after two years from the grant thereof if a
substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced except for good cause. Such
approval may, for good cause, be extended in writing by the Planning Board upon
the written request of the applicant.
9.5.8. Regulations; fees. The Planning Board may adopt and from time to time amend
reasonable regulations for the administration of these site plan guidelines. The
Planning Board may adopt reasonable administrative fees and technical review fees
for site plan review.
9.5.9. Appeal. Any decision of the Planning Board pursuant to this Section 9.5 shall be
appealed in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 40A, § 17, to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
9.5 ZONING 9.6
375:95

SECTION 10.0
Definitions
10.1. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings given herein unless a contrary intention clearly appears.
10.2. Terms defined.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE — A customary building or use on the same lot
with, and clearly incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure, except that offsite,
off-street parking located in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.1 shall be
considered as an accessory use.[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
ADULT DAY-CARE FACILITY — A social day-care (SDC) program or adult day
health program as those terms are defined by the commonwealth's Executive Office of
Elder Affairs (EOEA), serving not more than 15 persons in the home.
ADULT USE ESTABLISHMENTS — Shall include and be defined as follows:
ADULT BOOKSTORE – An establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its stock-in-trade printed matter, books, magazines, picture periodicals,
motion-picture films, videocassettes, computer compact disks, computer disks or
diskettes, or coin-operated motion-picture machines for sale, barter or rental which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing
or relating to "sexual conduct" as that term is defined in MGL c. 272, § 31, or an
establishment having for sale sexual devices, which shall mean any artificial human
penis, vagina or anus or other device primarily designed, promoted or marketed to
physically stimulate or manipulate the human genitals, pubic area or anal area,
including dildos, penisators, vibrators, penis rings, erection enlargement or prolonging
creams or other preparations, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to
the sale or display of such materials. [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS – Establishments which
feature live entertainment which consists of entertainers engaging in "sexual conduct"
or "nudity" as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
1. Verbs used in the present tense include the future; the singular noun includes the
plural, and the plural the singular.
2. The word "building" includes "structure" and shall be construed as being followed
by the words "or part thereof." The word "occupied" includes the words "designed,
arranged or intended to be occupied."
3. Where the verb "use" is employed, it shall be construed as if followed by the words
"or is intended, arranged, designed, built, altered, converted, rented or leased to be
used."
4. The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
5. All distances and areas refer to measurements in a horizontal plane.
10.1 ZONING 10.2
375:97
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER – An enclosed building with a
capacity for fewer than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "sexual
conduct" as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER – An enclosed building with a capacity of
50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "sexual conduct" as defined in
MGL c. 272, § 31, for observation by patrons therein.
SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT PORTION – At least that portion of:
(i) Retail sales accounting for at least 25% of gross sales;
(ii) Merchandise accounting for at least 25% of total merchandise available for
sales; or
(iii) Shelf space and display space which when combined is in excess of 80 square
feet.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING ORDINANCE — A local ordinance that requires
developers, as part of any application to obtain a special permit or variance to build
residential housing projects, to assist the City of Quincy in providing affordable housing
units.27
AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST COMMITTEE — An independent entity created
by the City of Quincy to administer affordable housing in the City of Quincy, including
housing units, land, property or funds contributed by developers for the creation of
affordable housing. The Affordable Housing Trust Committee shall have the powers
and authority granted to that Committee in the Affordable Housing Ordinance, Section
7.1.[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND — A fund into which any moneys, land,
property or housing units received by the Affordable Housing Trust Committee pursuant
to Section 7.1 may be deposited. Such moneys, land, property or housing units shall be
utilized solely as described in Section 7.1, and the Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall
be administered and governed in accordance with the provisions of Section 7.1.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS — Single-family or multifamily residential
dwelling units under any form of ownership and management which by permit or
variance condition, deed restrictions, covenants, lease conditions, and/or occupancy
agreements limit residents to income eligible households at the time of occupancy.
Income eligible households shall be defined by the Affordable Housing Trust Committee
on an annual basis. In defining income eligible households the Affordable Housing
Trust Committee shall seek to provide affordable housing to low- and moderate-income
families in accordance with Section 7.1.
AGE-RESTRICTED SENIOR HOUSING FACILITY — A multifamily residential
environment under any form of ownership and management which, by deed restrictions,
covenants, lease conditions, and/or occupancy agreements, limits residents to occupants
who have attained the age of 55 years.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL or VETERINARY FACILITY — Commercial medical facilities
for keeping animals to be treated, in treatment or recovering from treatment, in accord
27. Editor's Note: See § 7.1, Affordable housing.
10.2 QUINCY CODE 10.2
375:98
with normal veterinary practice as established by the Massachusetts Board of
Registration in Veterinary Medicine.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — Facility licensed pursuant to MGL c. 19D.
BASEMENT—The portion of a building that is partly underground and which has more
than 1/2 its height measured from finished floor to finished ceiling above the average
finished grade of the ground immediately adjoining the building.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — The providing of room and breakfast in a dwelling to
not more than three transient guests for remuneration. There shall be no more than
two persons per room. There shall be adequate off-street parking for residents and
guests.[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
BOARDER — An individual other than a member of the family occupying a dwelling
unit who, for a consideration, is furnished sleeping accommodations, meals, and may be
provided personal care.
BOARDINGHOUSE — See "lodging house."[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
BUILDING—A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, having a roof,
to form a structure for the shelter of persons, animals or property. For the purpose of this
definition, "roof" shall include an awning or similar covering, whether or not permanent
in nature.
BUILDING COVERAGE—The aggregate ground floor area of all buildings on the lot,
including accessory buildings but excluding unroofed terraces and steps and cornices,
eaves or gutters projecting not more than 30 inches, expressed as a percentage of the lot
area.
CERTIFICATION OF CONSISTENCY — A determination made by the Planning
Board with respect to the consistency of the design, parking elements, and other
components of:[Amended 11-21-2016 by Order No. 2016-249]
CHILD CARE CENTER — A child care center or school-aged child care program,
as those terms are defined in MGL c. 15D, § 1A.[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
CLUB, PRIVATE NONPROFIT — A building or portion thereof or an area which
is used to meet the social and recreational needs of a nonprofit group or organization
to which membership is limited or controlled, with or without the sale of alcoholic
beverages.[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
COMMERCIAL NURSERY — Land or greenhouse used to raise flowers, shrubs, and
plants for sale not otherwise exempt by MGL c. 40A, § 3.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION, INDOOR — Theaters, concert halls, and cinemas,
where noise is confined to the building, and there is no adult entertainment.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION, OUTDOOR — Drive-in theater, golf course/driving
range, bathing beach, sports club, horseback riding stable, boathouse, game preserve,
An urban renewal use with the Urban Renewal Plan in accordance with the
procedures set forth in the Urban Renewal Plan; or
1.
2. A proposed project in a transit-oriented district with the provisions of Section 8.5.
10.2 ZONING 10.2
375:99
marina or other commercial recreation carried on in whole or in part outdoors, except
those activities more specifically designated in this chapter.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A vehicle registered with the commonwealth as a
commercial vehicle or a vehicle with markings or signage to indicate that it is used for a
commercial purpose.
CONGREGATE ELDERLY FACILITY — A noninstitutional residential shared living
environment which integrates shelter and services needed by the functionally impaired
or socially isolated elder who does not require the constant supervision or intensive
health care services as provided in an institution. The shared living environment shall
include at least the following: (1) shared kitchen facilities; and (2) shared dining
facilities.
CONTRACTOR'S YARD — Premises used by a building contractor or subcontractor
for storage of equipment and supplies, fabrication of subassemblies, and parking of
wheeled equipment.
DISTRIBUTION CENTER OR FACILITY —A facility for the movement of products,
generally between storage and retail locations.
DRIVE-IN, RETAIL — A retail or consumer service establishment where a motorist
does not have to leave his vehicle, including any such establishment that provides drivethrough
window service for retail sales.
DWELLING — A building designed for occupancy as the living quarters for one or
more families, but not a trailer or mobile home.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING – A building designed for occupancy as a residence
and substantially separated by side yards from any other structure except accessory
buildings.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING – A building designed for occupancy as a residence for
two families, each occupying a single dwelling unit.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING – A building or structure designed for occupancy as
a residence by more than two families, but not including: attached dwellings; an
apartment house.
DWELLING UNIT – One or more rooms forming a habitable unit for one family and
complete and independent housekeeping facilities. Where a dwelling has more than
one kitchen, the burden of proof shall be upon the owner to show that the premises
constitutes not more than one dwelling unit.
EDUCATIONAL USE, NONEXEMPT — A facility providing educational services,
such as a trade, professional or other school conducted as a private gainful business,
dance studio or a martial arts classroom, but excluding noisy accessory uses, and not
exempt pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 3.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Services provided by a public service corporation or by
governmental agencies through erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance of
gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or distribution systems and collection,
communication, supply, or disposal systems, whether underground or overhead, but
not including wireless communications facilities. Facilities necessary for the provision
of essential services include poles, wires, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire
alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment in
10.2 QUINCY CODE 10.2
375:100
connection therewith. Included are transformer stations, substations, pumping stations
(except as an accessory use), and telephone exchanges.[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order
No. 2020-012]
FAMILY — One or more persons related within the first degree of kindred, including
domestic employees, occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit,
provided that a group of four or more persons who are not related by blood or marriage
shall not be deemed to constitute a family.
FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME—Any private residence operating a facility as defined
in MGL c. 15D, § 1A.[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME, LARGE — Any private residence operating a facility
as defined in MGL c. 15D, § 1A.[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
FARM STAND, EXEMPT — Facilities for the sale of produce and wine and dairy
products, provided that during the months of June, July, August and September of every
year, or during the harvest season of the primary crop, the majority of such products for
sale, based on either gross sales dollars or volume, have been produced by the owner of
the land containing more than five acres in area on which the facility is located.
FINDING — The simple majority vote of the Zoning Board of Appeals or the decision
of its designated Zoning Administrator, where applicable.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The ratio of the total gross floor area of a building or
buildings on one lot to the total area of the lot.
FREIGHT TERMINAL — A structure or area where freight brought by some means of
transportation is stored for routing and reshipment.
FUNERAL HOME — Facility for the conducting of funerals and related activities such
as embalming.
GENERAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Establishments for trades and crafts
which require manual dexterity, including but not limited to shops such as the following:
plumbers, electricians, painters, paperhangers, upholsterers, sign painters, and
monument works.
GREENHOUSE — Building with roof and sides made largely of glass or other
transparent material in which temperature and humidity are regulated for the cultivation
of plants for sale, not otherwise exempted by MGL c. 40A, § 3.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of a building, excluding areas used for accessory garage purposes and such basement or
cellar areas as are devoted exclusively to uses accessory to the operation of the building.
All horizontal dimensions shall be taken from the faces of walls, excluding unenclosed
balconies. It shall include the horizontal area at each floor level devoted to stairwells and
elevator shafts. Notwithstanding the first sentence of the "gross floor area" definition, the
exclusion granted for accessory garage purposes shall not apply to either the Residence
B or Business A Zoning Districts.
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT (GVW) — Applies when classifying trucks. "Gross
vehicle weight" is the maximum loaded weight of a truck. It includes the actual weight
of the truck and the maximum cargo weight. The rates contemplate the fact that many
trucks, especially pickups, are only occasionally fully loaded.
10.2 ZONING 10.2
375:101
HALF STORY — Any story which is under a pitched roof, where the point of
intersection of the rafters and the face of the wall is less than three feet above the floor
level.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING—The vertical distance measured from the finished ceiling of
the top story to a point at the finished grade measured at the average grade plane at six
feet from the foundation.
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use which by custom has been carried on
entirely within a dwelling unit and is incidental and subordinate to the dwelling use. In
connection with such use, there shall be no retail sale of merchandise on the premises.
Home occupations shall not include barbershops, commercial stables or kennels, motor
vehicle repair or service, contractor's or landscaper's yards, or teaching of more than
three pupils simultaneously and, in the case of musical instruction, more than one pupil
at a time.
HOTEL, INN or MOTEL — A building designed or used for paying guests, primarily
the temporary abode of persons who have their residence elsewhere, who are lodged with
or without meals, and in which major provision for cooking may be made in a central
kitchen but may not be in the individual rooms or suites.
INCLUSIONARY PROJECT — A project subject to the provisions of Section 7.1.1 in
which affordable dwelling units are required.
JUNK—Worn out, cast off or discarded articles or materials which have been collected
or stored for salvage, destruction or conversion to some use, but not including articles or
material which, unaltered or unchanged, and without further reconditioning, can be used
for its original purpose as readily as when new.
KENNEL — Facilities for keeping three or more animals three months old or older on
a single premises, whether maintained for breeding, boarding, sale, training, hunting, or
other purposes, and including any shop where animals are customarily kept for sale.
LABORATORY, RESEARCH — Laboratory or research establishments including
biotechnology companies, but excluding laboratories categorized as Level 4 by the
National Institutes for Health.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — Manufacturing assembly, reconditioning and
processing plant of the following types of industries: food and kindred products, apparel,
electronics and electrical products, furniture and fixtures, and primary and fabricated
metal products, including the storage of new materials and containers used in or
incidental to any of the foregoing.28
LODGING HOUSE — A building or premises, other than a hotel, inn, motel, or tourist
house, where rooms are let and where meals may be regularly served by prearrangement
for compensation; not open to transient guests, in contrast to hotels, restaurants, and
tourist homes, open to transients.[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
LOT — A contiguous parcel of land in identical ownership throughout, bounded by
other lots or streets, and used or set aside and available for use as the site of one or more
buildings or other definite purpose. For the purpose of this chapter a lot may or may not
28. Editor's Note: The definitions of "local retail operation, small" and "local retail operation, large," which immediately
followed this definition, were repealed 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012. See the definitions of "retail operation, small"
and "retail operation, large" in this section.
10.2 QUINCY CODE 10.2
375:102
coincide with a lot of record.
LOT AREA — The horizontal area within the exterior lines of the lot, exclusive of any
area in a public or private way open to public uses.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines
measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
LOT, FRONTAGE OF — A lot line coinciding with the side line of a street which
provides both legal rights of vehicular access and physical vehicular access to the lot,
said line to be measured continuously along a single street or along two intersecting
streets if their angle of intersection is greater than 120°. Vehicular access to a building
site on the lot shall be exclusively through the frontage of the lot.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot recorded in the Registry of Deeds of Norfolk County or in
the Land Court of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts either as a separate lot or as part
of a subdivision.
LOT WIDTH — The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured
perpendicular to the mean direction of the side lot lines.
FRONT LOT LINE – A line separating the lot from a street or private way.
REAR LOT LINE – The lot line opposite the front lot line, except that, in the case of
a corner lot, the rear lot line shall be the line opposite from the street on which the
principal building faces.
MAJOR NONRESIDENTIAL USE — Any use, whether allowed by right or by special
permit in the Table of Use Regulations, other than a dwelling, which, after initial
construction or expansion of an existing structure, will have 10,000 or more gross square
feet in floor area.
MANUFACTURE, PROCESSING, ASSEMBLY OR OTHER INDUSTRIAL
OPERATIONS — A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of
materials, or the manufacture from previously prepared materials of finished products
or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental
storage, sales and distribution of such products but excluding the following: acid
manufacture; cement, bituminous concrete or asphalt manufacture; lime, gypsum or
plaster of paris manufacture; production of chlorine or similar noxious gases; distillation
of bones; drop-forge industries manufacturing forging with power hammers;
manufacture or storage of explosives in bulk quantities; fertilizer manufacture; garbage,
offal, or dead animal reduction or dumping; glue manufacture; hair manufacture;
petroleum refining; processing of sauerkraut, vinegar or yeast; rendering or refining of
fats or oils; smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ore, including blast furnace or blooming
mill; stockyard or feeding pen; and slaughter of animals, not including the killing of
fowl.
MARINA—A dock or basin where slips, moorings and often supplies, repairs and other
services are available for craft.
MEDICAL CLINIC — A facility as defined in 105 CMR 140.020, including a mobile
clinic.[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
MGL — Reference to the General Laws of the commonwealth.
MINI STORAGE WAREHOUSE — A facility at which individual self-service storage
10.2 ZONING 10.2
375:103
spaces are made available to the public for rent.
MIXED USE — A combination of residential and nonresidential uses in one
development or building.
MOTOR VEHICLE BODY OR PAINT SHOP — An establishment for body work
or painting, provided that all work is carried out inside the building, the structure
is sufficiently sound-insulated and any flashing, fumes, bases, smoke and vapor are
effectively confined to the premises.
MOTOR VEHICLE BODY REPAIR — An establishment, garage or work area
enclosed within a building where repairs are made or caused to be made to motor vehicle
bodies, including fenders, bumpers and similar components of motor vehicle bodies,
but does not include the storage of vehicles for the cannibalization of parts.[Amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
MOTOR VEHICLE GENERAL REPAIR — Premises for the servicing and repair of
autos, but not to include fuel sales.
MOTOR VEHICLE HOURLY RENTAL STATION—A facility at which, by contract,
motor vehicles are made available for rent for a period not longer than 24 hours.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — A building or premises used for the
dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels directly to users of motor vehicles.
Other sales activities and any repairs shall be activities minor in scope and clearly
subordinate to the sale of motor fuels, oils and lubricants.
MUNICIPAL FACILITY — Facility owned or operated by the City of Quincy,
including police stations, fire stations and municipal administration buildings.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR LOT — A building or lot that does not conform
to a dimensional regulation prescribed by this chapter for the district in which it is
located or to regulations for off-street parking or loading or accessory buildings,
provided that such building or lot was in existence and lawful at that time the regulations
became effective.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use of a building or lot that does not conform to a use
regulation prescribed by this chapter for the district in which it is located, provided that
such use was in existence and lawful at the time the use regulation became effective.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME—Any building with sleeping rooms where
persons are housed or lodged and furnished with meals and nursing care for hire.
OCCUPANCY — The utilization of land, buildings or structures. Change of occupancy
is not intended to include change of tenants or proprietors.
OPEN SPACE — That part of a lot designed and developed for use by the occupants
of the lot or for the pleasant appearance of the building in which they reside. Such
space may include swimming pools, tennis courts or similar facilities, private gardens,
or landscaped elements and natural features on the site, walks and terraces. Exterior
balconies and patios having an area of not less than 40 square feet and reserved for the
exclusive use of one family may be counted toward meeting the required open space on
the lot. Such open space may not include lot area for parking, access and service drives
or other hard-surfaced areas intended for vehicular use.
PARKING AREA, COMMERCIAL — Principal use of a lot for the structured or
10.2 QUINCY CODE 10.2
375:104
unstructured parking of passenger cars for which a fee is paid, including customary
ancillary service operations. A commercial parking area shall not employ machinery to
engage in stacking or lifting vehicles.
PARKING AREA, MUNICIPAL — A parking area owned or operated by the City of
Quincy.
PARKING AREA or PARKING GARAGE OR STRUCTURE — Parking, whether
as a principal use of a lot or as a secondary use, for the parking of passenger cars
of employees, customers or guests of establishments or of residents of a multifamily
dwelling, provided that no sales or service operations are performed.
PAVING — For the purposes of Section 5.1.14 the following definitions shall apply:
"Pave," and its derivatives, shall mean the placement of materials on the ground,
including but not limited to tar, asphalt, concrete, gravel, bituminous material, crushed
stone, tile, and stone, concrete and brick pavers.
"Repaved" shall mean the replacement of the existing paved surfaces or the
supplementation of existing paving materials or the placement of a new type of surface
material over an existing paved surface.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — A service business primarily serving
local needs with fewer than five employees, including but not limited to barber, beauty
shop, laundry and dry cleaning, shoe repair, printing shop, photography studio, and
caterer's shop.
PRIVATE OFF-SITE GARAGE OR PARKING AREA — A facility for the storage of
vehicles owned by residents of other lots in residence districts.
PUBLIC ART AND PLACE-MAKING PROGRAM — For the purposes of Sections
8.3.9 to 8.3.14, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
ART, ARTWORK or WORKS OF ART or PLACE-MAKING – Tangible creations by
artists exhibiting the highest quality of skill and aesthetic principles and includes all
forms of the visual arts conceived in any medium, material, or combination thereof,
including but not limited to paintings, sculptures, engravings, carvings, frescos, stained
glass, mosaics, mobiles, tapestries, murals, photographs, video projections, digital
images, bas-relief, high relief, fountains, kinetics, collages, drawings, monuments
erected to commemorate a person or an event, functional furnishings, such as artistdesigned
seating and pavers, architectural elements designed by an artist, and artistdesigned
landforms or landscape elements. The following shall not be considered
artwork or works of art for this chapter: (i) reproductions or unlimited copies of original
artwork; (ii) art objects which are mass produced; or (iii) works that are decorative,
ornamental, or functional elements of the architecture or landscape design, except when
commissioned from an artist as an integral aspect of a structure or site.
ARTIST or PROFESSIONAL ARTIST – A practitioner in the visual arts, and shall
include visual artists, landscape artists and architects, as well as graphic artists,
generally recognized by critics and peers as a professional of serious intent and ability.
Indications of a person's status as a professional artist or place-maker include, but
are not limited to, income realized through the sole commission of artwork, frequent
or consistent art exhibitions, placement of artwork in public institutions or museums,
receipt of honors and awards, and training in the arts.
10.2 ZONING 10.2
375:105
DEVELOPMENT – Any construction or redevelopment of any private or public
building within the Quincy Center Urban Redevelopment District or the Quincy Center
Zoning Districts.
PUBLIC ART COMMISSION – The entity appointed by the Mayor to administer the
Public Art and Place-Making Program and administer the Public Art Fund.
PUBLIC ART FUND – A separate, interest-bearing account set up by the City to
receive moneys for the Public Art and Place-Making Program.
REMODELING or CONVERTING – Changes to the facade of a building, changes to
the interior of a building, increases or decreases in the floor area of a building and
changes to exterior improvements.
PUBLIC MARKET — A market or market place as defined in MGL c. 40, § 10.
RESTAURANT, GENERAL—An establishment exceeding 20,000 square feet of gross
floor area, other than a fast-food restaurant, where the principal activity is the service or
sale of prepared food or drink for on-premises or off-premises consumption, or a smaller
such establishment providing dancing and entertainment, but not adult entertainment.
RESTAURANT, LOCAL — Eating places of 5,000 square feet or less of gross floor
area per establishment primarily serving local needs, including but not limited to lunch
room, restaurant, cafeteria, places for sale and consumption of beverages, ice cream, etc.,
primarily in enclosed structures with no dancing or entertainment other than music and
no drive-in retail or drive-through window service.[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
RETAIL — A business which supplies commodities, but not including exterior sales
or services, drive-in or window services or the provision of any amusement, live or
mechanical, except music or as incidental to the operations of a permitted church, school,
club or similar nonprofit institution or educational use.
RETAIL ANCILLARY TO MANUFACTURING — Stores 5,000 square feet or less
of gross floor area per establishment where manufacturing, assembly or packaging
of consumer goods is conducted, provided that at least 50% of such merchandise is
sold at retail on the premises and that all display and sales are conducted within a
building.[Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
RETAIL OPERATION, GENERAL — Stores with more than 20,000 square feet of
gross floor area serving the general retail needs of a major part of the City, including but
not limited to general merchandise department store, furniture and household goods.
RETAIL OPERATION, LARGE—Stores 5,000 square feet to 20,000 square feet gross
retail floor area per establishment, primarily serving the local retail business needs of the
residents of the vicinity, including but not limited to grocer, food, package, dry goods,
clothing, hardware, florists and drugstores.
RETAIL OPERATION, SMALL — Stores 5,000 square feet or less of gross retail floor
area per establishment, primarily servicing the local retail business needs of the residents
of the vicinity, including but not limited to grocer, food, package, dry goods, clothing,
hardware, florists and drugstores, provided that such establishment does not provide
drive-in retail or drive-through window service for food or beverages and is not open
for business between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless a special permit is
granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
1.
10.2 QUINCY CODE 10.2
375:106
RETAIL SALES OF FLOWERS OR GARDEN SUPPLIES — Sales place for flowers,
garden supplies, and agricultural produce, conducted partly or wholly outdoors,
commercial nursery or greenhouse.
SATELLITE RECEIVING ANTENNA — A satellite receiving antenna is a device or
instrument for the reception of television or other electronic communications broadcast
or relayed from a satellite orbiting the earth.
SIGN AND SIGN AREA DEFINITIONS — The following definitions apply to these
terms as used in Section 5.3 of this chapter:
The following definitions shall apply in this section:
ABANDONED SIGN – A sign that no longer identifies or advertises a location, product
or activity conducted on the premises on which the sign is located; a panel, box or
cabinet in disrepair.
ANIMATED SIGN – A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of motion. They
differ from changeable signs as follows:
Environmentally Activated. Animated signs or devices motivated by wind, thermal
changes, or other natural input. Includes spinners, pinwheels, pennant strings, and/or
other devices that respond to natural phenomena.
Mechanically Activated. Animated signs characterized by repetitive motion and/or
rotation activated by a mechanical system, electric motor or other mechanical means.
Electrically Activated. Animated signs producing the illusion of movement by means
of electronic, electrical, or electromechanical input and/or illumination capable of
simulating movement through employment of the classifications noted below:
a. Flashing. Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose illumination is
characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period of illumination is either the
same as or less than the period of nonillumination. For the purposes of this chapter,
"flashing" will not be defined as occurring if the cyclical period between on-off
phases of illumination is 60 seconds or more.
b. Patterned Illusionary Movement. Animated signs or animated portions of signs
whose illumination is characterized by simulated movement through alternate or
sequential activation of various illuminated elements for the purpose of producing
repetitive light patterns designed to appear in some form of constant motion.
ANNOUNCEMENT BOARD – See "bulletin board."
APPURTENANCE – A device supporting or lighting a sign.
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION – Any projection that is not intended for
occupancy and that extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building but that
does not include signs as defined here.
AWNING – An architectural projection or a shelter or both projecting from and
supported by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering of rigid
material and/or fabric on a supporting framework that may be either fixed or retractable.
AWNING SIGN – A sign on or attached to a temporary retractable shelter or permanent
architectural projection that is supported entirely from the exterior wall of building.
BACKGROUND AREA OF SIGN – The entire area of a sign on which copy and/or
graphics could be placed.
10.2 ZONING 10.2
375:107
BACK-LIT AWNING – An awning whose covering material exhibits the characteristic
of luminosity obtained by means of a source of illumination contained within its
framework.
BANNER – A flexible fabric material on which copy or graphics may be displayed.
BANNER SIGN – A sign utilizing a banner as its display surface, generally composed
of lightweight flexible material, sometimes in a rigid frame.
BELT SIGN – Any sign designed in the horizontal strip part of a facade. See "storefront
sign."
BILLBOARD – See "off-premises sign." [Amended 6-1-2020 by Order No.
2020-012]
BOX SIGN – See "freestanding sign."
BUILDING NAME SIGN – A sign that indicates the name of a building, normally
made of stone, stainless steel, or other permanent material.
BULLETIN BOARD – A sign with nonelectronic changeable sign copy.
BUSINESS GOODS OR SERVICES SIGN – A sign that indicates the goods or
services available on the premises.
BUSINESS HOURS SIGN – A sign that indicates the hours and days of operation of a
business.
BUSINESS NAME SIGN – A sign that indicates the name of a business.
BUSINESS SALE SIGN – A temporary sign that indicates that certain goods, services
or products are being offered at a special or reduced price or with other considerations.
CANOPY, ATTACHED – A multi-sided structure or architectural projection supported
by attachment to a building on one or more sides and either cantilevered from such
building on one side or also supported by columns at additional points.
CANOPY, FREESTANDING – A multi-sided structure supported by columns. The
surface(s) and/or soffit of a freestanding canopy may be illuminated by means of
internal or external sources of light.
CANOPY SIGN – A sign affixed to the visible surface(s) of an attached or freestanding
canopy. May be internally or externally illuminated.
CHANGEABLE SIGN – A sign with capability of content change by means of manual
or remote input. Includes these types:
a. Manually Programmed. Changeable sign whose message copy or content can be
changed manually on a display surface.
b. Electrically Programmed. Changeable sign whose message copy or content can be
changed by means of remote electrically energized on-off switching combinations
of alphabetic or pictographic components arranged on a display surface.
Illumination may be integral to the components, such as characterized by lamps or
other light-emitting devices, or may be from an external light source designed to
reflect off of the changeable component display. See "electronic message sign."
COMMERCIAL SIGN – A sign belonging to any private establishment, office or place
of business, where such business is conducted for profit.
10.2 QUINCY CODE 10.2
375:108
COMPOSITE SIGN – Any freestanding sign listing the name of a shopping center or
complex and its establishments.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN – A temporary sign that indicates the name of architects,
contractors, lenders and others involved in the design, construction or financing of a
building or structure or alteration of such structure.
COPY – The graphic content or message of a sign.
COPY AREA OF SIGN – The actual area of the sign copy as applied to any
background. Copy area on any individual background may be expressed as a
mathematically or geometrically computed portion area, regulated by law, to control
the amount and size of letters, words, graphics or logos. In the case of freestanding
signs, and where a sign has a background color, surface or finish material which is
different from the building or window face, the area shall include that surface on which
all message, symbols or other graphic designs are displayed, but does not include the
supporting framework and bracing.
CORNICE – Any prominent, continuous, horizontally projecting feature surmounting a
wall or other portion of a building.
CORNICE SIGN – A sign which is affixed to the visible surface of a cornice. May be
internally or externally illuminated.
DATE SIGN – A sign indicating date of initial construction or alteration of a building.
DIMENSIONAL LETTERS – Individually attached letters cut so as to allow visibility
of their spatial qualities of width, height and length.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN – Any sign whose content informs the viewer, pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, how to proceed to locate a particular premises, activity or facility.
DIRECTORY SIGN – A sign that lists the businesses within a building.
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN – A sign with two faces, commonly back to back.
EASEL SIGN – A freestanding sign mounted on a tripod, often single-sided, or a
sandwich board type A-frame sign, generally two-sided.
ELECTRIC SIGN – Any sign activated by means of electrical energy.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN – An electrically activated changeable sign whose
variable message capability can be electronically programmed. The copy must remain
in a stationary position.
ENTRY SIGN – Any sign located at a recessed building entry.
EVENT SIGN – A temporary sign indicating a public event.
EXTERIOR SIGN – Any sign placed on the outside of a building or on the premises.
FACADE – The separate face of a building including parapet walls. Where separate
faces are oriented in the same direction, they are to be considered as a single facade.
FASCIA – Flat horizontal band or member between moldings or between vertical
elements on a facade, usually above doors and windows on a storefront.
FASCIA SIGN – See "wall sign."
FLAG SIGN – Any sign mounted on a flagpole or similar support. See regulations for
banners. Flying the flag of the United States of America is not subject to a permit.
FOR SALE/FOR RENT/FOR LEASE SIGN – See "real estate sign."
10.2 ZONING 10.2
375:109
FREESTANDING SIGN – Any sign attached to or part of a completely self-supporting
structure which is connected to the ground and not attached to any building or other
structure.
FRONTAGE, BUILDING – The length of an exterior building wall or structure of a
single premises along either a public way or other properties that it faces. Commonly,
the street address side.
FRONTAGE, PROPERTY – The length of the property line(s) of any single premises
along either a public way or other properties on which it borders.
GOOD REPAIR – A physical condition required of both permanent and temporary
signs; signs which do not contain rust, decay, broken or dangling parts, cracked, peeling
or flaking paint, ripped, torn or faded materials, with clean sign copy that is not
obscured.
GROUND SIGN – See "freestanding sign."
HISTORICAL COMMISSION – The duly established Historical Commission of the
City of Quincy.
HISTORIC COMMERCIAL DISTRICT – A duly established historic commercial
district of the City of Quincy.
HISTORIC DISTRICT – The duly established historic district of the City of Quincy.
HISTORIC MARKER – A sign that provides information on the history or architecture
of a building or structure located within the historic district or on a building which is
listed on one of the historic registers.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN – A sign identifying the occupants of a building. See
"directory sign."
ILLUMINATED SIGN – A sign characterized by the use of electric light, either
projecting through its surface(s) (internally illuminated) or reflecting off its surface(s)
(externally illuminated).
INTERMEDIATE REMOVABLE SURFACE – A removable sign face.
LOGO SIGN – A graphic-type sign indicating a business, goods, services, product or
activity.
MANSARD – A roof-like facade comparable to, and part of, an exterior building wall.
MARQUEE – A permanent canopy or overhanging shelter projecting from and entirely
supported by the building to which it is attached.
MARQUEE SIGN – A sign on or attached to a permanent overhanging shelter that
projects from the face of a building.
MURAL – A sign or painting intended to function as a sign, or just a painting executed
on or affixed to the wall(s) or window(s) of a building.
NONCOMMERCIAL SIGN – A sign containing any noncommercial message such
as civic, philanthropic, charitable, religious, cultural, political, or ideological or time,
temperature and bus stop.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN – A sign which advertises or announces a use conducted or
goods provided that are available elsewhere than within the building or on the lot on
which the sign is located.
10.2 QUINCY CODE 10.2
375:110
ON-PREMISES SIGN – A sign which advertises or announces a use conducted or
goods that are available within the building or on the lot on which the sign is located.
The sign bears a direct relationship to the activities conducted on the premises.
PARAPET – The extension of a building facade above the line of the structural roof.
PEDESTRIAN ORIENTATION – Description of area abutting a roadway which is not
a super highway and which indicates by its layout that it has made accommodations for
people to walk there.
PERMANENT SIGN – A durable sign structure designed to promote, advertise, and
support a place of business, an office, or an establishment for the duration of its
existence. It is normally stationary and affixed.
POLE SIGN – See "freestanding sign."
POLITICAL SIGN – Any temporary nonpremises sign which refers only to the issues,
causes or candidates involved in a political election and is designed to influence the
actions of voters.
PORTABLE SIGN – Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or to a building
or building surface.
PREMISES – A tract of land including its buildings and other appurtenances.
PRODUCT SIGN – A sign that indicates a product or goods.
PROJECTING SIGN – A sign (other than a wall sign, an awning, a canopy, a marquee
or a V sign), including all of its mounting or supporting devices, that is attached to or
projects more than 12 inches from a building face or wall over a public way or from
a structure whose primary purpose is other than the support of a sign. Projecting signs
under the two-square-foot limit and not mounted over a public way are permitted.
PUBLIC SAFETY DEVICE – For purposes of this chapter, a traffic light, a traffic
light pole, a sign or sign pole listing City parking rules, directions, policies or
announcements, or any other device serving these municipal purposes.
PUBLIC SIGN – A sign erected or maintained by a municipality or other government
entity.
REAL ESTATE SIGN – A temporary sign advertising the sale, lease, or rental of the
property or premises upon which it is located.
REMOVABLE FACADE SURFACE – A flat object that is attached flush to and covers
a portion of a building facade often becoming the receiving surface for sign copy.
REVOLVING SIGN –A sign that revolves 360° about an axis. See "animated sign."
ROOFLINE – The edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms the top
line of the building silhouette; for a pitched roof, this shall mean the lower edge of the
roof where it meets the building wall. Where a building has several roof levels, that roof
level belonging to that portion of the building on whose wall the sign is located.
ROOF SIGN – A sign located on and attached to the roof or above the roof line of a
building, which is wholly or partially supported by such building.
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN – A freestanding, double-sided A-frame sign.
SECONDARY SIGN – A sign located on a building face other than the one which is
directed to the main stream of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
10.2 ZONING 10.2
375:111
SETBACK – That open portion of a lot which is located between the property line and
the building wall.
SIGN – Any structure, device, letter work, symbols, banner, logo, commercial flag
or pennant, insignia, light, figure, picture, message, plaque, poster, form or other
representation (excluding displays of merchandise) designed to be seen from outside a
building and visible from a public way, which is used to direct public attention to and/
or indicate the presence of any person, product, service or activity, whose purpose is
to convey a commercial or noncommercial message. Such structure above shall include
any removable facade surface used for signage.
SIGN AREA – The area of the smallest rectangle or circle within which the entire sign
can fit, including any portion of the structural supports which contribute through shape,
color, or otherwise to the sign's message, and including any separate surface, board,
frame or shape on or within which the sign is displayed. For signs the components of
which are applied directly to a building or other structure, the sign area shall include
any background of a different color, material, or appearance from the remainder of the
wall or structure and shall in any event enclose all letters, figures, or representations
related to the sign.
SIGN BAND – That exterior portion of a retail or commercial building which contains
an area specifically designed to accommodate signage, usually set off by architectural
details or framing elements.
SIGN ILLUMINATION – Any means of artificially lighting a sign.
SIGN MATERIALS – Any materials used to construct a sign.
SIGN MOUNTING PANEL – That portion of a fascia which has a surface to which
a sign may be attached and which is generally set off and framed. In a building with
several storefronts, such panels will generally be separate and distinct for each one.
Sign mounting panels would be considered to be abandoned when they meet the criteria
listed for abandoned signs or if they are left in disrepair.
SIGN SUPPORT – Any pole, post, streetlight, cable or other structural fixture
necessary to hold and secure a sign.
SLOGAN – A catch phrase used in advertising or promotion.
STOREFRONT – That portion of a ground floor building front occupied by a separate
and distinct use and at which a major entrance is located.
STOREFRONT SIGN – A graphic design which may or may not incorporate words,
symbols, or letters painted on or applied as surface material to a large unbroken expanse
of blank wall.
TEMPORARY SIGN – A poster, sign or sign card lacking a permanent support
structure and intended to be displayed for only a specified period of time.
TIME/TEMPERATURE SIGN – A sign indicating the time and temperature that may
contain the ability to transmit other information.
TRADEMARK – A name, symbol or other device identifying a product officially
registered and legally restricted to the use of the owner or manufacturer.
UNDER CANOPY OR UNDER MARQUEE SIGN – A sign attached to the underside
of a canopy or marquee.
10.2 QUINCY CODE 10.2
375:112
V SIGN – A sign containing two faces of equal size, positioned at an angle of less than
179° at the point of juncture of the individual faces.
WALL SIGN – A flat sign mounted against a flat wall, with the exposed face parallel
to the exterior plane of the building to which it is affixed. It projects not more than 18
inches from the building or structure wall. It also includes signs affixed to architectural
projections provided the copy area of such signs remains on a parallel plane to the face
of the building facade or to the face of the architectural projection to which it is affixed.
WINDOW SIGN – A permanent sign erected, applied and located so as to be visible
through a window and placed in the interior surface of a window with its message
intended to be visible to the exterior environment.
STORY—A basement or cellar, the ceiling of which extends more than four feet above
the finished grade measured at the average grade plane at six feet from the foundation;
also that part of a building between a floor and the floor or roof next above.
STREET LINE — The boundary line of the lot separating it from a public street or
private way.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location to give
support or shelter, such as a building, bridge, tower, framework, retaining wall, tank,
tunnel, clothesline, stadium, platform, bin, fence, sign or the like.
TOD DESIGN GUIDELINES — The guidelines developed by the City of Quincy
Department of Planning and Community Development intended to enhance the
connectivity between street networks and adjoining uses located at or near transit
stations in the City. These guidelines address landscape design, sidewalks and pathways,
signage, building facade treatments, parking strategies, and a variety of land
uses.[Added 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-249]
TOD PERMITTED USES — Any of the following: retail uses (all); restaurant uses
(all); multifamily dwellings; mixed use; essential public services; municipal office or
administrative facilities; municipal parking lot; public market; miscellaneous
commercial uses (all except for those uses included in TOD prohibited uses); drivein
uses (all); laboratory or research facility; public transportation terminal and parking
facilities related thereto; swimming pool or tennis court; nonresidential accessory uses
(all except for those uses included in TOD prohibited uses); and parking area or garage
or structure for the parking of passenger cars of employees, customers or guests of
establishments or of residents of a multifamily dwelling.[Added 11-21-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-249]
TOD PROHIBITED USES — Any of the following: lodging house; municipal waste
disposal area operated by the City or under contract to the City; adult use establishments;
body art establishment; marina; funeral home or crematorium; motor vehicle uses;
warehouse, wholesale and storage uses (all); industrial uses (all except for those uses
included in TOD permitted uses); transportation related uses (all except for those uses
included in TOD permitted uses); residential accessory uses; and storage or display or
abandonment of more than one cubic yard of the materials described in Section L of
the Table of Use Regulations.29[Added 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-249; amended
6-1-2020 by Order No. 2020-012]
29. Editor's Note: The Table of Use Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
10.2 ZONING 10.2
375:113
URBAN RENEWAL PLAN — The Quincy Center District Urban Revitalization and
Development Plan dated May 7, 2007, as amended, and the Quincy Center District
Design Guidelines dated November 2005, as amended.
URBAN RENEWAL USE — A use that is: A) one or more of the following: i) allowed
as set forth in Section 8.3.2; ii) a municipal parking garage; iii) a sales place for flowers,
plants, garden supplies, or agricultural produce, conducted partly or wholly indoors; or
iv) a combination of more than one of the preceding uses in a single building or structure;
and B) for which a certification of consistency has been granted by the Planning Board
pursuant to the Urban Renewal Plan.
WAREHOUSE — A structure designed or used for the storage of goods.
WHOLESALE — The sale of goods in large quantity for the purpose of resale and
completely enclosed in a building. Such uses shall not include the sale or transfer of
flammable liquids, gas, explosives or other potentially hazardous materials.
WIND FACILITIES—The following definitions shall apply with regard to Section 6.7:
DIRECTOR – Director of Inspectional Services
HEIGHT – The height of a wind turbine measured from natural grade to the tip of the
rotor blade at its highest point, or blade-tip height.
PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY – The Planning Board shall be the site plan
review permit granting authority and the special permit granting authority.
RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY – The maximum rated output of electric power
production equipment. The manufacturer typically specifies this output with a
nameplate on the equipment.
WIND FACILITY – A facility where the primary use of the facility is the conversion
of wind to electricity, including but not limited to the wind turbine(s) and all the
equipment and/or machinery required for the generation, storage, and transmission of
such electricity.
WIND MONITORING OR METEOROLOGICAL TOWER – A temporary tower
equipped with devices to measure wind speeds and direction, used to determine how
much wind power a site can be expected to generate.
WIND TURBINE – A device that converts kinetic wind energy into rotational energy
that drives an electrical generator. A wind turbine typically consists of a support tower,
nacelle body, and a rotor with two or more blades.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — The following definitions shall
apply with regard to Section 6.6:
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES – Facilities for the provision of
personal wireless services.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES – Commercial mobile services, unlicensed
wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services.
UNLICENSED WIRELESS SERVICE – The offering of telecommunications service
using duly authorized devices which do not require individual licenses, but does not
mean the provision of direct-to-home satellite services.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY – A personal wireless service facility.
10.2 QUINCY CODE 10.2
375:114
YARD — The open area at the front, sides and rear of a building between the exterior
walls of the building and the boundaries of the lot upon which it stands.
10.2 ZONING 10.2
375:115

Appendix
10.2 ZONING 10.2
375:117

Chapter A400
GENERAL LAW ACCEPTANCES
§ A400-1. General acts accepted by City Council of Quincy.
July 8, 1890 MGL c. 83, §§ 25 to 27 Betterment Act
August 21, 1893 MGL c. 81, §§ 1 to 5, 7, 9,
12, 13 and 16
Betterment Act
June 18, 1909 MGL c. 136, § 6 Regulating sales on Lord's Day
November 25, 1910 MGL c. 32, § 83 Pensions to police officers
December 14, 1911 MGL c. 147, § 15 Vacations for police
May 8, 1912 MGL c. 139, §§ 1 to 3 Common nuisances
December 9, 1912 MGL c. 71, § 71 Use of halls in school buildings
February 5, 1913 MGL c. 143, § 3 Authorizing cities to regulate use of
buildings for protection of public
health and morals
October 6, 1913 MGL c. 82, § 37 Laying out and discontinuing ways
and damages caused by taking land
for public uses
February 2, 1914 MGL c. 80, § 13 Apportionment of sidewalks
assessments and payment of interest
thereon
May 4, 1914 MGL c. 80, § 13 Apportionment of sewer assessments
and payment of interest thereon
August 30, 1915 MGL c. 111, § 126 Preservation of public health
June 7, 1917 MGL c. 159A, §§ 1, 6 and
12
Jitney Act
July 12, 1917 MGL c. 143, §§ 6 to 12 Building inspection
April 5, 1920 MGL c. 32, §§ 44 and 45 Pensions for school janitors
September 9, 1920 MGL c. 22, § 12; c. 147,
§§ 32 to 51
Boxing commission
May 2, 1921 MGL c. 32, § 52 Retirement of Civil War veterans
December 30, 1922 MGL c. 32, § 89 Annuities for families of police
officers dead as a result of injuries on
duty
April 16, 1923 MGL c. 41, § 34A Board of public welfare
July 16, 1923. MGL c. 40, §§ 42A to 42F Collection of water rates
May 19, 1924 MGL c. 32, § 77B Pensions to foremen
April 21, 1925 MGL c. 51, § 14A Police listing
10.2 GENERAL LAW ACCEPTANCES § A400-1
A400:1
August 10, 1925 MGL c. 148, § 6 Removal of combustible material
June 28, 1926 MGL c. 32, § 77B Pensions to foremen
December 10, 1928 MGL c. 136, §§ 2 and 21
and 28
Sunday sports and games
May 27, 1929 MGL c. 139, §§ 1 to 3 Burnt and dangerous buildings
November 17, 1930 MGL c. 40, § 6B Uniforms for police and firemen
June 1, 1931 MGL c. 136, § 21 Time of games on Lord's Day
October 5, 1931 MGL c. 48, §§ 56B to 59D Reserve forces in fire department
July 17, 1933 MGL c. 32, §§ 56 to 59 Retirement of Spanish and World
War I veterans
December 31, 1934 MGL c. 31 Relating to labor service
April 6, 1936 MGL c. 32, § 88; c. 48,
§ 83
Compensation to widows and
children of firemen
June 15, 1936 MGL c. 41, § 100A Indemnification of employees for
damages arising out of operation of
motor vehicles
August 2, 1937 MGL c. 147, § 16A 1 day off in 7 for police officers
June 21, 1938 MGL c. 32, § 77C Pensions for foremen, inspectors, etc.
April 8, 1940 MGL c. 147, § 16 1 day off in every 6 for police
officers
September 16,
1940
MGL c. 148, § 56 Licensing open air parking spaces
December 27, 1940 MGL c. 48, § 59E Abolishing reserve fire department
February 2, 1942 MGL c. 48, § 58A 70 hour duty for firemen
March 16, 1942 MGL c. 33, § 54 Payment of persons in employment
of City during time of service in
militia
October 5, 1942 MGL c. 85, § 11A Registration of bicycles
March 10, 1944 MGL c. 40, §§ 27A and
30A
Prevention of multiplicity of
proposals for zoning changes
November 6, 1944 Gen. Acts of 1943, Ch.
499
Vacations for employees in military
service
April 2, 1945 MGL c. 41, § 111B Sick leave for laborers
April 30, 1945 MGL c. 54, § 103A Absent voting in City elections
April 30, 1945 Gen. Acts of 1945, Ch.
166
Absent voting for members of armed
forces
October 1, 1945 MGL c. 32, § 45A Retirement allowances for school
janitors
October 15, 1945 MGL c. 44, § 65 Vacation pay
§ A400-1 QUINCY CODE § A400-1
A400:2
December 3, 1945 MGL c. 32, §§ 26 to 31H Contributory pensions
June 3, 1946 MGL c. 48, § 59E Abolishing police reserve forces
October 7, 1946 MGL c. 32, § 1 Pension increases to former public
employees
November 4, 1946 MGL c. 32, §§ 85E and
85F
Retirement from fire and police
departments
April 14, 1947 MGL c. 136, § 4B Sunday bowling
May 12, 1948 MGL c. 149, § 33A Forty hour week for certain City
employees
December 26, 1950 MGL c. 41, §§ 81A to
81Y
Planning Board
January 12, 1953 MGL c. 152, § 69 Workingmen's compensation
July 24, 1953 Gen. Acts of 1953, Ch.
434
Rent control
June 21, 1954 MGL c. 111, §§ 26A to
26E
Health Commissioner
December 19, 1954 Gen. Acts of 1954, Ch.
268
Retirement credit for reserve police
and firefighters
March 5, 1956 Gen. Acts of 1955, Ch.
760
Group insurance
March 26, 1956 Gen. Acts of 1956, Ch.
760
Accepting 32B
April 15, 1956 Gen. Acts of 1956, Ch.
605
Pension increases
August 8, 1956 Gen. Acts of 1956, Ch.
374
Pensions for widows of police
December 3, 1956 Gen. Acts of 1956, Ch.
629
Civil service amendment
May 6, 1957 Gen. Acts of 1957, Ch. 58 Facsimile countersignatures
December 10, 1958 Gen. Acts of 1957, Ch.
750
Pensions for widows of laborers
October 5, 1959 MGL c. 140, § 185H Licensing and police supervision of
dancing schools. License fee, $5
March 6, 1961 Gen. Acts of 1959, Ch.
595
City pay 1/2 group insurance of
retired employees
March 20, 1961 MGL c. 149, § 33B Overtime pay for City employees
September 21,
1961
Gen. Acts of 1961, Ch.
319
Repair of private ways
September 4, 1962 MGL c. 32, § 95A Annuities to surviving spouse or
children of policemen and firemen
§ A400-1 GENERAL LAW ACCEPTANCES § A400-1
A400:3
September 24,
1962
Gen. Acts of 1962, Ch.
386
Additional pay for City clerks
May 6, 1963 Gen. Acts of 1962, Ch.
647
Blue Cross and Blue Shield for
retired employees
May 22, 1963 MGL c. 40, § 8A, as
amended
Development and industrial
commission
July 11, 1963 Gen. Acts of 1963, Ch.
149
Extra creditable service for police
and firefighters
November 18, 1963 Gen. Acts of 1963, Ch.
478
Additional pension allowances
December 2, 1963 Gen. Acts of 1962, Ch.
249
Regulating the issuance of
nomination papers
December 2, 1963 Gen. Acts of 1962, Ch.
409
Regulating jaywalking, so-called
March 2, 1964 Gen. Acts of 1963, Ch.
608, § 29A
Construction of sea walls on private
property
June 30, 1964 Gen. Acts of 1960, Ch.
239, § 77
Laborers' pensions
March 1, 1965 Gen. Acts of 1960, Ch.
289, § 77B
Increased pensions for employees
forced to retire at 70
March 1, 1965 Gen. Acts of 1964, Ch.
486
Increased pensions for certain former
public employees
April 22, 1965 MGL c. 32, § 77B Effective January 1, 1966, for all
persons retired after October 1, 1962
July 16, 1965 MGL c. 40, § 83 Conservation commission
December 8, 1965 MGL c. 90, § 200 Noncriminal disposition of parking
violations
March 24, 1966 MGL c. 48, § 67E Fire Chief to receive additional pay
for holiday while on duty
March 24, 1966 MGL c. 48, § 57F Police Chief to receive additional
pay for holiday while on duty
April 3, 1966 MGL c. 71, § 46B Cities and towns to provide
transportation for retarded and
handicapped children to and from
school
April 3, 1966 Gen. Acts of 1961, Ch.
552
Widows of deceased employees to
receive $1,500 per year provided the
deceased employee had 14 years of
creditable service
§ A400-1 QUINCY CODE § A400-1
A400:4
April 3, 1966 Gen. Acts of 1965, Ch.
539
Member of the noncontributory
pension plan who was promoted to a
supervisory position retains pension
rights
April 20, 1966 Gen. Acts of 1965, Ch.
735
Vacation rights of employees
May 9, 1966 Gen. Acts of 1965, Ch.
405
Cities and towns authorized to
change the position of sealer and
deputy sealer of weights and
measures to inspector and deputy
inspector of weights and measures
June 8, 1966 Gen. Acts of 1965, Ch.
277
Noncontributory pension paid to
certain former policemen be
increased
June 8, 1966 Gen. Acts of 1965, Ch.
278
Noncontributory pension paid to
certain former firefighters be
increased
July 20, 1966 MGL c. 32, § 90A Increasing allowances of former
employees retired on account of
accidental disability
October 17, 1967 Gen. Acts of 1967, Ch.
400
Increasing retirement allowance of
policemen and firefighters who
retired under the Veterans
Retirement Act
January 17, 1968 Gen. Acts of 1967, Ch.
430
Authorizing cities and towns to
employ police cadets
February 20, 1969 Gen. Acts of 1967, Ch.
611, § 8A
The grantee of real estate shall notify
the City or town Assessors of the
name and address of the purchaser of
such property
June 5, 1969 Gen. Acts of 1965, Ch.
452
Forty-two hour work week for
firefighters
August 12, 1969 MGL c. 140, § 47 License required for coffee house or
tea house, so-called
November 18, 1971 Gen. Acts of 1970, Ch.
835
Police career incentive base salary
increases
December 2, 1971 MGL c. 32, § 11D Accidental death insurance for
policemen and firemen killed in line
of duty
December 2, 1971 MGL c. 90, § 20C "No-fix" parking rule
December 2, 1971 MGL c. 147, § 10F Parking control officers
§ A400-1 GENERAL LAW ACCEPTANCES § A400-1
A400:5
September 8, 1972 Gen. Acts of 1960, Ch.
100
Local governmental unit contribution
for group insurance covering certain
employees
April 9, 1973 Gen. Acts of 1972, Ch.
763
Increase in group life insurance
benefits to retired employees
April 9, 1973 MGL c. 44, § 53C Revolving fund for police details
November 20, 1973 MGL c. 32B, § 8A Use of dividends or refunds to
reduce the employees share of
premium costs
April 3, 1974 MGL c. 32, § 90C Increasing allowance of former
employees retired on superannuation
May 14, 1975 Gen. Acts of 1973, Ch.
448
Removal of gravestones and other
memorials for the purposes of repair
or reproduction
June 19, 1978 Ch. 40, § 6H Private ways—Repairs and liability
December 4, 1978 Ch. 148, § 26C Installation of automatic smoke or
heat detectors in hotels, lodging
houses, etc.
July 30, 1980 Acts of 1977, Ch. 612 Increasing fine on traffic violators
failing to respond within 21 days of
notice
September 2, 1980 MGL c. 32B, § 16 Optional insurance for services of
health care organizations
May 18, 1981 MGL c. 71, § 71E Payment of school personnel salaries
from income received from rental of
school buildings
June 30, 1981 MGL c. 71, § 71E Payment of park & recreation
salaries from income received from
rental of park & recreation facilities
August 27, 1981 Ch. 90, § 20A An act to designate or appoint a
parking Clerk in the City
November 16, 1981 Ch. 351, § 83 Increasing license for automatic
amusement devices from $20 to $100
November 16, 1981 Increasing license for innholders and
restaurants from $5 to $50
December 21, 1981 Acts of 1981, Ch. 606 Further regulating the operation of
certain premises licensed to sell
alcoholic beverages
September 7, 1982 MGL c. 148, § 26E Local option for smoke detectors in
private dwellings
§ A400-1 QUINCY CODE § A400-1
A400:6
December 6, 1982 MGL c. 32B, § 10A Provision of dental benefits for
certain persons in the service of the
City and their dependents
December 20, 1982 MGL c. 44, § 64 Payment of bills incurred in excess
of appropriation
May 16, 1983 Acts of 1982, Ch. 597
amended MGL c. 60A, § 1
Exemption from motor vehicle
excise tax for vehicles owned by a
former prisoner of war
May 16, 1983 MGL c. 180, § 17A Authorizing treasurer-collector to
make deductions on account of union
dues and to pay such dues to the
treasurers of the respective unions
January 17, 1984 MGL c. 59, § 5 Accepting clauses seventeenth C,
thirty-seventh A and forty-first B
March 13, 1984 MGL c. 40, § 8J Authorizing the establishment of a
commission on handicapped affairs
May 21, 1984 Acts of 1982, Ch. 545,
MGL c. 148, § 26G
Further regulating the installation of
automatic sprinkler systems
November 5, 1984 MGL c. 60, § 106 Requiring a single payment of
property taxes which are less than
$25
December 2, 1985 MGL c. 71, § 71F School department may retain funds
received as tuition payments for
nonresident students and as
reimbursements for students who are
foster care children. Pertains to
vocational technical school only
March 17, 1986 Acts of 1985, Ch. 640 Relative to the granting or renewing
of certain licenses and permits in
cities and towns
March 17, 1986 Acts of 1985, Ch. 727 Further regulating real estate
exemptions of organizations of
veterans of war
March 17, 1986 MGL c. 40, § 4G Advertising municipal contracts prior
to award
April 22, 1986 Acts of 1985, Ch. 308 Authorizing cities and towns to
assume responsibility for dog
licensing, control and regulation
May 5, 1986 Acts of 1985, Ch. 275 Relative to water conservation
§ A400-1 GENERAL LAW ACCEPTANCES § A400-1
A400:7
May 5, 1986 Acts of 1985, Ch. 188,
§ 13
Establishing a professional
development grant program for the
purpose of supplementing teacher
compensation in cities, towns and
regional school districts, educational
collaborative or independent
vocational schools
May 5, 1986 Acts of 1985, Ch. 188,
§§ 16 and 17
$18,000 minimum salary
June 2, 1986 Acts of 1985, Ch. 598 Relative to unpaid real estate
bills—interest
September 2, 1986 Acts of 1985, Ch. 811 Authorizing provision of grant funds
under Public Works Economic
Development Program
March 16, 1987 MGL c. 59, § 5, clauses
17D and 41, as amended
by Acts and Resolves of
1986, Ch. 73, §§ 1 and 2
September 8, 1987 Acts of 1987, Ch. 273 Certain creditable service for certain
employees in the public retirement
system
October 19, 1987 MGL c. 152, as amended
by Acts of 1985, Ch. 572
Workers' compensation
April 19, 1988 MGL c. 71, § 40 Establishing a minimum salary for
teachers
May 16, 1988 Acts of 1988, Ch. 697,
§ 107
Allowing employees who reach the
age of 70 to continue to contribute to
the retirement system until they leave
the employment of the City
1989 Acts of 1987, Ch. 499 Real estate abatement for veterans
organization
March 6, 1989 MGL c. 148, § 26H Automatic sprinkler systems in
lodging or boarding houses
1989 MGL c. 40, § 8G Mutual police aid programs
1989 MGL c. 32, § 22D Removes $30,000 cap on retirement
benefits
1990 MGL c. 71, § 71E Establishing a revolving account for
Quincy summer school/extended
school year/school day program
1990 MGL c. 148, § 26I Automatic sprinkler system in new
construction
1991 MGL c. 166, § 32A Permitting Wire Inspector to work as
an electrician
§ A400-1 QUINCY CODE § A400-1
A400:8
May 6, 1991 MGL c. 59, § 57C Providing for the establishment of a
quarterly tax payment system
May 20, 1991 MGL c. 41, § 41B Payment of public employees by
direct bank credits
1991 MGL c. 268A, § 1 Conservation Commission members
classified as special municipal
employees
October 7, 1991 Acts of 1991, Ch. 223 Replacing Acts of 1991, Ch. 138,
§ 231; amending MGL c. 44 §§ 56
and 56A and Ch. 71, § 40 (teachers'
summer pay deferral)
November 4, 1991 Acts of 1990, Ch. 291 Allowing receipt of enhanced 9-1-1
service, including no-cost benefits
for early acceptance
February 18, 1992 MGL c. 32, § 90G 3/4 Relating to creditable service toward
retirement for employees over 70
years of age
February 18, 1992 MGL c. 38, §§ 121 and
122
Regarding the Medicare Extension
Plan
1993 MGL c. 53, § 9A Nomination papers
1993 MGL c. 148, § 56 Parking space business, licenses,
fees, etc.
1994 Acts of 1993, Ch. 71, § 83 Teachers early retirement incentive
program
September 18,
1995
MGL c. 32, § 20 Retirement Board members'
compensation
1995 MGL c. 54, § 34 Electronic voting systems
1995 MGL c. 12, § 99 Advance payments for retirement
allowance
1996 Acts of 1991, Ch. 138,
§ 126
Raising from $20,000 to $40,000 the
amount of income a senior citizen
may have before they would be
barred from participation in the
property tax deferral program
August 22, 1996 Acts of 1996, Ch. 71 Certain public employees creditable
retirement service time for active
service in armed forces
September 18,
1997
Acts of 1997, Ch. 17 COLA for retirees
September 8, 1998 Acts of 1998, Ch. 194,
§ 288
Benefits of retirees
February 1, 1999 Acts of 1998, Ch. 456 COLA to noncontributory retirees
§ A400-1 GENERAL LAW ACCEPTANCES § A400-1
A400:9
May 3, 1999 Acts of 1989, Ch. 653,
§ 40
COLA
November 15, 1999 MGL c. 33, § 59 Effect of military service on salary
and vacation allowance
January 18, 2000 Acts of 1999, Ch. 127,
§ 51
COLA
2000 Acts of 1999, Ch. 158 One-week extension of due date for
tax payments and filing application
for abatements
2002 Acts of 2001, Ch. 203,
§ 19
Extending the time for mailing fiscal
year 2002 tax bills
MGL c. 59, § 17E COLA to tax exemptions/abatements
for senior citizens, surviving spouses
and more
May 20, 2002 Acts of 2002, Ch. 116 Local government workforce
reduction through an early retirement
incentive program
2002 § 6 of An Act Providing
for Local Government
Workforce Reduction
Through an Early
Retirement Incentive
Program for Certain
Employees
2002 MGL c. 60, § 3C City education fund
March 3, 2003 MGL c. 32B, § 9I Provide health benefits for City
employees called to active military
service
2003 MGL c. 258, § 13 Indemnity of municipal officials
October 20, 2003 Acts of 2003, § 116 Early retirement incentive program
2004 MGL c. 40, § 42J Deferral of water charges for senior
citizens
2006 Acts of 2005, Ch. 157, § 1 Disability retirement benefits for
veterans
2006 Acts of 2005, Ch. 157, § 2 Disability retirement benefits for
veterans
2006 § 5 of Ch. 5 of Subsection
41A as amended by § I of
Ch. 136 of the Acts of
2005
2006 MGL c. 39, § 23D Adjudicatory hearings of all
municipal boards
§ A400-1 QUINCY CODE § A400-1
A400:10
2006 MGL c. 44, § 53F 1/2 Establishing sewer-water-drain
service as an enterprise fund
effective as of fiscal year 2008
2007 MGL c. 59, § 5L Temporary tax deferment to
members of the MA National Guard,
reservists
2008 MGL c. 32B, § 19 Transferring City employees to the
GIC
2009 MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2 Establishing a revolving account for
the Park and Recreation Department
2009 MGL c. 60, § 3D Aid to elderly and disabled taxation
fund
2009 Acts of 2009, Ch. 183 To extend the time for mailing actual
tax bills for fiscal year 2010
2010 MGL c. 64L, § 2(a) Local meals tax
2010 Appendix 120.AA Stretch Code
2010 MGL c. 59, § 5L Deferring taxes for 3 years for MA
National Guard
2012 MGL c. 71, § 37M Consolidation of administrative
functions with city and town public
schools
2012 MGL c. 59, § 5N Reduction of property tax obligation
of veteran in exchange for volunteer
services
2012 MGL c. 32B, § 20 Other Post-Employment Benefits
Liability Trust Fund
June 18, 2012
(Order No.
2012-118)
MGL c. 59, § 5N Reduction of property tax obligation
of veteran in exchange for volunteer
services
June 18, 2013
(Order No.
2013-076)
MGL c. 44B, § 3
(acceptance amended)
Community preservation
November 10, 2014
(Order No.
2014-224)
MGL c. 40U Collection of unpaid municipal fines
June 15, 2015
(Order No.
2015-101)
MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2 Establish revolving account for the
Department of Public Works for
drainage consulting, inspection and
maintenance fees
§ A400-1 GENERAL LAW ACCEPTANCES § A400-1
A400:11
May 15, 2017
(Order No.
2016-287)
§ 193 of Ch. 218 of the
Acts of 2016
An Act Modernizing Municipal
Finance and Government (provision
allows for a community to establish a
fundamental speed limit of 25 miles
per hour on public ways)
November 13, 2017
(Order No.
2017-177)
MGL c. 40, § 8G Authorizing Chief of Police to enter
into mutual aid agreements
§ A400-2. General acts accepted by citizens of Quincy.
December 5, 1899 MGL c. 149, § 31 Eight hour day for City employees
November 3, 1903 MGL c. 53, § 24 Providing joint caucuses for all
political parties
December 1, 1908 MGL c. 45, §§ 15 and 16 Public playgrounds for cities
December 7, 1909 MGL c. 32, §§ 81 and 82 Pensions for firemen
November 5, 1912 MGL c. 32, § 77 Pensioning laborers
December 3, 1912 MGL c. 143, § 3 Inspection of buildings
December 2, 1913 MGL c. 48, §§ 36 and 37 Promotion of call men in fire
department
December 2, 1913 MGL c. 152, §§ 69 to 74 Compensation of laborers
November 3, 1914 MGL c. 41, § 111 Vacations for laborers
November 7, 1916 MGL c. 74, §§ 15 to 17 Schools for agriculture
November 7, 1916 MGL c. 43, §§ 1 to 44
and 46 to 55
Plan-A-City Charter
December 4, 1917 MGL c. 48, § 58 Tenure of office of chief of the fire
department
November 4, 1919 MGL c. 48, § 59 2 platoon system of firemen
November 4, 1919 MGL c. 71, §§ 21 to 26 Continuation schools
December 7, 1920 MGL c. 136, §§ 21 to 25 Sunday sports
December 7, 1920 MGL c. 22, § 12; c. 147,
§§ 32 to 51
Boxing commission
November 2, 1926 MGL c. 43, §§ 44A to
44G
Preliminary City election
December 7, 1937 MGL c. 41, § 103 Establishing purchasing department
November 4, 1947 MGL c. 48, § 58B Forty-eight hours for firemen
November 4, 1947 MGL c. 71, § 40 Equal pay for men and women
teachers
November 4, 1947 MGL c. 43, §§ 9 to 11 Acceptance of Plan E Charter
November 8, 1955 MGL c. 43, §§ 9 to 11 Acceptance of Plan E Charter
§ A400-1 QUINCY CODE § A400-2
A400:12
November 5, 1957 Gen. Acts of 1956, Ch.
349
Five-day week for police officers
§ A400-2 GENERAL LAW ACCEPTANCES § A400-2
A400:13

Chapter A401
SPECIAL ACTS
§ A401-1. Special acts applicable to Quincy.
3-29-1788 Preservation of Marshes. An act for the
preservation of the Salt Marshes in that part of
the town of Dorchester, in the county of
Suffolk, known by the name of Squantum.
L & R 1786—1787,
Chapter 60, Page 653
2-22-1792 Town Incorporation. An act for incorporating
the North Precinct of the town of Braintree in
the county of Suffolk, into a separate town by
the name of Quincy, and for annexing sundry
inhabitants of the town of Dorchester, with their
estates, to the said town of Quincy.
Acts 1790—1801,
Chapter 36, Pages
319—30
2-22-1792 Quincy. An act for incorporating the North
Precinct of the town of Braintree in the county
of Suffolk, into a separate town by the name of
Quincy, and for annexing sundry inhabitants of
the town of Dorchester, with their estates, to the
said town of Quincy.
L & R 1790—1791.
Chapter 36, Page 319
3-11-1802 Bridge. An act for incorporating certain
persons, for the purpose of building a bridge
over Neponset River between Dorchester and
Quincy, and for supporting the same.
L & R 1800—1801,
Chapter 74, Pages
381—385
2-7-1803 Bridge. An act in addition to an act entitled "An
act for incorporating certain persons, for the
purpose of building a bridge over Neponset
River and for supporting the same.
L & R 1802, Chapter 48,
Pages 78-80
3-4-1803 Turnpike. An act for incorporating certain
persons for the purpose of laying out and
making a turnpike road from Quincy Meeting
House to a place called Queen Ann's Corner on
the borders of Hingham and Scituate, for
building the necessary bridges on said road, and
supporting the same.
L & R 1802, Chapter
102, Pages 203-209
3-4-1803 Roads. An act for incorporating certain persons
for the purpose of laying out and making a
turnpike road from Quincy Meeting House to a
place called Queen Ann's Corner on the borders
of Hingham and Scituate for building the
necessary bridges on said road and supporting
the same.
L & R 1802—1803,
Chapter 102, Page 203
§ A400-2 SPECIAL ACTS § A401-1
A401:1
2-10-1814 Quincy. An act in addition to an act, entitled
"An act for Incorporating the North Precinct of
the Town of Braintree, in the County of
Suffolk, into a separate Town, by the name of
Quincy, and for annexing sundry inhabitants of
the Town of Dorchester, with their estates, to
the said Town of Quincy.
L & M 1812—1815,
Chapter 105, Sections
1—3, Pages 353—354
2-20-1818 Fisheries. An act to regulate the fishery in
Monatiquot River in the town of Braintree.
Acts I of M
1815—1818, Chapter
151, Pages 558—560
2-20-1818 Turnpike. An act relating to the Braintree and
Weymouth Turnpike Corporation.
Acts L of M
1815—1818, Chapter
156, Page 571
2-12-1819 Quincy. An act to set off Caleb Faxon, with his
family and estate, from the town of Dorchester,
and annex them to the town of Quincy.
L of M 1819, Chapter
70, Page 105
2-21-1820 Quincy. An act to alter and establish the county
line between the towns of Dorchester and
Quincy.
L of M 1818—1822,
Chapter 249, Pages
371—372
2-3-1827 Quincy. An act to incorporate the supervisors of
the Adams Temple and School Fund, in Quincy
in the county of Norfolk.
L of M, V. 1, 1825,
1828, Chapter 59, Page
410
6-5-1830 Bridge. An act in further addition to an act,
entitled, "An act for incorporating certain
persons for the purpose of building a bridge
over the Neponset River, between Dorchester
and Quincy, and for supporting the same."
A & R 1820—1831,
Chapter 1, Pages
491—492
4-10-1831 Granite Railway Co. An act in addition to an
act entitled "An act to incorporate the Granite
Railway Company."
Laws 1831—1833,
Chapter 48, Pages
92—93
3-7-1832 Rivers. An act to improve the navigation of
Town River in Quincy.
L of M 1831—1833,
Chapter 106, Pages
360—361
3-12-1832 Bridge. An act in addition to "an Act to
establish the Hingham and Quincy Bridge and
Turnpike Corporation."
A & R 1831—1833,
Chapter 122, Pages
381—382
3-14-1833 Society. An act to incorporate the First
Universalist Society in the town of Quincy.
L of M 1831—1833,
Chapter 108, Page 644
3-30-1836 Manufacturing. An act to incorporate the
Norfolk Granite Company.
L of M 1834—1836,
Chapter 79, Page 739
3-31-1836 Bank. An act to establish the Quincy Stone
Bank.
L of M 1834—1836,
Chapter 112, Page 772
4-6-1836 Granite Railway. An act to increase the capital
stock of the Granite Railway Company.
1834—1835, Chapter
160, Page 838
§ A401-1 QUINCY CODE § A401-1
A401:2
3-4-1837 Granite. An act to incorporate the Boston
Granite Company.
L of M 1837—1838,
Chapter 29, Page 26
3-7-1837 Granite. An act to incorporate the Washington
Granite Company.
L of M 1837—1838,
Chapter 44, Page 41
3-10-1837 Manufacturing. An act to incorporate the
Quincy Granite Company.
L of M 1837—1838,
Chapter 63, Pages
55—56
3-24-1840 An act to incorporate the Quincy Mill-Dam
Corporation.
G & SS 1839—1842,
Chapter 95, Pages
240—242
3-3-1842 Canal and Wharf. An act to incorporate the
proprietors of the Mount Hope Canal and
Wharf Company.
G & SS 1839—1842,
Chapter 90, Page 540
3-16-1844 Railroads. An act to establish the Old Colony
Railroad Corporation.
A & R 1845, Chapter
150, Pages 249—252
3-18-1845 Banks. An act to incorporate the Quincy
Savings Bank.
A & R 1843—1845,
Chapter 156, Pages
480—481
3-25-1845 Railroads. An act to establish the Randolph and
Bridgewater Railroad Corporation.
A & R 1845, Chapter
226, Pages 559—561
3-26-1846 Railroad. An act to incorporate the South Shore
Railroad Company.
A & R 1846—1848,
Chapter 152, Pages
101—102
4-16-1846 Granite Railroad Company. An act authorizing
the Granite Railway Company to extend their
railroad, and for other purposes.
A & R 1846—1848,
Chapter 232, Pages
159—160
3-31-1847 Railroad. An act to incorporate the Quincy
Branch Railroad Company.
A & R 1846—1848,
Chapter 146, Pages
396—397
4-12-1847 Insurance Company. An act to incorporate the
Quincy Mutual Fire Insurance Company.
A & R 1846—1848,
Chapter 171, Page 411
4-15-1847 Railroad. An act to incorporate the Quincy
Point Railroad Company.
A & R 1846—1848,
Chapter 187, Pages
422—423
4-20-1847 Railroad. An act concerning the South Shore
Railroad Company.
A & R 1846—1848,
Chapter 201, Pages
435—436
4-2-1851 Insurance Companies. An act to incorporate the
Quincy Mutual Fire Insurance Co.
A & R 1850—1851,
Chapter 22, Page 571
4-8-1853 Quincy. An act to establish a fire department in
the town of Quincy.
A & R 1852—1853,
Chapter 129, Page 436
§ A401-1 SPECIAL ACTS § A401-1
A401:3
4-28-1853 Incorporating Bank. An act to incorporate the
Mount Wollaston Bank in Quincy.
A & R 1852—1853,
Chapter 250, Page 514
2-6-1854 Public Utilities. An act to incorporate the
Quincy Gas Light Company.
A & R 1854—1855,
Chapter 5, Pages 4—5
4-15-1854 Insurance. An act relating to the Quincy Mutual
Fire Insurance Company.
A & R, Chapter 315,
Page 228
4-15-1854 Insurance. An act relating to the Quincy Mutual
Fire Insurance Company.
A & R Act 1854,
Chapter 315, Page 228
3-14-1855 Ferries. An act to incorporate the Quincy Point
and Germantown Ferry Company.
A & R 1854—1855,
Chapter 48, Pages
523—524
4-18-1855 Insurance Company. An act to incorporate the
Quincy Fire And Marine Insurance Company.
A & R 1854—1855,
Chapter 199, Page 616
5-2-1855 Quincy. An act to set off a part of the town of
Dorchester and annex it to the town of Quincy.
A & R 1854—1855,
Chapter 167, Page 684
4-24-1856 Quincy. An act to set off a part of the town of
Braintree and annex the same to the town of
Quincy.
A & R, Chapter 132,
Pages 72—73
5-4-1857 Insurance. An act in addition to an act to
incorporate the Quincy Fire and Marine
Insurance Company.
A & R 1857, Chapter
108, Page 476
5-13-1857 Boundaries. An act in addition to an act to set
off a part of the town of Dorchester, and annex
it the town of Quincy.
A & R 1857, Chapter
146, Page 500
5-26-1857 Bridges, Etc. An act concerning the Neponset
Bridge and Braintree and Weymouth Turnpike.
A & R 1857, Chapter
223, Page 556
2-15-1859 Rivers. An act authorizing Samuel R. Edwards
and another to widen Town River in Quincy.
A & R 1859, Chapter 28,
Page 233
10-1-1859 Schools. An act in addition to an act to
incorporate the supervisors of the Adams
Temple and School Fund in Quincy.
A & R 1859, Chapter 46,
Page 244
9-24-1860 Public Utilities. An act to incorporate the
Citizens' Gas Light Company of Quincy.
A & R 1860, Chapter 36,
Pages 26—27
3-31-1860 Turnpike and Bridge. An act concerning the
Hingham and Quincy Turnpike and Bridges.
A & R Act 1860,
Chapter 140, Pages
122—124
4-4-1860 Marine Railway. An act incorporating the
Quincy Point Marine Railway Company.
A & R Act 1860,
Chapter 173, Page 138
2-15-1861 Railroads. An act to incorporate the Quincy
Railroad Company.
A & R 1861, Chapter 48,
Pages 367—370
4-30-1862 Bridges. An act concerning the Hingham and
Quincy Turnpike and Bridges.
A & R Act 1862,
Chapter 177, Page 139
§ A401-1 QUINCY CODE § A401-1
A401:4
5-22-1866 Manufacturing. An act to incorporate the
Quincy Point Shipping Company.
A & R 1866, Chapter
250, Pages 240—241
3-26-1869 Wharf. An act to authorize Charles R. Mitchell
to construct a wharf in Quincy.
A & R 1869, Chapter
117, Page 475
3-26-1869 Railroads. An act to authorize Charles R.
Mitchell to construct a railroad from his quarry
land to "Hayward's Creek," in Quincy.
A & R 1869, Chapter
115, Pages 474—475
4-24-1869 Railroad. An act to authorize Luke Rideout to
construct a railroad from his quarry land to
"Quincy Adams" Station, in Quincy.
A & R 1869, Chapter
190, Page 530
2-31-1870 Manufacturing. An act to incorporate the
Southworth Cotton Company for manufacture
of cotton cloths and threads.
A & R 1870, Chapter
133, Pages 88—89
5-20-1870 Bridges and Turnpike. An act to amend Chapter
177 of the Acts of 1862, concerning the
Hingham and Quincy Turnpike and Bridges.
A & R 1870, Chapter
265, Page 190
3-18-1871 Hotel. An act to incorporate the Wollaston
Hotel Company.
A & R 1871, Chapter
103, Pages 496—497
5-6-1871 Railroad. An act to incorporate the Plymouth
County Railroad Company.
A & R 1871, Chapter
257, Pages 603—605
3-7-1873 Wharves. An act to authorize John F. Dodge
and others to construct a wharf in Quincy.
A & R 1873, Chapter 56,
Pages 518—519
3-8-1873 Transportation. An act to incorporate the
Quincy Point Street Railway Company.
A & R 1873, Chapter 65,
Page 521
10-2-1873 Bridges. An act to incorporate the Squantum
Free Bridge Company. (Squantum)
A & R 1873, Chapter
269, Page 694
2-28-1874 Insurance Company. An act to extend the
charter of the Quincy Mutual Fire Insurance
Company and to authorize the same to hold real
estate. (May hold real estate not exceeding
$50,000.)
A & R 1874, Chapter 32,
Page 35
3-27-1875 Wharf. An act to incorporate the Wollaston
Wharf and Dock Company.
A & R 1875, Chapter 76,
Pages 651—652
3-30-1876 Bridges. An act to extend the time for building
the Squantum Free Bridge.
A & R, Chapter 81, Page
61
4-11-1876 Sewer. An act to empower the City of Boston to
lay and maintain a main sewer discharging at
Moon Island in Boston Harbor, and for other
purposes.
A & R 1876, Chapter
136, Pages 108—110
3-21-1879 Bridge. An act to extend the time and to amend
the act for the building of the Squantum Free
Bridge.
A & R 1879, Chapter
145, Page 496
§ A401-1 SPECIAL ACTS § A401-1
A401:5
4-16-1879 Sewer. An act in addition to an act to empower
the City of Boston to lay and maintain a main
sewer discharging at Moon Island in Boston
Harbor, and for other purposes.
A & R 1879, Chapter
230, Page 564
2-27-1880 Wharf. An act to enable the Wollaston Wharf
and Dock Company to hold additional real
estate in Quincy.
A & R 1880, Chapter 42,
Page 37
2-27-1880 District. An act to reinstate the town of Quincy
in the lumber district for "Suffolk and
Vicinity."
A & R 1880, Chapter 39,
Page 37
3-17-1880 Churches. An act to incorporate the First
Baptist Church of Quincy.
A & R 1880, Chapter
106, Page 68
4-17-1880 Quincy. An act to incorporate the trustees of the
Thomas Crane Public Library in the town of
Quincy.
A & R 1880, Chapter
202, Pages 151—153
2-9-1882 Quincy. An act to authorize the inhabitants of
Quincy to appropriate a part of their ancient
burial ground for the enlarging their town hall.
A & R 1882, Chapter 16,
Page 20
3-11-1882 Quincy. An act for laying out a public park in
the town of Quincy.
A & R 1882, Chapter 70,
Pages 56—59
5-3-1883 Quincy. An act to incorporate the Quincy Water
Company.
A & R 1883, Chapter
162, Page 449
3-13-1884 Bounties. An act to authorize the town of
Quincy to pay certain bounties.
A & R 1884, Chapter 80,
Pages 58—59
3-19-1885 Bounties. An act to authorize the town of
Quincy to pay certain boundaries.
A & R 1885, Chapter 28,
Page 520
4-16-1885 Quincy. An act changing the boundary line
between the town of Quincy and the town of
Milton in Norfolk County.
A & R 1885, Chapter
171, Page 616
6-19-1885 Quincy. An act to authorize the Quincy Water
Company to supply the town of Milton with
water.
A & R 1885, Chapter
372, Page 841
5-19-1887 Quincy. An act to give to the Board of road
Commissioners of the town of Quincy certain
powers in relation to brooks and streams
therein.
A & R 1887, Chapter
296, Pages 923—924
4-30-1888 Drawbridge. An act to provide for the widening
of the draws in the 2 bridges across Neponset
River, known as the Neponset Avenue Bridge
and the Granite Avenue Bridge.
A & R 1888, Chapter
279, Page 226
10-17-1888 Quincy. An act to incorporate the City of
Quincy.
A & R 1888, Chapter
347, Pages 281—301
§ A401-1 QUINCY CODE § A401-1
A401:6
5-28-1888 Water Company. An act to incorporate the
Milton Water Company.
A & R 1888, Chapter
411, Pages 424—430
3-1-1889 Water. An act to authorize the City of Boston to
supply Moon Island and Long Island with pure
water.
A & R 1889, Chapter 74,
Pages 830—831
3-11-1889 Quincy. An act to authorize the City of Quincy
to pay certain engineers and volunteer firemen.
A & R 1889, Chapter 99,
Pages 844—845
3-13-1889 Quincy. An act to incorporate the City Hospital
in the City of Quincy.
A & R 1889, Chapter
107, Pages 858—859
4-5-1889 Quincy. An act to change the name of the City
Hospital in the City of Quincy.
A & R 1889, Chapter
216, Page 930
4-15-1889 Municipal. An act to amend Section 44 of
Chapter 347 of the Acts of the year 1888
relating to the municipal indebtedness of the
City of Quincy.
A & R 1889, Chapter
256, Page 965
6-4-1889 Church. An act to confirm the title to certain
real estate in the City of Quincy used and
occupied by the Washington Street
Congregational Society.
A & R 1889, Chapter
400, Page 1083
2-2-1890 Church. An act to amend an act to incorporate
the Protestant Episcopal Society of Christ's
Church, in Quincy.
A & R 1890, Chapter
164, Page 137
6-16-1890 Corporation. An act to amend an act to
incorporate the City Hospital in the City of
Quincy.
A & R 1890, Chapter
417, Page 370
4-24-1891 Quincy. An act to authorize the City of Quincy
to construct a system of sewerage.
A & R 1891, Chapter
243, pages 811—819
4-28-1891 Quincy. An act to require the School
Committee of the City of Quincy to furnish
certain estimates to the City Council.
A & R 1891, Chapter
255, Page 829
5-28-1891 Railway. An act to incorporate the Quincy
Electric Freight Railway Company.
A & R 1891, Chapter
350, Pages 924—928
6-11-1891 Quincy. An act to authorize the City of Quincy
to introduce a public water supply.
A & R 1891, Chapter
401, Pages 1001—1010
5-6-1892 Quincy. An act to authorize the City of Quincy
and the towns of Weymouth and Hingham to
grant locations to street railway corporations
over Weymouth Fore River and Weymouth
Back River.
A & R 1892, Chapter
250, Page 221
§ A401-1 SPECIAL ACTS § A401-1
A401:7
6-13-1892 Quincy. An act authorizing the appointment of
water Commissioners for the City of Quincy,
and providing means for the purchase of the
franchise, corporate property and all the rights
of the franchise, corporate property and all the
rights and privileges of the Quincy Water
Company.
A & R 1892, Chapter
373, Page 390
4-4-1893 Corporation. An act to incorporate the
Wollaston Club.
A & R 1893, Chapter
168, Page 805
5-4-1893 Railway. An act to authorize the Quincy and
Boston Street Railway Company to purchase
the property and franchises of the Quincy Street
Railway Company and the Manet Street
Railway Company and to increase its capital
stock and issue bonds.
A & R 1893, Chapter
316, pages 950—951
5-12-1893 Quincy. An act to annex a part of the City of
Quincy to the City of Boston.
A & R 1893, Chapter
336, Pages 972—974
6-3-1893 Metropolitan Park Commission. An act to
establish a Metropolitan Park Commission.
A & R 1893, Chapter
407, Pages 1135—1136
3-9-1895 Land Sale. An act to authorize the City of
Boston to sell a parcel of land in Quincy.
A & R 1895, Chapter
101, Page 102
4-17-1895 Quincy. An act to authorize the City of Quincy
to construct a system of sewerage.
A & R 1895, Chapter
279, Pages 279—286
3-11-1896 Hospital. An act relative to appropriations for
the City Hospital in the City of Quincy.
A & R 1896, Chapter
148, Page 100
3-31-1896 Transportation. An act to authorize the Quincy
and Boston Street Railway Company to lease or
purchase the property of the Braintree Street
Railway Company, and to increase its capital
stock.
A & R 1896, Chapter
130, Page 88
4-1-1897 Quincy. An act relative to the payment of
indebtedness incurred by the City of Quincy in
constructing a system of sewerage.
A & R, Chapter 325,
Page 175
6-1-1897 Railroads. An act to incorporate the Boston,
Quincy and Fall River Bicycle Railway
Company.
A & R 1897, Chapter
527, Page 563
3-1-1898 Real Estate. An act to authorize the City of
Quincy to sell certain real estate.
A & R 1898, Chapter
102, Pages 69-70
3-30-1899 Bond Issue. An act to authorize the City of
Quincy to refund a part of its indebtedness.
A & R 1889, Chapter
219, Pages 178—179
4-1-1899 Street Improvement Loan. An act to authorize
the City of Quincy to incur indebtedness
beyond the limit fixed by law, for street
improvements.
A & R 1899, Chapter
225, Pages 184—185
§ A401-1 QUINCY CODE § A401-1
A401:8
4-6-1899 Quincy. An act relative to the tenure of office
of the Board of Water Commissioners in the
City of Quincy.
A & R 1899, Chapter
237, Pages 199—200
4-11-1900 Quincy. An act relative to the appointment of
Assessors and assistant Assessors in the City of
Quincy.
A & R 1900, Chapter
216, Pages 154—155
4-27-1900 Parks and Playgrounds. An act relative to the
construction of buildings in the parks and
playgrounds of the City of Quincy.
A & R 1900, Chapter
270, Page 196
6-1-1900 Sewerage. An act to authorize the City of
Quincy to expend certain money for sewer
construction.
A & R 1900, Chapter
364, Pages 289—290
7-12-1900 Bridges. An act to provide for the construction
of a new bridge over the Weymouth Fore River
in the City of Quincy and town of Weymouth.
A & R 1900, Chapter
456, Pages 445—447
3-21-1901 Game. An act relative to the protection of wild
fowl.
A & R 1901, Chapter
174, Pages 109—110
5-23-1901 Sewerage. An act making an appropriation for
maintaining and operating the Quincy Pumping
Station and force mains in the South
Metropolitan sewerage system.
A & R 1901, Chapter
429, Pages 356—357
1-27-1902 Sewage. An act making an appropriation for
operating the South Metropolitan system of
sewage disposal.
A & R 1902, Chapter 13,
Pages 9—10
2-24-1902 Quincy. An act relative to the fire department of
the City of Quincy.
A & R 1902, Chapter
105, Page 71
4-11-1902 Quincy. An act to authorize the City of Quincy
to make an additional sewerage loan.
A & R 1902, Chapter
248, Page 181
4-9-1903 Bridge. An act to provide that a portion of the
expense of construction and maintenance of the
bridge over Weymouth Fore River may be
assessed upon the county of Norfolk.
A & R 1903, Chapter
211, Pages 169—170
5-18-1903 Harbor. An act to direct the Board of Harbor
and Land Commissioners to dredge the
northerly shore of Quincy between Wollaston
and Squantum.
A & R 1903, Chapter
366, Page 336
2-27-1904 Bridges. An act to authorize the Metropolitan
Park Commission to construct a drawless
bridge over Sachem Brook, so-called in the
Quincy Shore Reservation.
A & R 1904, Chapter
124, Page 84
5-20-1904 Quincy. An act relative to the custody and to
the apportionment of the cost of the bridge over
Weymouth Fore River between the City of
Quincy and the town of Weymouth.
A & R 1904, Chapter
362, Page 303
§ A401-1 SPECIAL ACTS § A401-1
A401:9
3-9-1905 Sewer Loan. An act to authorize the City of
Quincy to make an additional sewerage loan.
A & R 1905, Chapter
151, Page 101
3-24-1905 Sewage South Metropolitan Systems. An act
making an appropriation for operating the
South Metropolitan system of sewage disposal.
A & R 1905, Chapter
214, Page 145
5-4-1905 Blue Hills Reservation Metropolitan Park
Commission. An act making additional
appropriations for the care of reservations in the
control of the Metropolitan Park Commission.
A & R 1905, Chapter
360, Page 291
4-6-1906 Bridge. An act to authorize Fallon Brothers to
construct a bridge over Quincy Town River in
the City of Quincy.
A & R 1906, Chapter
255, Pages 219—230
3-8-1907 Water Supply Loan. An act to authorize the
City of Quincy to incur indebtedness for water
supply purposes.
A & R 1907, Chapter
182, Page 139
3-27-1908 Fish. An act to prohibit the taking of herring in
certain waters by means of torches or other
light.
A & R 1908, Chapter
298, Pages 260—261
2-17-1909 Railroad. An act to authorize the Old Colony
Street Railway Company to extend its service
into the grounds of the Fore River Shipbuilding
Company.
A & R 1901, Chapter 70,
Page 57
4-15-1909 Quincy. An act to authorize the construction of
public landing places in the City of Quincy.
A & R 1909, Chapter
304, Pages 246—247
3-25-1910 Quincy. An act to authorize the City of Quincy
to drain its territory into the high level sewer.
A & R 1910, Chapter
292, Page 226
2-20-1911 Bond Issue. An act to authorize the City of
Quincy to make an additional sewerage loan.
A & R 1911, Chapter 57,
Page 42
3-2-1911 Quincy. An act to authorize the trustees of the
Thomas Crane Public Library of Quincy to hold
property to the amount of $200,000.
A & R 1911, Chapter 93,
Page 73
4-1-1911 Bridge. An act to provide for repairs and
alterations of the bridge over the Weymouth
Fore River in the City of Quincy and the town
of Weymouth.
A & R 1911, Chapter
230, Pages 183—184
4-20-1911 Quincy. An act relative to the authority of the
Board of Health of the City of Quincy.
A & R 1911, Charter
301, Page 259
5-13-1911 Quincy. An act to authorize the City of Quincy
to incur indebtedness for water supply
purposes.
A & R 1911, Chapter
448, Pages 434—435
§ A401-1 QUINCY CODE § A401-1
A401:10
6-8-1911 District Court of East Norfolk Land. An act to
authorize the taking of additional land in the
City of Quincy for a building for the District
Court of East Norfolk.
A & R 1911, Chapter
535, Pages 556—557
7-18-1911 Quincy. An act to authorize the City of Quincy
to borrow money for the development of its
waterfront.
A & R 1911, Chapter
713, Pages 872—873
4-29-1912 Association. An act relative to the Quincy
Firemen's Relief Association.
A & R 1912, Chapter
555, Page 509
5-11-1912 Quincy. An act to extend the provisions of the
Civil Service Act to the Chief of the Fire
Department of the City of Quincy.
A & R 1912, Chapter
579, Page 588
5-29-1912 Quincy. An act to authorize the City of Quincy
to fund a certain portion of its indebtedness
A & R 1912, Chapter
685, Page 755
2-24-1913 Quincy. An act to authorize the City of Quincy
to sell water for mechanical or manufacturing
uses on certain terms.
A & R 1913, Chapter
154, Pages 103—104
2-28-1913 Quincy. An act to authorize the City of Quincy
to change its method of sewer assessment.
A & R 1913, Chapter
405, Pages 342—343
6-20-1913 Interest Rate. An act relative to the rate of
interest upon certain securities issued by the
City of Quincy.
A & R 1913, Chapter
836, page 1100
6-25-1914 Quincy. An act to establish a board of survey
for the City of Quincy.
A & R 1914, Chapter
704, Pages 723—726
1-29-1915 Quincy. An act to authorize the City of Quincy
to appropriate a sum of money for the City
Hospital.
A & R 1915, Chapter 29,
Page 26
2-10-1915 Quincy. An act relative to filling vacancies in
the City council of the City of Quincy.
A & R 1915, Chapter 32,
Pages 27—28
2-15-1915 Bridge. An act to authorize the Metropolitan
Park Commission to construct and maintain a
bridge over Black's Creek in Quincy for the
extension of Furnace Brook Parkway.
A & R 1915, Chapter 51,
Page 40
4-1-1915 Quincy. An act to authorize an appropriation by
the City of Quincy for the improvement of
Weymouth Fore River.
A & R 1915, Chapter
244, Page 171
4-16-1915 Quincy. An act relative to adjustment of taxes
assessed on the property of the City of Boston
lying within the City of Quincy.
A & R 1915, Chapter
280, Pages 211—212
4-22-1915 River Improvement. An act to provide for the
improvement of Weymouth Fore River.
A & R 1915, Chapter
199, Pages 184—185
4-28-1915 Sewer. An act to provide for an additional
outlet for the South Metropolitan sewer.
Gen. Acts 1915, Chapter
210, Page 193
§ A401-1 SPECIAL ACTS § A401-1
A401:11
5-31-1915 Quincy. An act to authorize the construction
and maintenance of a new bridge over the
Neponset River between the cities of Boston
and Quincy.
A & R 1915, Chapter
300, Pages 376—377
5-3-1916 Bridge. An act to authorize the Fore River
Shipbuilding Corporation to build a bridge over
a tidal creek in the City of Quincy.
A & R 1916, Chapter
292, Page 267
4-11-1917 Quincy. An act to authorize the City of Quincy
to incur indebtedness for the purpose of
refunding abatements on account of taxes of the
year 1916
A & R 1917, Chapter
280, Page 261
5-3-1917 Bridge. An act to provide further for the
construction and maintenance by the
Metropolitan Park Commission of a new bridge
over the Neponset River between the cities of
Boston and Quincy.
Gen. Act of Mass. 1917,
Chapter 220, Page 209
5-16-1917 Quincy. An act to authorize the City of Quincy
to pay certain bills contracted by City officials
in excess of appropriations and to incur
indebtedness therefor.
Spec. Act Mass. 1916,
Chapter 31, Page 355
5-24-1917 Public Utilities. An act to authorize the Bay
State Street Railway Company to sell electricity
to the Fore River Shipbuilding Corporation
during the performance of existing contracts for
naval construction.
Spec. Act Mass. 1917,
Chapter 352, Page 398
5-25-1917 Quincy. An act to provide for an investigation
and protection of the shore of Quincy Bay.
Spec. Act Mass. 1917,
Chapter 363, Page 404
5-25-1917 Boulevard. An act to authorize the Metropolitan
Park Commission to pay to certain claims
arising from the taking of land for a boulevard
from Quincy to Quincy Shore Reservation.
Gen. Acts Mass. 1917,
Chapter 316, Pages
325—326
2-11-1918 Quincy. An act to authorize the City of Quincy
to pension Lawrence Keegan.
S.A. 1918, Chapter 13,
Page 9
2-20-1918 Quincy. An act to provide a Saturday halfholiday
for certain employees of the City of
Quincy.
S.A. 1918, Chapter 32,
Page 19
2-19-1919 Quincy. An act relative to filling the office of
Mayor of the City of Quincy during the
temporary absence or disability of the Mayor
and to succession to said office in case of
vacancy.
S.A. 1919, Chapter 27,
Pages 16—17
4-12-1919 Quincy. An act to authorize the City of Quincy
to establish a hospital.
S.A. 1919, Chapter 134,
Pages 117—118
§ A401-1 QUINCY CODE § A401-1
A401:12
5-28-1919 Quincy. An act relative to the tenure of office
of the City Clerk of Quincy.
S.A. 1919, Chapter 13,
Page 10
6-12-1919 Bridge. An act to provide for the completion by
the Metropolitan Park Commission of Neponset
Bridge over Neponset River between the cities
of Boston and Quincy.
Gen. Acts 1919, Chapter
238, Pages 179—180
6-27-1919 Bridge. An act to authorize the maintenance of
a temporary bridge over Neponset River in the
cities of Boston and Quincy, and to cede certain
land to the United States.
Gen. Acts 1919, Chapter
258, Pages 192—193
12-23-1919 Quincy. An act to exempt the City of Quincy
from certain payments on account of the
operation of the cars of the Boston Elevated
Railway Company over Victory Bridge to The
Government Reservation at Squantum.
S.A. 1919, Chapter 250,
Pages 355—356
2-26-1920 Quincy. An act establishing a board of license
Commissioners in the City of Quincy.
A & R 1920, Chapter 70,
Pages 43—44
3-4-1920 Harbor Lines. An act to establish harbor lines in
Weymouth Fore River above Quincy Point
Bridge.
A & R 1920, Chapter
104, Page 72
4-24-1920 Quincy. An act relative to the City council of
the City of Quincy.
A & R 1920, Chapter
195, Pages 145—146
5-27-1920 Quincy. An act to authorize the City of Quincy
to incur indebtedness for constructing and
furnishing school buildings and a hospital.
A & R 1920, Chapter
526, Pages 524—528
5-3-1921 Construction Work. An act authorizing the City
of Quincy to procure plans for construction
work without advertising.
A & R 1921, Chapter
353, Page 385
2-11-1922 Harbor Lines. An act establishing harbor lines
in Weymouth Fore River above Quincy Point
bridge.
A & R 1922, Chapter 37,
Page 28
5-3-1922 Bridge. An act making further provisions for
the construction and completion by the
Metropolitan District Commission of Neponset
Bridge over the Neponset River between the
cities of Boston and Quincy.
A & R 1922, Chapter
380, Page 396
4-18-1923 Bank. Resolve in favor of the Quincy Savings
Bank.
Resolve, A & R 1923,
Chapter 29, Page 572
5-7-1923 Highway. An act to provide for the completion
by the Metropolitan District Commission of the
Old Colony Boulevard, so-called
Acts, A & R 1923,
Chapter 365, Pages
368—369
§ A401-1 SPECIAL ACTS § A401-1
A401:13
5-7-1923 Highway. An act authorizing the Metropolitan
District Commission to construct Furnace
Brook Parkway from Newport Avenue to
Hancock Street in the City of Quincy.
Acts, A & R 1923,
Chapter 366, Page 369
3-14-1924 Quincy. An act extending the time during
which the United States may maintain the
temporary bridge, or build and maintain a new
bridge over the Neponset River in the cities of
Boston and Quincy.
A & R 1924, Chapter
101, Page 68
5-22-1924 Quincy. An act directing the Metropolitan
District Commission to construct a dam, with or
without a tide gate, across Black's Creek in the
City of Quincy where the same is crossed by
Furnace Brook Parkway.
A & R 1924, Chapter
391, Page 350
3-19-1925 Quincy. An act authorizing the City of Quincy
to supply water to the town of Braintree.
A & R 1925, Chapter
140, Pages 114—115
3-19-1925 Banks. An act authorizing the Quincy Trust
Company to hold additional real estate in the
City of Quincy.
A & R 1925, Chapter
141, Page 115
5-1-1925 Highways. An act to provide for the laying out
and construction of a southern route to
accommodate traffic between Boston and the
territory to the south and east thereof
A & R Act 1925,
Chapter 330, Pages
381—383
2-4-1926 Quincy. An act relative to preliminary elections
for the nomination of candidates for elective
municipal office in the City of Quincy.
A & R 1926, Chapter 17,
Page 10
4-16-1926 Quincy. An act authorizing the City of Quincy
to borrow money for school purposes.
A & R 1926, Chapter
249, Page 247
5-3-1926 Quincy. An act authorizing the City of Quincy
to borrow money for school purposes.
A & R 1926, Chapter
303, Page 320
5-25-1926 Public Works. An act relative to the laying out
and construction of a southern route to
accommodate traffic between Boston and the
territory to the south and east thereof
4-8-1927 Boulevard. An act providing for the extension
of the Quincy Shore Reservation to a point near
the junction of Sea and Canal Streets in the City
of Quincy.
A & R 1927, Chapter
229, Page 237
4-8-1927 Pond. An act authorizing the Metropolitan
District Commission to create and maintain a
pond for skating in Blue Hills Reservation in
the City of Quincy.
A & R 1927, Chapter
230, Page 238
§ A401-1 QUINCY CODE § A401-1
A401:14
2-29-1928 Quincy. An act authorizing the City of Quincy
to acquire land for the purposes of the extension
of the Quincy Shore Reservation in said City.
A & R 1928, Chapter 59,
Page 37
4-2-1928 Water Supply. An act relative to the admission
of certain cities and towns into the Metropolitan
Water District.
A & R 1928, Chapter
189, Page 207
4-2-1928 Quincy. An act relative to an underpass under
the drive on the Quincy Shore Reservation in
the City of Quincy.
A & R 1928, Chapter
190, Page 208
4-17-1928 Quincy. An act to authorize the Metropolitan
District Commission to enable the City of
Quincy to drain by gravity certain parts of its
sewerage system.
A & R 1928, Chapter
240, Pages 247—248
4-25-1928 Public Highway. An act providing for the
construction of a public highway with rip-rap
protection along the shore of Dorchester Bay in
the Squantum district of the City of Quincy.
A & R 1928, Chapter
259, Page 261
3-15-1929 Quincy. An act authorizing the City of Quincy
to borrow money for school purposes.
A & R 1929, Chapter
122, Page 108
3-15-1929 Quincy. An act authorizing the City of Quincy
to borrow money for hospital purposes.
A & R 1929, Chapter
125, Page 109
4-24-1930 Municipal. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to settle and pay a certain claim of
August H. Norton and H. P. Marden against
said City.
A & R 1930, Chapter
249, Page 288
5-21-1930 Naval Matters. An act ceding jurisdiction to the
United States of America over certain tracts of
land in Boston, Quincy, Scituate, Chatham and
the town of Nantucket.
A & R 1930, Chapter
333, Page 381—384
5-22-1930 Metropolitan Park Commission Reservation.
An act providing for the acquisition by the
Metropolitan District Commission of
Noswetusett Hummock in the City of Quincy as
an addition to the Quincy Shore Reservation.
A & R 1930, Chapter
337, Page 388
4-7-1931 Grade Crossing. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to borrow money for grade crossing
abolition purposes.
Acts A & R 1931,
Chapter 177, Page 154
6-9-1931 Comfort Station. An act authorizing the
Metropolitan District Commission to construct
a rest room and comfort station in the Blue
Hills Reservation in the City of Quincy.
Acts A & R 1931,
Chapter 406, Page 565
§ A401-1 SPECIAL ACTS § A401-1
A401:15
6-10-1931 Quincy. An act giving the City council of the
City of Quincy the right to disapprove the
granting in said City of certain licenses relative
to explosives and inflammables.
Acts A & R 1931,
Chapter 431, Page 657
3-7-1933 Auditor of Account. An act to provide for the
election of the auditor of accounts of the City of
Quincy by the City council of said City.
A & R 1933, Chapter 61,
Page 69
6-10-1933 Fish. An act relative to the taking of clams and
other shellfish at Wollaston Beach in the City
of Quincy.
A & R 1933, Chapter
252, Page 381
7-22-1933 Bridge. An act authorizing the construction of a
new high level bridge over the Weymouth Fore
River to replace the Fore River Bridge, socalled,
and for its maintenance as a state
highway.
A & R 1933, Chapter
348, Page 625
2-13-1934 Quincy. An act subjecting the office of
inspector of wires of the City of Quincy to the
Civil Service laws.
A & R 1934, Chapter 28,
Page 24
4-4-1934 Quincy. An act placing the office of chief
engineer in the Fire Department of the City of
Quincy under the Civil Service laws.
A & R 1934, Chapter
128, Page 123
4-17-1934 Quincy. An act providing retirement allowances
based on annuity and pension contributions for
employees of the City of Quincy.
A & R 1934, Chapter
152, Pages 138—155
6-23-1934 Quincy. An act relative to the construction of a
sea wall and other shore protection in the
Hough's Neck section of the City of Quincy.
A & R 1934, Chapter
322, Page 426
3-7-1935 Quincy. An act subjecting the office of
inspector of buildings in the City of Quincy to
the Civil Service laws.
A & R 1935, Chapter 46,
Page 59
5-13-1936 Quincy. An act authorizing the school
committee of the City of Quincy to take certain
land for constructing and enclosing an athletic
field and to charge admission fees in connection
with certain contests and exhibitions held on
such land.
A & R 1936, Chapter
266, Pages 257—258
6-2-1936 Association. An act relative to payments by the
Quincy Police Mutual Association to any
member thereof upon the death of his wife.
A & R 1936, Chapter
312, Pages 353—354
3-11-1937 Court. An act authorizing the County
Commissioners of the county of Norfolk to
provide adequate accommodations for the
District of East Norfolk at Quincy and for the
District Court of Northern Norfolk at Dedham.
A & R 1937, Chapter
100, Page 75
§ A401-1 QUINCY CODE § A401-1
A401:16
3-23-1937 Harbor Lines. An act reestablishing a certain
harbor line in Weymouth Fore River in Quincy
and Braintree.
A & R 1937, Chapter
120, Page 94
5-20-1937 River. An act relative to the improvement of the
Town River in Quincy.
A & R 1937, Chapter
419, Pages 508—509
3-22-1938 Courts. An act relative to providing additional
accommodations for the District Court of East
Norfolk at Quincy and for the District Court of
Northern Norfolk at Dedham.
A & R 1938, Chapter
130, Pages 93—94
6-7-1938 Draw-tenders. An act relieving the City of
Quincy and the towns of Braintree and
Weymouth from the obligation of paying the
compensation of the draw-tenders employed at
the new high level bridge over the Weymouth
River.
A & R 1938, Chapter
399, Page 451
6-7-1938 Retirements. An act relative to the retirement of
certain laborers in the employ of the City of
Quincy and validating certain action in relation
thereto.
A & R 1938, Chapter
402, Page 453
6-9-1938 Sea Wall. An act providing for the construction
of a sea wall along the shore of Great Hill, socalled,
in the City of Quincy.
A & R 1938, Chapter
409, Pages 458—459
6-22-1938 Cinders. Resolve providing for an investigation
by the Metropolitan Department of Public
Utilities relative to providing relief in the City
of Quincy and town of Weymouth against the
escape or discharge of cinders, ashes or other
solids from buildings in or upon which a
furnace or boiler with a forced or induced draft
is used.
A & R 1938, Chapter 59,
Pages 732—733
3-15-1939 Hospital. An act to allow the corporation
known as City Hospital of Quincy to purchase
additional real estate and convey the same to
the City of Quincy.
A & R 1939, Chapter 66,
Page 64
6-30-1939 Sea Wall. An act removing the limitation on the
cost of construction of a certain sea wall in the
City of Quincy.
A & R 1939, Chapter
331, Page 389
8-12-1939 Sewage. An act making additional provisions
for the sewage disposal needs of the north and
south metropolitan districts and other
communities which now and hereafter may be
included in said districts.
A & R 1939, Chapter
512, Page 773
2-28-1941 Land. An act authorizing the City of Quincy to
convey or release certain lands owned by said
City.
A & R 1941, Chapter 42,
Page 35
§ A401-1 SPECIAL ACTS § A401-1
A401:17
4-7-1941 Elections. An act providing for biennial
municipal elections in the City of Quincy.
A & R 1941, Chapter
163, Page 126
7-28-1941 Land. An act ceding jurisdiction to the United
States of America over a certain tract of land in
Quincy.
A & R 1941, Chapter
541, Page 654
7-29-1941 Borrowing Money. An act authorizing the City
of Quincy to borrow money for the purpose of
refunding to the Boston Consolidated Gas
Company certain overpayments of taxes
assessed upon it by said City.
A & R 1941, Chapter
546, Page 658
10-30-1941 Sewage. An act further providing for sewage
disposal needs of the north and south
metropolitan sewerage districts and
communities which now or hereafter may be
included in said districts, and extending the life
of the emergency public works commission.
A & R 1941, Chapter
720, Page 1120
3-14-1945 City Hall. An act authorizing the repeal of
certain provisions of the charter of the City of
Quincy imposing restrictions relative to the
erection of a City hall.
A & R 1945, Chapter
112, Page 84
3-15-1945 Salaries. An act relative to the salaries of the
Mayor and the members of the City council of
the City of Quincy.
A & R 1945, Chapter
129, Page 95
7-12-1945 Retirement. An act increasing the retirement
allowance of Quincy firemen in the City of
Quincy.
A & R 1945, Chapter
601, Page 625
7-24-1945 Sewage. An act further providing for sewage
disposal needs of the north and south
metropolitan sewerage districts and
communities which now or hereafter may be
included in said districts.
A & R 1945, Chapter
705, Page 879
7-25-1945 Dredging. An act providing for the dredging by
the Port of Boston Authority of a channel from
Quincy Bay to the Wollaston and Squantum
Yacht Clubs, of a basin in front of said clubs
and of a channel in the Weymouth Fore River.
A & R 1945, Chapter
718, Page 906
6-6-1946 Dredging. An act providing for the dredging by
the Port of Boston Authority of a mooring basin
in Town River in the City of Quincy.
A & R 1946, Chapter
449, Page 468
6-7-1946 Shore Protection. An act providing for the
construction by the Port of Boston Authority of
shore protection in the City of Quincy.
A & R 1946, Chapter
485, Page 496
3-3-1947 Salaries. An act relative to the salaries of the
Mayor and City council of the City of Quincy.
A & R 1947, Chapter
113, Page 78
§ A401-1 QUINCY CODE § A401-1
A401:18
3-18-1947 Borrowing Money. An act authorizing the City
of Quincy to borrow money for the purpose of
meeting an appropriation for a judgment
obtained by the Hia-Pearl Corporation against
said City for land taking.
A & R 1947, Chapter
171, Page 114
3-18-1948 Rapid Transit. An act authorizing the approval
of plans and estimates of costs of the extension
of rapid transit to the City of Quincy and the
town of Braintree and for ascertaining the
wishes of the inhabitants of said City and town
relating thereto.
A & R 1948, Chapter
151, Page 103
5-28-1948 Unpaid Bills. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to appropriate money for the payment
of, and to pay, certain unpaid bills.
A & R 1948, Chapter
429, Page 385
6-4-1948 Wollaston Beach. An act providing for sanding
and improving portions of Wollaston Beach
adjacent to Quincy Shore Boulevard in the City
of Quincy.
A & R 1948, Chapter
490, Page 483
5-10-1949 License Commissioners. An act relative to the
members of the Board of license
Commissioners in the City of Quincy.
A & R 1949, Chapter
275, Page 191
5-10-1949 Parking Place and Meters. An act to authorize
the City of Quincy to borrow money for the
purpose of constructing a public parking place,
including drainage and installation of lighting
facilities, and authorizing the installation of
parking meters on such parking place.
A & R 1949, Chapter
271, Page 189
7-28-1949 Breakwater, Hough's Neck. An act providing
for the construction by the Port of Boston
Authority of a breakwater in Hough's Neck in
the City of Quincy.
A & R 1949, Chapter
608, Page 532
7-30-1949 Dredging Hough's Neck. An act providing for
the dredging by the Port of Boston Authority of
a channel, or channels, to the public landing
and waterfront in the Hough's Neck section of
the City of Quincy.
A & R 1949, Chapter
616, Page 537
3-20-1950 Dog Pound. Payment for construction of dog
pound.
A & R 1950, Chapter
239. Page 137
5-2-1950 Housing Authority. Authorizing City to
purchase land from housing authority for school
purposes.
A & R 1950, Chapter
383, Page 269
6-27-1950 Borrowing Money. Authorizing City to borrow
money for school purposes.
A & R 1950, Chapter
562, Page 400
§ A401-1 SPECIAL ACTS § A401-1
A401:19
3-9-1951 Convey Land. Authorizing Metropolitan
District Commission to convey land to U.S. as
addition to Adams Mansion National Historic
Site.
A & R 1951, Chapter
122, Page 114
7-25-1951 Borrowing Money. Authorizing City to borrow
money for hospital purposes.
A & R 1951, Chapter
550, Page 498
3-16-1953 Convey Land. An act authorizing the City of
Boston to sell to the City of Quincy certain land
in the Squantum district of the City of Quincy.
A & R 1953, Chapter
174, Page 131
3-16-1953 School Committee. An act providing that 3
members of the Quincy school committee be
elected biennially for terms of 4 years and
changing the method of filling vacancies.
A & R 1953, Chapter
177, Page 134
3-16-1953 School Committee. An act authorizing school
committee of the City of Quincy to provide
conveniences at Veterans Memorial Field.
A & R 1953, Chapter
182, Page 137
5-1-1953 City Council. An act relative to filling
vacancies in the City council of the City of
Quincy.
A & R 1953, Chapter
321, Page 230
2-24-1954 Lease Property. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to lease certain portions of the property
acquired by it from the New York, New Haven
and Hartford Company.
A & R 1954, Chapter
154, Page 93
6-6-1955 Cemetery. An act to authorize the City of
Quincy to purchase land for cemetery purposes
A & R 1955, Chapter
414, Page 280
7-7-1955 Sanitary Facilities. An act to authorize the City
of Quincy to locate sanitary facilities in its offstreet
parking areas.
A & R 1955, Chapter
521, Page 429
7-7-1955 Bond Proceeds. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to use certain bond proceeds for the
construction of sanitary facilities in its off-street
parking areas.
A & R 1955, Chapter
522, Page 429
7-22-1955 Furnace Brook. An act providing for the
enclosure by pipe or conduit of a portion of
Furnace Brook in Quincy.
A & R 1955, Chapter
600, Page 493
1-26-1956 Capital Improvements. An act to authorize the
City of Quincy to use the balance of certain
bond proceeds for certain capital
improvements.
A & R 1956, Chapter 19,
Page 14
2-2-1956 School Committee. An act authorizing the
School Committee of the City of Quincy to
grant the use of Veterans Memorial Field to
charitable, historical and veterans organizations
and permit the charging of certain fees.
A & R 1956, Chapter 42,
Page 27
§ A401-1 QUINCY CODE § A401-1
A401:20
3-5-1956 Hall Cemetery. An act authorizing the transfer
of property and funds of the Hall Cemetery
Association, Inc. to the City of Quincy.
A & R 1956, Chapter
133, Page 76
3-5-1956 Salaries. An act authorizing the initial
establishment of the annual salaries of the
Mayor and councillors of the City of Quincy
under the Plan A charter
A & R 1956, Chapter
154, Page 86
8-8-1956 Ward Councillors. An act providing for ward
representation in the City council of the City of
Quincy
A & R 1956, Chapter
633, Page 568
2-8-1957 School Committee An act authorizing the
school committee of the City of Quincy to grant
the use of Veterans Memorial Field to any
church or religious organization
A & R 1957, Chapter 60,
Page 41
2-14-1957 Shellfish Constable. An act placing the office of
shellfish constable under the civil service laws
A & R 1957, Chapter 79,
Page 54
3-4-1957 Land Sale. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to sell a parcel of land taken for
highway purposes
A & R 1957, Chapter
149, Page 98
4-12-1957 Broad Meadows. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to sell or lease certain land in the Broad
Meadows section of said City
A & R 1957, Chapter
289, Page 185
4-16-1957 Advertising Funds. An act authorizing the City
of Quincy to appropriate funds for historic
purposes and to advertise and promote the City
A & R 1957, Chapter
295, Page 189
5-17-1957 Town River. An act providing for the payment
of certain funds by the department of public
works to the secretary of the army for the
purpose of completing the improvement of
Town River in the City of Quincy
A & R 1957, Chapter
381, Page 259
7-31-1957 Broad Meadows. An act relative to the use of
certain land in the Broad Meadows section of
the City of Quincy
A & R 1957, Chapter
619, Page 510
6-9-1958 Hancock Street. An act providing for the
transfer of the care, control and maintenance of
a portion of Hancock Street in the City of
Quincy to the Metropolitan District
Commission
A & R 1958, Chapter
372, Page 209
6-24-1958 Reimbursement. An act for the reimbursement
by the Commonwealth to the City of Quincy for
certain land taken for the widening of
Robertson Street
A & R 1958, Chapter
417, Page 235
§ A401-1 SPECIAL ACTS § A401-1
A401:21
8-1-1958 Cemetery Managers. An act establishing a
board of managers of public burial places in the
City of Quincy
A & R 1958, Chapter
499, Page 331
8-29-1958 Furnace Brook. An act authorizing and
directing the Metropolitan District Commission
to improve drainage and relieve flood
conditions in Furnace Brook and Black's Creek
in the City of Quincy
A & R 1958, Chapter
560, Page 410
3-9-1959 Health Commissioner. An act granting tenure of
office to the present incumbent of the office of
Commissioner of health until he attains the age
of 70
A & R 1959, Chapter
110
5-19-1959 Underpass. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to enter into a contract with the New
York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad
Company relative to the construction of a
pedestrian underpass at St. Ann's Road in said
City
A & R 1959, Chapter
323
3-7-1960 Director of Veterans' Services. An act
authorizing the placing of the office of director
of veterans' services of the City of Quincy
under the civil service laws
A & R 1960, Chapter
164
3-30-1960 Harbormaster. An act providing for the
appointment by the Mayor of the City of
Quincy of a harbormaster and assistant
harbormasters who shall have jurisdiction over
certain waters of Quincy Bay
A & R 1961, Chapter
268
2-9-1961 Assistant City Clerk. An act providing life
tenure for the incumbent of the office of
assistant City Clerk in the City of Quincy
A & R 1961, Chapter 50
2-17-1961 Park and Recreation Board. An act abolishing
the Board of park Commissioners and the
recreation commission of the City of Quincy
and establishing a park and recreation board
A & R 1961, Chapter 78
3-22-1962 City Auditor. An act providing life tenure for
the incumbent of the office of City auditor of
the City of Quincy
A & R 1962, Chapter
280
4-7-1962 Park and Recreation Board. An act providing
for the annual election of the Chairman of the
park and recreation board of the City of Quincy
and for the appointment of an executive
secretary to said board
A & R 1962, Chapter
388
§ A401-1 QUINCY CODE § A401-1
A401:22
7-16-1962 Cemetery. An act authorizing and directing the
Metropolitan District Commission to convey a
certain parcel of land to the City of Quincy for
cemetery purposes
A & R 1962, Chapter
669
7-15-1963 Sea Wall. An act directing the department of
public works to erect a sea wall on certain land
owned by the Commonwealth in the City of
Quincy
A & R 1964, Chapter
536
10-15-1963 First Railway. An act authorizing the
Metropolitan District Commission to acquire by
gift certain land in the City of Quincy in the
vicinity of the site of the first railway in
America
A & R 1963, Chapter
748
2-7-1964 School Site. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to use for school purposes certain land
held by the City for park purposes
A & R 1964, Chapter 42
6-4-1964 Mental Health. An act authorizing the
Department of Mental Health to establish a
mental health center in the City of Quincy
A & R 1964, Chapter
472
7-3-1964 Incinerator. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to construct an incinerator adjacent to
Hardwick quarry on Quarry Street in said City
A & R 1964, Chapter
666
2-15-1965 Retirement Appeal Board. An act permitting
Margaret Joyce to appeal to the Contributory
Retirement Appeal Board a decision of the City
of Quincy retirement board after the expiration
of the time required for such an appeal
A & R 1965, Chapter 26
4-27-1965 Pre-School Examinations. An act authorizing
the school committee of the City of Quincy to
require certain examinations of preschool
children
A & R 1965, Chapter
372
9-21-1965 Garbage and Refuse. An act authorizing the
City of Quincy to enter into a contract for the
disposal of garbage or refuse by incineration,
composting or any other sanitary means
A & R 1965, Chapter
706
10-11-1965 M.B.T.A. Extensions. An act authorizing the
Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority to
extend its rapid transit facilities in the cities of
Boston and Quincy and the towns of Braintree,
Hingham, Hull, Scituate, and Weymouth
A & R 1965, Chapter
372
11-9-1965 Park Land. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to sell and convey certain park land to
Thomas R. Picard
A & R 1965, Chapter
753
§ A401-1 SPECIAL ACTS § A401-1
A401:23
12-28-1965 Park Land. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to sell and convey certain park land in
said City to Columbus Club of West Quincy,
Inc
A & R 1965, Chapter
753
4-21-1966 Land Sale. An act authorizing the City of
Boston to sell to the City of Quincy certain land
in the Squantum District of the City of Quincy
A & R 1966, Chapter
181
6-1-1966 Bond Issue. An act providing for submitting, at
the biennial state election in the current year, to
the voters of the City of Quincy, the question of
approving or disapproving an order passed by
the City council authorizing a certain issue of
bonds
A & R 1966, Chapter
346
7-26-1966 Tax Refund. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to refund a certain sum of money for
certain taxes erroneously assessed and collected
from the John H. Settles Company, Inc.
A & R 1966, Chapter
454
8-24-1966 Board of Public Works. An act establishing a
board of public works in the City of Quincy
A & R 1966, Chapter
550
9-5-1966 Tax Refund. An act making a corrective change
in the law authorizing the City of Quincy to
refund a certain sum of money for certain taxes
erroneously assessed and collected from the
John H. Settles Company, Inc.
A & R 1966, Chapter
684
6-19-1967 Park and Recreation Board. An act placing the
position of executive secretary to the park and
recreation board of the City of Quincy under
the Civil Service Law
A & R 1967, Chapter
375
6-28-1967 Planning Director. An act exempting the
planning director of the City of Quincy from
the provisions of the Civil Service Law
A & R 1967, Chapter
409
8-11-1967 M.B.T.A. An act authorizing the City of Quincy
and the Massachusetts Bay Transportation
Authority to lease jointly air rights and space
over City of Quincy parking facilities and
Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority
facilities in the City of Quincy
A & R 1967, Chapter
537
8-22-1967 Payment of Medical Bills. An act authorizing
the City of Quincy to pay certain bills for
medical treatment or supplies required by Bruce
Gilmore as a result of an injury sustained by
him at the Quincy High School
A & R 1967, Chapter
569
9-6-1967 Retirement Board. An act directing the Quincy
retirement board to recompute the pensions of
certain former employees of said City
A & R 1967, Chapter
598
§ A401-1 QUINCY CODE § A401-1
A401:24
1-3-1968 Retirement Board. An act authorizing Margaret
D. Joyce to file with the retirement board of the
City of Quincy a late notice of a personal injury
sustained by her prior to her retirement
A & R 1968, Chapter
863
3-11-1968 Constables. An act providing for the
appointment and removal of constables in the
City of Quincy by the Chief of Police
A & R 1968, Chapter 38
3-29-1968 Registry of Motor Vehicles. An act authorizing
the City of Quincy to borrow money for the
construction of a building to be used by the
Registry of Motor Vehicles
A & R 1968, Chapter 99
5-18-1968 Quincy Point Congregational Church Homes,
Inc. An act authorizing Quincy Point
Congregational Homes, Inc. to hold additional
real and personal estate.
A & R 1968, Chapter
285
6-10-1968 Quincy Shore Drive. An act designating a
section of the William T. Morrissey Boulevard
in the City of Quincy as the Quincy Shore
Drive
A & R 1968, Chapter
386
6-29-1968 Railway. An act relative to the acquisition of
certain land in the City of Quincy on which the
first railway in America was situated
A & R 1968, Chapter
454
7-8-1968 Woodward Institute for Girls. An act
authorizing the City of Quincy to provide
scholarships at Woodward Institute School for
Girls in said City
A & R 1968, Chapter
515
7-18-1968 Squantum Tidewaters. An act providing that
certain licenses for the purpose of placing and
maintaining fill and other structures in and over
certain tidewaters in or adjacent to the
Squantum area of the City of Quincy be
irrevocable
A & R 1968, Chapter
668
7-24-1968 Hospital Board of Managers. An act increasing
the membership of the Board of managers of
the Quincy City Hospital and providing that
said board shall appoint the director of said
hospital for a term of years
A & R 1968, Chapter
745
4-29-1969 Unpaid Bills. An act authorizing City of Quincy
to appropriate money for the payment of, and to
pay, certain unpaid bills
A & R 1969, Chapter
230
5-5-1969 Annuity. An act authorizing the City of Quincy
to grant an annuity to Annie L. Dorley, a former
employee of said City
A & R 1969, Chapter
241
§ A401-1 SPECIAL ACTS § A401-1
A401:25
5-6-1969 Quincy Service Corps. An act authorizing the
City of Quincy to establish the Quincy service
corps for the employment of certain elderly
citizens
A & R 1969, Chapter
251
5-29-1969 Government Center Commission. An act
establishing a government center commission in
the City of Quincy
A & R 1969, Chapter
358
7-16-1969 Teachers Wages. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to appropriate money for the payment
of, and to pay, certain teachers back wages
A & R 1969, Chapter
521
8-19-1969 Park and Recreation Board. An act transferring
the forestry division of the City of Quincy to
the park and recreation board
A & R 1969, Chapter
733
8-24-1969 Registrar of Motor Vehicles. An act authorizing
the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to lease
premises in the City of Quincy for a term not
exceeding ten years
A & R 1969, Chapter
783
8-29-1969 School Street Bridge. An act directing the
Department of Public Works to participate with
the Massachusetts Bay Transportation
Authority and the City of Quincy in the
reconstruction of the School Street Bridge of
said City
A & R 1969, Chapter
864
4-1-1970 Deputy Collector. An act providing tenure of
office until age 70 for Sidney Gardiner,
incumbent of the position of deputy collector in
the hospital department of the City of Quincy
A & R 1970, Chapter
166
4-7-1970 School Physician. An act providing tenure of
office until age 70 for Alfred V. Mahoney,
incumbent of the position of school physician
in the health department of the City of Quincy
and authorizing said incumbent to become a
member of the retirement system of said City
A & R 1970, Chapter
180
5-28-1970 Parking Facility. An act providing for the
construction of an off-street parking facility by
the City of Quincy
A & R 1970, Chapter
371
8-31-1970 Tidegates. An act directing the Metropolitan
District Commission to construct certain
tidegates and culverts in the City of Quincy
A & R 1970, Chapter
850
4-22-1971 Parking Garage. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to borrow money for the construction of
a public parking garage in said City
A & R 1971, Chapter
200
§ A401-1 QUINCY CODE § A401-1
A401:26
5-20-1971 Nurses Aides. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to appropriate money for the payment
of, and to pay, certain sums to certain female
nurses aides employed at the Quincy City
Hospital
A & R 1971, Chapter
324
6-21-1971 Ice Skating Rink. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to construct an ice skating rink on
certain park land in said City
A & R 1971, Chapter
416
10-21-1971 Salary Increases. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to grant salary increases and establish
new positions for the year 1971
A & R 1971, Chapter
914
11-10-1971 Dog Officer. An act providing tenure of office
for the incumbent of the position of dog officer
of the City of Quincy
A & R 1971, Chapter
1042
11-10-1971 Mclntyre Plaza. An act providing for the
designation by the Massachusetts Bay
Transportation Authority of the plaza in the
Quincy Square section of the City of Quincy as
the Captain William F. Mclntyre Plaza
A & R 1971, Chapter
1043
5-25-1972 Appropriation. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to appropriate and pay a certain sum of
money to Edward Del Gizzi for certain
educational benefits
A & R 1972, Chapter
329
3-15-1973 Quincy Youth Hockey. An act authorizing the
Board of Regional Community Colleges, to
grant an easement to the Quincy Youth Hockey
Association, Inc., for the purpose of providing
an access way
A & R 1973, Chapter 87
8-8-1973 Wards. An act increasing the numbers of wards
and ward councillors and authorizing the
redrawing of ward lines in the City of Quincy.
A & R 1973, Chapter
590. (Note: This act was
not passed)
10-10-1973 Department of Planning and Community
Development. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to establish a department of planning
and community development which shall
include certain other departments of said City
A & R 1973, Chapter
898
10-23-1973 Quincy Housing Authority. An act directing the
Building Inspector of the City of Quincy to
issue a permit to the Quincy Housing Authority
to construct certain multiple dwelling units for
the elderly in said City
A & R 1973, Chapter
938
12-4-1973 Unpaid Bills. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to pay certain unpaid bills.
A & R 1973, Chapters
1126, 1127
§ A401-1 SPECIAL ACTS § A401-1
A401:27
12-11-1973 Park Land. An act validating the conveyance of
certain park land from the City of Quincy to
Thomas G. Waldie of said City
A & R 1973, Chapter
1199
12-12-1973 Director of Plant Facility. An act providing
tenure of office for the incumbent of the
position of director of plant facility of the City
of Quincy
A & R 1973, Chapter
1213
3-7-1974 Bonds. An act authorizing the City of Quincy to
appropriate certain proceeds of the sale of
certain bonds
A & R 1974, Chapter 20
5-8-1974 Death Benefits. An act increasing the amount of
certain death benefits which may be paid by the
Quincy Police Mutual Aid Association
A & R 1974, Chapter
198
6-5-1974 Fire Department. An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to continue to employ William A.
Novelli as master mechanic in the fire
department of said City
A & R 1974, Chapter
303
7-11-1975 Dispatcher. An act authorizing the appointment
of David H. Baharian to the position of
dispatcher in the department of public works in
the City of Quincy
A & R 1975, Chapter
460
8-13-1975 Park Land. An act relative to the conveyance of
certain park land from the City of Quincy to
Thomas G. Waldie of said City
A & R 1975, Chapter
515
9-22-1975 Uniform Allowances. An act authorizing the
City of Quincy to pay uniform allowances
directly to certain employees of its police, fire,
health and hospital departments
A & R 1975, Chapter
616
12-1-1975 Retroactive Pay Raise. An act directing the City
of Quincy to appropriate and pay certain
employees of the Quincy City Hospital a
retroactive pay raise
A & R 1975, Chapter
711
11-3-1980 Quincy. An act relative to the qualification of
certain Assessors
A & R 1980, Ch. 416
1-17-1984 Quincy. An act increasing the amounts of
certain exemptions during the first year of
100% valuation
A & R 1982, Ch. 653,
§ 8
6-13-2014 An Act Relative to Quincy College Acts of 2014, Ch. 135
(petitioned by Order No.
2013-173)
12-22-2016 An Act Facilitating Urban Redevelopment in
the City of Quincy
Acts of 2016, Ch. 355
(petitioned by Order No.
2016-247)
§ A401-1 QUINCY CODE § A401-1
A401:28
1-13-2017 An Act Authorizing Quincy College to Confer
Baccalaureate Degrees
Acts of 2016, Ch. 442
(petitioned by Order No.
2015-043)
1-18-2018 An Act Relative to the Civil Service Eligibility
List for Police Officers in the City of Quincy
Acts of 2018, Ch. 4
(petitioned by Order No.
2017-138)
8-23-2018 An Act Authorizing the City of Quincy to Grant
Veteran's Abatements of Real Estate Taxes to
Certain Veterans in the City of Quincy
Acts of 2018, Ch. 235
(petitioned by Order No.
2018-107)
10-22-2018 An Act Relative to the Disability Retirement of
Public Safety Personnel in the City of Quincy
Acts of 2018, Ch. 284
(petitioned by Order No.
2018-106)
§ A401-2. Special acts accepted by City Council of Quincy.
September 21,
1914.
Spec. Acts of 1914, Ch. 704 Establishment of board of survey.
May 26, 1919 Spec. Acts of 1919, Ch. 13 Tenure of office of City Clerk
March 17, 1920 Spec. Acts of 1920, Ch. 70 Board of license Commissioners
June 2, 1924 Spec. Acts of 1924, Ch. 391 Tide gate, Black's Creek
April 17, 1933 Spec. Acts of 1933, Ch. 99 Advance payment of taxes.
May 8, 1933 Spec. Acts of 1933, Ch. 3 Renewal of temporary loans.
January 15, 1934 Spec. Acts of 1933, Ch. 99 Advance payment on account of
taxes.
July 20, 1936 Spec. Acts of 1936, Ch. 266 Stadium, Merrymount Park
April 2, 1945 Spec. Acts of 1945, Ch. 112 Removing restrictions on erection of
City Hall
July 16, 1945 Spec. Acts of 1945, Ch. 601 Increasing retirement allowances of
firemen
April 3, 1950 Spec. Acts of 1950, Ch. 239 Payment for construction of dog
pound
May 15, 1950 Spec. Acts of 1950, Ch. 383 Authorizing City to purchase land
from housing authority for school
purposes
June 5, 1951 Spec. Acts of 1950, Ch. 820 Increase in amounts of certain
pensions of certain former
employees
June 7, 1954 Spec. Acts of 1954, Ch. 154 Lease land acquired from N.Y., N.H.
& H. RR.
June 18, 1956 Spec. Acts of 1956, Ch. 133 Transfer of funds and property of
Hall Cemetery to City of Quincy
§ A401-1 SPECIAL ACTS § A401-2
A401:29
May 6, 1957 Spec. Acts of 1957, Ch. 289 Power to sell or lease land in Broad
Meadows
May 6, 1957 Spec. Acts of 1957, Ch. 295 Authority to advertise and promote
historic Quincy
March 11, 1957 Spec. Acts of 1957, Ch. 79 Shellfish constable
March 11, 1957 Spec. Acts of 1957, Ch. 149 Sale of land taken for highway
purposes
January 20, 1958 Spec. Acts of 1957, Ch. 619 Removing restrictions on Broad
Meadows
August 6, 1958 Spec. Acts of 1958, Ch. 499 Board of Managers for burial places
June 15, 1959 Spec. Acts of 1959, Ch. 110 Tenure for health Commissioner
March 24, 1960 Spec. Acts of 1960, Ch. 164 Tenure for the director of veteran's
services
May 17, 1961 Spec. Acts of 1961, Ch. 50 Tenure for assistant City Clerk
May 25, 1962 Spec. Acts of 1961, Ch. 78 Abolishment of Park Commission
April 5, 1962 Spec. Acts of 1962, Ch. 280 Tenure for City auditor
July 13, 1964 Spec. Acts of 1964, Ch. 42 Faxon Field as school site
October 17,
1966
Spec. Acts of 1966, Ch. 684 Authorizing City to refund a certain
sum of money for certain taxes
erroneously assessed and collected
from the John H. Settles Company,
Inc.
June 21, 1967 Spec. Acts of 1951, Ch. 245 An act relative to the remuneration
of Civil Engineers employed by the
City of Quincy
August 29, 1967 Spec. Acts of 1967, Ch. 409 An act exempting the position of
Planning Director of the City of
Quincy from the provisions of the
Civil Service Law
November 24,
1967
Spec. Acts of 1967, Ch. 598 An act directing the Quincy
Retirement Board to recompute the
pensions of certain former
employees of the City
April 10, 1969 Spec. Acts of 1969, Ch. 733 An act making the forestry division
of the City of Quincy a part of the
park and recreation board
May 5, 1969 Spec. Acts of 1969, Ch. 241 An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to grant an annuity to Annie
L. Dorley
§ A401-2 QUINCY CODE § A401-2
A401:30
May 20, 1969 Spec. Acts of 1969, Ch. 521 An act authorizing the City of
Quincy to appropriate money for the
payment of certain teachers back
wages
October 19,
1973
Spec. Acts of 1973, Ch. 898 Department of Planning and
Community Development
February 16,
1982
1981 Ch. 752 Annuity to Mabel G. McEachern
§ A401-3. Special acts accepted by citizens of Quincy.
April 6, 1892. Spec. Acts of 1883, Ch. 162 Purchase of water works
December 5,
1893
Spec. Acts of 1891, Ch. 401 Authorizing introduction of public
water supply
July 9, 1895 Spec. Acts of 1895, Ch. 279 Authorizing construction of
sewerage system
November 7,
1911
Spec. Acts of 1911, Ch. 468 Civil service for Chief of Police
December 3,
1912
Spec. Acts of 1912, Ch. 546 Vacations for firemen
December 3,
1918
Spec. Acts of 1918, Ch. 32 Saturday half-holidays for laborers
November 2,
1920
Spec. Acts of 1920, Ch. 195 Ward representation, City council
December 8,
1931
Spec. Acts of 1931, Ch. 431 Giving City council right to
disapprove the granting of certain
licenses relative to explosives and
inflammables
December 5,
1933
Spec. Acts of 1933, Ch. 61 Election of auditor of accounts by
City council
December 7,
1933
Spec. Acts of 1933, Ch. 252 Taking of clams and other shellfish
at Wollaston Beach
November 6,
1934
Spec. Acts of 1934, Ch. 128 Placing office of chief engineer of
fire department under civil service
laws
November 6,
1934
Spec. Acts of 1934, Ch. 28 Subjecting office of inspector of
wires to civil service laws
December 4,
1934
Spec. Acts of 1934, Ch. 152 Providing retirement allowances
based on annuity and pension
contributions for employees of City
November 3,
1936
Spec. Acts of 1935, Ch. 46 Subjecting office of inspector of
buildings to civil service laws
§ A401-2 SPECIAL ACTS § A401-3
A401:31
November 4,
1947
Spec. Acts of 1947, Ch. 113 Increasing limit of salaries of Mayor
and councillors
November 3,
1953
Spec. Acts of 1953, Ch. 177 Four year term for school committee
November 6,
1956
Spec. Acts of 1956, Ch. 154 Initial salaries for Mayor and
councillors, under Plan A
November 5,
1957
Spec. Acts of 1956, Ch. 633 Ward councillors under Plan A
§ A401-3 QUINCY CODE § A401-3
A401:32
Chapter A402
HEALTH DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS
§ A401-3 HEALTH DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS § A401-3
A402:1

ARTICLE I
Smoking Regulations
[Adopted effective 8-9-2004]
§ A402-1. Definitions and guidelines.
A. Definitions. As used in this regulation, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS AGENT — An individual who has been designated by the owner or
operator of any establishment to be the manager or otherwise in charge of said
establishment.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual or person who performs services for an employer
in return for wages, profit, gratuity, privilege or benefit.
EMPLOYER — Any individual, person, partnership, association, corporation,
trust, school, college, university or other educational institution or other legal entity,
whether public, quasi-public, private or nonprofit, including any public or private
authority or municipal or other governmental agency, which regularly uses the
services of one or more employees.
ENCLOSED — A space bounded by walls (with or without windows or other
fenestrations) continuous from floor to ceiling and enclosed by one or more doors,
including but not limited to offices, function rooms and hallways.
MEMBERSHIP ASSOCIATION —
OUTDOOR SPACE — An outdoor area open to the air at all times and that cannot
be enclosed by a wall or side covering.
A not-for-profit entity that has been established and operates for a charitable,
philanthropic, civic, social, benevolent, educational, religious, athletic,
recreational or similar purpose and is comprised of members who collectively
belong to:
A society, organization or association of a fraternal nature that operates
under the lodge system, and having one or more affiliated chapters or
branches incorporated in any state;
(a)
(b) A corporation organized under MGL c. 180;
An established religious place of worship or instruction in the
commonwealth whose real or personal property is exempt from taxation;
or
(c)
A veterans' organization incorporated or chartered by the Congress of
the United States, or otherwise, having one or more affiliated chapters or
branches incorporated in any state.
(d)
(1)
Except for a religious place of worship or instruction, an entity shall not be
a membership association for the purposes of this definition unless individual
membership is required for all members of the association for a period of not
less than 90 days.
(2)
§ A402-1 HEALTH DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS § A402-1
A402:3
§ A402-2. Prohibition of smoking in the workplace, public places and membership
OWNER or OPERATOR — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation,
trust, school, college or other educational institution or other organization,
including any public or private authority or municipal or other governmental
agency, that owns or operates a workplace, public place or membership association.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE — The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including,
without limitation, a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile
home, vacation home, cabin or cottage, a residential unit in a governmental public
housing facility, and the residential portions of a school, college or university
dormitory or facility. A residential unit provided by an employer to an employee
at a place of employment shall be considered to be a residence if the unit is
an enclosed indoor space used exclusively as a residence and other employees,
excluding family members of the employee, or the public has no right of access to
the residence. For the purposes of this definition, a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, bedand-
breakfast or other similar public accommodation, hospital, nursing home or
assisted living facility shall not be considered a residence.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any building, facility or vehicle owned, leased, operated
or occupied by the City of Quincy, including school buildings and grounds; any
enclosed area open to the general public, including but not limited to retail stores,
retail food stores, supermarkets, restaurants, bars, cafes, libraries, museums,
theaters, banks, laundromats, indoor sports arenas, auditoriums, inn/hotel/motel
lobbies, private and public educational facilities, shopping malls, common areas
of residential buildings, public rest rooms, lobbies, staircases, halls, exits,
entranceways, elevators accessible to the public, public mass transit conveyances
and indoor platforms and enclosed outside platforms, open meetings of a
governmental body as defined in MGL c. 30A, § 11A, MGL c. 39, § 23A, and MGL
c. 34, § 9F,30 and licensed child-care locations.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE — An establishment that is not required to possess a
retail food permit whose primary purpose is to sell or offer for sale to consumers,
but not for resale, tobacco products and paraphernalia, in which the sale of the other
products is merely incidental, and in which the entry of persons under the age of 18
is prohibited at all times, and maintains a valid permit for the retail sale of tobacco
products as required to be issued by the City of Quincy.
SMOKING — Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette,
pipe, or other lighted tobacco product in any manner or form or non-tobacco
product designed to be combusted and inhaled.
WORK SPACE — Any enclosed area occupied by an employee during the course
of his or her employment, including but not limited to offices, customer service
areas, common areas, hallways, waiting areas, rest rooms, lounges, and eating
areas.
B. Guidelines. The Commissioner of Public Health for the City of Quincy may issue
guidelines for the implementation of this regulation, including but not limited to
definitions of terms as used in this regulation and in the guidelines.
30. Editor's Note: All three of these sections were repealed by St. 2009, c. 28. See now MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 to 25.
§ A402-1 QUINCY CODE § A402-2
A402:4
associations.
§ A402-3. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § A402-2 of this regulation, smoking may be
permitted in the following places and/or circumstances:
§ A402-4. Violations and penalties.
A. Smoking is prohibited in all workplaces, public places and membership
associations within the City of Quincy. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator,
business agent or employer to permit smoking in a workplace, public place or
membership association.
B. It shall further be the responsibility of the employer to provide a smoke-free
environment for all employees working in an enclosed workplace. Each employer
shall adopt, distribute and implement a written policy prohibiting smoking in the
workplace in accordance with this regulation.
C. The written smoking policy shall be adopted and distributed to all employees within
four weeks of the effective date of this regulation or within four weeks of the
commencement of business operations. A copy of the policy shall be clearly and
conspicuously posted in common areas of the workplace.
D. The employer shall post in a clear and conspicuous manner in the workplace signs
stating that smoking is prohibited.
A. Private residences, except during such time when the residence is utilized as part of
a business as a group child care center, school age day-care center, school age day
or overnight camp, or a facility licensed by the Office of Child Care Services or as
a health-care-related office or facility;
B. Hotel, motel, inn, bed-and-breakfast and lodging home rooms that are rented to
guests and are designated as smoking rooms. A room so designated shall have signs
posted indicating that smoking is allowed therein;
C. Nursing homes, licensed pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 71, and any acute care
substance abuse treatment center under the jurisdiction of the commonwealth, after
application and approval by the Quincy Health Department for designation of part
of the facility as a residence after compliance with the provisions of MGL c. 270,
§ 22(f), as amended, pertaining to such application;
D. Performers upon a stage provided that the smoking is part of a theatrical production
or professional film production;
E. Religious ceremonies where smoking is part of the ritual; and
F. Retail tobacco store, if the store maintains a valid permit for the sale of tobacco
products issued by the City of Quincy. All required permits shall be displayed in a
conspicuous manner, visible at all times to patrons of the establishment.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, operator, employer, business agent, or
other person having control of a workplace, public place or membership association
§ A402-2 HEALTH DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS § A402-4
A402:5
§ A402-5. Enforcement.
§ A402-6. Conflicts with other laws, ordinances or regulations.
§ A402-7. Severability.
If any provision, clause, sentence, paragraph or word of this regulation or the application
thereof to any person, entity or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall
to ensure compliance with all sections of this regulation pertaining to his/her place
of business or any person in violation of any section of this regulation. A violator
of this regulation may receive:
(1) In the case of a first violation, a fine of $100;
(2) In the case of a second violation within 24 months of the first violation, a fine
of $200; and
(3) In the case of three or more violations within 24 months of the second or
current violation, a fine of $300 for each violation.
B. Each calendar day an owner, operator, business agent or employer operates in
violation of any provision of this regulation shall be deemed a separate violation.
C. Nothing in this regulation shall be interpreted as undermining or eliminating the
enforcement provisions of MGL c. 270, § 22(m)(2). With respect to enforcement of
this regulation against membership associations otherwise exempt under MGL c.
270, § 22, the provisions of Subsection A above shall apply.
D. Nothing in this regulation shall be interpreted as prohibiting the Quincy Health
Department or any other City of Quincy department from revoking any license or
permit issued by and within the jurisdiction of such department for repeated
violations of this regulation.
A. Authority to enforce this regulation shall be held by the Quincy Health Department,
its subsidiary programs or designees, the City of Quincy Inspectional Services
Department, the City of Quincy Police Department, and the City of Quincy Fire
Department.
B. Any violation of this regulation may be enforced in the manner provided in MGL
c. 111, §§ 31 and 187, by the Quincy Health Department, its subsidiary programs
or designees.
C. Any person may register a complaint under this regulation to initiate an
investigation and enforcement with the Quincy Health Department.
A. Nothing in this regulation shall be deemed to amend or repeal any applicable fire,
health or other law, ordinance or regulation so as to permit smoking in areas where
it is prohibited by such fire, health or other law, ordinance or regulation.
B. Nothing in this regulation shall be deemed to preempt the further limitation of
smoking in the City of Quincy by any local regulatory body within the limits of its
authority and jurisdiction.
§ A402-4 QUINCY CODE § A402-7
A402:6
not affect the other provisions of this regulation which can be given effect without the
invalid provisions or application, and to this end the provisions of this regulation are
declared severable.
§ A402-8. Effective date.
This regulation shall take effect on August 9, 2004.
§ A402-7 HEALTH DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS § A402-8
A402:7

Derivation Table
§ A402-8 HEALTH DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS § A402-8
A402:9

Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1993 Code to 2020 Code
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. II.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Title/Chapter From 1993 Code Location in 2020 Code
Title 1, General Provisions
Ch. 1.01, Code Adoption (Reserved) –
Ch. 1.04, General Provisions (Reserved) –
Ch. 1.08, City Seal Ch. 44, Art. I
Ch. 1.12, Municipal Standard and City Flag Ch. 44, Art. II
Ch. 1.16, General Penalties Ch. 1, Art. I
Title 2, Administration and Personnel
Ch. 2.04, City Branches, Departments and
Divisions
Ch. 5, Art. I
Ch. 2.08, City Council Ch. 19
Ch. 2.10, City Council Members Ch. 19
Ch. 2.12, Clerk of Committees Ch. 66, Art. I
Ch. 2.14, City Council Office Administrative
Staff
Ch. 66, Art. XIII
Ch. 2.16, City Clerk
§§ 2.16.010 to 2.16.050 Ch. 66, Art. II
§ 2.16.060 (fees) NLP; see Ch. 150
Ch. 2.18, Department of Municipal Finance Ch. 25, Art. VIII
Ch. 2.20, City Auditor Ch. 66, Art. III
Ch. 2.24, City Solicitor Ch. 66, Art. IV
Ch. 2.28, Treasurer and Collector Ch. 66, Art. V
Ch. 2.36, Public Works
§§ 2.36.010 to 2.36.030 Ch. 66, Art. VI
§ 2.36.040 Ch. 66, Art. VII
§§ 2.36.050 to 2.36.070 Ch. 66, Art. XI
Ch. 2.38, Natural Resources Ch. 25, Art. X
Ch. 2.40, Health Commissioner
§§ 2.40.010 to 2.40.050 Ch. 66, Art. VIII
§ A402-8 DERIVATION TABLE § DT-1
DT:1
Title/Chapter From 1993 Code Location in 2020 Code
§ 2.40.060 (fees) NLP; see Ch. 150
Ch. 2.44, Budget Coordinator Repealed by Order No. 2008-272;
see Ch. 25, Art. VIII
Ch. 2.48, Purchasing Agent Ch. 66, Art. XII
Ch. 2.52, Department of Inspections Ch. 25, Art. VI
Ch. 2.52, Department of Constituent Services Ch. 25, Art. VII
Ch. 2.56, Harbor Master Ch. 66, Art. IX
Ch. 2.60, Director of Veterans' Services Ch. 66, Art. X
Ch. 2.68, Police Department Ch. 25, Art. I
Ch. 2.72, Fire Department
§§ 2.72.010 to 2.72.180, 2.72.200 to
2.72.220
Ch. 25, Art. II
§ 2.72.190 (fees) NLP; see Ch. 150
Ch. 2.76, Department of Data Processing Ch. 25, Art. III
Ch. 2.80, Department of Traffic Engineering
and Control
Ch. 25, Art. IV
Ch. 2.84, Communication Division Ch. 25, Art. I
Ch. 2.88, Emergency Management Ch. 25, Art. V
Ch. 2.92, Planning Board Ch. 12, Art. I
Ch. 2.96, Board of Assessors Ch. 12, Art. II
Ch. 2.100, Board of Registrars of Voters Ch. 12, Art. III
Ch. 2.104, Board of Managers of Hospital
Department
REP
Ch. 2.108, Board of Managers of Elizabeth
Serposs Clinic
Ch. 12, Art. IV
Ch. 2.116, Conservation Commission Ch. 12, Art. V
Ch. 2.117, Recycling Commission Ch. 12, Art. XI
Ch. 2.120, Commission on Disability Ch. 12, Art. VI
Ch. 2.124, Quincy Historical Commission Ch. 180, Art. I
Ch. 2.128, Rent Grievance Board REP
Ch. 2.132, Traffic Commission Ch. 12, Art. VII
Ch. 2.136, Council for Aging Ch. 12, Art. VIII
Ch. 2.137, Commission on the Family Ch. 12, Art. X
Ch. 2.138, Community Oriented Policing and
Problem Solving Commission
Ch. 12, Art. XII
Ch. 2.140, Adams Academy Ch. 89, Art. I
§ DT-1 QUINCY CODE § DT-1
DT:2
Title/Chapter From 1993 Code Location in 2020 Code
Ch. 2.144, Adams Temple and School Fund Ch. 89, Art. II
Ch. 2.148, Job Classifications and Salaries Ch. 72, Art. I
Ch. 2.150, Human Rights Commission Ch. 12, Art. IX
Ch. 2.154, Education Fund Committee Ch. 12, Art. XIII
Ch. 2.256, Community Preservation Act Ch. 12, Art. XIV
Title 3, Revenue and Finance
Ch. 3.04, Fiscal Year Ch. 34, Art. I
Ch. 3.08, Assessment Procedures Ch. 34, Art. II
Ch. 3.12, City Leases, Conveyances and
Contracts
Ch. 78, Art. I
Ch. 3.16, Purchases of City-Owned Land Ch. 78, Art. II
Ch. 3.20, Department Revolving Funds Ch. 34, Art. III
Title 4 (Reserved) –
Title 5, Business Licenses and Regulations
Ch. 5.04, Licenses and Permits Ch. 196, Art. I
Ch. 5.08, Gas Stations Ch. 163
Ch. 5.12, Hackney Carriages Ch. 330, Art. I
Ch. 5.14, Liveries and Limousines Ch. 330, Art. II
Ch. 5.16, Solicitors and Canvassers Ch. 234, Art. I
Ch. 5.20, Hawkers and Peddlers Ch. 234, Art. II
Ch. 5.24, Junk and Secondhand Dealers Ch. 189
Ch. 5.28, Precious Metal Dealers Ch. 240
Ch. 5.32, Pawnbrokers Ch. 226
Ch. 5.36, Public Concerts, Dancers and Other
Entertainments
Ch. 138
Ch. 5.40, Miscellaneous Business License Fees
and Regulations
Ch. 196, Art. II
Ch. 5.44, Shopping Carts Ch. 282
Title 6, Animals
Ch. 6.04, Dogs and Animals Generally Ch. 113, Art. III
Title 7 (Reserved) –
Title 8, Health and Safety
Ch. 8.04, Fire Alarm Systems Ch. 105, Art. I
Ch. 8.08, Flammable Liquids Ch. 175, Art. I
Ch. 8.12, Garbage Collection and Disposal Ch. 293, Art. I
§ DT-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DT-1
DT:3
Title/Chapter From 1993 Code Location in 2020 Code
Ch. 8.16, Quincy Disposal Facility Ch. 293, Art. II
Ch. 8.20, Infectious Waste Disposal Ch. 175, Art. II
Ch. 8.24, Petroleum and Petroleum Products Ch. 175, Art. III
Ch. 8.28, Smoking REP
Ch. 8.30, Access of Tobacco Products to
Minors
Ch. 288, Art. I
Ch. 8.31, Pharmacy Posting Requirements for
Municipal Prescription Drug Disposal
Facilities
Ch. 175, Art. V
Ch. 8.32, Miscellaneous Health Regulations Ch. 270, Art. II
Ch. 8.38, Synthetic Drugs Ch. 134, Art. I
Ch. 8.36, Body Piercing Ch. 124
Ch. 8.37, Bodywork Ch. 126
Ch. 8.40, Neighborhood Property Preservation Ch. 244, Art. I
Ch. 8.44, Maintenance of Residential
Properties
Ch. 244, Art. II
Title 9, Public Peace and General Welfare
Ch. 9.04, Alcoholic Beverages Ch. 109
Ch. 9.08, Offenses Against Public Peace and
Decency
Ch. 230
Ch. 9.12, Offenses Relating to Property
§§ 9.12.010 and 9.12.020 Ch. 101
§ 9.12.030 Ch. 205
§ 9.12.040 Ch. 230
§§ 9.12.050, 9.12.060 and 9.12.170 Ch. 155
§§ 9.12.070 to 9.12.110, 9.12.150 and
9.12.160
Ch. 253
§§ 9.12.120, 9.12.130 and 9.12.140 Ch. 344
§§ 9.12.180 and 9.12.190 Ch. 261
Ch. 9.16, Offenses By or Against Minors Ch. 208
Ch. 9.20, Noise Ordinance; Registered Sex
Offender Restrictions
Ch. 215; Ch. 274
Title 10, Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 325
Title 11 (Reserved) –
Title 12, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
§ DT-1 QUINCY CODE § DT-1
DT:4
Title/Chapter From 1993 Code Location in 2020 Code
Ch. 12.04, Street and Sidewalk Construction
and Maintenance
Ch. 305, Art. I
Ch. 12.08, Street and Sidewalk use
Regulations
Ch. 305, Art. II
Ch. 12.12, Public Places and Playgrounds Ch. 222
Ch. 12.16, Regulation of City Waterways Ch. 120, Art. I
Ch. 12.20, School Grounds Ch. 266
Ch. 12.24, City Harbor Ch. 120, Art. II
Ch. 12.26, Mooring Permits Ch. 120, Art. III
Ch. 12.28, Public Construction Projects Ch. 249, Art. I
Title 13, Public Services
Ch. 13.04, Water Service System Ch. 270, Art. III
Ch. 13.08, Sewer Service System Ch. 270, Art. II
Ch. 13.10, Storm Drain System Ch. 300, Art. I
Ch. 13.12, Utilities Permitting Ch. 319
Ch. 13.14, Storm Water Management and
Land Disturbance
Ch. 300, Art. II
Ch. 13.16, Post-Construction Stormwater
Management
Repealed by Order No. 2015-103
Title 14 (Reserved) –
Title 15, Buildings and Construction
Ch. 15.04, Building Permit Fees NLP; see Ch. 150
Ch. 15.08, Plumbing and Gas Permit Fees NLP; see Ch. 150
Ch. 15.12, Electrical Permits
§§ 15.12.010 to 15.12.040 Ch. 136
§ 15.12.050 (fees) NLP; see Ch. 150
Ch. 15.16, Sewerage Rehabilitation Fund Ch. 270, Art. I
Ch. 15.20, Numbering of Buildings Ch. 129
Ch. 15.24, Historical Districts Ch. 180, Art. II
Ch. 15.26, Responsible Employer Invalidated by Court
Ch. 15.28, Wage Theft Prevention Ch. 78, Art. III
Title 16 (Reserved) –
Title 17, Zoning Ch. 375
Title 18, Environmental Protection
Ch. 18.04, Shellfish and Seaworms Ch. 278
§ DT-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DT-1
DT:5
Title/Chapter From 1993 Code Location in 2020 Code
Ch. 18.08, Wetlands Protection Regulations Ch. 349
Ch. 18.12, Feeding of Waterfowl Ch. 113, Art. I
Ch. 18.16, Environmental Assessment and
Control for City Project
Ch. 175, Art. IV
Ch. 18.20, Tree Protection Ch. 311
Ch. 18.30, Disposal Plastic Retail Shopping
Bags
Ch. 293, Art. III
§ DT-1 QUINCY CODE § DT-1
DT:6
Disposition List
§ DT-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DT-1
DT:7

Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
KEY:
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Order No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
93-046 5-17-1993 Adoption of 1993 Code NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. II
93-159 6-28-1993 Human Rights
Commission Amendment
Ch. 12, Art. IX
93-093 7-26-1993 Fire Alarm Systems
Amendment
Ch. 105, Art. I
94-262 2-21-1995 Display of
Nondomesticated Animals
for Entertainment
Ch. 113, Art. II
99-019 4-5-1999 Environmental
Assessment and Controls
for City Projects
Ch. 175, Art. IV
99-188A 12-6-1999 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 25, Art. I
2000-078 6-5-2000 Responsible Employer
Ordinance
Invalidated by Court
2000-188 9-25-2000 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 325
2000-189 9-25-2000 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 325
2000-190 9-25-2000 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 325
2000-352 1-16-2001 Body Art Ch. 124
2001-105 5-21-2001 Mooring Permits Ch. 120, Art. III
2001-136 9-24-2001 Department of Information
Technology and
Telecommunications
Systems Amendment
Ch. 25, Art. III
2001-147 10-15-2001 Human Rights
Commission Amendment
Ch. 12, Art. IX
2001-192 9-24-2001 Responsible Employer
Ordinance Amendment
Invalidated by Court
§ DT-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:1
Order No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2002-118 6-17-2002 Department of Constituent
Services
Ch. 25, Art. VII
2002-204 9-23-2002 Educational Fund
Committee
Ch. 12, Art. XIII
2002-100A 5-19-2003 Health Commissioner Fees NLP; see Ch. 150
2002-100B 6-16-2003 Clerk Fees Amendment NLP; see Ch. 150
2002-306 12-15-2003 Shopping Carts Ch. 282
2003-032 4-22-2003 Organization of City
Government Amendment
Ch. 5, Art. I
2003-263 10-20-2003 Board of Managers of
Elizabeth Serposs Clinic
Amendment
Ch. 12, Art. IV
8-9-2004 Health Department
Smoking Regulations
Ch. A402, Art. I
2004-146 11-8-2004 Hackney Carriages
Amendment
Ch. 330, Art. I
2005-047 4-19-2005 Mooring Permits
Amendment
Ch. 120, Art. III
2005-094 6-20-2005 Discharges to Storm Drain
System
Repealed by Order No.
2015-102
2005-184 12-5-2005 City Harbor Amendment See Ch. 120, Art. II
2005-185 12-5-2005 City Harbor Amendment See Ch. 120, Art. II
2005-224 12-5-2005 Animal Control
Amendment
Ch. 113, Art. III
2005-239 12-5-2005 Animal Control
Amendment
Ch. 113, Art. III
2005-246 12-19-2005 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 325
2006-034 3-6-2006 Responsible Employer
Ordinance Amendment
Invalidated by Court
2006-010 3-6-2006 Streets and Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 305, Art. II
2006-019A 6-19-2006 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 325
2006-296 12-18-2006 Community Preservation
Committee
Ch. 12, Art. XIV
2006-192 6-4-2007 Hawkers and Peddlers
Amendment
Ch. 234, Art. II
§ DL-1 QUINCY CODE § DL-1
DL:2
Order No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2006-270 12-17-2007 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 325
2007-013 5-7-2007 Abatement of Nuisances Ch. 244, Art. I
2008-048 4-22-2008 Tree Protection Ch. 311
2008-068 6-16-2008 Precious Metal Dealers
Amendment
Ch. 240
2008-125 6-16-2008 Stormwater Management
and Land Disturbance
Repealed by Order No.
2015-103
2008-126 6-16-2008 Post-Construction
Stormwater Management
Repealed by Order No.
2015-103
2008-191 5-19-2008 Body Art Amendment Ch. 124
2008-272 10-20-2008 Organization of City
Government Amendment;
Department of Municipal
Finance; City Auditor
Amendment
Ch. 5, Art. I; Ch. 25, Art.
VIII; Ch. 66, Art. III
2008-269 11-10-2008 Hackney Carriages
Amendment
Ch. 330, Art. I
2008-131 11-10-2008 Residential Properties in
Foreclosure
Ch. 244, Art. II
2008-304 11-10-2008 Minors Amendment Ch. 208
2008-328 11-10-2008 Streets and Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 305, Art. II
2008-381 3-2-2009 Liveries and Limousines Ch. 330, Art. II
2009-033 12-21-2009 Sex Offenders Ch. 274
2010-114 6-7-2010 Noise Ch. 215
2010-193 8-16-2010 Designation of Noise-
Sensitive Area
Ch. 215, Attachment 1
2010-198 6-21-2010 Moratorium on Clothing/
Material Donation Bins
Expired
2010-047 6-20-2011 Zoning Ch. 375
2011-093 9-6-2011 Community Preservation
Committee Amendment
Ch. 12, Art. XIV
2011-149 12-5-2011 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 25, Art. I
2011-149A 12-5-2011 Fire Department
Amendment
Ch. 25, Art. II
2012-022 4-23-2012 Water and Sewer bills Ch. 270, Art. III
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:3
Order No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
5-7-2012 Water and Sewer Bills
Amendment
Ch. 270, Art. III
2012-107 6-25-2012 Zoning Amendment Ch. 375
2012-118 6-18-2012 Accept MGL c. 59, § 5N Ch. A400
2013-070 5-6-2013 Community Preservation
Committee Amendment
Ch. 12, Art. XIV
2013-072 4-22-2013 Petition to General Court
for Special Act
See Order No. 2017-138
2013-076 6-18-2013 Accept MGL c. 44B, § 3 Ch. A400
2013-108 6-17-2013 Regulation of Waterways Ch. 120, Art. I
2013-109 6-17-2013 City Harbor Amendment Ch. 120, Art. II
2013-110 6-17-2013 Mooring Permits
Amendment
Ch. 120, Art. III
2013-173 11-12-2013 Petition for Special Act
(Acts of 2014, Ch. 135)
See Ch. A401
2013-175 11-13-2013 Synthetic Drugs Ch. 134, Art. I
2014-009 1-21-2014 Creation of Municipal
Technology and
Information Management
Committee (Council
Committee)
NCM
2014-103 6-3-2014 Zoning Amendment Ch. 375
2014-120 6-17-2014 Job Classifications and
Salaries Amendment
Ch. 66, Art. I
2014-147 6-17-2014 Recreation Revolving
Account Limit for 2015
NCM
2014-148 6-17-2014 Department of Public
Works Revolving Account
Limit for 2015
NCM
2014-197 2-10-2015 Bodywork Ch. 126
2014-224 11-10-2014 Accept MGL c. 40U Ch. A400
2015-043 4-27-2015 Petition for Special Act
(Acts of 2016, Ch. 442)
See Ch. A401
2015-082 5-18-2015 Approve Raising
Minimum Personal
Property Tax Exemption
NCM
2015-091 6-15-2015 Prescription Drugs Ch. 134, Art. II
2015-101 6-15-2015 Accept MGL c. 44, § 53E
1/2
Ch. A400
§ DL-1 QUINCY CODE § DL-1
DL:4
Order No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2015-102 6-15-2015 Discharges to Storm Drain
System
Ch. 300, Art. I
2015-103 6-15-2015 Stormwater Management
and Land Disturbance
Ch. 300, Art. II
2015-104 6-15-2015 Stormwater Fees and
Charges
Ch. 300, Art. III
2015-105 6-15-2015 Sewer Use Amendment Ch. 270, Art. II
2015-106 6-15-2015 Sewer Use Amendment Ch. 270, Art. II
2016-074 2-6-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 375
2016-137 2-6-2017 Wage Theft Prevention Ch. 78, Art. III
2016-157 6-27-2016 Animal Control
Amendment
Ch. 113, Art. III
2016-246 11-10-2016 City Council Amendment;
Clerk of Committees
Amendment; City Auditor
Amendment; City Council
Office Administrative
Staff
Ch. 19; Ch. 66, Art. I; Ch.
66, Art. III; Ch. 66, Art.
XIII
2016-247 11-10-2016 Petition for Special Act
(Acts of 2016, Ch. 355)
See Ch. A401
2016-249 11-21-2016 Zoning Amendment Ch. 375
2016-273 12-5-2016 Housing Development Ch. 183
2016-287 5-15-2017 Accept § 193 of Ch. 218
of the Acts of 2016
Ch. A400
2017-003 3-6-2017 Formal Financial Policies NCM
2017-039 12-18-2017 Smoking on City-Owned
Land
Ch. 288, Art. II
2017-138 9-5-2017 Petition for Special Act
(Acts of 2018, Ch. 4)
See Ch. A401
2017-139 10-16-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 375
2017-174 12-4-2017 Establish Energy
Improvement Revolving
Fund
NCM; see Order No.
2018-187
2017-177 11-13-2017 Accept MGL c. 40, § 8G Ch. A400
2017-189 12-18-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 375
2018-012 6-4-2018 Human Rights
Commission Amendment
Ch. 12, Art. IX
2018-014 6-4-2018 Business Licenses and
Fees Amendment
Ch. 196, Art. II
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:5
Order No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2018-037 6-4-2018 Gas Stations Amendment Ch. 163
2018-080 5-21-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 325
2018-094 6-18-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 375
2018-101 4-22-2019 Utility Permits
Amendment
Ch. 319
2018-106 6-4-2018 Petition for Special Act
(Acts of 2018, Ch. 284)
See Ch. A401
2018-107 6-4-2018 Petition for Special Act
(Acts of 2018, Ch. 235)
See Ch. A401
2018-147 10-15-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 325
2018-160 10-15-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 325
2018-176 2-4-2019 Organization of City
Government Amendment;
Department of Natural
Resources
Ch. 5, Art. I; Ch. 25, Art. X
2018-187 12-3-2018 Revolving Funds Ch. 34, Art. III
2019-034 4-22-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 375
2019-125 12-2-2019 Disposable Plastic
Shopping Bags
Ch. 293, Art. III
2019-193 12-2-2019 Ceasing Quincy College
as an Enterprise Fund
NCM
2020-012 6-1-2020 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
2020-014 2-3-2020 Business Licenses and
Fees Amendment
Ch. 196, Art. II
2020-016 6-1-2020 Regulation of Waterways
Amendment
Ch. 120, Art. I
2020-052 6-1-2020 Utility Permits
Amendment
Ch. 319
§ DL-1 QUINCY CODE § DL-1
DL:6