General Bylaws
Sutton, Massachusetts
With Amendments through May 2019
General Bylaws Page 1
TOWN OF SUTTON
GENERAL BYLAWS
General By-laws which have been voted by the town are contained herein. Zoning By-laws,
Subdivision Rules and Regulations and Sutton's Home Rule Charter are published separately.
These by-laws have been approved by the Attorney General and published or posted in
accordance with statutory requirements. The "amended" date refers to the town meeting date an
article was amended not the effective date.
AMENDMENTS THROUGH MAY 13, 2019
ATTEST:
Laura J. Caruso
Town Clerk
General Bylaws Page 2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
BYLAW PAGE #
1. Finance and Warrant Advisory Committee 4
2. Town Administrative Organization 5
3. Town Meeting/Town Election 7
4. Trailers and Mobile Homes 8
5. Earth Removal 9
6. Animal Control 15
7. Unregistered Motor Vehicles 17
8. Public Drinking 18
9. Driveways 19
10. Public Sewer 19
11. Entertainment 30
12. Wetlands Protection 32
13. Street Numbering 46
14. Council on Aging 47
15. Scenic Road 47
16. Renewal or Granting Of Certain Licenses/Permits 51
17. Regulation of Recreation Camps, Overnight Camps or 52
Cabins, Motels or Mobile Home Parks
18. Use of Public Right of Way 53
General Bylaws Page 3
BYLAW PAGE #
19. General Administration 54
20. Use of Private Ways 55
21. Recreation Commission 58
22. Cemetery Commission 58
23. Personnel Regulations 59
24. False Alarms 85
25. Motorized Scooters Prohibited 86
26. Town of Sutton Right to Farm 87
27. Illicit Storm Water Connections & Discharges 89
28. Hawkers and Peddlers 95
29. Stretch Energy Code 95
30. Tax Title Payment Agreements 96
31. Revolving Funds 96
32. Recreational Marijuana Establishments 97
33. Energy Efficiency 97
General Bylaws Page 4
TOWN OF SUTTON
GENERAL BYLAWS
BYLAW 1. FINANCE AND WARRANT ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Section 1.1 – Membership
There shall be Finance and Warrant Advisory Committee appointed by the Moderator
consisting of nine members each appointed for a term of three years to expire on June
30th in the third year following appointment. No member of this committee shall be a
member of any other town board or committee, nor shall any member hold any town
position involving the handling or expenditures of town funds. Every effort shall be
made by the Moderator to obtain as equal a representation from the three (3) precincts as
possible. Vacancies in membership shall be filled in the manner of the original
appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term.
Section 1.2 – Notification to Chairman of Appointments
Within five days after swearing in a new member, the Town Clerk shall mail to the home
address of the chairman, the name, address, telephone number and a copy of the new
member’s appointment paper. The appointment paper shall clearly indicate the date of
appointment, term expiration date, precinct in which the appointee resides, and the name
of the member being replaced.
Section 1.3 – Organization
The said committee shall, as soon as practical following the commencement of each
fiscal year, meet and organize by electing from its own number a chairman, vicechairman,
and clerk each of whom shall perform the usual duties of such officers.
Section 1.4 - Report of Committee
The report of the finance and warrant advisory committee required under the Charter
shall be printed and copies shall be made available for distribution to every person who
shall request a copy thereof at the office of the Town Clerk, at the public library, at the
police station and at other convenient places in the Town for the convenience of the
voters. The report shall be available at least seven days prior to the convening of any
annual or special town meeting. The report shall also include the vote of the committee
on each warrant article.
Adopted: Feb. 2, 1927
Amended: 3/29/50, 3/1/69, 4/20/85, 10/15/90, 10/16/95
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
General Bylaws Page 5
BYLAW 2. TOWN ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION
Section 2.1 - Appointments by the Board of Selectmen
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint the following:
Position Term Number Of
a. Town Manager indefinite 1
b. Board of Health three years 5
c. Conservation Commission three years 5
d. Registrar of Voters in a manner
as provided by general law three years 3
e. Board of Appeals (regular) three years 5
f. Council on Aging as provided by Bylaw
g. Cultural Council as provided by general law
h. Historical Commission three years 5
i. Planning Board three years 2
j. Town Counsel three years 1
k. Sewer Commission three years 3
l. Recreation Commission three years 3
m. Emergency Management Director and
related personnel one year
n. Constables one year
o. Cemetery Commission as provided by Bylaw
p. Sutton Community TV Board three years 5
q. Housing Partnership Committee three years 7
Section 2.2 - Appointments by the Town Manager
The Town Manager shall appoint the following:
Position Term Number Of
a. Police Chief and Officers indefinite
b. Fire Chief (who shall be the
Forest Warden) and Firefighters indefinite
c. Board of Assessors, Principal
Assessor three years 1
d. Board of Assessor member
(part-time) three years 2
e. Treasurer/Collector indefinite 1
f. Town Clerk indefinite 1
g. Town Accountant three years 1
h. Building Commissioner indefinite 1
i. Wiring Inspector indefinite 1
j. Gas Inspector indefinite 1
k. Plumbing Inspector indefinite 1
l. Sealer of Weights and Measures one year 1
General Bylaws Page 6
m. Animal Control Officer indefinite 1
n. Parking Clerk one year 1
o. Veterans Agent, Director
Burial Agent indefinite 1
p. Personnel of Health Dept. indefinite 1
q. Highway Superintendent indefinite 1
r. Tree Warden indefinite 1
s. Fence Viewer one year 1
t. Planning Director indefinite 1
u. Library Director indefinite 1
2.2.1 The Town Manager shall in addition to the qualifications set forth in the
Charter have at least earned a bachelor’s level degree from a recognized,
accredited college or university.
The screening committee, in consultation with the Board of Selectmen,
shall be responsible for advertising for such position which shall include
the specification of a salary or salary range consistent with like positions
in the greater Blackstone Valley area.
2.2.2 Forthwith following a notice of resignation or vacancy of the Town
Manager position, a screening committee shall be established for the
purpose of screening all applicants.
The screening committee shall consist of nine persons who shall be chosen
as follows: the Board of Selectmen, the School Committee, the Planning
Board and the Board of Library Trustees shall each designate one person,
the Finance and Warrant Advisory Committee shall designate two persons
and three persons shall be chosen by the Town Moderator. Persons
chosen by said agencies may, but need not, be members of the agencies by
which they are designated. Appointments made by the Town Moderator
may, in so far as it is feasible, be representative of all demographic and
occupational bases of the Town.
The said committee shall meet and organize by electing from its own a
chairman, vice-chairman and clerk, each of whom shall perform the usual
duties of such officers.
Not more than 120 days following the date on which the committee meets
to organize, the committee shall submit to the Board of Selectmen the
names of not less than three nor more than five persons whom it believes
to be best qualified to perform the duties of Town Manager.
Within thirty (30) days following the date the list of nominees is submitted
to it, the Board of Selectmen shall choose one of the said nominees to
General Bylaws Page 7
serve as Town Manager. In the event the Board of Selectmen shall fail to
appoint within the thirty (30) days, and unless within the thirty (30) days
the Board of Selectmen has notified the screening committee to start a new
search, the screening committee shall, forthwith, appoint the Town
Manager.
Upon the appointment of a Town Manager, the Committee established
hereunder shall be considered discharged.
Section 2.3 - Probationary Term of Office
Subject to any provision of the Charter to the contrary, the appointment of any town
official or employee by the Town Manager, other than a member of a collective
bargaining unit, a position subject to civil service laws, or a position for which the term is
provided for by law, shall initially be for a one (1) year probationary period. Thereafter,
the term of office shall be as stated in the Charter or these Bylaws.
Section 2.4 - Attendance Record
All boards and committees are to keep an attendance record of all members at all regular
and special meetings. Such attendance record shall be made a part of the written annual
report to the Board of Selectmen.
Adopted: Oct. 15, 1990
Amended: 10/21/91, 10/18/93, 10/16/95, 5/6/97, 1/20/00, 10/18/04, 5/9/05
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
BYLAW 3. TOWN MEETING/TOWN ELECTION
Section 3.1 - Date of Town Meeting
The spring session of the annual town meeting shall be held on the second Monday in
May and shall continue on the evenings of successive business days until the warrant has
been dissolved; the fall session of the town meeting shall be held on the third Monday in
October and shall continue on the evenings of successive business days until the warrant
has been dissolved.
Section 3.2 - Date of Town Election
The annual town election for the election of town officers and for the determination of all
other matters to be referred to the voters shall be held on the fourth Tuesday in May.
Section 3.3 - Posting of Warrants
Town Warrants shall be posted at the following locations:
* at the store in Sutton Center
* at the Town Hall (Municipal Center)
* at each of the Post offices
* at the Senior Center, Hough Road
General Bylaws Page 8
* at the Whittier’s Farm Milk Store, Douglas Road
* at the store in Manchaug at the Four Corners
* at the elderly housing community center
* at the store in Heritage mall in Wilkinsonville
* on the town’s website and local access cable channel, provided, however, that
in the event technological or practical impediments to such posting occur, failure
to so post shall not affect the validity of the Town Meeting, any town meeting
vote on the warrant, or any actions taken in connection therewith.
Section 3.4- Motions for Reconsideration
* any action taken on an article in the warrant shall not by reconsidered except
by a two-thirds vote of the meeting.
* Reconsideration must be done at the same session of the meeting at which the
vote in question was acted upon.
* Any vote upon a motion for reconsideration shall be final.
* A vote upon a question shall not be reconsidered more than once.
Section 3.5 - Two-Thirds Votes
On matters requiring a two-thirds vote by statute a count need not be taken unless the
vote so declared is immediately questioned by seven or more voters as provided in G.L.
c.39, §15, or as otherwise provided in these Bylaws.
Section 3.6 – Action on Articles
All articles in the warrant shall be taken up in the order presented in the warrant unless
otherwise ordered by a majority vote of the meeting.
Adopted: Jan. 8, 1985
Amended: 12/11/86, 5/4/92, 10/18/93, 10/17/94, 10/16/95, 10/19/98, 6/28/99, 1/20/00, 2/5/07
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
BYLAW 4. TRAILERS AND MOBILE HOMES
No person shall erect, maintain, or use of a trailer or mobile home for dwelling purposes within
the Town for more than 120 days within any calendar year. No zoning Bylaw shall prohibit the
owner and occupant of a residence which has been destroyed by fire or other natural disaster
from placing a mobile home on the site of such residence and residing in such home for a period
not to exceed twelve consecutive months while the residence is being rebuilt. Any such mobile
home shall be subject to the provisions of the state sanitary code. The penalty for the violation
commencing ten days following the receipt of written notice from the Building Commissioner
shall be $100.00 per day.
Adopted: Feb. 16, 1963
Amended: 4/19/86
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
General Bylaws Page 9
BYLAW 5. EARTH REMOVAL
Section 5.1 - Definitions
a. Abutter: the owner of land abutting a lot including land on the directly opposite
side of an abutting way or abutting an abutter within 300 feet of the lot property
line.
b. Board: Planning Board
c. Earth: all forms of soil including, without limitation, sod, loam, sand, gravel,
clay, peat, hardpan, rock, quarried stone, or mineral products.
d. Earth Removal: removing any form of Earth
e. Earth Removal, Commercial Earth Removal Operation: an earth removal not
defined as Subdivision; or Miscellaneous, Residential, and Agriculture.
f. Earth Removal, Miscellaneous, Residential, and Agriculture: That which is
entirely incidental to construction that is subject to a building permit for a
single family home, or agricultural building; or that which is less than 300
cubic yards.
g. Earth Removal, Subdivision: That which is entirely incidental to a
subdivision, site plan or special permit.
h. Lot: the area described in an application for an earth removal permit as the
area from which Earth is sought to be removed.
i. Owner: The Person who holds the fee interest in the Lot.
j. Person: shall include but not be limited to an individual, corporation, society,
association, partnership or other legal entity.
k. Removal: stripping, digging, excavating or blasting of Earth and carrying it
away from the Lot.
l. Surety: a method of securing performance of a permit which shall take the
form of (1) insurance bond, (2) cash deposit, or (3) tri-party agreement with a
lender
Section 5.2 – Scope
This Bylaw shall be administered by the Board to apply to all Earth Removal
operations in the Town of Sutton except as otherwise provided in this Bylaw. It
shall apply to all areas regardless of zoning district.
Nothing in this Bylaw shall prevent the application of the Zoning Bylaws.
General Bylaws Page 10
Section 5.3 – Hearing
Before issuing a new permit, the Board shall hold a public hearing after giving
at least fourteen days notice of the time and place thereof, such notice to be by
advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the town and by certified
mail, postage prepaid to all Abutters as they appear upon the most recent tax list.
Notice costs shall be borne by the applicant.
The Board shall distribute copies of the application to the Conservation
Commission, Police Chief, Highway Superintendent, Fire Chief, and Tax
Collector. Such officials may, within fourteen days, provide such comments as
they deem appropriate; provided, however, that failure to provide such comments
within said period shall not prevent the Board from thereafter acting on the
application.
Section 5.4 - Permit Applications and Site Plan Requirements
Except as otherwise provided in Section 5.9 of this Bylaw, no Earth shall be
removed from any Lot in the Town unless a permit shall first have been obtained
by the Owner of such Lot from the Board.
Applications for Earth Removal Permits shall be made to the Board by filing an
application with the Board on a form to be provided by the Board.
Each application shall include and be accompanied by the following information
and supporting documentation:
a. a filing or renewal fee in an amount established by the Board and contained in
the Rules and Regulations.
b. the legal address of the Lot together with a description by metes and bounds of
the Lot proposed for excavation.
c. legal name and address of the Owner of the Lot
d. legal name and address of the petitioner, which address shall be used by the
Board for all correspondence hereunder.
e. names and addresses of all Abutters as appearing on the most recent tax list as
certified by the assessors.
f. a current topographical plan\map of the Lot showing zoning classification and
topography of surrounding areas with 100 feet of the property line.
g. a certified statement of the quantity of excavation or fill involved made by a
registered engineer or land surveyor.
General Bylaws Page 11
h. the plan of the land showing proposed contours of the site at the completion of
the excavation project.
i. the form of the Surety proposed to be submitted in accordance with Section 5.7.
j. the applicant shall also pay, in addition to the filing or renewal fees set forth
above, such other fees as determined by the Board to cover the costs of the
engineering and/or legal expenses incurred by the Town that are not otherwise
covered by the filing or renewal fee.
Section 5.5 - Granting or Denying Permits
A. In granting or denying a permit, in whole or in part, the Board shall take into
consideration whether or not the granting of a permit would:
1. endanger the public health or safety, or existing or potential water
supplies;
2. constitute a nuisance;
3. result in detriment to the normal use of adjacent property by reason
of noise, dust or vibration, or undermining the property;
B. Any permit issued by the Board shall comply with the following provisions:
1. Operations may not occur within 200 feet of a way open to the public use,
whether public or private, or within 200 feet of a building or other structure
unless the Board is reasonably satisfied that such operations will not
undermine such way or building or other structure.
2. No removal below the natural grade shall be permitted within 200 feet of
a residentially zoned property line unless safety and protection from
nuisance factors is assured through additional measures such as fencing or
sloping as determined by the Board. In no case shall excavation take place
within 100 feet of a residentially zoned property line unless the abutting
land is subject to an Earth Removal permit granted under this Bylaw and the
owner of such land has granted written approval of such removal. The buffer
zones shall remain undisturbed with regard to vegetation unless approved by
the Board. The applicant must stake the proposed zones for review by the
Board or its agent(s) prior to any vegetation removal. At the discretion of
the Board, planting or otherwise upgrading of existing vegetation may be
required.
3. No slope created by Earth Removal operations shall be finished at a
grade in excess of 2 (horizontal) to 1 (vertical) unless specifically otherwise
authorized in the permit.
General Bylaws Page 12
4. The lowest excavated point shall be no less than ten (10) feet above the
existing groundwater table. To ensure this depth, the Owner shall, at its
expense, install observation wells in accordance with the requirements of the
Board’s agent.
5. The routes proposed for truck traffic shall be reviewed and accepted by
the Police\Highway Departments to determine safety and road conditions.
6. New permits shall be limited to an area of five acres. Subsequent permits
shall be issued only upon reclamation of the original area.
C. Applications for permits may be granted, denied, or granted in part and denied
in part.
Section 5.6 - Operating Standards
Each permit issued by the Board shall be subject to the following conditions
which shall be set forth on the permit.
a. No area shall be excavated so as to allow the accumulation of freestanding
water.
b. Such other reasonable requirements consistent with the provisions of this
Bylaw and such rules and regulations as the Board may adopt hereunder
including, but not limited to, grading, constant sloping, seeding, and planting,
fencing or screening necessary for public safety and\or visual aesthetics;
methods of removal; location and use of buildings and other structures; hours
of operation, routes of transportation of Earth Removal, control of drainage
and disposition of waste incidental to the removal operations.
c. Upon the conclusion of Earth Removal operations all areas upon which such
operations have been conducted shall be covered with not less than four
inches of topsoil capable of supporting vegetation brought to the finished
grades and seeded with a cover crop, suitable to the Board, except where
ledge rock is exposed and all large stones and boulders which protrude above
finished grade shall be buried or removed. The Board shall require the
applicant to guarantee growth of the crop cover on such areas within two
years of seeding.
Section 5.7 – Surety
a. Prior to commencing Earth Removal operations, the applicant shall post with
the treasurer of the Town of Sutton proper Surety in such form and amount
and with such Sureties as determined by the Board to be sufficient to
guarantee compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit and any
amendments thereto. The purpose of the Surety is to assure that funds are
available to the Town to comply with this Bylaw and to complete restoration.
General Bylaws Page 13
b. The Surety shall not be released until (1) the owner’s surveyor or engineer has
filed with the Board an “as built” plan and has certified that the restoration
has been completed in compliance with the permit and the plans, and (2) the
final plans and site have been reviewed by the Board’s Agent and signed off
by the Board. Outstanding fees and or penalties owed to the Town shall be
paid in full prior to the release of the Surety.
Section 5.8 – Permit Expiration and Renewals
Expiration - Any permit issued hereunder shall automatically expire upon
completion of the Earth Removal project for which it was issued or at such other
time as may be specified in said permit; provided however, that no such permit
shall be valid for more than one year from the date of issuance.
Renewals - Upon application for renewal of a permit, the Board may in its
discretion grant renewals for periods of up to one (1) additional year without a
public hearing. The Board shall notify the town departments per section 5.3.b.
Any renewal application shall meet the same requirements as a new permit.
Section 5.9 – Exemptions
The Board may exempt, in part or in whole, the following Earth Removal
operations from the provisions of this Bylaw after the applicant has filed a
statement with the Board that the removal falls into one if the following
categories and states the amount and type of material to be removed. The
applicant shall meet with the Board to discuss the request and present engineering
plans to support the request. These plans shall include; a description by metes and
bounds of the Lot proposed for excavation; the location of the area to be
excavated; the legal name and address of the Owner; the legal name and address
of the applicant, which address shall be used by the Board for all correspondence
hereunder.
The Board shall decide on such requests for exemption within forty-five days of
receipt of the written request for an exemption. After meeting with the applicant,
the Board may require an exempt operation to meet any or all of the standards set
forth in section 5.5 and 5.6 as determined to be necessary by the Board.
a. Earth Removal operations for any municipal purpose by or on behalf of
the Town of Sutton or any department or agency thereof.
b. Earth Removal operations which are customarily incidental to farming,
agriculture, gardening or nursery operations involving less than 300 cubic
yards.
c. Earth Removal defined as Miscellaneous, Residential, and/or Agriculture
that is incidental to the construction of a building or other structure and
associated facilities that is subject to a building permit and to the
General Bylaws Page 14
installation of walks, driveways, landscaping, and similar appurtenances to
said building; or earth removal involving less than 300 cubic yards.
d. Earth Removal operations in connection with the construction or
improvement of a private way.
e. Earth Removal operations defined as Earth Removal, Subdivision, and
which is entirely incidental to the subdivision, site plan or special
permitting process.
Section 5.10 - Rules and Regulations
The Board may adopt and amend reasonable rules and regulations to carry out the
purpose of this Bylaw. Said rule-making authority includes, but is not limited to,
regulations regarding applications, site plan detail, engineering detail, criteria to
be met to protect aquifers or wetlands, criteria for site restoration notices and
enforcement. Said rules and regulations shall not be effective until reviewed and
authorized by the Board of Selectmen and filed in the Office of the Town Clerk.
Section 5.11- General Provisions
a. If the Board determines that any Person is violating any provision of this
Bylaw, the Board may order such Person to cease and desist from such
violation. The Board shall cause notice of the order to be served on such
Person by mail or by having it delivered in hand by the Board’s agent. If
after receipt of such notices such Person continues such violation; such
Person shall be subject to penalties as outlined in G.L. c.40, §21D. Each
day for which any such violation continues after receipt of such notice
shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
b. For the purposes of ensuring compliance with this Bylaw, the Board shall
appoint an agent who shall have such authority as is specifically delegated
by vote of the Board. Said authority shall not exceed that authority
granted to the Board under this Bylaw. The appointment of said agent
shall not take effect until notice thereof is filed with the Town Clerk and
the Board of Selectmen.
Section 5.12 – Pre-Existing Operations
Earth Removal activities in lawful operation prior to 1987 may continue subject to
the below listed conditions.
a. Applications for renewal of permits for existing operations shall meet all the
plan requirements as set forth in this Bylaw and the application shall include
information on all contiguous open areas owned by the applicant.
b. Any excavation shall be at least 10 feet above the water table. If excavation is
already below that level, the area shall be filled to a level sufficient to protect
the water supply as determined by the Board.
General Bylaws Page 15
c. Operations shall be exempt from the limitation on the number of acres open at
one time. The Owner shall submit a reclamation plan acceptable to the Board
on the recommendation of its engineering agent. This plan shall include the
location and number of acres to be reclaimed within one year. A long-range
plan may also be required at the discretion of the Board.
d. Any area of excavation which is already within the required buffer shall be
fenced and screened from abutting residences unless the Board determines
that no nuisance or safety problems exist.
e. New excavations, constituting an expansion of operations into areas of land
not presently being mined, will require permits in accordance with the terms
of this Bylaw.
Section 5.13 – Validity
The invalidity of any section or provision of this Bylaw shall not invalidate any
other section or provision hereof.
Adopted: Feb. 20, 1954
Amended: 2/16/57, 4/17/70, 4/19/75, 4/17/76, 4/18/81, 4/17/82, 4/19/86, 9/23/87, 2/1/89, 10/16/95, 6/28/99,
10/15/01, 10/21/02, 10/17/05, 10/15/12
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
BYLAW 6. ANIMAL CONTROL
Section 6.1 - Animal Control Officer
The Town Manager shall annually appoint an Animal Control Officer. The Animal Control
Officer and/or his assistants are not required to be a resident of the Town. The Animal Control
Officer shall receive such compensation as agreed upon by the Animal Control Officer and the
Town Manager.
Section 6.2 - Licensing
Annual dog and kennel Licenses as required by G.L. c. 140, §§137 and 137A, must be obtained
from the Office of the Town Clerk by January 1 for a licensing period of January 1 through
December 31. When licensing a dog for the first time, proof of spay or neutering should be
presented in order to be eligible for neutered or spayed license fee. There will be a late fee per
dog for licensing after March 1.
Applicants for kennel licenses shall include the name, breed, age, proof of fixing (if applicable),
proof of rabies vaccinations and the telephone number where the licensee can be reached at all
times.
General Bylaws Page 16
In addition to meeting all of the requirements of G.L. c. 140, §§137A to 137C, any person who
receives a kennel license shall maintain the premise in accordance with the following
specifications:
a. A minimum of four by eight (4x8) feet for each dog shall be provided.
b. Locks on gates to prevent the escape of dogs and the entry of children shall be
provided.
c. Kennel shall be sixty (60) feet from the street and forty (40) feet from lot lines.
No kennel license shall be issued unless the applicant demonstrates that the use of the subject
property as a kennel is permitted under the Town’s Zoning Bylaws.
Section 6.3 Fees
The annual fee for individual and kennel licenses shall be as follows:
a. Individual Dog, fixed $ 15.00
b. Individual Dog, intact $ 20.00
c. Kennel, 4-8 dogs $ 90.00
d. Kennel, 9 or more dogs $150.00
e. Late fee after March 1 $ 15.00
f. Late fee after April 1 $ 25.00
Section 6.4 Restraint
No person shall permit any dog, whether licensed or unlicensed, to wander on private property
without permission of the owner thereof, or on any public property within the Town, included
but not limited to public ways, school grounds, recreation areas and cemeteries, unless the dog is
restrained. A dog is under restraint for purposes of this Bylaw if it is accompanied by its owner
or other person responsible for the dog, who is in full control of such dog, or unless the dog is
held firmly on a leash of not more than six (6) feet.
Unrestrained or unlicensed dogs may be sought out and confined by the Animal Control Officer
or any police officer of the Town, and impounded pursuant to G.L. c. 140, §§151A and 167.
Noting in the Bylaw shall be deemed to prohibit the use of dogs for hunting, sporting or working
purposes as long as said dogs are properly restrained.
Section 6.5 Impoundment
The owner or keeper of any dog impounded under the provisions of G.L. c. 140, §167 may claim
such dog, provided he or she first procures from the Town Clerk a license and tag for any such
dog that is not licensed and pays the amount per day for the care of the dog during the period of
impoundment.
No person shall fail to promptly remove and properly dispose of any feces left by any dog
owned, kept or controlled by them on the property of another, including but not limited to any
public property within the Town.
General Bylaws Page 17
Section 6.6 Enforcement
The Animal control Officer or any police officer of the Town shall be empowered to enforce
provisions of this Bylaw.
In addition to the remedies set forth herein and G.L. c. 140, §§136A to 174E, inclusive, or any
other applicable provision of law, this Bylaw may be enforced through any lawful means in law
or in equity, including, but not limited to, non-criminal disposition pursuant to G.L. c. 40, §21D.
If non-criminal disposition is elected, then any person who violates any provision of this Bylaw
shall be subject to the following penalties:
First Offense: $ 50 fine
Second Offense: $100 fine
Third and subsequent Offense: $200 fine
Subsequent offenses shall be determined as offenses occurring within two years of the date of the
first noticed offense. Each day or portion thereof shall constitute a separate offense. If more
than one, each condition violated shall constitute a separate offense.
Adopted: Mar 3, 1973
Amended: 4/16/77, 4/20/85, 5/6/91, 5/12/03, 10/20/03
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
BYLAW 7. UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLES
Section 7.1 Number of Allowed Vehicles
Not more than two unregistered motor vehicles, assembled or disassembled, shall be
kept, stored or allowed to remain on a parcel of land except by a person duly licensed
under G.L. c.140 §§57-69, inclusive and except as provided herein.
Section 7.2 Storage Location Restrictions
No unregistered motor vehicles, assembled or disassembled or any parts thereof, shall be
kept, stored or allowed to remain in or on any front or side yard as defined in Section I.B
of the Sutton Zoning Bylaw except by a person duly licensed under G.L. c.140 §58 and
except as provided in Section 7.3 of this Bylaw.
Section 7.3 Board of Selectmen Permit Issuance; Public Hearing; Guidelines
The Board of Selectmen may issue a permit to keep, store or allow any vehicles or parts
thereof as described in Section 7.1 and 7.2 of this Bylaw on a certain parcel of land after
said board has held a public hearing thereon, first causing at least seven days notice of the
time, place and subject matter of such hearing to be given at the expense of the applicant
by:
a. Publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town.
b. Registered or certified mail to all abutters as appearing on the most recent tax list
certified by the assessors.
General Bylaws Page 18
Said Board shall not issue such a permit unless it finds that the presence of said vehicles
or parts thereof on such parcel:
a. Will not nullify or substantially derogate from the intent or purpose of this
Bylaw.
b. Will not constitute a nuisance.
c. Will not adversely affect the neighborhood in which such parcel is situated.
Section 7.4 Permit Requirements
Each permit shall:
a. Specify the maximum number of such vehicles that may be kept, stored or
allowed to remain in or on such parcel.
b. Be limited to a reasonable period of time.
c. Be a personal privilege of the applicant and not a grant attached to and running
with the land.
Section 7.5 - Exceptions
The provisions of this Bylaw shall not apply to vehicles which are:
a. Stored within an enclosed building.
b. Designed and used for farming or agricultural purposes.
Section 7.6 – Violation Penalty
Any person who continues to violate the provisions of this Bylaw after thirty days
following receipt by him of written notice of such violation from the Board of Selectmen
shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding $100.00 for each offense. Each day that any
violation is allowed to continue after said thirty-day period shall constitute a separate
offense.
Adopted: Feb. 16, 1963
Amended: 4/20/74, 4/17/76
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
BYLAW 8. PUBLIC DRINKING
Section 8.1 – General Provision
Except as duly licensed under general law or these Bylaws by the Board of Selectmen, no
person shall drink, or have in his possession an open container of, an alcoholic beverage
as defined in G.L. c.138 §1, while on, in, or upon any public way or upon any way to
which the public has a right of access, or any place to which members of the public have
access as invitees or licensees, or park or playground, or private land or place without the
consent of the owner or person in control thereof.
Section 8.2 – Violation Seizure
All alcoholic beverages being used in violation of this Bylaw shall be seized and safely
held until final adjudication of the charge against the person or persons arrested or
General Bylaws Page 19
summonsed before the court, at which time they shall be destroyed according to statute or
by order of the court.
Section 8.3 – Violation Penalty
The penalty for violations of this Bylaw shall be a fine of up to three hundred dollars
($300.00) for each offense, and shall be recovered by indictment or on complaint before
the district court, or by non-criminal disposition in accordance with G.L. c.40 §21D.
Adopted: 4/16/77
Amended: 10/15/90
Revised; Oct. 20, 2014
BYLAW 9. DRIVEWAYS
Section 9.1 General Provisions; Penalty
No way or driveway shall be constructed leading into a public way without obtaining
from the Highway Superintendent or the Board of Selectmen a written permit within 60
sixty days of the start of construction of the said way or driveway. No way or driveway
shall be constructed or maintained which shall discharge water onto or upon a public way
or into a public drainage system without the permission and under the supervision of the
Highway Superintendent. Any violation of this Bylaw or any order of the Highway
Superintendent or the Board of Selectmen shall subject the owner and/or violator to a fine
of ($20.00) twenty dollars per day for each day of violation or take any other action as the
law may provide.
Adopted: 4/15/78
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
BYLAW 10. PUBLIC SEWER
Section 10.1 - Definitions
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this
Bylaw shall be used as follows:
"BOD" (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) shall mean the quality of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per
liter.
"Building Sewer" shall mean the extension from the building drain to the Public
Sewer or other place of disposal.
General Bylaws Page 20
"Combined Sewer" shall mean a Sewer receiving both surface runoff and
Sewerage.
"Garbage" shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from handling, storage, and sale
of produce.
"Industrial Wastes" shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from Sanitary Sewage.
"Natural Outlet" shall mean any outlet into a Watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or groundwater.
"Person" shall mean any individual, association, corporate entity, partnership,
trust, department of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the federal
government (to the extent permitted by law, and any officer, employee, or agent of
such person.
"pH" shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
"Properly Shredded Garbage" shall mean the wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
Public Sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch (1.27 centimeters)
in any dimension.
"Public Sewer" shall mean a Sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
"Sanitary Sewer" shall mean a Sewer which carries Sewage and to which storm,
surf ace, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
"Sewage" shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
"Sewage Treatment Plant" shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating Sewage.
"Sewage Works" shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and
disposing of Sewage.
"Sewer" shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying Sewage.
General Bylaws Page 21
"Slug" shall mean any discharge of water, Sewage or Industrial Waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds more than
five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration of flows during
normal operation for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes.
"Storm Drain" (sometimes termed "storm Sewer") shall mean a Sewer which
carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes Sewage and Industrial
Wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
"Superintendent" shall mean the Superintendent of Sewage Works and/or Water
Pollution Control of the Town of Sutton or his authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
"Suspended Solids" shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, Sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
mechanical filtering.
"Watercourse" shall mean a channel in which flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
Section 10.2 - Buildings, Sewers, and Connections
10.2.1
No Person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter,
or disturb any Public Sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a
written permit from the Superintendent. Any Person proposing a new discharge
into the system or a substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants
that are to be discharged into the system shall file an application with the
Superintendent at least forty-five (45) days prior to the proposed change or
connection.
10.2.2
There shall be two (2) classes of Building Sewer permits
a. for residential and commercial use.
b. for service to establishments producing Industrial Wastes.
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the Town. The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications, and other information considered pertinent in the judgment
of the Superintendent. All applicable permit and inspection fees in such amount
as set forth in the fee schedule of the Sewer Department shall be paid to the Town
at the time the application is filed.
10.2.3
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the Building
Sewer shall be borne by the owner.
General Bylaws Page 22
The owner shall indemnify the Town against any loss or damage that may directly
or indirectly be caused by the installation of the Building Sewer.
10.2.4
A separate and independent Building Sewer shall be provided for every building;
except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and
private Sewer is not available or cannot be constructed to the rear building
through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the Building Sewer from the
front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as
one Building Sewer.
10.2.5
Existing Building Sewers may be used in connection with the new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and tested by the Superintendent, to meet all
requirements of this Bylaw.
10.2.6
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a Building Sewer and the
methods to be used in excavating, placement of the pipe, jointing, testing and
backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and
plumbing code and other applicable rules and regulations of the Town. In the
absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof the materials and
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F.
Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
10.2.7
No Person shall make connections of roof downspouts, exterior foundations
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
Building Sewer or building drain which, in turn, is connected directly or indirectly
to a Sanitary Sewer.
10.2.8
The connection of the Building Sewer into the Public Sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code and other applicable rules and
regulations of the Town, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications
of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.E. manual or Practice No. 9. All such connections
shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed
procedure and materials must be approved by the Superintendent before
installation.
10.2.9
The applicant for the Building Sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent when
the Building Sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the Public Sewer.
The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Superintendent or his
representative.
General Bylaws Page 23
10.2.10
All excavations for Building Sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards. Streets, sidewalks,
parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be
restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town.
10.2.11
All property owners whose land abuts a public or private way in which a Sanitary
Sewer has been laid are required to connect to the Sewer, unless the property
owner can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board of Health the existence of
a compliant Title V system.
Section 10.3 - Use of the Public Sewer
10.3.1
No Person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface
water, groundwater, roof water, runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, or
industrial process waters to any Sanitary Sewer.
10.3.2
Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such Sewers
as are specifically designated as Combined Sewers or Storm Sewers, or to a
Natural Outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process water may be discharged, on approval of the Superintendent.
to a storm Sewer, Combined Sewer, or Natural Outlet.
10.3.3
No Person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any Public Sewers:
a. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
b. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any Sewage treatment process, constitute
a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the Sewage Treatment Plant.
c. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.5, or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage to structures, equipment,
and personnel of the Sewage Works.
d. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in Sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the Sewage Works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, un-ground Garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
General Bylaws Page 24
fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either
whole or ground by Garbage grinders.
10.3.4
No Person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the
Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the Sewers, Sewage treatment
process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving system, or can
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In
forming his opinion as the acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent shall
give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to
flows and velocities in the Sewers, materials of construction of the Sewers, nature
of thee Sewage treatment process, capacity of the Sewage Treatment Plant, degree
of treatability of wastes in the Sewage Treatment Plant and other pertinent factors.
The substances prohibited are:
a. Any liquid or vapor in excess of one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150° or 65° C).
b. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/1) or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between
thirty two and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (32°F to 150°F or 0°
to 65°C).
c. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
d. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite Sewage at the Sewage Treatment Plant exceeds the limits
established by the Superintendent for such materials.
e. Any waters or wastes substances in such concentrations exceeding
limits established by the State, Federal, or other public applicable agencies
for such discharge to the receiving waters.
f. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as
may exceed limits established by applicable State and Federal regulations.
g. Any waters or waste having a pH in excess of 9.0.
h. Materials which exert or cause:
General Bylaws Page 25
1. Unusual concentration of inert Suspended Solids (such as, but
not limited to, fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate).
2. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes,
and vegetable tanning solutions).
3. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load
on the Sewage Treatment Plant, may cause the effluent limitations
of the discharge permit to be exceeded.
4. Unusual volume or flow or concentration of wastes constituting
Slug.
i. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amendable to
treatment or reduction by the Sewage treatment processes employed, or
are amendable to treatment only to such degree that the Sewage Treatment
Plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of the other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
10.3.5
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the
Public Sewers which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics
enumerated in Sections 10.3.3 and 10.3.4 of this Bylaw and which in the
judgment of the Superintendent, could have a deleterious effect upon the Sewage
Works, processes, equipment or receiving waters or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
a. Reject the wastes.
b. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the Public Sewers.
c. Require control of the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or
d. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent, and subject to
the requirements of all applicable codes, this Bylaw, laws, and the
municipal discharge permit. Further, such treatment installations must be
consistent with the requirements of any state pretreatment permit.
General Bylaws Page 26
10.3.6
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any
water or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense.
10.3.7
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a
Building Sewer carrying Industrial Wastes shall install a suitable control manhole
together with such necessary meters, and other appurtenances in the Building
Sewer to facilitate observation sampling, and measurement of the wastes, such
manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent. The
manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by
him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. All industries discharging into a
Public Sewer shall perform such monitoring of their discharges as the
Superintendent may reasonably require, including installation, use, and
maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping records and reporting the results
of such monitoring to the Superintendent. Where industrial pretreatment permits
are issued by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts monitoring records must also
be submitted to the Board of Sewer Commissioners in accord with such permit.
Records of any other monitoring will be supplied by the Superintendent to the
Commonwealth on request.
10.3.8
All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes
to which reference is made in this Bylaw shall be determined in accordance with
the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater" published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be
determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at
said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the
control manhole shall be considered to be the downstream manhole in the Public
Sewer nearest to the point at which the Building Sewer is connected. Sampling
shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the Sewage Works and to determine the existence of hazards to
life, limb, and property. (The particular analysis involved will determine whether
a twenty-four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or
whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.) Normally, but not always,
BOD and Suspended Solids analysis are obtained from 24-hour composites of all
outfalls whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples.
10.3.9
Any Person held in violation of the provisions of this Bylaw may have its
disposal authorization terminated.
General Bylaws Page 27
10.3.10
No statement contained in this Bylaw shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the Town and any industrial concern whereby
an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Town
for treatment, subject to payment, therefor, by the industrial concern.
Section 10.4 - Protection From Damage
10.4.1
No Person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which
is a part of the Sewage Works. Any Person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest.
Section 10.5 - Authority of Inspectors
10.5.1
To the extent permitted by law, or if authorized by the owner or other party in
control of the property, the Superintendent and other duly authorized employees
and agents of the Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
Bylaw.
10.5.2
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in Section
10.5.1 above, all duly authorized employees and agents of the Town shall observe
all safety rules applicable to the premises and made known to such employees and
agents.
10.5.3
Duly authorized employees and agents of the Town bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which
the Town holds an easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the
Sewage Works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if
any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the
easement pertaining to the private property involved.
Section 10.6 - Penalties
10.6.1
Any Person found to be violating any provision of this Bylaw except Section 10.4
shall be served by the Town with written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease
all violations.
General Bylaws Page 28
10.6.2
Any Person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for
in Section 10.6.1, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof,
shall be fined in the amount not exceeding $20.00 for each violation. Each day in
which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
10.6.3
Any Person violating any of the provisions of this Bylaw shall become liable to
the Town for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned to the Town by reason of
such offense.
10.6.4
In addition to the provisions set forth in Bylaw 19 General Administration Section
19.2.3, any industrial, residential or commercial user discharging into the Public
Sewer system who is found guilty of violating either Federal, State or Local
discharge rules and regulations shall be subject to a civil penalty in such amount
as set forth in the fees, fines and penalties schedule of the Sewer Department for
each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.
Section 10.7 – Severability
The provisions of this Bylaw are hereby declared to be severable. The invalidity
of any section, clause, sentence or provision of this Bylaw or the application
thereof to any Person, establishment or circumstances shall not affect the validity
of any other provision or application of this Bylaw.
Section 10.8 - Rates
10.8.1
The Board of Sewer Commissioners shall establish the user charge and industrial
cost recovery system in accordance with appropriate Federal and State rules and
regulations pertaining to the costs associated to the use of the Sewer by an
industry.
10.8.2
The Board of Sewer Commissioners shall establish the user charge system in
accordance with appropriate Federal and State rules and regulations pertaining to
the costs associated to the use of the Sewer by a non-industrial user.
10.8.3
The Board of Sewer Commissioners shall in establishing the rates referred to in
Sections 10.8.1 and 10.8.2 above, make specific reference to the sewer use rate
structure in force at the time of any connection. The sewer use rate structure shall
incorporate the requirements of the applicable State and Federal regulations.
10.8.4
Rate Structure (to be developed).
General Bylaws Page 29
10.8.5
Industrial Cost Recovery Structure (to be developed).
Section 10.9 - Sewer Connection Fees
10.9.1
The Town of Sutton shall charge a permanent sewer connection fee as established
by this Bylaw.
10.9.2
Whenever a connection is made, either directly or indirectly, to the Town Sewer
system, or any connection already made, or whenever the use of a Sewer
previously connected is subsequently changed as hereinafter provided, a
permanent sewer connection fee shall be assessed. Such fee shall be that which is
in effect at the time the connection is made; or, in the case of a change in use of a
Sewer previously connected, then the fee in effect at the time an application for a
building permit is filed; or if no such permit is required then at the time an
occupancy permit is issued, or, of none, then at the time the new use begins.
10.9.3
The permanent sewer connection fee shall be at a per-unit rate in such amount as
determined and established by the Sewer Commissioners. For the purpose of this
Bylaw the number of units to be assessed on each such connection shall be as
follows:
A. Residential Use
1. Each single family building connected directly to the Town
Sewer system shall be assessed as one unit.
2. Each dwelling unit in a multiple family dwelling, whether
connected to the Town Sewer system directly or indirectly, shall be
assessed at the per-unit rate.
B. Other Uses
1. For uses other than residential there shall be an assessment of a
minimum of one unit, and an additional unit for every 10,000
square feet of floor space, or major portion thereof, exceeding an
initial 10,000 square feet of floor space, up to a total of 50,000
square feet of floor space; and an additional unit for every 25,000
square feet of floor space or major percentage thereof exceeding
the initial 50,000 square feet. In the event that said (unit) is
subdivided into more than one tenant or business, an additional
unit will be charged for each tenant or business.
General Bylaws Page 30
C. Change in Use
1. When a Sewer has previously been connected, in residential
uses when additional dwelling units are added, a fee at the per-unit
rate then in effect.
2. When a Sewer has previously been connected, in uses other
than residential when additional floor space is added, a fee shall be
assessed on one unit for each additional 10,000 square feet of floor
space, or major percentage thereof, up to a total of 50,000 square feet of
total floor space of the building; and an additional unit for every 25, 000
square feet of floor space, or major percentage thereof, exceeding the
initial 50,000 square feet, or if it is subdivided into more than one tenant
or business, an additional unit will be charged for each tenant or
business.
Section 10.10 – Administration
10.10.1
The Board of Sewer Commissioners (“Board”) shall administer, implement, and
enforce this Bylaw, and any rules and regulations adopted thereunder. The Board
shall have authority to establish fees and charges in accordance with the
provisions of this Bylaw. Any powers granted to or duties imposed on the Board
may be delegated to employees or agent of the Board.
10.10.2
The Board may promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this
Bylaw and to govern the use and operation of the Town Sewer System. Failure
by the Board to promulgate such rules and regulations shall not have the effect of
suspending or invalidating any provision of this Bylaw.
10.10.3
To the extent the Town is a party to any third party agreement which contains
provisions that are more restrictive than those otherwise set forth in this bylaw,
said more restrictive provisions shall control, to the extent applicable pursuant to
the terms of said agreement.
Adopted: Oct. 12, 1978
Amended: 4/18/86, 10/17/88, 2/1/89, 6/19/89, 5/1/89, 5/4/92, 5/3/93, 10/19/98, 10/19/98, 10/20/03, 5/9/05, 5/14/07
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
Amended May 11, 2015
BYLAW 11. ENTERTAINMENT
Section 11.1
The acts or conduct enumerated in Section 2 of this Bylaw are deemed contrary to the
public need and to common good and therefore are prohibited in or on premises licensed
under the provisions of G.L. c.18 §1 and §12, or c.140 §181 or §183A.
General Bylaws Page 31
Section 11.2
The following acts or conduct are prohibited as provided in Section 1 of this Bylaw.
a. To employ or permit any person in or on the licensed premises while such
person is unclothed or in such attire as to expose to view any portion of the areola
of the female breast or any portion of the pubic hair, cleft of the buttocks, or
genitals.
b. To employ or permit any person to mingle with the patrons while such person
is unclothed or in such attire as described in paragraph (a) above.
c. To encourage or permit any person in or on the licensed premises to touch,
caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, or genitals of any other person.
d. To employ or permit any person to wear or use any device or covering exposed
to view which simulates the breasts, buttocks, pubic hair or genitals or any portion
thereof.
e. To employ or permit any person in or on the licensed premises to perform an
act or acts or to simulate the act or acts of:
1. Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, flagellation or any sexual
acts prohibited by law.
2. Touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks or genitals of
one another.
f. To employ or permit any person in or on the licensed premises to show or
depict through any visual medium any acts or any simulation of any of the acts
prohibited in paragraphs (a-e) hereof.
Section 11.3
Nothing contained in this Bylaw shall permit any other conduct or activity in or on any
licensed premises in violation of any general or special law or Bylaw now in force or
hereafter enacted or adopted.
Section 11.4
Nothing contained in this Bylaw shall limit or prohibit the appropriate licensing authority
from adopting additional regulations relating to conduct or activity on licensed premises
or from imposing additional conditions on the issuance of any license.
Section 11.5
Violation of the provisions of this article shall be cause for the suspension or revocation
of any license granted pursuant to G.L. c.138 §1 and §12 or c.140 §181 or §183A.
General Bylaws Page 32
Section 11.6
In addition to the penalty imposed by Section 11.5 hereof, violations of this Bylaw shall
be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day a prohibited activity occurs shall constitute as a
separate offense.
Section 11.7
If any of the provisions of this Bylaw, or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any other provisions of this
article, or the application thereof, and for this purpose the provisions of this article are
severable.
Adopted: April 18, 1981
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
BYLAW 12. WETLANDS PROTECTION
Section 12-1. Purpose
The purpose of Bylaw 12 of the General Bylaws of the Town of Sutton ("Bylaw") is to preserve,
protect, and where possible, restore the public interests ("Public Interests") associated with
wetlands, related water resources and adjoining land areas in the Town, and to set forth a public
review and decision making process for activities having an impact or effect upon any areas
subject to protection ("Area Subject to Protection"). This Bylaw is a mandate unto itself and as
an adjunct to the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act at MGL. c. 131, §40, and its
Regulations at 310 CMR 10.00, as amended from time to time. This shall be done by controlling
activities deemed by the Conservation Commission ("Commission") to have an impact or
cumulative impact upon the resource areas ("Resource Areas) and stated public interests ("Public
Interests") in MGL. c.131, §40 and 310 CMR 10.00 and this Bylaw. This Bylaw is intended to
utilize the Home Rule authority of this municipality to protect additional Resource Areas and
Public Interests, with additional standards and procedures stricter than those found in MGL c.
131, §40 and 310 CMR 10.00. As such, additional Public Interests under this Bylaw include the
following:
• Protection of Aquatic Life Habitat;
• Protection of Recreational Activities;
• Protection of Aesthetics;
• Protection of Agriculture
Section 12-2. Jurisdiction
No person shall alter any Area Subject to Protection ("Resource Area") defined in MGL c.131,
§40 and/or 310 CMR 10.00, which shall be afforded protection under this Bylaw, or the
additional Areas Subject to Protection ("Bylaw Resource Area" or simply "Resource Area")
under the Bylaw as stated below.
• Wetlands, regardless of whether they border a waterbody or watercourse;
General Bylaws Page 33
• All streams, regardless of whether they are associated with a Resource Area or upgradient
of a Resource Area;
• Areas Subject to Storm Flowage (ASSF)
• Vernal pools;
• Waterbodies less than 1/4acre-foot in size;
• Great Ponds;
• Adjacent Upland Resource Area ("AURA")
Notwithstanding the above, the Commission may permit Work within the above-mentioned
Resource Areas deemed not to result in Adverse Impact to the Public Interests stated in MGL. c.
131, §40, its Regulations at 310 CMR 10.00, or in §12.1 above.
The jurisdiction of this Bylaw shall not extend to uses and structures of agriculture that enjoy the
rights and privileges of laws and regulations of the Commonwealth governing agriculture,
including work performed for normal maintenance or improvement of land in agricultural or
aquacultural uses as defined in 310 CMR 10.04.
Section 12-3. Definitions
The definition of terms in this Bylaw shall be as set forth in MGL c.131, §40 and 310 CMR
10.00, except as otherwise provided in this §12-3:
Activity- means any form of draining, dumping, dredging, damming, excavating, filling or
grading; the erection, reconstruction or expansion of any buildings or structures; the driving of
pilings; the construction or improvement of roads and other ways; the changing of runoff
characteristics; the intercepting or diverging of ground or surface water; the installation of
drainage; sewage and water systems; the discharging of pollutants, including sediment; the
destruction of plant life; and any other changing of the physical, biological, or chemical
characteristics of land or water;
Adjacent Upland Resource Area- The land within 100' of a Resource Area as defined in MGL
c.131, §40, 310 CMR 10.00, §13-2 of this Bylaw, or 200' from the bank of a Great Pond or
Perennial River as defined in this Bylaw.
Adjacent Upland Resource Area ("AURA")- An Area Subject to Protection under this Bylaw
which extends perpendicularly from the outermost edge of stated Resource Areas below, without
regard for topography.
A 100' AURA shall apply to:
• Banks of Intermittent Streams;
• Wetlands, regardless of whether they border a waterbody or watercourse;
• Vernal pools;
A 200' AURA shall apply to:
• Banks/Bankfull Condition/Mean Annual High Water mark of Perennial Rivers;
• Great Ponds
General Bylaws Page 34
AURA shall not apply to the following:
• Land Under Waterbodies & Waterways (LUW)
• Bordering Land Subject to Flooding (BLSF)
• Waterbodies less than 1/4acre-foot in size;
• Isolated Land Subject to Flooding (ILSF)
Aesthetics- Outward appearance: the way something looks, especially when considered in terms
of how pleasing it is;
Adjunct- added as an accompanying object or circumstance; in this case, this Bylaw is an adjunct
to MGL c.131, §40 and 310 CMR 10.00;
Adult Fish Population- this definition shall be consistent with the policies and procedures of the
Massachusetts Division of Fisheries & Wildlife ("DFW") Natural Heritage and Endangered
Species Program ("NHESP"), as amended from time to time;
Adverse- a) In general: having an opposing or contrary interest; in this case, opposing or
contrary to the Public Interests;
b) In the context of Impact: in the opinion of the Conservation Commission, an Activity or
Alteration to a Resource Area which, by its area, scope, or duration appears to represent more
than a minimal change (i.e. Significant) to the characteristics, Functions or Values to the stated
Public Interests;
Alter/Alteration- Means to change the condition of any Area Subject to Protection under MGL
c.131 §40, or any Area Subject to Protection under the Bylaw. Examples of alterations include,
but are not limited to the following:
(a) the changing of pre-existing drainage characteristics, flushing characteristics, sediment
patterns, flow patterns, and flood retention capabilities;
(b) the lowering of the water level or water table;
(c) the destruction of vegetation;
(d) the changing of water temperature, biological oxygen demand (BOD), and other physical,
biological or chemical characteristics of the receiving water
Application- The forms, documents, and plans submitted to the Commission in order to request
the approval of a Permit or Order. Unless and until the Commission creates forms specific to the
Bylaw, applicants may use Wetlands Protection Act forms created by the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection ("DEP").
Appurtenance- Any structural or adjunct or incidental construct to a single family residential
structure or on any parcel of land, such as a septic system, garage, shed, deck, porch, patio,
swimming pool, tennis/basketball courts, driveway, or sidewalk. Exclusions include, without
limitations, lawns, landscaped areas, orchards, gardens, fields, pastures, paddocks, and in-ground
sprinkler systems.
Aquatic Life Habitat- The ecological or environmental area particular to aquatic ecosystems and
necessary for the function and well-being of aquatic life forms.
General Bylaws Page 35
Area Subject to Storm Flowage (ASSF)- This shall include Drainage Ditch/Swales and channels
that lead into, out of, pass through or connect other Wetlands or Waterbodies less than 1/4 acrefoot
in size, and that carry flows resulting from storm events, but may remain relatively dry at
other times and does not convey groundwater.
Avoid/Avoidance- To keep Work completely outside of Jurisdictional Areas.
Bankfull Condition- Synonymous with Mean Annual High Water (MAHW) and shall be
commensurate with the term as used in 310 CMR 10.58(2).
Commute- To replace with something else.
Consultant- Synonymous with Qualified Professional, normally related to third party peer review
under MGL c.44, §53G.
Control/Controlling- To regulate or govern by law; in this case, for the Conservation
Commission to carry out MGL c.131, §40, 310 CMR 10.00, and Bylaw 12 of the Sutton General
Bylaws.
Cumulative- Gradually building up: becoming successively larger; in this case normally related
to Impact.
Day of Discovery- The day which a violation of this Bylaw is found to be present.
Discharge- Without limitation, any overland water or groundwater that empties into a Resource
Area or its Adjacent Upland Resource Area.
Distance- All distances noted in this Bylaw (excluding depth), such as the distance between the
outermost boundary of a Resource Area and outermost boundary of its associated Adjacent
Upland Resource Area, are planar distances measured along a single elevation and without
regard for topography.
Drainage Ditch/Swale: A man -made, channelized conveyance system normally created to
convey surface or groundwater away from a developed area, such as a road, driveway, parking
lot, roof, agricultural field or the like. If a Stream/Intermittent stream flows into a Drainage
Ditch/Swale, that portion of the channel below the confluence shall be considered a
Stream/Intermittent Stream.
Emergency- Sudden and unexpected event or condition, normally associated with public health
and safety, that must be dealt with so urgently that the normal permitting process as described in
this Bylaw must be bypassed.
Effective Date- June 1, 1983.
Existing- The condition in place as of the Effective Date of this Bylaw or the date of an
Application.
General Bylaws Page 36
Functions- The intrinsic, nature-governed actions of a Resource Area or its Habitat that
contribute to its Value to the Public as a whole.
Great Pond- Waterbodies which contain or contained more than ten acres in their natural state, as
listed by DEP, and which are subject to the jurisdiction of MGL c. 91. In this case, Lake
Singletary, Manchaug Pond, and Ramshorn Pond. Further, this Bylaw shall consider Stevens
Pond as a Great Pond although it is not listed by DEP as such.
Habitat- An ecological or environmental area that is inhabited by a particular species of animal,
plant, or other type of organism. It is the natural environment in which an organism lives, or the
physical environment that surrounds a species population. In this case, normally associated with
Aquatic Life Habitat and Wildlife Habitat.
Illegal- As it pertains to this Bylaw, any Activity or Alteration not duly permitted by the
Conservation Commission, or exempted under §12.4 of this Bylaw.
Impact- To have an effect on a Resource Area by Work, Activity, or Alteration.
Impracticable- A fact or circumstance that excuses a party from performing an act because it
would cause extreme and unreasonable difficulty or hardship.
In-Kind- In the same way. In the context of a structure repair or replacement, it means that the
nature, location, and footprint will remain the same as before said repair or replacement.
Inactive- Not in use or operation, especially in regards to being Maintained.
Individual- Pertaining to a single location or instance.
Jurisdictional Area- One or more of the Areas Subject to Protection under the Bylaw/ Resource
Areas under the Bylaw.
Maintain/Maintained- To keep functional and in good repair or otherwise keep in a static state
and not a Natural State. In the case of lawns, landscaped areas, fields, gardens, orchards,
pastures, and paddocks, it means to continually cut herbaceous vegetation so that new woody
vegetation is suppressed. When an area as just described has not been Maintained and therefore
Inactive for a 5yr. or greater period*, it is no longer considered Maintained and loses any
Conditional Exemptions/Exceptions it may have enjoyed in the past. If, in the opinion of the
Commission an area has reverted to a Natural State prior to the 5yr. period, said area loses its
Maintain/Maintained status.
*The "5yr. or greater period" is a reference to Agriculture as found in 310 CMR 10.04 and meant
to be a corollary, but in this case is not limited to Agriculture/Land in Production.
General Bylaws Page 37
Mean Annual High Water (MAHW)-
a) Within the context of a river, MAHW is synonymous with Bankfull Condition and the
definition of MAHW shall be commensurate with that found in 310 CMR 10.58(2);
b) Within the context of Great Ponds, lakes, and ponds, the MAHW shall be commensurate with
the term Bankfull Condition and shall be the line that is apparent from visible markings or
changes in the character of soils or vegetation due to the prolonged presence of water and may
not necessarily be located at a defined break in slope.
Minimal- In the opinion of the Commission, Minimal means Impact that is so small as to be nonsignificant
to the Functions and Values of Resource Areas as they relate to the Public Interests.
Mitigate/Mitigation- Shall be commensurate with 310 CMR 10.04. Further, to lessen the impact
of an Activity, Alteration, or Project so the effects on Resource Areas are no longer considered
an Adverse Impact.
Most Years- Normally within the context of Vernal Pools, most years shall mean three (3) out of
five (5) years, which means that the Commission shall have the right to require investigation of
the presence or absence of a vernal pool for up to 5 years.
Natural State- An unmaintained condition in which an area is untouched by human intervention
or no longer meets the definition of Maintain/Maintained.
Necessary- Required: indispensable to achieve a specific result.
Perennial River- Shall be consistent with the definition of River, including the ability to
overcome the presumption of perenniality, as found in 310 CMR 10.58(2) except that it need not
empty into any ocean, lake, pond, or other river.
Permit- Synonymous with Order as found in 310 CMR 10.04.
Pre-Existing- Means in place prior to the enactment of Bylaw12.
Project- An activity with a functional purpose (e.g. construction of a single-family house,
expansion of a commercial development, dealing with an Emergency to public health and
safety).
Public- Relating or belonging to an entire community; in this case, the Town of Sutton.
Public Interests- The general welfare that warrants recognition, protection, and something in
which the public as a whole has a stake.
Qualified Professional- A Person having earned a college degree(s) in an area of study directly
related to wetlands science and engineering and having a minimum of 3 years’ demonstrable
field experience of actual hands-on expertise in delineating, assessing, analyzing wetlands and
their hydrologic, soil(s), biological, zoological and botanical characteristics, functions and
General Bylaws Page 38
values, and having a current working knowledge of all facets of the MGL c. 131, §40 and 310
CMR 10.00, DEP Wetlands Program Policies, and this Bylaw. The Commission may otherwise
accept and act upon creditable information presented by a Person(s) other than a Qualified
Professional, as defined herein, at its discretion.
Random- An Activity, Alteration, or Work for which an applicant does not specify in the
application the entire Project proposed or contemplated by the Applicant or in which the purpose
of the Activity, Alteration, or Work cannot be determined.
Recreation- In activity that a person takes part in for pleasure or relaxation. It may include active
recreation, such as hiking, or passive recreation such as bird watching.
Restore/Restoration- To return to a previous condition, normally, a better condition.
Scope/Scope of Work- An accurate, detailed, and concise description of the Work to be
performed as part of any Activity, Alteration, or Project. The Scope of Work includes the entire
Project, and not merely a segment of such (e.g. the entire subdivision, including proposed house,
well, and septic system placement and not just road infrastructure).
Significant- Plays a role. Within the context of Resource Areas under MGL c. 131, §40 and 310
CMR 10.00 or Resource Areas under the Bylaw, they are significant if they play a role in the
protection, as appropriate, of one or more Public Interests. Within the context of determining
Impact or Adverse Impact, significant means more than Minimal.
Spring- March 20 to June 20 of any given year.
Statement of Impact Avoidance and Minimization- A portion of the narrative required in
§12.5(B) which requires that an applicant satisfactorily demonstrate to the Commission that all
probable Impacts to Resource Areas have been avoided to the maximum extent practicable, and
where Impacts could not be avoided, that the Impacts to Resource Area(s) Functions and Values
have been reduced to the maximum extent practicable so as not to result in Adverse Impact.
Stream/Intermittent Stream- The definition of stream shall be consistent with that found in 310
CMR 10.04 except a stream need not flow within, into or out of a Resource Area. It may stand
alone without the accompaniment of a Resource Area (e.g. streams may occur upgradient of
Wetlands or may exist without any wetland present whatsoever). Further, streams and
intermittent streams may be supplied by either surface water runoff or groundwater, as opposed
to ASSF's, which convey only surface water runoff. Intermittent streams dry at least once per
year. If a Stream/Intermittent stream flows into a Drainage Ditch/Swale, that portion of the
channel below the confluence shall be considered a Stream/Intermittent Stream.
Summer- June 21 to September 23 of any given year.
Threshold- Those established in 310 CMR 10.54(4)(a)4., 10.57(4)(a)3. and 10.58(4)(d)1.c. which
establish quantitative numbers, below which alterations to Resource Areas are not deemed to
impair capacity to provide important wildlife habitat functions.
General Bylaws Page 39
Unavoidable- Impracticable to avoid.
Undesirable/Undesirable Alteration- Any Work, Activity, Alteration, or Project that poses an
individual Adverse or Cumulative Impact.
Unreasonable- Not guided by reason; irrational or capricious.
Value- The importance or worth of one or more of a Resource Area or Habitat's Functions to the
Public.
Vernal Pool- A confined basin, which need not be located within another Resource Area, and
which, at least in most years, holds water for a minimum of two continuous months during the
spring and/or summer, are free of adult fish populations, and are further identified by the species
of fauna that utilize them. The method for determining the fauna necessary to classify a vernal
pool shall be that used by the Massachusetts Division of Fisheries & Wildlife, as amended from
time to time. The outermost boundary of the Vernal Pool is the line that is apparent from visible
markings or changes in the character of soils or vegetation due to the prolonged presence of
water, or by using procedures outlined in 310 CMR 10.57(2)(b)(3) for Isolated Land Subject to
Flooding. A vernal pool may have a permanent inlet, but may not have a permanent outlet. The
Resource Area of Bank does not apply to Vernal Pool under this definition. The Vernal Pool
need not be certified by the Massachusetts Division of Fisheries & Wildlife to be classified as
such and receive protection under this Bylaw.
Waterbodies less than 1/4 acre-foot in size- An isolated area, which need not be located within
another Resource Area, that provides temporary storage for water and where runoff and high
groundwater pond and slowly evaporate or infiltrate into the ground. They are not Vernal Pools
in that the requisite aquatic life components are not found and are mainly, but not necessarily
limited to flood control functions.
Wetland- As defined in 310 CMR 10.55(2), except that they shall not be limited to those that
border on creeks, rivers, ponds, and lakes, but may be isolated in nature.
Work- Pertains to duties to be performed in association with Activities, Alterations, and/or
Projects.
Section 12-4. Conditional Exceptions
A. An Application and Permit required by this Bylaw shall not be required for in-kind
maintenance or repairs to Pre-Existing or duly Permitted structures, Appurtenances, or
Maintained areas.
B. An Application and Permit required by this Bylaw shall not be required for normal
maintenance or improvement of land in agricultural and aquacultural use defined under 310
CMR 10.04
C. An Application and Permit required by this Bylaw shall not be required for emergency
projects necessary for the protection of health and safety of the public, provided the work is to be
General Bylaws Page 40
performed by or has been ordered to be performed by an agency of the Commonwealth or a
political subdivision thereof; provided that advance notice, oral or written, has been given to the
Commission prior to commencement of work or within 24 hours after commencement; provided
that the Commission certifies the work as an emergency project; provided that the work is
performed only for the time and place certified by the Commission for the limited purposes
necessary to abate the emergency; and provided that within 30 days of commencement of an
emergency project a permit application shall be filed with the Commission for review as
provided in this Bylaw. Failure to meet these and other requirements, the Commission may,
after notice and a public hearing, revoke or modify an emergency project approval and order
restoration and mitigation measures.
D. Other than stated in this Bylaw, the exceptions provided in MGL c.131, §40 and 310 CMR
10.00 shall not apply under this Bylaw.
Section 12-5. Applications for Permits
A. Written application (“Application”) shall be filed with the Commission to perform all related
Work associated with Activities, Alterations, and/or Projects affecting any Resource Area(s).
The Application shall contain such plans and analysis deemed necessary by the Commission, and
as specified in this Bylaw and its Regulations, which describe the proposed Work, Activities,
Alteration(s) or Projects and their effect on Resource Area(s).
B. All Applications shall contain a written project description/work narrative, as well as a
Statement of Impact Avoidance and Minimization in sufficient detail that describes the entire
Scope of any/all proposed Work, Activity Alteration, or Project(s) associated with the
Application;
C. The provisions of the DEP Stormwater Management Standards shall apply to those projects
described at 310 CMR 10.05(6)(l). At its discretion, the Commission shall have the authority to
require studies, to its satisfaction, for projects described at 310 CMR 10.05(6)(l), even if they do
not discharge to a Critical Area as defined in 310 CMR 10.04. Examples of required studies
would include the 100 year analysis for stormwater runoff associated with a single family house
or small (4 or fewer lots) subdivision.
D. The Commission shall have the authority to require studies beyond those mentioned above for
any Work, Activity, Alteration, or Project within a Resource Area, regardless of size, scope, or
Threshold found in 310 CMR 10.00 and as defined in this Bylaw, to be conducted by a Qualified
Professional. The decision shall be based upon the Commission's estimation of the importance
of the Resource Area under consideration in relation to the Public Interests. Examples may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, Type A or B wildlife habitat evaluations (at the
Commission's discretion), hydraulic/hydrologic studies of rivers and streams, and floodplain
studies.
E. For the purposes of this Bylaw, the Commission may accept the Notice of Intent form or
other forms filed pursuant to MGL c.131 §40 and 310 CMR 10.00, which shall be sent by
certified mail to the Commission, accompanied with the appropriate fee(s), payable to the Town
of Sutton.
General Bylaws Page 41
F. All Application(s) shall be filed concurrently with (or after) any other application(s) for
variances and approvals required by any other Town Board or Commission or under their
Regulations, or after any such permit(s) have been issued, unless the Commission so decides to
waive this requirement. The Commission shall have the conditional prerogative of withholding
its final decision until all relevant or related permits are issued. Should an applicant have already
filed and received a permit from another Town Board or Commission under their Regulations,
the Commission shall not be held to conformance with those permits already received.
G. No work, Alteration(s) or Activities shall commence without receiving and complying with a
Permit processed and issued pursuant to this Bylaw.
H. Unless and until the Commission creates separate application forms for projects jurisdictional
under this Bylaw only, the Commission shall accept forms under 310 CMR 10.00 (e.g. WPA
Form 3- Notice of Intent);
I. No parcel of land shall be considered buildable unless the buildings(s), well and septic system
are located in contiguous upland acreage equal to the minimum required lot area for the zoning
district where the lot is located.
Section 12-6. Fees
A. At the time of an application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee, called the Bylaw Filing
Fee, specified in regulations of the Commission. The Bylaw Filing Fee is in addition to
that required by the Wetlands Protection Act and 310 CMR 10.00. Pursuant to G.L. Ch.
44 §53G and regulations promulgated by the Commission, the Commission may impose
reasonable fees upon applicants for the purpose of securing outside consultants including
engineers, wetlands scientists, wildlife biologists or other experts in order to aid in the
review of proposed projects. Such funds shall be deposited with the town treasurer, who
shall create an account specifically for this purpose.
B. Town, County, State, and Federal projects are exempt from the Bylaw Filing Fee. The
Commission may waive or decrease the filing fee for non-exempt persons, parties, or
entities at its discretion. Filing with the Commission does not relieve any person, party,
or entity, from filing for permits also required at the local, state, or federal level.
C. The Commission shall provide the applicant with the Consultant Fee Schedule, to be
specified in regulations of the Commission, and which shall also act as the contractual fee
schedule for said Consultant. Any unused portions of collected fee(s) shall be returned to
the applicant following issuance of a finding (e.g. Determination of Applicability) or a
final Certificate of Compliance, unless the Commission, at a public hearing, decides that
additional services and information will be required (e.g. pre-application meeting,
construction monitoring). Procedures for the hiring and payment of a Qualified
Professional shall be in accordance with MGL c.44, §53G and Rules and Regulations
promulgated by the Commission in accordance therefore.
D. Only costs relating to consultant work done in connection with a Project for which a
consultant fee has been collected shall be paid from this account, and expenditures may
General Bylaws Page 42
be made at the sole discretion of the Commission. Any consultant hired under this
provision shall be selected by, and report exclusively to, the Commission. The
Commission shall provide applicants with written notice of the selection of a consultant,
identifying the consultant, the amount of the fee to be charged to the applicant, and a
request for payment of that fee. Notice shall be deemed to have been given on the date it
is mailed or delivered. The applicant may withdraw the application or request within five
(5) business days of the date notice is given without incurring any costs or expenses.
E. Specific Consultant services may include, but are not limited to interpretation of Work,
Activity, Alteration, or a Project's compliance with MGL c.131, §40, 310 CMR 10.00,
Bylaw 12 (i.e. this Bylaw), Resource Area(s) survey and delineation and delineation
review, analyses of Resource Area(s) Functions and Values, including but not necessarily
limited to wildlife, plant and aquatic habitat evaluations, invasive species and eradication
plans and plan review, hydrogeologic, soils and drainage analysis, environmental or land
use law, and interpretation(s) thereof, as well as stormwater, erosion and sedimentation
control review and associated inspections of on-going construction, attending preconstruction
meetings, inspections for Certificates of Compliance, presentations at public
hearings and meetings to the Commission of findings and opinions in the form of reports,
memos, photos, videos, GIS and computer services, and coordination of any of the above.
F. All fees that are shared with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, when paid, shall be
placed and held in the Sutton Wetlands Protections Fund, so constituted, pursuant to GL
c.43 §218 of the Acts of 1997 (Amending GL c.131 §40). Fees required solely under this
Bylaw shall be deposited in a 'revolving fund' pursuant to GL c.44 §53 1/2. These fees
shall include all Application fees, related and any prorated fees, or fees of any kind.
Payment of the Consultant Fee schedule shall be placed in a Section 53G account, and
shall be made at the time of application. The Consultant Fee may be amended from time
to time in light of contemporary, competitive rates.
G. The entire fee must be received before the initiation of consulting services. Failure by the
applicant to pay the requested fees above within ten (10) business days of the request for
payment shall be cause for the Commission to declare the application administratively
incomplete and deny the permit without prejudice, except in the case of an appeal. The
Commission shall inform the applicant and DEP of such a decision in writing.
H. The applicant may appeal the selection of an outside consultant to the Board of
Selectmen, who may disqualify the consultant only on the grounds that the consultant has
a conflict of interest or is not properly qualified. The minimum qualifications shall
consist of either an educational degree or three or more years of practice in the field at
issue, or a related field. The applicant shall make such an appeal in writing, and must be
received within ten (10) business days of the date that request for consultant fees was
made by the Commission. Such appeal shall extend the applicable time limits for action
upon the application.
General Bylaws Page 43
Section 12-7. Notice and Hearings
A. Procedures related to Notices and Hearings shall be commensurate with those found in MGL
c.131, §40 and 310 CMR 10.00, as may be amended from time to time, except that notification to
abutters shall be extended to 300 feet from the property line.
B. To the extent permitted by law, by submitting an Application, an applicant is deemed to
consent to entry onto the property that is the subject of the Application, by the Commission, its
agents or Consultants, officers, members and employees during reasonable times, and upon
reasonable notice, without such entry being deemed a trespass, for the purpose of performing
their duties under this Bylaw.
Section 12-8. Permits, Conditions & Denials
A. If the Commission, after a public hearing, determines that the Work, Activities, Alterations,
and/or Project which are the subject of the application are likely to have an Individual or
Cumulative Impact, Adverse or no, upon the Functions and Values of Resource Areas as they
relate to the Public Interests, the Commission shall within twenty one (21) days of the close of
the hearing issue or deny a Permit for the Work, Activities, Alterations, and/or Project requested.
The Commission shall impose conditions which it deems necessary or desirable for the
protection of the Public Interests, and all Work, Activities, Alterations, and/or Projects shall be
performed in accordance with those conditions. A Permit may identify requirements that shall be
enforceable for a stated number of years, indefinitely, or until permanent protection is in place,
and shall apply to all current and future owners of the land.
B. The Commission shall have the authority to impose conditions upon Determinations of
Applicability if work is proposed within a Resource Area.
C. When making a determination to issue a Permit or denial, the Commission shall take into
consideration the extent to which the applicant has avoided, minimized, and mitigated Individual
or Cumulative Adverse Impacts for any such Work, Activity, Alteration, or Project. The
Commission shall also take into account the individual or Cumulative Impacts to Resource Areas
throughout the municipality as they relate to the application under consideration, resulting from
past activities, permitted and exempt, and foreseeable future activities.
D. Where no conditions are adequate to protect said Resource Areas, the Commission is
empowered to deny a Permit for failure to meet the requirements of this Bylaw. It may also deny
a Permit: for failure to submit necessary information and plans requested by the Commission; for
failure to comply with the procedures, design specifications, performance standards, and other
requirements in this Bylaw or Regulations of the Commission; for failure to avoid when
practicable, or adequately minimize and mitigate when avoidance is not practicable, for Adverse
Individual or Cumulative Impact upon the Functions and Values of Resource Areas as they relate
to the Public Interests described in this Bylaw.
E. To the extent permitted by law, the Commission shall have the right to inspect properties,
without the prior consent of the applicant or owner, during reasonable hours, for compliance with
an Order of Conditions, even if expired, until that Permit receives a full Certificate of
Compliance. The Commission shall not have the right to inspect a property if the Order of
General Bylaws Page 44
Conditions has expired and work has not begun unless there is probable cause to inspect due to
unlawful Work, Activities, Alterations, or Projects occurring or having occurred on said
property.
F. For good cause, the Commission may revoke any Permit or any other Order, determination, or
other decision issued under this Bylaw after notice to the holder, the public, the abutters, Town
Boards, and a public hearing.
G. Amendments to Permits shall be handled in the manner set out 310 CMR 10.00 and the DEP
Wetlands Program Policies.
H. Unless and until the Commission creates individual forms, the Permit, Certificate of
Compliance, Notice of Violation, or Enforcement Order issued under this Bylaw may use the
DEP Wetlands and Waterways Program forms for such.
Section 12-9. Hardship & Waivers
Due consideration shall be given to any demonstrated hardship on the applicant by reason of
denial, as presented at the public hearing. Upon written request by the applicant, the
Commission may waive specifically identified and requested procedures, design specifications,
performance standards, or other requirements from this Bylaw or Regulations of the Commission
provided that: the Commission finds in writing after said public hearing that there are no
reasonable conditions or alternatives that would allow the proposed Activity, Alterations, and/or
Project to proceed in compliance with the Bylaw or Regulations of the Commission; that
avoidance, minimization, and mitigation have been employed to the maximum extent
Practicable; and that the waiver is necessary to accommodate an overriding Public Interest or to
avoid a decision that so restricts the use of the property as to constitute a taking without just
compensation.
Section 12-10. Rules & Regulations
A. After public notice and public hearing, the Commission shall promulgate rules and
regulations to effectuate and clarify the purposes of this Bylaw effective when voted and filed
with the Town Clerk. Failure by the Commission to promulgate such rules and regulations or a
legal declaration of their invalidity by a court of law shall not act to suspend or invalidate the
effect of this Bylaw.
B. At a minimum, these regulations shall define key terms in this Bylaw not inconsistent with
this Bylaw.
Section 12-11. Security
As part of a permit issued under this Bylaw, in addition to any security required by any other
municipal or state board, agency or official, the Commission may require that the performance
and observance of the conditions imposed hereunder be secured wholly or in part by one or more
of the methods described below:
A. By a proper bond or deposit of money or negotiable securities or other undertaking of
financial responsibility sufficient in the opinion of the Commission, to be released in whole or in
part upon issuance of a Certificate of Compliance for work performed pursuant to the permit.
General Bylaws Page 45
B. By a conservation restriction, easement or other covenant enforceable in a court of law,
executed and duly recorded by the owner of record, running with the land to the benefit of this
municipality whereby the permit conditions shall be performed and observed before any lot may
be conveyed other than by mortgage deed. This method shall be used only with the consent of
the applicant.
Section 12-12. Enforcement
A. No person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade or otherwise alter resource areas
protected by this Bylaw or cause, suffer, or allow such activity or fill to be left in place or
otherwise fail to restore illegally altered land to its original condition, or fail to comply with a
permit or an enforcement order issued pursuant to this Bylaw without the required authorization
pursuant to this Bylaw.
B. The Commission, its agents, officers and employees shall have authority, to the extent
provided by the constitutions and laws of the United States and the Commonwealth or with prior
approval from the property owner, to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of
performing their duties under this Bylaw and may make or cause to be made such examinations,
surveys or sampling as the Commission deems necessary.
C. The Commission shall have authority to enforce this Bylaw, its rules and regulations and
Permits issued thereunder by violation notices, administrative orders (i.e. cease & desist order),
Enforcement Orders, non-criminal citations pursuant to Subsection G below, and civil and
criminal court actions. Any person who violates provisions of this Bylaw may be ordered to
restore the property to its original condition and take other action deemed necessary to remedy
such violations.
D. Upon request of the Commission, the Board of Selectmen and the Town Counsel may take
legal action for enforcement under civil law. Upon request of the Commission, the Chief of
Police may take legal action for enforcement under criminal law.
E. Municipal boards and officers, including any police officer or other officer having police
powers, shall have authority to assist the Commission in enforcement.
F. Any person who violates any provision of this Bylaw, regulation thereunder, or permits or
administrative orders issued thereunder, may be punished by a fine of not more than $300,
beginning, at the Commission's discretion, on the Day of Discovery. Each day or portion thereof
during which a violation continues, or unauthorized fill remains in place, shall constitute a
separate offense, and each provision of the Bylaw, regulations, permit or order violated shall
constitute a separate offense. Fines may end when a written plan to Restore the affected area has
been presented or accepted by the Commission, or an application for Permit received.
G. Non-criminal disposition- In addition to the procedures for enforcement as described above,
the provisions of this Bylaw may also be enforced by non-criminal complaint pursuant to the
provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D and Section 19.2.2 of the Town General Bylaws. The
enforcement agent shall be the conservation agent or designee (e.g. Conservation Commissioner
or consultant to the Commission) or police officer. The penalty for violation of any provision of
General Bylaws Page 46
this Bylaw shall be $300 for the Day of Discovery, and each day the violation continues pursuant
to subsection F above.
H. Any Person who purchases, inherits, or otherwise acquires real estate upon which work has
been done in violation of the provisions of this Bylaw or in violation of any Permit issued
pursuant to this Bylaw shall comply with any such order or Restore such land to its condition
prior to any such violation. No action, civil or criminal, shall be brought against such Person
provided that that such Person files a Notice of Intent and receives and records a duly issued
Order of Conditions.
I. Upon written appeal for good reason, the Commission may, at its discretion and at a public
hearing, reduce or commute fines resulting from violations of this Bylaw.
Section 12-13. Burden of Proof
The applicant for a Permit shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the credible
evidence that the work proposed in the application will not present individual or cumulative
Adverse Impact as defined by this Bylaw to a Resource Area or Bylaw Resource Area as they
relate to the stated Public Interests.
Section 12-14. Appeals
A decision of the Commission shall be reviewable in the Superior Court in an action filed within
60 days thereof, in accordance with MGL c. 249, §4.
Section 12-15. Relation to the Wetlands Protection Act
This Bylaw is adopted under the Home Rule Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution and
the Home Rule statutes, independent of the Wetlands Protection Act (MGL c.131, §40) and its
Regulations (310 CMR 10.00) thereunder. It is the intention of this Bylaw that the purposes,
jurisdiction, authority, exemptions, rules and regulations, specifications, standards, and other
requirements shall be interpreted and administered as stricter than those under MGL c. 131, §40
and 310 CMR 10.00.
Section 12-16. Severability
The invalidity of any section or provision of this Bylaw shall not invalidate any other section or
provision thereof, nor shall it invalidate any permit, approval or determination which previously
has been issued.
Adopted: June 1, 1983
Amended: 1/85, 5/8/00, 10/16/00, 5/10/04, 5/11/09, 5/9/11
Revised; May 11, 2015
BYLAW 13. STREET NUMBERING
All single or multi-family dwellings, industrial or commercial buildings shall be
conspicuously marked with identifying numbers legible from a public street or access
road, said numbers shall be assigned by the Board of Assessors. To the extent not legible
General Bylaws Page 47
from a public street or access road, said identifying numbers shall also be posted on a
mailbox, post or pole so as to be legible from a public street or access road. Numbers
shall be a minimum size of 3” on a residential house and 6” on an industrial or
commercial building and of opposing color to the color of the structure. The Board of
Assessors, in their discretion, may also assign numbers to any building on any street.
Adopted: April 18, 1987
Amended: 5/14/07
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
BYLAW 14. COUNCIL ON AGING
Section 14.1 – General Provisions
There shall be a Council On Aging as provided in G.L. c.40, §8B.
Section 14.2 – Membership
The Council On Aging shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Board of
Selectmen for three (3) year terms, so arranged that as equal as possible a number of
terms shall expire each year.
Section 14.3 – Powers & Duties
The Council On Aging shall coordinate and carry out programs designed to address the
issues of the Towns’ elder citizens in coordination with programs of the Mass.
Department of Elder Affairs. The Council shall submit an annual report to the Town and
shall send a copy thereof to the Department of Elder Affairs.
Section 14.4 – Alternate Members
The Council On Aging shall also consist of three (3) alternate members appointed by the
Board of Selectmen for three (3) year terms. Alternate members may speak on any issue
that comes before the Council but may not vote. The purpose of alternate members is to
be available for consideration as full members if and when a vacancy should occur.
Adopted: 10/17/88
Amended: 5/3/93, 5/13/02
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
BYLAW 15. SCENIC ROAD
Purpose: The purpose of this article is to ensure compliance with G.L. c.40 §15C and G.L. c.87,
with respect to protection of trees and stone walls along, and within the right of way of Scenic
Roadways and public roadways in the Town.
General Bylaws Page 48
Section 15.1 - Definitions
15.1.1 "Road" shall mean a right-of-way or any way laid out or used and
maintained as a public way plus necessary appurtenances within the right-of-way
such as bridge structures, drainage systems, retaining walls, traffic control devices
and sidewalks, but not intersecting streets or driveways.
15.1.2 “Repair, Maintenance, Reconstruction, or Paving Work" shall mean any
work within the right-of-way by any person or agency, public or private. This
includes any work on any portion of the right-of-way which was not physically
finished at the time the road was designated as a Scenic Road. Construction of
new driveways or alterations of existing one is also included, insofar as it takes
place within the right-of-way.
15.1.3 "Tearing Down or Destruction of Stone Walls" shall mean altering the
stone wall in any way within or along the boundary of a right-of-way.
Section 15.2 - Purpose
These regulations are intended to ensure that;
15.2.1 Roads will be recommended for designation as Scenic Roads on stated
criteria;
15.2.2 Roads so designated will not be altered without following proper
procedures and without adherence to proper consideration;
15.2.3 Roads as designated will not be altered by the decision of any person,
organization, or agency other than the Planning Board.
Section 15.3 – Procedures - Designation as a Scenic Road
15.3.1 Any person or group of persons may request that the Planning Board,
Conservation Commission or Historical Commission take the necessary steps to
petition Town Meeting or a group of citizens may petition Town Meeting
pursuant to the requirements of G.L. c. 39, §10, to designate any road or portion
thereof located within the Town as a Scenic Road pursuant to G.L. c. 40, §15C
and this Bylaw. A citizen petition to Town Meeting shall be treated as a request
to the Planning Board, which shall make a recommendation upon any such
request prior to the date of the Town Meeting, if feasible.
15.3.2 The Planning Board, Conservation Commission, or Historical Commission
may in determining which roads or portions of roads should be recommended for
designation as Scenic Roads, consider the following criteria:
a. Roads bordered by trees of exceptional quality;
b. Roads bordered by stone walls;
c. Roads bordered by any other natural or man-made features of
aesthetic or historical value;
d. Roads for which alteration is being planned or is likely to be planned in
the future.
General Bylaws Page 49
Section 15.4 - Notification of Designation as Scenic Road
15.4.1 The Planning Board shall take the following steps within thirty (30) days
after a road (s) has been designated a Scenic Road:
a. Notify all municipal departments that may take any action with respect
to the road (s);
b. Notify the Mass. Department of Public Works;
c. Publish in a paper having circulation within the Town notice that the
road(s) have been so designated;
d. Indicate such information on all maps currently in use or planned by
municipal departments
e. Notify all utility companies or other such parties who may do work
along the border of such roads.
Section 15.5 – Procedures – Work on Scenic Roads
15.5.1 No person shall conduct any repair, maintenance, reconstruction or paving
work on any Scenic Road in the Town, if the work involves the cutting or removal
of trees or the tearing down or destruction of stone walls, or portions thereof,
without the prior written consent of the Planning Board.
15.5.2 Any person, organization, state, or municipal agency seeking the written
consent of the Planning Board regarding the cutting or removal of trees or the
tearing down or destruction of stone walls, or portions thereof, shall file a written
request with the Planning Board together with the following:
a. Text of a legal notice identifying the location of the proposed action in
terms enabling the readers to locate the area with reasonable accuracy and
a description of the proposed changes to trees, stone walls, natural
surroundings, man-made objects or features;
b. A statement of the purpose(s) for such changes;
c. A list of owners of properties, as certified by the
board of assessors, abutting on the Scenic Road within one hundred (100)
feet of the proposed action;
d. A fee, as established by the Planning Board, to cover
the cost of advertising, notification, and administration;
e. Any further explanatory material useful to adequately inform the
Planning Board.
15.5.2 Notice
The Planning Board shall, as required by statute, give notice of the time, date,
place and purpose of its public hearing by advertising twice in a newspaper of
general circulation in the area, with the last publication occurring at least seven
(7) days prior to the date of the public hearing. The public hearing may coincide
with the hearing(s) for proposed construction of homes or other buildings. Copies
of the notice of public hearing shall also be sent to the Board of Selectmen,
Conservation Commission, Historical Commission, Highway Superintendent,
Tree Warden, and abutters within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed action.
General Bylaws Page 50
15.5.3 Time of Hearing
The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within thirty (30) days of the
Planning Board meeting at which a properly filed request is received.
15.5.4 Timing of Decision
The Planning Board shall make a decision on the request within twenty-one (21)
days of the closing of the public hearing.
15.5.5 Public Shade Tree Law
Whenever possible, when a public hearing must be held under the provisions of
this section and under G.L. c.87, §3 (Public Shade Trees) prior to the cutting or
removal of a tree, such hearings shall be consolidated into a single public hearing
before the Tree Warden and the Planning Board.
Section 15.6 - Considerations
The Planning Board's decision on any application for proposed action affecting sScenic
Roads shall be based on consideration of the following:
1. Preservation of natural resources;
2. Environmental values;
3. Scenic and aesthetic characteristics;
4. Historical values;
5. Public Safety;
6. Mitigating actions proposed, such as replacement of trees or walls;
7. Other sound planning considerations.
Section 15.7 - General
15.7.1 Emergency/Hazard Considerations:
The Highway Superintendent, Tree Warden may take immediate action to remove
trees or branches of any size during emergency situations such as fallen debris
adjacent to or on roadways. This would also include trees or limbs of a
threatening nature to existing or proposed electrical power lines that may
jeopardize the safety of the public.
15.7.2 The Planning Board may adopt more detailed regulations for carrying out
the provisions hereunder.
Section 15.8 – Violations
This Bylaw may be enforced by the Tree Warden, Building Commissioner or any Police
Officer of the Town.
Whoever violates any provision of this Bylaw may be penalized by a noncriminal
disposition process as provided in G.L. c.40, §21D and the Town’s non-criminal
disposition Bylaw. If enforced through noncriminal disposition, any person who violates
any provision of this bylaw shall be subject to a penalty in the amount of three hundred
dollars ($300.00) per day for each day of violation. Each day or portion thereof and each
tree or stone wall or portion thereof removed shall constitute a separate offense. If more
than one, each condition violated shall constitute a separate offense.
General Bylaws Page 51
The Town may enforce this Bylaw or enjoin violations thereof through any lawful
process, and the election of one remedy shall not preclude enforcement through any other
lawful means.
Adopted: October 17, 1988
Amended: 10/18/04, 5/9/05, 10/18/10
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
BYLAW 16. RENEWAL OR GRANTING OF CERTAIN LICENSES/ PERMITS
Section 16.1 – General Provisions
The Town Collector herein, referred to as "Collector" shall annually furnish to each
department, board, or commission, hereinafter, referred to as the "Licensing authority"
that issues licenses or permits, including renewals and transfers, a list of any person,
corporation, or business enterprise, as to whether such applicant, hereinafter, referred to
as the "Party" or that has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments,
betterment or other municipal charges, for not less than a twelve month period, and that
such party has not filed in good faith a pending petition before the appellate tax board.
Section 16.2 – Licensing Authority Action
The Licensing Authority may deny, revoke, or suspend any license or permit, including
renewals and transfers of any Party whose name appears on said list furnished to the
Licensing Authority from the Collector or with respect to any activity, event or other
matter which is the subject of such license or permit and which activity, event or matter is
carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate owned
by any Party whose name appears on said list furnished to the Licensing Authority from
the Collector; provided, however, that written notice is given to the party and the
Collector, as required by applicable provisions of law, and the Party is given a hearing, to
be held no earlier than fourteen (14) days after said notice Said list shall be prima facie
evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any party. The
Collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to such
license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by the Licensing Authority
with respect to such denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purposes
of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at
law, except for any appeal from such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any
license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this Bylaw shall not be re-issued or
renewed until the Licensing Authority receives a certificate issued by the Collector that
the party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments,
betterment or other municipal charges payable to the Town as of the date of issuance of
said certificate written verification.
Section 16.3 – Payment Agreements
Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement, thereby
allowing the Licensing Authority to issue a certificate indicating said limitations to the
General Bylaws Page 52
license or permit and the validity of said license shall be conditional upon the satisfactory
compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds
for the suspension or revocation of said license or permit; provided however, that the
holder be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
Section 16.4 – Waivers
The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it finds there
is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its officers or
stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as defined in G.L. c.268A, §1
in the business or activity conducted in or on said property.
Section 16.5 – Exclusions
This section shall not apply to the following licenses and permits
1. Open burning, MGL Chapter 48, Section 13.
2. Bicycle Permits, MGL Chapter 85, Section 11A.
3. Sale of articles for charitable purposes, MGL Chapter101, Section 33.
4. Children Work Permits, MGL Chapter 149, Section 69.
5. Clubs, associations dispensing food and beverages licenses, MGL Chapter 140,
Section 21E.
6. Dog Licenses, MGL Chapter 140, Section 137.
7. Fishing, Hunting, trapping licenses, MGL Chapter 131, Section 12.
8. Marriage Licenses, MGL Chapter 207, Section 28.
9. Theatrical events, public exhibition permits, MGL Chapter 140, Section 181.
Adopted: April 18, 1987
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
BYLAW 17. REGULATION OF RECREATION CAMPS, OVERNIGHT CAMPS OR CABINS, MOTELS
OR MOBILE HOME PARKS
Section 17.1 - Licensing
17.1.1 Any recreation camp, overnight camp or cabin, motel, or mobile home
park in the Town shall be licensed annually by the Board of Health.
17.1.2 Such license shall be issued pursuant to the requirements of G.L. c.140
§32B.
17.1.3 Such license shall expire annually on December thirty-first.
Section 17.2 - Fee
17.2.1 The fee for any license issued under Section 17.1.1 of this Bylaw shall be
$50.00 for each original or renewal license.
General Bylaws Page 53
Section 17.3 - Rules and Regulations
17.3.1 The Board of Health may adopt, and from time to time alter or amend,
rules and regulations to enforce G.L. c.140, §32B.
Adopted: February 15, 1989
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
BYLAW 18. USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY
Section 18.1 – Secured Rubbish In Transport
All rubbish being transported in the Town shall be secured by suitable means designed to
prevent the escape of litter from the transporting vehicle.
Section 18.2 - Obstructing A Public Right of Way.
18.2.1 No person shall cause an obstruction to a public Right of Way in any of the
following manners:
a. Plowing of snow into the public Right of Way.
b. Dispensing or allowing to be dispensed water or other substances into
the public Right of Way.
c. Erection of any type of structure, including a fence or stone wall, in
the public Right of Way.
d. Placing of rubbish or other items in the public Right of Way.
e. Parking of vehicles within the public Right of Way from the
commencement of snow fall and/or freezing precipitation until 8 hours
after the snow and/or freezing precipitation has ended.
The Town shall not be responsible for damage to any structures or items which
have been placed or erected in the public Right of Way in violation of this Bylaw.
18.2.2 Enforcement and Penalty.
In addition to those enforcement agents identified in Article 19, General
Administration, the Highway Superintendent and Building Commissioner shall be
additional enforcement agents of this Bylaw. Any person who violates any
provisions of this Bylaw shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding $20.00 for each
violation. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
Adopted: May 1, 1989
Amended: 6/28/99, 5/10/04, 5/9/05
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
General Bylaws Page 54
BYLAW 19. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
Section 19.1 - Budgets
The Town Manager shall submit a proposed operating budget to the Board of Selectmen
ninety (90) days prior to the date on which the town meeting is to convene in its spring
session; and to the Finance and Warrant Advisory Committee seventy-five (75) days
before such meeting is to convene. The School Committee shall submit its proposed
operating budget to the Town Manager at least one hundred (100) days prior to the date
the town meeting is to convene in its spring session.
Section 19.2 – Enforcement
19.2.1 Criminal Complaint: Whoever violates any provision of these Bylaws may
be penalized by indictment or on criminal complaint brought in the district court.
Except as may be otherwise provided by law and as the district court may see fit
to impose, the maximum penalty for each violation or offense brought in such
manner shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00). Each day on which any violation
exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
19.2.2 Non-criminal Disposition: Whoever violates any provision of these
Bylaws, the violation of which is subject to a specific penalty, may be penalized
by a non-criminal disposition as provided in G.L. c.40, §21D. The non-criminal
method of disposition may also be used for violations of any rule or regulation of
any municipal officer, board or department which is subject to a specific penalty.
Without intending to limit the generality of the foregoing, it is the intention of this
provision that the specific penalties established herein, by a specific bylaw, or by
a Town board or officer shall apply in such cases and that in addition to any
police officer of the Town and the Town Manager, who shall in all cases be
considered enforcing persons for the purpose of this provision, the municipal
personnel listed in a particular bylaw or regulation if any, shall also be enforcing
persons for such purposes. Each day on which any violation exists shall be
deemed to a separate offense.
General Bylaws
Wetlands Protection (Bylaw 12)
(Designated Agents & Members of Conservation Commission, Building Commissioner)
a) First Offense Warning
b) Second Offense $200.00
c) Third & Subsequent Offenses $300.00
Trailers $100.00
(Zoning enforcement officer)
Earth Removal Bylaw $300.00
(Planning Board)
General Bylaws Page 55
Unregistered Motor Vehicles $100.00
Open Container Bylaw first offense $100.00
Each subsequent offense $300.00
Driveways $ 20.00
(Highway Superintendent)
Public Sewer Bylaw $300.00
(Sewer commission and its agent)
Entertainment Bylaw $ 50.00
Use of Public Ways $ 50.00
Obstructing A Public Way (Section 18.2) $ 20.00
(Highway Superintendent, Building Commissioner)
Non-Storm Water Discharges first offense $ 50.00
2nd offense $100.00
subsequent offenses $300.00
Solid Waste Haulers first offense warning
2nd offense $ 50.00
subsequent offenses $100.00
Sutton Zoning Bylaw (in its entirety) and
Approvals and permits issued
in accordance with said Bylaws first offense $ 50.00
2nd offense $100.00
3rd offense $300.00
Adopted: May 1, 1989
Amended: 5/ 8/90, 10/15/90, 5/6/91, 6/2/99, 10/20/03, 5/9/05, 5/11/09
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
Amended: May 11, 2015
BYLAW 20. USE OF PRIVATE WAYS
Section 20.1 - Temporary Repairs to Private Ways
20.1.1 The Town may make temporary repairs on private ways which have been
open to public use for a period of six (6) consecutive years or more, provided the
General Bylaws Page 56
repairs are for the protection of the health and safety of the general public using
such private ways, subject to the provisions of this Bylaw.
20.1.2 No repairs shall be made on private ways that have not been released from
covenant and/or bond.
Section 20.2 - Minor Temporary Repairs
20.2.1 The Town may make minor temporary repairs upon a private way in the
Town. Such repairs shall be made only after the board of selectmen determines
that, based on recommendation from the highway superintendent, the repairs are
required by public necessity. No petition by abutters shall be necessary for the
Town to make such minor repairs.
20.2.2 Minor temporary repairs shall include the filling of holes in the subsurface
of such ways and repairs to the surface materials thereof. Materials for such
repairs, where practical, should be the same as, or similar to, those used for the
existing surfaces of such ways, but may include surfacing the ways with
bituminous materials, including but not limited to bituminous concrete.
20.2.3 Minor temporary repairs shall be limited to minor work such as filling,
patching and not more than grading or scraping twice per year. Such repairs shall
not include surfacing, resurfacing, installation of drainage of any kind or the
original construction of sidewalks, curbing or street construction.
20.2.4 The cost of such minor temporary repairs shall be borne entirely by the
Town, subject to funds being available through an appropriation voted by the
Town; no betterment shall be assessed against the abutters; and, no cash deposit
shall be required.
Section 20.3 - Major Temporary Repairs
20.3.1 The Town may make major temporary repairs on a private way in the
Town. Such repairs shall be made only after a petition has been filed in the office
of the board of selectmen. Such petition shall identify the repairs to be made and
shall be signed by the owners of no less than fifty (50) percent of the lineal
frontage of said way. Following the submission of said petition, the board of
selectmen shall conduct a public hearing, at which hearing interested persons may
present evidence relative to the petition.
No repairs shall be made until the board, by a majority vote of its members, and
following such hearing, determines that such repairs are required by public
necessity, and until the town meeting has appropriated funds for such repairs.
20.3.2 Following such determination by the board that said repairs are a public
necessity, the board shall issue an order stating on its face that betterment are to
be assessed upon the owners of estates which derive particular benefit or
advantage from making of such repairs.
General Bylaws Page 57
Such assessment shall be a sum equal, in the aggregate, to the total cost of such
repairs, and, in the case of each estate, shall be in proportion to the frontage
thereof upon such private way.
20.3.3 Such repairs may include surfacing, resurfacing and the installation of
drainage, but shall not include the original construction of sidewalks, curbing or
street construction. No cash deposit shall be required.
20.3.4 Drainage easements, if necessary, shall be the responsibility of the
petitioners.
Section 20.4 - Assessments
20.4.1 Except as herein otherwise provided, the provisions of G.L. c.80, as it
relates to public improvements and assessments therefor, shall apply to major
temporary repairs, as defined in this Bylaw, to private ways where such repairs
are ordered to be made under authority of this Bylaw.
20.4.2 Any assessment made in accordance with the provisions of this Bylaw
upon the owner of an estate shall be paid within six (6) months of the date that
such assessment is levied, where the total assessment is less than two hundred
dollars ($200.00).
20.4.3 Where the total assessment amounts to two hundred dollars ($200.00) or
more, the owner of the estate may divide the payment of such assessment into not
more than ten (10) equal payments, the final installment payment to be made not
later than five (5) years from the date of the levy of the assessment.
20.4.4 Assessments made under this Bylaw shall constitute a lien upon the land
assessed in accordance with the provisions of G.L. c.80, §12.
Section 20.5 - Liability
20.5.1 In no event shall the Town be liable for bodily injury, death or damage to
personal property caused by reason of a defect or want of repair in any private
way.
20.5.2 The Town shall not be liable or accountable for any damage caused by
repairs made pursuant to this Bylaw.
20.5.3 G.L. c.84, §25 shall not apply.
Adopted: October 9, 1989
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
General Bylaws Page 58
BYLAW 21. RECREATION COMMISSION
Section 21.1 – Composition; Term of Office
There shall be a Recreation Commission which shall consist of three (3) members
appointed by the Selectmen for terms of three (3) years each so arranged that the term of
one member shall expire each year.
Section 21.2 - Rules and Regulations
Subject to approval of the Board of Selectmen, the Recreation Commission is authorized
to adopt such rules and regulations as it deems necessary for the operation and control of
town-owned lands and buildings (except those controlled by the Sutton School
Committee) used for recreational purposes.
Section 21.3 - Enforcement
Enforcement of rules and regulations and requisitions adopted pursuant to this Bylaw
shall be according to the following procedures:
21.3.1 by seeking a criminal complaint in district court, the penalty for each
violation shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00); and, each day on which a
violation exists shall be a separate offense.
21.3.2 by seeking non-criminal disposition pursuant to G.L. c.40, §21D; the
penalty for each violation shall be an amount established by such rules and
regulations (not exceeding $300.00); and, each day on which a violation exists
shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 21.4 - Fees
The Recreation Commission may establish such fees as it deems necessary for the
support and maintenance of the recreation programs it provides.
Adopted: May 6, 1991
Amended: 10/21/91, 1/20/00
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
BYLAW 22. CEMETERY COMMISSION
Section 22.1 - Composition, Term of Office
There shall be a Cemetery Commission which shall consist of three members appointed
by the Board of Selectmen for terms of three years each so arranged that the term of one
member shall expire each year.
Section 22.2 - Powers and Duties
The Cemetery Commission shall have general charge and superintendence of all burial
grounds within the Town and any land set aside by the town for cemetery purposes.
Adopted: May 4, 1992
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
General Bylaws Page 59
BYLAW 23. PERSONNEL REGULATIONS
Section 23.1 - Application And Purpose
23.1.1 - Application
All town departments and all positions in the town service, except elected
officials and employees of the Sutton Public Schools shall be subject to the
provisions of this Bylaw pursuant to the provisions of G.L. c. 41, §§ 108A &
108C.
23.1.2 – Other Agreements/Policies
To the extent that any provision of an approved collective-bargaining agreement
conflicts with any provisions of this Bylaw with respect to employees covered by
such labor agreement, the provision of the approved collective-bargaining
agreement shall prevail.
23.1.3 – Policy Purpose
The principal purpose of this Bylaw is to establish a system of public personnel
management for the Town of Sutton to support the program needs of town
government. It is the intent of this Bylaw to provide means to recruit, develop and
maintain a responsive work force. All personnel actions in the town service shall
be made without regard to sex, race, religion, color, age, handicap, political
affiliations or other non job-related factors and shall be based on merit and fitness.
Section 23.2 - Personnel Director
The Town Manager shall carry-out the duties of Personnel Director. The Personnel
Director shall be responsible for the daily administration of the personnel system of town
government, including the maintenance of personnel records and the enforcement of rules
and regulations. The Town Manager shall have the right to delegate any portion of these
duties to other employees, but shall retain responsibility for all such delegated functions
and the performance of same in the event of a conflict such duties should be carried out
by the Chairman of the Board of Selectmen.
Section 23.3 - Personnel Department; Duties of Director
23.3.1 – Personnel Director Described
The Personnel Director shall head up the Personnel Department and shall
impartially and equitably oversee and direct the administrative and technical
activities of the town’s personnel management system.
23.3.2 – Personnel Director Duties
The Personnel Director shall:
(1) Oversee position classification and pay plans and direct the continuous
administration of these plans, including periodic review of said plans by
independent outside consultants, subject to the approval of the Town
Manager, and adequate funding.
(2) Review, for budgetary purposes, annual salary costs.
General Bylaws Page 60
(3) Direct the recruitment, testing, selection and hiring process of
employees.
(4) Participate in employee contract and collective bargaining negotiations
and promote and enforce policies and procedures for personnel
administration.
(5) Supervise, develop and maintain personnel systems, forms, procedures
and methods of record keeping.
(6) Maintain a roster of all persons in the town service.
(7) Direct employee orientation, training, counseling and career
development in conjunction with the department heads.
(8) Administer these personnel policies, including the employee grievance
procedure.
(9) Review, recommend and administer the employee performance
evaluation process.
(10) Review, recommend and administer employee benefit programs,
including group health and insurance coverage in compliance with G.L.
c.32B.
(11) Encourage and exercise leadership in the development of effective
personnel management within the several departments of town
government and make the services of his/her office available to officers
and employees.
(12) Keep department heads apprised of the need for effective manpower
planning and utilization.
(13) Administer the total personnel management system of the town.
(14) Establish and maintain records of all officers and employees in town
service.
(15) Provide information and services to the Board of Selectmen in all
matters relating to personnel management to the extent of available
resources.
(16) Render an annual report on the status of personnel management in
town government to the Board of Selectmen.
General Bylaws Page 61
(17) Perform any other lawful acts which are considered necessary or
desirable to carry out the purpose of the central personnel system and the
provisions of this Bylaw.
Section 23.4 - Personnel Bylaw Principles
23.4.1 - General
Consistent with the provisions of this Bylaw, the Town Manager is responsible
for the daily administration of the town’s personnel management system,
including the maintenance of personnel records and enforcement of personnel
rules and regulations. These rules and regulations shall be consistent with the
principles outlined in Section 27.6 of this Bylaw.
23.4.2 – Review & Changes
This Personnel Bylaw may be reviewed from time to time. The Town Manager
shall obtain approval from Town Meeting of all changes to this Bylaw.
Section 23.5 - Periodic Review Of Personnel Management System
The Town Manager shall initiate periodic reviews and evaluations of the town’s
personnel management system for conformance with this Bylaw and shall undertake
those actions necessary to bring about conformance. The Town Manager may, from time
to time, make recommendations for changes in this Bylaw as may be necessary or
advisable.
Section 23.6 - Purpose And Policies
23.6.1 - Purpose
It is the purpose of this Bylaw to provide to department heads, supervisory
personnel and employees the policies and procedures for assuring maintenance of
an equitable personnel management system in the town. The policies and
procedures for personnel administration set forth herein have as their purpose to
promote the efficiency and economy of government, to promote the morale and
well being of town employees and to promote equal employment opportunity for
all candidates for employment by the town and for all its employees.
23.6.2 - Policy
(1) These personnel policies are based on the following principles:
(a) Recruiting, selecting, and advancing employees on the basis of
their relative abilities, knowledge and skills.
(b) Providing equitable and adequate compensation.
(c) Training employees as needed to assure high-quality
performance and to promote career development.
(d) Retaining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their
performance, correcting inadequate performance and terminating
employees whose inadequate performance cannot be corrected.
(e) Assuring fair treatment of applicants and employees in all
aspects of personnel administration without regard to political
affiliation, race, color national origin, age, sex, creed, handicap or
General Bylaws Page 62
any other non-merit factor, except where such factor is a bona fide
occupational requirement, and with proper regard for their privacy
and constitutional rights as citizens; prohibiting discrimination
against any person on the basis of such non-merit factors.
(f) Assuring that employees are protected against coercion for
partisan political purposes and are prohibited from using their
official authority for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the
result of an election or a nomination for office.
23.6.3 - Equal Employment Opportunity
Discrimination against any person in recruitment, examination, appointment,
training, promotion, retention or any other personnel action because of political
affiliation, race, creed, color, national origin, age, sex, handicap or other nonmerit
factor will be prohibited except where such factor is a bona fide
occupational requirement. Any employee who believes that he/she is aggrieved
may process an appeal in accordance with the Town’s Equal Employment
Opportunity Policy.
23.6.4 - Applicability Of These Policies
The rules and regulations contained in this Bylaw shall apply to all officers and
employees, except elected officials and Sutton public schools. The policies
reflected in these rules and regulations are not intended to be all-inclusive. Final
discretion as to interpretation and as to the appropriate course of action
concerning a personnel matter shall be that of the Town Manager or his/her
designee.
23.6.5 - Other State Statutes
(1) Nothing contained in these rules and regulations shall be construed to conflict
with any special law enacted for the Town of Sutton nor any provision of the
State Constitution, or other state and federal statutes. To the extent that any
apparent conflict exists, it shall be determined in favor of the higher state statute
or provision of the State Constitution, and/or the Town of Sutton Home Rule
Charter.
(2) In the event that a specific provision of this Personnel Bylaw should conflict
with a provision of a collective-bargaining agreement adopted in conformance
with GL c.150E, the provision of the collective-bargaining agreement shall
prevail.
23.6.6 - Affirmative Action Policy Statement
The Town of Sutton will make every effort to recruit and hire qualified minority
and female employees proportionate to the minority population of the town.
23.6.7 - Sexual Harassment & Gender Bias Policy Statement
(1) General Statement of Policy: The Town of Sutton does not discriminate on the
basis of sex in employment opportunities, wages, hours, benefits, job
General Bylaws Page 63
advancement or any other terms or conditions of employment. It is the policy of
the Town of Sutton that all employees shall have the same opportunities for
professional development and experience regardless of gender. For further
information, please see the Town of Sutton’s sexual harassment policy.
Section 23.7 - Responsibility For Administration
23.7.1 - Personnel Director
Consistent with the provisions of Section 27.2 of this Bylaw, the Town Manager
shall serve as Personnel Director for the Town of Sutton, and shall impartially and
equitable oversee all personnel activities of town government in administering
this Bylaw.
23.7.2 - Department Heads
Department heads are expected to supervise effectively their employees, to report
in an approved manner upon the efficiency and performance of their subordinates,
to notify the Personnel Director of changes in duties of their employees in order
that the classification plan will be maintained, to recommend salary increases, and
to discipline employees where needed. Department heads shall recommend to the
Personnel Director, as necessary, desirable changes in the personnel policies and
procedures to improve administration of the personnel system. Department heads
may establish such rules, regulations, policies and procedures as deemed
necessary for the efficient and orderly administration of the department. Such
rules must be on file with the Town Manager before they become effective and
must be consistent with these personnel policies and procedures. Copies of
department rules must be made available in the office of each department head for
use by the employees.
23.7.3 - Employees
It shall be the responsibility of all employees to acquaint themselves thoroughly
with the material in these personnel policies and any subsequent revisions.
Employees shall also be responsible for knowing and understanding all policies,
procedures, rules, or regulations in effect within his or her department. Employees
are also encouraged to submit suggestions for changes and improvement in
personnel policies and procedures for improvement of the personnel
administration to their department head.
Section 23.8 - Definitions
As used in this Bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COMPENSATION - The salary or wages earned by any employee by reason of service in the
position, but does not include allowances for expenses authorized and incurred as incidents
to employment.
COMPENSATORY TIME – Time earned by exempt employees for hours worked beyond
the employee’s regularly scheduled work week.
DEMOTION - The movement of an employee from a position in one class to a position in
another class with a lower pay rate.
General Bylaws Page 64
DEPARTMENT - A generic term meant to be applied to any department, board, committee,
commission or any other body of town government in which persons are employed.
DISCHARGE or DISMISSAL - The permanent, involuntary termination of a person from
town service.
DISCIPLINARY ACTION - An oral warning, written reprimand, suspension, demotion or
dismissal taken by the appropriate authority.
EMERGENCY APPOINTMENT - A noncompetitive appointment made temporarily during
an emergency for a period of up to thirty (30) workdays to prevent stoppage of public
business or hazard or serious inconvenience to the public when appointment from an eligible
list is not possible.
EMPLOYEE - A person occupying an approved municipal position or a person who is on
authorized leave of absence.
EMPLOYEE: EXEMPT – Managers, professional staff, supervisors, and others whose duties
and responsibilities allow then to be “exempt” from overtime pay provisions as provided by
the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) and any applicable state laws.
EMPLOYEE: NON-EXEMPT – An employee, as defined by the Federal Fair Labor
Standards Act (FLSA), who holds a position that is entitled to receive overtime pay.
EMPLOYEE: PERMANENT FULL-TIME – Any person required to work regularly for
thirty-five (35) hours or more per week and 1,827 hours or more per year.
EMPLOYEE: PERMANENT PART-TIME – Any person who works less than 35 hours per
week and 1,827 hours per year. Part-time employees regularly working twenty (20) hours or
more per week and 1,044 hours or more per year shall be entitled to fringe benefits on a prorata
basis, except for insurance where they shall receive benefits as a full-time employee.
EMPLOYEE: TEMPORARY – Any person who works on an irregular basis or for a specific
project or season determined by the work load and/or climatic conditions. Temporary
employees are not entitled to receive fringe benefits except as required by G.L. c. 32B.
EMPLOYMENT DATE - The date on which an employee commences performance of duties
and is placed on the payroll, otherwise known as Date Of Hire.
EXAMINATION - All of the tests of fitness taken together that are applied to determine the
fitness of applicants for positions.
GRIEVANCE - A dispute or disagreement between an employee and a supervisor over the
employee’s working conditions and/or the interpretation or application of a policy, rule or
regulation.
INCUMBENT - The current occupant of a position.
LAYOFF - The separation of an employee because of lack of work or funds or other reasons
not related to fault, delinquency or misconduct on the part of the employee.
LEAVE - An authorized absence from regularly scheduled work hours which has been
approved by proper authority.
OVERTIME – Hours of work performed by an hourly employee in excess of forty (40) hours
per week or other applicable amount as set forth by the Fair Labor Standards Act.
PERMANENT EMPLOYEE - An employee who has satisfactorily completed an individual
probationary period and who is in an approved position in town service.
PERSONNEL ACTION - Any and all activities affecting any aspect of an employee’s status,
which include appointments and changes in appointments, original hiring, re-employment,
transfer, promotion, demotion, changes in hours, reallocation, resignation, suspension,
discharge, placement on leave, step increases, etc.
General Bylaws Page 65
PERSONNEL DIRECTOR - The Town Manager or a person designated by the Town
Manager to direct the town’s personnel management system.
PERSONNEL OFFICE - The office of the Town Manager or other office designated by the
Town Manager.
POSITION - A group of current duties and responsibilities assigned or delegated by
appropriate authority to one (1) person.
PROBATIONARY PERIOD: NEW HIRE - A twelve (12) month period following
appointment or hire during which an employee must demonstrate fitness for the position.
PROBATIONARY PERIOD: PROMOTION - A six (6) month period following promotion
during which an employee must demonstrate fitness for the position.
REMOVAL - See “discharge” or “dismissal.”
SUSPENSION - An involuntary absence without pay imposed on an employee for
disciplinary action or pending the final outcome of an appeal.
Section 23.9 - Compensation System
23.9.1 - Pay Policy
(1) The Town Manager shall annually recommend to the Board of Selectmen, the
Finance and Warrant Advisory Committee and Annual Town Meeting the rate of pay,
including any wage/salary increase, for each position compensated by the Town.
(2) Longevity Pay. All non-union employees who are not covered under the terms of
an existing employment agreement shall receive a stipend, paid once on or about
September 1, in the year in which he or she completes the following length of service
levels:
10 Years Two Hundred Dollars ($200)
15 Years Four Hundred Dollars ($400)
20 Years Six Hundred Dollars ($600)
25 Years Eight Hundred Dollars ($800)
30 Years One Thousand Dollars ($1,000)
23.9.2 - Pay Administration
(1) Classification System:
Municipal positions, excluding School, elected positions and certain contractual
positions shall be assigned to a wage and salary classification scale and grade
schedule. Said position classifications shall be reviewed annually by the Town
Manager to ensure efficiency. Positions covered by a collective bargaining agreement
shall have compensation levels determined by said agreement.
(2) Step Placement – New Employees: Any employee hired after the adoption of this
section 23.9.2 shall be placed in the minimum/starting step of his/her position’s
grade. Said employee may be placed in a step other than minimum/starting if the
appointing authority determines that doing so is in the best interests of the Town
provided, however, that said step shall not be greater than the third step of said
position’s grade and shall be subject to the approval of the Town Manager.
(3) Cost of Living Increases: In the event that a cost-of-living percentage increase is
budgeted for and appropriated by Town Meeting, all municipal pay scales covered by
General Bylaws Page 66
this Bylaw shall be adjusted upward in accordance with the stated percentage. This
action shall have no effect on step increases as described herein.
(4) Movement To Another Grade: Employees shall only move to another grade if
his/her job description is amended to reflect changes in duties and responsibilities that
require adjustment according to the point/factor rating system. Administration of this
provision shall be the responsibility of the Town Manager.
Section 23.10 - Pay Period; Hours of Work; and Overtime/Compensatory Time
23.10.1 - Pay Period
(1) The pay period will be on a weekly basis and will commence at 12:00AM
midnight Sunday and will end at 11:59PM on the following Saturday.
23.10.2 - Hours Of Work
(1) All employees shall refer to their individual job descriptions for identification
of their actual work schedule.
(2) Managers and department heads are expected to normally work not less than
thirty-five (35) hours weekly, unless budget requirements dictate otherwise. The
normal expectancy for managers and department heads is to measure their hours
of work against anticipated workload demands, which may produce a workweek
in excess of the minimum cited.
(4) Lunch period. All employees scheduled to work a shift of greater than six (6)
hours shall be granted a thirty (30) minute period during the middle of the shift as
a meal break. Said lunch break shall not be compensated.
(5) Rest period. All employees will be eligible to receive a fifteen minute rest
period during each half of their full work shift. If the half of shift is not at least
three and one-half (3 1/2) hours, then no rest period will be allowed. Rest periods
are not to be accumulated.
23.10.3 - Overtime
All non-exempt employees shall be compensated for overtime in accordance with the
provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act.
23.10.4 - Compensatory Time
An “exempt” employee who is not entitled to receive overtime compensation for hours
worked in excess of his or her normal weekly schedule, including department heads, may
be authorized to use any such excess hours as compensatory time off at a later time. The
actual accrual of compensatory time must be approved in advance by the appropriate
department head. All staff must also have the use of accrued compensatory time approved
by the appropriate department head or supervisor in advance. It shall also be used within
five (5) weeks from the date the excess accrued, and may not be carried-over. These
hours must be taken so as not to adversely affect the operation of the employee’s
department. All departments shall be required to submit a quarterly “Comp. Time
Report” to the Town Manager. All compensatory time shall be accrued as straight time,
not time and one-half.
General Bylaws Page 67
23.10.5 - Recall
When a non-exempt employee is recalled to work, the employee shall be paid a minimum
of two (2) hours pay at time and one-half (1 ½) the employee’s regular rate of pay. The
minimum of two hours shall not apply when the recall time merges with the employee’s
regular work day.
Section 23.11 - Leave
23.11.1 - General Policy
Leave is any authorized absence during regularly scheduled work hours that is approved
by proper authority. Leave may be authorized with or without pay and shall be granted in
accordance with these rules on the basis of the work requirements of the departments and,
whenever possible, the personal wishes of the employee.
23.11.2 - Procedure For Requesting Leave
For all leave other than holiday, sick, disability, injury and emergency leave, a written
request indicating the type of leave, duration and dates of departure and return must be
approved by the department head prior to the taking of leave. In the case of disability,
injury and emergency leave, the request shall be submitted for approval as soon as
reasonably possible, but no later than upon the employee’s return to duty. Unless an
absence is substantiated by a request approved by the department head, an employee shall
not be paid for any absence from scheduled work hours. All leaves must be reported to
the Town Manager’s Office.
23.11.3 - Holiday Leave
(1) Authorized Holidays. Only the following days and no others shall be
recognized as holidays and such other days as may be declared holidays for the
conduct of public business by the state or federal governments:
New Year’s Day
Martin Luther King Day
Presidents’ Day
Patriot’s Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Columbus Day
Veteran’s Day
Thanksgiving Day
1/2 after Thanksgiving Day
1/2 day before Christmas Day*
Christmas Day
1/2 day before New Year’s Day*
* Provided that such day is a normally scheduled workday.
(2) Saturday And Sunday Holidays. Whenever any of the above named holidays
falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the following Monday, shall be a holiday, unless
another day is established by law.
General Bylaws Page 68
(3) Work On Holidays. On the designated holidays, employees not otherwise
covered by labor agreement shall be excused from all duty not required to
maintain essential services.
(4) Restriction: Payment for a holiday shall be made only if the eligible employee
shall have worked on his/her last scheduled work day prior to such a holiday and
on his/her next regularly scheduled work day following such holiday. This shall
not apply to employees using authorized leave immediately before or after a
holiday.
23.11.4 - Vacation Leave
(1) Vacation Policy. The Town provides vacation leave for all permanent fulltime
and part-time employees who work 20 hours or more per week. Vacation
leave may be taken as earned after completion of six months of employment.
Seasonal and temporary employees or employees who work less than 20 hours per
week shall not be eligible to receive vacation leave.
(2) The Vacation Year. Eligible employees’ accrued vacation time runs
concurrent with the Town’s fiscal year, i.e. July 1st through June 30th. All
employees, except those employees hired after July 1 of the immediate preceding
year, will accrue all of their respective vacation time on July 1 of each year.
(3) Vacation Accrual - Years Of Service. As discussed elsewhere in these
policies, an employee’s “years of service” are based on date of hire, or rehire,
whichever is later. Employees of the Town of Sutton accrue vacation time in
hours, based upon one’s weekly schedule. Full Accrual, as used in this policy, is
defined as the full amount of time an employee is entitled to receive on July 1
according to years of service as shown below. The following schedule of vacation
accrual according to years of service shall be observed except in the case of newly
hired or rehired employees:
YEARS OF SERVICE LEVEL OF VACATION ACCRUAL
One Year to Four Years: Two Times Weekly Schedule of Hours
Five Years to Nine Years: Three Times Weekly Schedule of Hours
Ten Years to Fifteen Years: Four Times Weekly Schedule of Hours
Sixteen Years & Beyond: Five Times Weekly Schedule Hours
(4) New Employees - Vacation Accrual. Newly hired or rehired employees shall
receive the following vacation accrual:
Hired/Rehired in July: Five Days Beginning January 1 - Full Accrual Beginning July 1
Hired/Rehired in August: Five Days Beginning February 1 - Full Accrual Beginning July 1
Hired/Rehired in September: Three Days Beginning March 1 - Full Accrual Beginning July 1
Hired/Rehired in October: Three Days Beginning April 1 - Full Accrual Beginning July 1
Hired/Rehired in November: Two Days Beginning May 1 - Full Accrual Beginning July 1
Hired/Rehired in December: Two Days Beginning June 1 - Full Accrual Beginning July 1
Hired/Rehired in January: Zero Days - Full Accrual Beginning July 1
Hired/Rehired in February: Zero Days - Full Accrual Beginning August 1
Hired/Rehired in March: Zero Days - Full Accrual Beginning September 1
Hired/Rehired in April: Zero Days - Full Accrual Beginning October 1
General Bylaws Page 69
Hired/Rehired in May: Zero Days - Full Accrual Beginning November 1
Hired/Rehired in June: Zero Days - Full Accrual Beginning December 1
(5) Moving To The Next Level Of Vacation Accrual. Employees shall move from
one level of vacation accrual in the following manner:
DATE OF HIRE MOVE TO NEXT LEVEL
Between July 1 and December 31, inclusive On July 1 Of Current Fiscal Year
Between January 1 and June 30, inclusive On July 1 of Following Fiscal Year
(6) Use Of Vacation Time. The use of and scheduling of vacation time shall be
approved by the department head with due regard to the employee’s wishes and
the needs of service for the department.
(7) Vacation Carry-over. It is the intent of this policy that all employee’s make
use of earned vacation time within the fiscal year said time is accrued. If however,
for reasons of extenuating circumstances an employee is unable to fully utilize all
earned vacation time, accrued vacation hours in an amount not to exceed the
employee’s weekly scheduled hours (1 week), may be carried over into a
succeeding fiscal year with the written approval of the employee’s department
head. Such notification must also be given in written form to the Personnel Office
for accounting and personnel management purposes. Any vacation time not used
that is in excess of the employee’s weekly scheduled hours will be forfeited with
no financial compensation.
(8) Payment For Unused Vacation Time. Payment for accrued but unused
vacation time may only be awarded to those employees who terminate their
employment with the Town during the fiscal year, provided that the employee has
successfully completed six (6) full months of service from date of hire.
(9) Holiday During Vacation. When a holiday falls within an employee’s vacation
week, the holiday is charged as a holiday and not as a vacation day.
(10) Death Of An Employee Eligible For Vacation. Upon the death of an
employee who is eligible for vacation, payment shall be made to the estate of the
employee in an amount equal to the amount of accrued but unused vacation time.
23.11.5 - Sick Leave
(1) Policy. Sick leave shall not be considered as a privilege but as insurance
against extended illness, which an employee may use at the employee’s
discretion, but shall be allowed only in case of actual sickness or disability of the
employee, to meet medical or dental appointments, to take physical examinations
or for other sickness prevention measures. Sick leave may be taken by any
eligible employee unable to work due to pregnancy and conditions relating
thereto, childbirth and recovery therefrom.
(2) Eligibility: Sick leave shall be available to all permanent municipal employees
working a regular schedule of twenty (20) or more hours per week, including
probationary employees. Seasonal, temporary, emergency or permanent part-time
employees who are scheduled for less than twenty (20) hours per week are not
eligible for sick leave.
General Bylaws Page 70
(3) Sick Leave Allowance: Permanent employees shall accrue sick time in hours
at a rate equal to one work day per month. Said time shall accrue on the first day
of each month.
(4) Use of Sick Time: If any employee is out sick for more than three (3)
consecutive days, a written note from a physician may be requested by the
employee’s department head to substantiate illness and/or necessity to be away
from work. The Town reserves the right to require that any employee missing
work for a period exceeding five (5) consecutive days be seen by a physician
designated and funded by the Town.
(5) Probationary Employees: Probationary employees shall be authorized sick
leave in the same manner as permanent employees, with the exception that a
physician’s note may be required by the Town for any sick leave occurrence,
regardless of duration.
(6) Reporting: An employee absent on account of illness or non-job-related injury
shall see to it that his/her department head is notified within two (2) hours of the
start of the workday. Failure to notify the department head may result in the loss
of pay.
(7) Recording: Each department head shall report all uses of sick time on the
weekly payroll sheets submitted to the Treasurer. Said reporting shall include
employee’s name using sick time, date of sick time used, and number of hours
used on that day. The department head shall notify the Town Manager
immediately if abuse of sick time is suspected.
(8) Accumulation/Accrual: There is no limit to the number of sick days that an
employee can accumulate (accrue) that can be used for sickness or injury.
(9) Layoffs and Sick Time: Accumulated/Accrued sick leave at the termination of
employment due to a reduction in force will be carried for a period of eighteen
months. Sick days will be reinstated at the date of rehiring.
(10) Retirement and Sick-Leave: Upon the retirement of an employee with
an unused portion of sick leave that the employee had earned prior to
January 1, 2007, but not used as of that date, payment shall be made to the
employee in an amount equal to sixty-five percent (65%) of the actual
amount of such sick leave, up to a maximum of 145 days. Payment shall be
made at the current rate of pay of the employee on the date of
retirement. Any sick leave which was earned by an employee on or after
January 1, 2007, but not used as of the time of retirement shall not be
eligible for any payment under this provision.
23.11.6 - Job-Related Injury Leave
(1) An employee injured on the job, however slightly, must report the fact
immediately to his/her supervisor or department head. Work related injuries shall
be handled in accordance with the provisions of G.L. c. 152 or, if applicable, G.L.
c. 41, §111F.
23.11.7 - Funeral or Bereavement Leave
Funeral and bereavement leave shall be granted to permanent employees as
follows:
General Bylaws Page 71
(1) For death and/or memorial services involving a member or an employee’s
immediate family or household, the day on which death occurs and three (3)
additional days shall be granted. If the funeral is held after the three additional
day period, the time up to and including the funeral shall also be allowed. The
three (3) additional days following death are consecutive calendar days, including
Saturday, Sunday and holidays, beginning the day after the death. Cases involving
special circumstances, including but not limited to travel for an extensive period
of time, should be referred to the department head, whose permission related to
extended leave shall not be unreasonably withheld.
(2) “Immediate family” includes parent, step-parent, parent-in-law, sibling,
spouse, any grandparent, son or daughter, and domestic partners. A “Member of
the household” includes anyone who resides with the same family unit as the
employee and who is regarded by the employee, generally speaking, as a member
of the family.
(3) For death of relatives other than the immediate family or household, absence
up to one (1) full day may be allowed to attend funeral or memorial services.
23.11.8 - Military Leave
Military leave shall be granted to eligible employees in accordance with all
applicable state and/or federal laws.
23.11.9 - Jury Leave
An employee summoned to jury duty will be excused from his/her work for the
period necessary to perform jury duty and shall receive the difference in pay
between his/her regular total compensation and jury duty compensation, if any.
23.11.10 - Witness Duty Leave
An employee summonsed or otherwise requested by the Town to appear as a
witness before a court or other state or federal agency related to his/her official
duties will be excused with pay from his/her work for the period necessary to
complete his/her testimony.
23.11.11 - Leave Without Pay
(1) Upon approval of the Town Manager, an employee may be granted leave
without pay for reasons not covered by the Family and Medical Leave Act for a
specified period of time not to exceed sixty (60) days for compelling personal
reasons as determined by the Town Manager or in other situations in which the
Town Manager deems it to be in the best interests of the Town to allow such
leave. At the expiration of a leave without pay, the employee shall return to the
position or to a similar position. Failure of the employee to report promptly at the
expiration of such leave shall be considered a resignation. Leave without pay shall
be considered as inactive employment where time spent on such leave in excess
of one (1) week shall not count as service (time worked) for purposes of seniority,
vacation leave, pension, and other benefits. An employee may continue under the
health and life insurance program provided that the employee meets the eligibility
General Bylaws Page 72
requirements for doing so that are set forth in G.L. c. 32B and payment is made
within 60 days of the billing date.
(2) The Town Manager may grant a leave without pay for periods in excess of
sixty (60) days in cases of extenuating circumstances.
23.11.12 - Personal Leave
(1) A permanent employee who has completed a probationary period may be
granted time off with pay to conduct personal business, provided that such leave
is approved in advance by his department head.
(2) Such personal leave shall not exceed an hourly amount equal to three days in
any one fiscal year if hired prior to January 1st. If hired after January 1st personal
leave shall not exceed an hourly amount equal to 1 1/2 days and are not
cumulative from year to year.
(3) Each department head shall report all uses of Personal time on the weekly
payroll sheets submitted to the Treasurer. Said reporting shall include employee’s
name using personal time, date of time used, and number of hours used on that
day.
23.11.13 - Family and Medical Leave
Family and Medical Leave shall be granted to eligible employees in accordance
with the provisions of the Family and Medical Leave Act and the Town requires
employees to substitute accrued paid leave (such as sick or vacation leave) to
cover some or all of the FMLA leave.
Section 23.12 - Recruitment, Selection And Appointment Of Employees
23.12.1 - Town Policy
To assure a high quality of service to the public, selection will be from among the
most competent individuals from all appropriate sources of applicants. Selection
and appointment to all positions will be based solely upon job-related
requirements and the applicant’s demonstration that he or she possesses the skills,
knowledge, abilities and other characteristics necessary for successful job
performance.
23.12.2 - Recruitment Procedures
(1) Defining The Position. When a vacancy occurs, the appointing
authority (either the Town Manager or Board of Selectmen) will review
the functions, duties, responsibilities and minimum qualifications of the
position to ascertain whether the job description is still accurate or the job
is to be redefined. Any subsequent changes in the description or special
qualification requirements for the position will be reported to the
Personnel Department. The Personnel Director will review the changes,
make suggestions for revision, and return the job description to the
appointing authority. If the position being filled is a new position for the
Town of Sutton, then a complete job description shall be prepared by the
appointing authority or designee and the Personnel Director.
(2) Identifying The Selection Team. The appointing authority shall
identify a selection team, that will conduct the actual evaluation of
General Bylaws Page 73
applications. This may be the appointing authority itself, or a designee(s)
who shall conduct all screening prior to final appointment.
(3) Advertising The Vacancy. The Personnel Director will be responsible
for advising the public of the vacancy.
(a) The Personnel Director will publicize the vacancy in such
manner as to assure that all interested and qualified individuals,
including current employees, are informed of the position title,
duties, responsibilities and salary range; minimum and special
qualifications for the job; the time, place and manner of making
application; the town’s affirmative action and equal opportunity
statement, and any other information which may be useful to
applicants.
(b) The method of advertising vacancies will vary, depending upon
the nature and requirements of the position being filled. The
following methods are typical of those which may be used for
recruitment: posting notices on public bulletin boards, advertising
in professional journals and/or newspapers with local, statewide,
and/or national circulation.
(c) All job postings shall be posted on bulletin boards at the Town
Hall, and Public Libraries.
(d) To allow sufficient time for candidates to apply for the
position, recruitment efforts will be conducted for at least ten (10)
workdays, unless emergency requirements dictate otherwise.
23.12.3 - Application For Employment
All candidates applying for employment must secure and file an official
application form with the appropriate appointing authority prior to the close of
business on the date specified in the vacancy announcement or advertisement.
Each applicant shall sign the form, certifying the truth of all statements by his/her
signature. Deliberately false or misleading statements and deception in attempting
to secure employment will be grounds for rejecting an applicant, and/or
termination from employment if such deception is found after a position has been
offered and accepted.
23.12.4 - Selection Procedures
(1) Determining Evaluation Criteria. The appointing authority/selection
team and Personnel Director shall determine which criteria or combination
of criteria will be used to evaluate the relative fitness of each candidate for
the position.
(a) The criteria selected will relate to the duties and responsibilities
of the position for which candidates are being evaluated and shall
fairly appraise and determine the merit, fitness, ability and
qualifications of candidates to perform the duties of the position.
(b) A variety of criteria may be employed, including, but not
limited to assessment of training, education and work experience;
General Bylaws Page 74
assessment of related skills or talents; written, oral and
performance testing; physical exams to assess the candidate’s
ability to perform the essential functions of the position; and
reference checks. Each criteria utilized will be administered and
scored on a standardized basis to ensure equity.
(c) An evaluation plan/document will be prepared describing the
specific skills, knowledge or abilities to be measured by each
evaluation procedure selected, the importance weighting of each
part of the evaluation process, and the method to be used in
evaluating each candidate against the others. This plan will be
retained for use in documenting the job-relatedness of the
evaluation criteria. An evaluation plan may be designed for a
promotional vacancy or for an open competitive vacancy, or for
both purposes.
(2) The Evaluation Process. The evaluation process will result in a ranking
of candidates in order of their relative abilities to perform the job.
(a) The appropriate appointing authority/selection team will review
the applications of all the candidates who have applied for the
position to determine whether each candidate meets the minimum
requirements established for the position. A candidate who does
not meet these requirements will be disqualified.
(b) Qualified candidates will be evaluated in accordance with the
evaluation plan established for the position.
(c) Scores or ratings obtained on the various selection criteria used
will be combined, based on the weights assigned to them in the
evaluation plan, to derive a final ranking of each candidate.
(3) Interview And Selection. The selection team will interview applicants
who, in the opinion of the team, score high enough to merit further
consideration, and indicate a continued interest in the position. The
selection team will document through charting the reasons applicants
move to a semi-finalist stage and qualify for interviews. After
interviewing semi-finalists, the selection team shall recommend the top
candidate(s) to the appointing authority for a final interview. Following
this interview, the appointing authority shall be permitted to proceed to
appointment or continue the selection process.
(4) Notification To Applicants. All candidates will be informed in a timely
manner of their selection or non-selection for the position.
(5) Documenting The Selection Process. A record of the recruiting,
evaluation and appointing process used will be retained after the vacancy
is filled. This record will include the job description, vacancy
announcements, evaluation chart, the applications of all those who
applied, and any related comments or other documentation from the
selection team and/or the appointing authority.
General Bylaws Page 75
23.12.5 - Appointment
(1) Method Of Appointment. Vacancies shall be filled by original
appointment, emergency appointment, or temporary appointment, seasonal
or provisional appointment, promotion, demotion, transfer, or standard
hire.
(2) Appointment vs. Standard Hire. Employees who fill a vacancy through
an appointment do so for a specific period of time. Upon the expiration of
an original appointment, the appointing authority must reappoint,
eliminate the position, or announce a vacancy in the position. The
appointing authority may elect to “hire” an employee in a permanent
status, which shall not require a reappointment process. This standard hire
may only be exercised on positions not mandated by statute to be part of
the appointment requirement.
Section 23.13 - Probationary Period
23.13.1 - Objective
The probationary period is an integral part of the selection procedure allowing the
appropriate department head to train, observe and evaluate an employee’s work in
order to determine fitness for permanent status in the in the position.
23.13.2 - Duration Of Probationary Period
Each person promoted or appointed or hired to a permanent position shall be
required to complete successfully a probationary period which shall be of
sufficient length to enable the department head to observe the employee’s ability
to perform the various principle duties of the position. The probationary period
shall begin immediately upon original appointment or hire and continue for one
(1) year. The probationary period for a promoted employee shall last for six (6)
months. Throughout the probationary period the department head will observe the
employee’s performance, and any strengths or weaknesses in the employee’s
performance will be discussed with the employee.
23.13.3 - Probation Evaluation
An employee shall receive at least one (1) performance evaluation during the
probationary period. The department head will notify the Personnel Department in
writing that:
(1) The employee’s performance is satisfactory and that the individual
should be retained as a permanent employee; or
(2) The employee’s performance or conduct is unsatisfactory and that
his/her removal is proposed as of a specific date prior to the end of the
probationary period. The department head will furnish reasons for the
recommended removal to the appointing authority.
23.13.4 - Removal Of An Employee
(1) An employee may be removed during the probationary period if the
employee is unwilling or unable to perform required duties or if his/her
habits or dependability do not merit continuance in the position. The
General Bylaws Page 76
employee will be notified in writing why he/she is being terminated and
the effective date of the action.
(2) An employee may also be removed at any time if it is revealed that
information submitted prior to appointment was falsified.
Section 23.14 - Promotion, Demotion, Transfer and Separation
23.14.1 - Promotion Policy
Employees are encouraged to develop new skills, expand knowledge of their
work, assume greater responsibilities and make known their qualifications for
promotion to more difficult and responsible positions.
(1) Vacancy announcements shall be posted in the Town Hall
(2) Current employees are encouraged to apply for any vacancy for which
they meet the requirements of the position according to the procedures
outlined in Section 23.12 of this Bylaw for all applicants.
(3) No supervisor shall deny an employee permission to apply for a
vacancy.
(4) When a town employee’s qualifications are ranked equal to or higher
than outside applicants, the town employee shall be given preference.
23.14.2 - Demotion
An employee may be demoted to a vacant position of a lower grade for which
he/she is qualified for any of the following reasons:
(1) When an employee would otherwise be laid off because his/her
position is being abolished.
(2) When his/her position is reclassified to a lower grade.
(3) When he/she voluntarily requests a lower classification.
(4) When an employee does not render satisfactory service in the position
held.
23.14.3 - Transfer
A position may be filled by transferring an employee from another position of the
same pay rate, involving the performance of similar duties and requiring
essentially the same basic qualifications. All transfers must be approved by the
Town Manager.
23.14.4 - Separation
(1) Retirement. “Retirement” is the separation of an employee in
accordance with the provisions of the retirement system under which the
employee is eligible to receive benefits.
(2) Resignation. “Resignation” is the separation of an employee by his/her
voluntary act. An employee may resign in good standing from the
jurisdiction by submitting in writing the reasons therefore and the effective
date to the department head at least fourteen (14) calendar days in
advance. The department head may permit a shorter period of notice
because of extenuating circumstances. The resignation shall be forwarded
to the Personnel Director and Town Manager with pertinent information
General Bylaws Page 77
concerning the reason for resignation. The Personnel Director shall make
every effort to see to it that an exit interview is conducted with each
employee who resigns and will verify the employee’s reasons for leaving.
Copies of the employee’s letter of resignation will be placed in the
employee’s personnel file.
(3) Layoff. In the case of layoff or reduction of personnel for lack of work
or by reason of fiscal cutback, the laying off or demotion of employees
within each job classification shall be determined first by type of
appointment in the following order: emergency, provisional, temporary,
probationary and then permanent. Within the type of appointment, the
order of layoff shall be determined by length of continuous service in town
service. In no case shall such layoff be construed as a dismissal for
unsatisfactory performance. Permanent employees who are laid off shall
be given first consideration for subsequent vacancies in the class from
which they were laid off for a period of one (1) year.
(4) Termination or dismissal. An appointing authority may terminate or
dismiss an employee for disciplinary or performance based reasons.
Section 23.15 - Performance Evaluation
23.15.1 - Purpose
The town recognizes the need for an operating performance evaluation system to:
(1) Assess fairly and accurately an employee’s strengths, weaknesses and
potential for growth.
(2) Encourage and guide the employee’s development of his or her special
skills and work interests.
(3) Provide a method of improving operational programs through
employee input.
(4) Identify training needs.
23.15.2 - Procedure
The Personnel Director shall be responsible for the establishment and
maintenance of the employee performance evaluation system. Employee
evaluation is the continuing day to day responsibility of the department head.
Annually and prior to affecting any pay increase, the department head will make a
written evaluation of the employee’s performance.
(1) Employee Evaluations. An employee evaluation is the summary of the
supervisor’s observations of the employee during the past year and a
summary of the performance in terms of a variety of job-related factors.
The evaluation will also include a plan to develop strengths, identify and
improve weak areas and record the employee’s observations of work
assignments in the last year. Proper use of the performance evaluation
serves as a means for identifying training needs, helping to improve
individual performance, recognizing outstanding accomplishments,
helping to strengthen employee-supervisor relationships, emphasizing the
employee’s contribution to the town’s programs and helping to identify
the strengths and weaknesses in the town’s programs.
General Bylaws Page 78
(2) Procedure For Employee Evaluation
(a) Prior to June 1 annually, the department head will make a
written evaluation of the employee’s job performance, considering
any changes that have occurred in the job or other factors which
might affect job performance and noting strengths and capabilities
worthy of special mention and areas where improvement is needed.
The employee and department head will then meet to conduct the
employee-supervisor discussion.
(b) Employee-Supervisor discussions will begin with a thorough
review of the employee’s current job description, to review and
clarify job requirements and duties assigned and to note any major
changes which may have taken place in the employee’s job. The
department head will note major changes which may have an
impact on classification or will require a change to the job
description and will submit these changes to the Personnel
Director. Job descriptions determined to be generally accurate
should be initialed and dated by the department head and employee
to certify accuracy and currency. The department head and
employee should also discuss the employee’s career development
plans, special work interests, projects or assignments of interest
and particular training interests or needs. The employee’s general
observations of the department’s programs, and especially
suggestions for improving assignments, functions and work
procedures, should be particularly encouraged. The employee
should have the opportunity to discuss any other points and may
attach comments to the department head’s evaluation. The
employee will then certify that he/she has reviewed the evaluation
and that it has been discussed with him/her.
(c) Employees believing that their evaluations are incorrect may
appeal their evaluations in writing to the Personnel Director,
whereupon the department head, the employee and the Personnel
Director will meet to review the rating.
(d) The evaluation will then be forwarded to the Personnel Director
to become a part of the employee’s personnel record.
Section 23.16 - Training and Staff Development
27.16.1 - Policy
It shall be the joint responsibility of the department head and Personnel Director
to foster and promote employee training programs for the purpose of improving
the quality of personal service rendered to citizens and aiding employees to equip
themselves for advancement in the service.
23.16.2 - Administration Of The Employee Training Program
The Town Manager, in consultation with the department heads, shall be
responsible for:
(1) Establishing standards of training programs.
General Bylaws Page 79
(2) Providing assistance to department heads in developing and
conducting training to meet the specific needs of their departments and in
developing and utilizing other techniques for increasing employee
efficiency.
(3) Developing supervisory and management training and other types of
training and employee development programs common to all departments.
(4) Providing assistance to department heads in establishing standards of
performance and procedures for evaluating employee performance and
potential for growth and identifying training needs.
(5) Providing for the safe-keeping records of all approved training courses
and programs and record of employees who successfully complete such
courses and programs.
23.16.3 - Identifying Training Needs
At the time of the annual employee-supervisor evaluation discussion, the
department head and employee should discuss areas where training is needed or
desirable for performance in the employee’s present job, or would be helpful in
developing additional skills for growth into other positions in the town service.
The department head should forward a written report of training needs to the
Personnel Director, who shall so inform the Town Manager. Department heads
shall, through contact with the Personnel Director and the public community,
keep themselves apprised of training programs that may be of help or interest both
to themselves and to their employees and should nominate employees for
appropriate training courses.
23.16.4 - Tuition Reimbursement
All permanent full-time employees who take courses at accredited institutions of
higher education may be eligible, subject to the availability of funds appropriated
for such purposes, to be reimbursed up to twenty (20%) of the tuition paid by said
employee for such courses directly related to their professional growth in their
position with the Town. Tuition reimbursement is limited to the equivalent tuition
at state institutions. In order to receive partial reimbursement of tuition, the
employee must submit, after completion of the course(s), a written statement
showing a passing grade of “B” or better, together with written receipts which
verify the payments by the employee. At least one (1) month prior to the
scheduled start of a course or program, the employee must submit to the Town
Manager a statement indicating the courses he/she plans to take, together with a
statement showing how these courses will benefit the employee and the town.
This statement should indicate an alternative course(s) to be taken if the stated
course is either unavailable or not offered that term. The decision of the Town
Manager as to course and tuition approval/denial shall be final.
Section 23.17 - Disciplinary Actions
23.17.1 - Responsibility Of Employees
It is the responsibility of all employees to observe the policies and regulations
necessary for the proper operation of all the departments in town government.
General Bylaws Page 80
23.17.2 - Department Head Responsibilities
Department heads are responsible for the proper and efficient operation of their
departments and for enforcing all policies and regulations, which may involve
invoking such disciplinary measures as may be necessary.
23.17.3 - Reasons For Disciplinary Action
Disciplinary action may be imposed upon an employee for conduct or actions
which interfere with or prevent the town from effectively and efficiently
discharging its responsibilities to the public. This shall include, but is not limited
to, the following:
(1) Neglect in the performance of the duties of the position to which the
employee is assigned.
(2) Disregard for or frequent violation of town and/or department policies
and regulations.
(3) Willful misuse, misappropriation, negligence or destruction of town
property.
(4) Frequent tardiness or absence from duty.
(5) Violation of any official order, refusal to carry out reasonable
directions given by a proper supervisor or other acts of insubordination.
(6) Use or consumption of intoxicating beverages or illegal drugs and
controlled substances while on duty.
(7)Abuse or misuse of legally prescribed narcotics, drugs or other
controlled substances so as to interfere with job performance or the
efficiency of town service.
(8) Criminal, dishonest, untruthful or other unsuitable conduct which
interferes with effective job performance or has an adverse effect on the
efficiency of the town service.
(9) Disregard for or frequent violations of employee conduct rules, town
bylaws or state or federal laws.
(10) Unauthorized dissemination of privileged or confidential
information.
(11) Any other conduct or action of such seriousness that disciplinary
action is considered by the appointing authority to be warranted.
23.17.4 - Procedures For Progressive Disciplinary Action; Progressive
Discipline
(1) Oral Reprimand. Whenever grounds for disciplinary action exist and
the department head determines that more severe action is not immediately
necessary, the department head should orally communicate to the
employee the observation of the deficiency and offer assistance in
correcting the deficiency. Whenever possible, sufficient time for
improvement should precede formal disciplinary action. When an oral
reprimand is given, the department head should ensure that the employee’s
personnel file is documented to show date of the reprimand and the
charge. The employee will be advised that this reprimand will be
General Bylaws Page 81
documented in his/her personnel folder and will have the opportunity to
submit comments for the personnel folder.
(2) Written Reprimand. A written reprimand shall be in order for
deficiencies or offenses that, in the opinion of the department head,
warrant a more stern response to an employee. All written reprimands
shall be addressed to the employee and will include the charge, the
specific behavior and the dates of the behavior, where appropriate, that
support the charge, the warning that continuance of this behavior will
result in more severe disciplinary action, an offer of assistance in
correcting the behavior, any circumstances affecting the severity of the
discipline, and advice on the right of appeal. A signed copy of the
reprimand shall be included in the employee’s personnel file, and the
employee will have the opportunity to submit comments for the personnel
folder.
(3) Suspension. The Town Manager may suspend an employee without
pay for up to but not exceeding five (5) calendar days. On or before the
effective date of the suspension, the Town Manager will furnish the
employee with a written statement setting forth reasons for suspension, the
effective dates of the suspension and the date the employee should return
to work. The statement will also include the charge, the specific behavior
and the dates of the behavior, where appropriate, that support the charge,
the warning that a continuance of this behavior will result in more severe
disciplinary action, an offer of assistance in correcting the behavior, any
circumstances affecting the severity of the discipline and advice on right
of appeal. The Town Manager may suspend an employee without pay for
a period of time not to exceed twenty-five (25) calendar days.
(4) Removal or Dismissal. An appointing authority may terminate an
employee in accordance with the procedure that is set forth in Section 7-8
of the Charter.
23.17.5 - Privacy And Public Information
In all instances, both the employee’s right to privacy and the right of the public to
have access to public information shall be preserved by observance of the
appropriate statutes and laws governing both.
Section 23.18 - Conduct Of Employees
23.18.1 - General Policy
In addition to the provisions set forth in Section 23.17, all employees are
prohibited from engaging in any conduct which could reflect unfavorably upon
the Town. Employees must avoid any action which might result in or create the
impression of using public office for private gain, giving preferential treatment to
any person or losing complete impartiality in conducting Town business.
23.18.2 - Conflict of Interest Law
Employees must adhere to all applicable provisions of G.L. c. 268A, the Conflict
of Interest Law, in relation to their position(s) with the Town.
General Bylaws Page 82
23.18.3 - Business Activities And Solicitation
No employee shall engage in any business other than his/her regular duties during
working hours, including such activities as selling to fellow employees, lending of
money for profit and any similar activity.
23.18.4 - Outside Employment
(1) Interference With Town Employment. No employee may engage in
additional employment which in any manner interferes with proper and
effective job performance, results in a direct or gives the appearance of a
conflict of interest, or may subject the town to public criticism or
embarrassment.
(2) Preference Of Town Employment. Employees who engage in
employment outside of regular working hours may be subject to call to
perform regular town duties first.
(3) Injury And Illness. The town shall in no respect be liable nor grant
injury or sick leave in case of injury to an employee while engaged in
outside employment nor any occupational illness attributed to the outside
employment.
23.18.5 – Confidential/Privileged Information
Employees often deal with plans, programs and documents of significant public
interest. Employees must not use this privileged information for their own
financial advantage or to provide family, friends and acquaintances with financial
advantages or with information which could be used for financial advantage or
use or disseminate said information in violation of G.L. c. 268A, the Conflict of
Interest Law. If an employee finds that he/she has an outside financial interest
which could be affected by town plans or activities, he/she must immediately
report the situation to his/her department head. Each employee is charged with the
responsibility of ensuring that he/she releases only information that should be
made available to the general public. Violation of this section may result in
disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment.
23.18.6 - Use Of Town Property
(1) General Policy. Employees should not, directly or indirectly, use or
allow the use of town property of any kind for other than official activities.
(2) Telephone Use. Personal use of town telephones should be limited to
emergencies and unusual circumstances, and should be as brief as
possible. Department heads shall review monthly telephone invoices
and/or reports to ensure compliance.
(3) Damaged/Missing Property. All employees are responsible for
reporting any damaged or missing town property to the appropriate
department head. Willful neglect, misuse, or theft of town property on the
part of an employee may require the reimbursement of said item(s) by the
employee to the town, and/or result in disciplinary action, up to and
including termination of employment.
General Bylaws Page 83
23.18.7 - Political Activity
(1) All employees are entitled to exercise their rights as citizens to express
their political opinions and to cast their votes.
(2) Employees may not:
(a) Use official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering
with or affecting the result of an election or nomination for office.
(b) Directly or indirectly coerce, attempt to coerce, command or
advise a state or local officer or employee to pay, lend or
contribute anything of value to a party, committee, organization,
agency or person for political purposes.
(c) Post political literature on town owned property, nor shall be
permitted to campaign during work hours.
23.18.8 - Dress Code
Each employee is responsible for reporting for duty in attire most appropriate to
the requirements of his/her position. Employees are expected to represent a
professional appearance at all times, and clothing may not be of a provocative or
safety hazard nature. The department head may authorize additional dress
requirements with due discretion.
23.18.9 - Dealings With Public, Vendors, & Other Staff
Employees are expected at all times to conduct all dealings with the public,
vendors, and other staff members in a most professional manner. Courtesy and
respect is to be observed at all times.
Section 23.19 - Records
23.19.1 - Personnel Records
The Personnel Director shall be responsible for the maintenance of an employee
record for each employee in accordance with the provisions of G.L. c. 149, §52C.
23.19.2 - Taxation & Retirement Records
As a means of ensuring employee privacy, the Treasurer shall maintain all
retirement and taxation related documents. An employee may review these
records at the convenience of the Treasurer.
23.19.3 - Retention Of Records
Personnel and other employment related records shall be maintained on a current
basis for each employee. Records of former employees shall be maintained in
accordance with the Records Retention Schedule of G.L. c. 66.
23.19.4 - Employee’s Right To See Records
Any employee may arrange to view or receive a copy of his/her personnel file in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of G.L. c. 149, §52C.
General Bylaws Page 84
23.19.5 - Documentation Of Personnel Actions
All personnel actions will be documented to ensure accurate maintenance of
personnel records relative to leave, employment and personal status changes.
Responsibility for documentation is as follows:
(1) Status Changes.
(a) Requests for personnel actions such as changes in classification
(i.e., reallocation of a position, abolishment of position), pay
increases, appointment, dismissal, suspension or transfer
(temporary or permanent) should be initiated by the department
head or other authorized official generally at least two (2) weeks
prior to the effective date of such action and forwarded to the
Personnel Director.
(b) Notices of personnel actions such as resignations or changes in
address, name, telephone number, marital status, dependents, etc.,
should be initiated by the employee and submitted to the Personnel
Director two (2) weeks prior to the effective date of such action or
as soon as possible. Department heads should advise employees to
report such changes, as well as adjustments in education and skills,
whenever such changes occur, to assure proper maintenance of
records and personnel files.
(c) The Personnel Director will document all personnel actions
affected in the employee’s personnel record and where applicable,
provide the employee with notice of same in accordance with the
provisions of G.L. c. 149, §52C.
(2) Leave. Notices of use of leave or requests for leave should be initiated
by the employee and submitted to the department head prior to the
commencement of the leave, as indicated in Section 27.11. Department
heads will forward the requests notices to the Town Manager.
Section 23.20 - Employee Benefits
23.20.1 - Group Insurance
Eligibility for participation in the Town’s group insurance plans as an employee
or retiree are governed by the provisions of G.L. c. 32B and any applicable group
insurance regulations adopted by the appropriate public authority. Participating
employees who drop their group health insurance from the town after retirement
may, at their option, be reinstated subject to such eligibility requirements.
23.20.2 - Retirement Plan
The town is a member of the Worcester County Retirement System which is
organized and operated under the provisions of G.L. c.32. Membership in the
system may be required for certain classes of employees as set forth in G.L. c.32.
23.20.3 - Workers’ Compensation Insurance
The town will provide an insurance program in compliance with G.L. c.152, as
amended, for employees involved in work-related illness or injury.
General Bylaws Page 85
23.20.4 - Highway Department Licenses
Employees of the Highway Department shall be reimbursed for the cost to acquire
or renew those licenses required for the performance of their job functions.
23.20.5 - Mileage
For travel necessitated by town business, upon the submission of appropriate
travel vouchers, any employee shall be reimbursed on a per-mile basis. The actual
rate of reimbursement shall be equal to that of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts at any given time.
23.20.6 - Deferred Compensation
Employees may participate, on a voluntary basis, in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts Deferred Compensation plan offered by the Town.
Upon adoption by Town Meeting, this Bylaw shall replace and render null and void any and
all town-wide personnel policies.
Adopted: April 21, 1984
Amended: 02/03/92, 10/20/97, 10/16/06
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
BYLAW 24. FALSE ALARMS
Section 24.1 - Definitions
For the purpose of this Bylaw, the following words and phrases shall have the following
meanings:
Alarm System - Any assembly of equipment and/or devices that are designed to be
activated either manually or automatically for the purpose of drawing attention to the
presence of a fire or hazard, or situation, criminal or otherwise, to which the police and/or
fire departments are expected to respond.
Alarm User - Any person or business on whose premises an Alarm System is installed
and maintained within the Town of Sutton, except for Alarm Systems that are installed in
or on motor vehicles.
False Alarm - The activation of an Alarm System through mechanical failure,
malfunction, improper installation or negligence of the user of the Alarm System or
his/her employees or agents; and any signal or communication transmitted to the Police
and/or Fire Departments requesting, requiring or resulting in a response from the Police
and/or Fire Departments when, in fact, there has been no fire or hazard, or unauthorized
entry or intrusion into the premises and there has been no attempted robbery or burglary
at the premises. Excluded from this definition shall be the activation of an Alarm System
by power outages, utility companies or other outside sources, hurricanes, severe storms
and similar conditions.
General Bylaws Page 86
Section 24.2 – False Alarms
(1) After the Police or Fire Departments have recorded three (3) separate False Alarms
within the calendar year, the Alarm User shall be assessed the following fines:
(a) One Hundred dollars ($100) for the fourth False Alarm.
(b) Two Hundred dollars ($200) for the fifth and subsequent False Alarms.
(2) Failure to pay the fine within the prescribed time period will result in court action for
violation of a town Bylaw or a municipal charges lien being placed on the real property
pursuant to G.L. c.40, §58, in the Worcester District Registry of Deeds until the fine is paid.
Section 24.3 – Audible Alarm
All Alarm Systems that emit an audible signal shall be equipped with a device for
limiting the length of the audible signal to ten (10) minutes. Any user of an Alarm
System that either does not have such a device or has a malfunction that allows the
audible signal to continue for more than ten (10) minutes shall be assessed a fee of fifty
dollars ($50). Failure to pay such fine within the prescribed time will result in either
court action for violation of a town Bylaw or the placement of a municipal charges lien
on the real property pursuant to G.L. c.40, §58, in the Worcester District Registry of
Deeds until the fine is paid.
Section 24.4 - Exemptions
(1) All federal, state and municipal buildings and property shall be exempt from
the provisions of this article.
(2) No provision of this article shall be construed to place an obligation on the
Police or Fire Departments to respond to an alarm.
Adopted: October 18, 1999
Amended: 10/20/08
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
BYLAW 25. MOTORIZED SCOOTERS PROHIBITED
Section 25.1. No person shall operate a motorized scooter, motorized skateboard
or other similar motorized motor vehicle including electric scooters on any public
way, sidewalk, playground, property of the Town.
Section 25.2. The Police shall have primary responsibility for the enforcement of
this Bylaw.
Section 25.3. Whoever violates this Bylaw shall be punished by a fine of fifty
dollars for the first offense, one hundred dollars for the second offense and two
hundred dollars for the third and subsequent offenses.
Adopted: August 18, 2004
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
General Bylaws Page 87
BYLAW 26. TOWN OF SUTTON RIGHT TO FARM
Section 26.1. Legislative Purpose and Intent
The purpose and intent of this Bylaw is to support with emphasis the Right to Farm accorded to
all citizens of the Commonwealth under Article 97 of the Articles of Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution, and all state statutes and regulations there under, including but not
limited to G.L. c. 40A, §3, ¶1; c. 90, §9; c.111, § l25A; and c.128 §1A. We the citizens of
Sutton restate and republish these rights pursuant to the Town's authority conferred by Article 89
of the Articles of Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution, ("Home Rule Amendment").
This General Bylaw encourages the pursuit of agriculture, promotes agriculture-based economic
opportunities, and protects farmlands within the Town of Sutton by allowing agricultural uses
and related activities to function with minimal conflict with abutters and Town agencies. This
Bylaw shall apply to all jurisdictional areas within the Town.
Section 26.2. Definitions
The word "farm" shall include any parcel or contiguous parcels of land, or water bodies used for
the primary purpose of agriculture, or accessory thereto.
The words "farming" or "agriculture" or their derivatives shall include, but not be limited to the
following:
• farming in all its branches and the cultivation and tillage of the soil;
• dairying;
• production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any agricultural, aquacultural, floricultural,
viticultural, or horticultural commodities;
• growing and harvesting of forest products upon forest land;
• raising of livestock including horses;
• keeping of horses as a commercial enterprise; and keeping and raising of poultry, swine, cattle,
ratites (such as emus, ostriches and rheas) and camelids (such as llamas and camels), and other
domesticated animals for food and other agricultural purposes, including bees and fur-bearing
animals.
"Farming" shall encompass activities including, but not limited to, the following:
• operation and transportation of slow-moving farm equipment over roads within the town;
• control of pests, including, but not limited to, insects, weeds, predators and disease organism
of plants and animals;
• application of manure, fertilizers and pesticides;
• conducting agriculture-related educational and farm-based recreational activities, including
agri-tourism, provided that the activities are related to marketing the agricultural output or
services of the farm;
• processing and packaging of the agricultural output of the farm and the operation of a farmer's
market or farm stand including signage thereto;
• maintenance, repair, or storage of seasonal equipment, or apparatus owned or leased by the
farm owner or manager used expressly for the purpose of propagation, processing, management,
or sale of the agricultural products; and
• on- farm relocation of earth and the clearing of ground for farming operations.
General Bylaws Page 88
Section 26.3. Right To Farm Declaration
The Right to Farm is hereby recognized to exist within the Town of Sutton. The above-described
agricultural activities may occur on holidays, weekdays, and weekends by night or day and shall
include the attendant incidental noise, odors, dust, and fumes associated with normally accepted
agricultural practices. It is hereby determined that whatever impact may be caused to others
through the normal practice of agriculture is more than offset by the benefits of farming to the
neighborhood, community, and society in general. The benefits and protections of this Bylaw are
intended to apply exclusively to those commercial agricultural and farming operations and
activities conducted in accordance with generally accepted agricultural practices. Nothing in this
Right To Farm Bylaw shall be deemed as acquiring or authorizing the acquisition of any interest
in land, or as imposing any land use regulation which is properly the subject of state statute,
regulation, or local zoning law, or as superseding any otherwise applicable statute, regulation,
Bylaw, or other law.
Section 26.4. Disclosure Notification
It is the policy of this community to conserve, protect and encourage the maintenance and
improvement of agricultural land for the production of food and other agricultural products, and
also for its natural and ecological value. This disclosure notification is to inform buyers or
occupants that the property they are about to acquire or occupy lies within a town where farming
activities occur. Such farming activities may include, but are not limited to, activities that cause
noise, dust and odors. Buyers or occupants are also informed that the location of property within
the Town may be impacted by commercial agricultural operations including the ability to access
water services for such property under certain circumstances."
A copy of this disclosure notification shall be posted by the Town to residents and property
owners each fiscal year in one or more of the following forms: annual report, official Town
website, transfer station, or library.
Section 26.5. Resolution of Disputes
Any person who seeks to complain about the operation of a farm may, notwithstanding pursuing
any other available remedy, file a grievance with the Board of Selectmen, the Building
Commissioner, or the Board of Health, depending upon the nature of the grievance, which shall
review and facilitate the resolution of the grievance within thirty (30) days of receipt. The filing
of the grievance does not suspend the time within which to pursue any other available remedies
that the aggrieved may have.
Section 26.6. Severability Clause
If any part of this Bylaw is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision
shall not affect the remainder of this Bylaw. The Town of Sutton hereby declares the provisions
of this Bylaw to be severable.
Adopted: October 15, 2007
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
General Bylaws Page 89
BYLAW 27. ILLICIT STORM WATER CONNECTIONS & DISCHARGES
Section 27.1. Purpose
Increased and contaminated storm water runoff is a major cause of impairment of water quality
and flow in lakes, ponds, streams, rivers, wetlands and Groundwater; contamination of drinking
water supplies; alteration or destruction of aquatic and wildlife habitat; and flooding.
Regulation of Illicit Connections and discharges to the Municipal Storm Drainage System is
necessary for the protection of the Town’s water bodies and Groundwater, and to safeguard the
public health, safety, welfare and the environment.
The objectives of this Bylaw are:
(1) To prevent Pollutants from entering the Town’s Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
(MS4);
(2) To prohibit Illicit Connections and unauthorized discharges to the MS4;
(3) To require the removal of all such Illicit Connections;
(4) To comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating to storm water discharges;
and
(5) To establish the legal authority to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
Bylaw through inspection, monitoring, and enforcement.
Section 27.2. Definitions
Authorized Enforcement Agency __ The Highway Department, its employees, officers, or agents
are designated to enforce this Bylaw.
Bylaw __ Refers to Bylaw 27. Illicit Storm Water Connections & Discharge of the “General
Bylaws of the Town of Sutton”.
Clean Water Act __ The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) as
hereafter amended.
Discharge Of Pollutants __ The addition from any source of any Pollutant or combination of
Pollutants into the Municipal Storm Drainage System or into the waters of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts or United States from any source.
Groundwater __ Water beneath the surface of the ground.
Illicit Connection __ A surface or subsurface drain or conveyance, which allows an Illicit
Discharge into the Municipal Storm Drainage System, including without limitation sewage,
process wastewater, or wash water and any connections from indoor drains, sinks, or toilets,
regardless of whether said connection was previously allowed, permitted, or approved.
Illicit Discharge __ Direct or indirect discharge to the Municipal Storm Drainage System that is
not composed entirely of storm water, except as exempted in Section 27.8, below. The term does
not include a discharge in compliance with a NPDES Storm Water Discharge Permit or a Surface
Water Discharge Permit, or resulting from fire fighting activities exempted pursuant to Section
27.8 of this Bylaw.
General Bylaws Page 90
Impervious Surface __ Any material or structure on or above the ground that prevents water
infiltrating the underlying soil. Impervious Surface includes without limitation roads, paved
parking lots, sidewalks, and rooftops.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) or Municipal Storm Drainage System __ The
system of conveyances designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water, including any
road with a drainage system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility,
retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered drainage channel, reservoir, and
other drainage structure that together comprise the storm drainage system owned or operated by
the Town.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit __ A
permit issued by United States Environmental Protection Agency or jointly with the State that
authorizes the Discharge of Pollutants to waters of the United States.
Non-Storm Water Discharge __ Discharge to the Municipal Storm Drainage System not
composed entirely of storm water.
Owner __ A Person with a legal or equitable interest in property.
Person __ Any individual, association, corporate entity, partnership, trust, department of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the federal government, to the extent permitted by law, and
any officer, employee, or agent of such Person.
Pollutant __ Any element or property of sewage, agricultural, industrial or commercial waste,
runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or other matter whether originating at a point or non-point
source, that is or may be introduced into any sewage treatment works or waters of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Pollutants shall include without limitation:
A. Paints, varnishes, and solvents;
B. Oil and other automotive fluids;
C. Non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
D. Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordnances,
accumulations and floatables;
E. Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
F. Hazardous materials and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
G. Dissolved and particulate metals;
H. Animal wastes;
I. Rock, sand, salt, soils;
J. Construction wastes and residues; and
K. Noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Process Wastewater __ Water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into direct
contact with or results from the production or use of any material, intermediate product, finished
product, or waste product.
General Bylaws Page 91
Storm Water __ Storm water runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface water runoff and drainage.
Surface Water Discharge Permit __ A permit issued by the Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) pursuant to 314 CMR 3.00 that authorizes the Discharge of Pollutants to waters
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Toxic or Hazardous Material Or Waste __ Any material, which because of its quantity,
concentration, chemical, corrosive, flammable, reactive, toxic, infectious or radioactive
characteristics, either separately or in combination with any substance or substances, constitutes
a present or potential threat to human health, safety, welfare, or to the environment. Toxic or
hazardous materials include any synthetic organic chemical, petroleum product, heavy metal,
radioactive or infectious waste, acid and alkali, and any substance defined as Toxic or Hazardous
under G.L. Ch.21C and Ch.21E, and the regulations at 310 CMR 30.000 and 310 CMR 40.0000.
Wastewater __ Any sanitary waste, sludge, or septic tank or cesspool overflow, and water that
during manufacturing, cleaning or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the
production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct or
waste product.
Watercourse __ A natural or man-made channel through which water flows or a stream of water,
including a river, brook or underground stream.
Waters of The Commonwealth Of Massachusetts __ All waters within the jurisdiction of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, including, without limitation, rivers, streams, lakes, ponds,
springs, impoundments, estuaries, wetlands, coastal waters, and Groundwater.
Wetlands __ Coastal and freshwater wetlands, including wet meadows, marshes, swamps, and
bogs, as defined and determined pursuant to G.L. c. 131, § 40 and 310 CMR 10.00 et seq.
Section 27.3. Applicability
This Bylaw shall apply to flows entering the Municipal Storm Drainage System.
Section 27.4. Authority
This Bylaw is adopted under the authority granted by the Home Rule Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule Procedures Act, and pursuant to G.L. c. 83, §§ 1,
10, and 16, as amended by St. 2004, c. 149, §§ 135-140, and the regulations of the federal Clean
Water Act found at 40 CFR 122.34
Section 27.5. Responsibility for administration
The Authorized Enforcement Agency shall administer, implement and enforce this Bylaw, and
any rules and regulations adopted thereunder. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the
Authorized Enforcement Agency may be delegated in writing by the Authorized Enforcement
Agency to employees or agents of the Authorized Enforcement Agency.
Section 27.6. Regulations
The Authorized Enforcement Agency may promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the
purposes of this Bylaw. Failure by the Authorized Enforcement Agency to promulgate such rules
and regulations shall not have the effect of suspending or invalidating this Bylaw.
General Bylaws Page 92
Section 27.7. Prohibited activities
A. Illicit Discharges. No Person shall dump, discharge, cause or allow to be discharged any
Pollutant or Non-Storm Water Discharge into the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
(MS4), into a watercourse, or into the waters of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
B. Illicit Connections. No Person shall construct, use, allow, maintain or continue any Illicit
Connection to the Municipal Storm Drainage System, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under applicable law, regulation or custom at the time of connection.
C. Obstruction of Municipal Storm Drainage System. No Person shall obstruct or interfere with
the normal flow of storm water into or out of the Municipal Storm Drainage System without
prior written approval from the Authorized Enforcement Agency.
Section 27.8. Exemptions
A. Discharge or flow resulting from fire fighting activities.
B. The following Non-Storm Water Discharges or flows are exempt from the prohibition of nonstorm
waters provided that the source is not a significant contributor of a Pollutant to the
Municipal Storm Drainage System:
(1) Waterline flushing;
(2) Flow from potable water sources;
(3) Springs;
(4) Natural flow from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(5) Diverted stream flow;
(6) Rising Groundwater;
(7) Uncontaminated Groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005(20), or
uncontaminated pumped Groundwater;
(8) Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains (not including active Groundwater
dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, or air conditioning condensation;
(9) Discharge from landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
(10) Water from individual residential car washing;
(11) Discharge from de-chlorinated swimming pool water (less than one ppm chlorine) provided
the water is allowed to stand for one week prior to draining and the pool is drained in such a way
as not to cause a nuisance;
(12) Discharge from street sweeping;
(13) Dye testing, provided verbal notification is given to the Authorized Enforcement Agency
prior to the time of the test;
(14) Non-Storm Water Discharge permitted under a NPDES permit or a Surface Water
Discharge Permit, waiver, or waste discharge order administered under the authority of the
United States Environmental Protection Agency or the Department of Environmental Protection,
General Bylaws Page 93
provided that the discharge is in full compliance with the requirements of the permit, waiver, or
order and applicable laws and regulations; and
(15) Discharge for which advanced written approval is received from the Authorized
Enforcement Agency as necessary to protect public health, safety, welfare or the environment.
Section 27.9. Emergency suspension of Municipal Storm Drainage System access
The Authorized Enforcement Agency may suspend Municipal Storm Drainage System access to
any Person or property without prior written notice when such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened Discharge of Pollutants that presents imminent risk of harm to the public
health, safety, welfare or the environment. In the event any Person fails to comply with an
emergency suspension order, the Authorized Enforcement Agency may take all reasonable steps
to prevent or minimize harm to the public health, safety, welfare or the environment.
Section 27.10. Notification of spills
Notwithstanding other requirements of local, state or federal law, as soon as a Person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has
information of or suspects a release of materials at that facility or operation resulting in or which
may result in Discharge of Pollutants to the municipal drainage system or storm waters of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, the Person shall take all necessary steps to ensure
containment, and cleanup of the release. In the event of a release of oil or hazardous materials,
the Person shall immediately notify the Fire and Police Departments, Board of Health, and the
Highway Superintendent. In the event of a release of non-hazardous material, the reporting
Person shall notify the Authorized Enforcement Agency no later than the next business day. The
reporting Person shall provide to the Authorized Enforcement Agency written confirmation of all
telephone, facsimile or in-person notifications within three business days thereafter. If the
discharge of prohibited materials is from a commercial or industrial facility, the facility Owner
or operator of the facility shall retain on-site a written record of the discharge and the actions
taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
Section 27.11. Enforcement
The Highway Superintendent or his or her appointed designee shall enforce this Bylaw,
regulations, orders, violation notices, and enforcement orders and may pursue all civil and
criminal remedies for such violations.
A. Civil Relief. If a Person violates the provisions of this Bylaw, regulations, permit, notice, or
order issued thereunder, the Authorized Enforcement Agency may seek injunctive relief in a
court of competent jurisdiction restraining the Person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the Person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
B. Orders.
(1) The Highway Superintendent or his or her appointed designee may issue a written order to
enforce the provisions of this Bylaw or the regulations thereunder, which may include:
(a) Elimination of Illicit Connections or discharges to the MS4;
(b) Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
General Bylaws Page 94
(c) That unlawful discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; and
(d) Remediation of contamination in connection therewith.
(2) If the Authorized Enforcement Agency determines that abatement or remediation of
contamination is required, the order shall set forth a deadline by which such abatement or
remediation must be completed. Said order shall further advise that, should the violator or
property Owner fail to abate or perform remediation within the specified deadline, the Town
may, at its option, undertake such work, and expenses thereof shall be charged to the violator.
(3) Within thirty (30) days after completion by the Town of all measures necessary to abate the
violation or to perform remediation, the violator and the property Owner will be notified of the
costs incurred by the Town, including administrative costs. The violator or property Owner may
file a written protest objecting to the amount or basis of costs with the Authorized Enforcement
Agency within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notification of the costs incurred. If the amount
due is not received by the expiration of the time in which to file a protest or within thirty (30)
days following a decision of the Authorized Enforcement Agency affirming or reducing the
costs, or from a final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, the costs shall become a
special assessment against the property Owner and shall constitute a lien on the Owner's property
for the amount of said costs. Interest shall begin to accrue on any unpaid costs at the statutory
rate provided in G.L. c. 59, § 57 after the thirty-first day at which the costs first become due.
C. Criminal Penalty. Any Person who violates any provision of this Bylaw shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $300. Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Non-criminal Disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution or civil action, the Town
may elect to utilize the non-criminal disposition procedure set forth in G.L. c 40, § 21D and
adopted by the Town as a General Bylaw in which case the Authorized Enforcement Agency of
the Town shall be the enforcing Person. The penalty for the 1st violation shall be $50, 2nd
violation shall be $100, and the penalty for the 3rd and subsequent violations shall be shall be
$300. Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
E. Entry to Perform Duties Under this Bylaw. To the extent permitted by state law, or if
authorized by the Owner or other party in control of the property, the Authorized Enforcement
Agency, its agents, officers, and employees may enter upon privately owned property for the
purpose of performing their duties under this Bylaw and regulations and may make or cause to
be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the Authorized Enforcement Agency deems
reasonably necessary.
F. Appeals. The decisions or orders of the Authorized Enforcement Agency shall be
final. Further relief shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction.
G. Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies listed in this Bylaw are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law.
General Bylaws Page 95
Section 27.12. Severability.
The provisions of this Bylaw are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, paragraph,
sentence, or clause, of this Bylaw or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or
circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or
application of this Bylaw.
Adopted: May 11, 2009
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
BYLAW 28. HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS
Section 28.1. Definition
The term “hawkers and peddlers,” for the purpose of this Bylaw, shall be the same as
defined in G.L. c.101, §13.
Section 28.2. License
No person shall go from place to place within the limits of the Town selling or bartering,
or carrying for sale or barter or exposing therefor, any goods, wares or merchandise,
either on foot or from any animal or vehicle, except as authorized by law, without first
obtaining a license to do so from the Board of Selectmen upon payment of a license fee
(set forth in the Selectmen’s regulations), said fee to be in conformity with G.L. c.101.
Section 28.3. Regulations
The Board of Selectmen may adopt regulations to implement this Bylaw.
Section 28.4. Expiration of License
Licenses issued under the provisions of this Bylaw shall expire December 31st following
the date of issuance.
Section 28.5. Exemption
Non-commercial activities are exempt from this Bylaw.
Adopted: October 19, 2009
Revised: Oct. 20, 2014
BYLAW 29. STRETCH ENERGY CODE
Section 29.1. Adoption
The Town of Sutton has adopted the provisions of 780 CMR 120.AA (i.e., Appendix
120.AA of the State Building Code or the “Stretch Energy Code”), as may be amended
from time to time, in place of the provisions set forth under 780 CMR 13.00, 34.00, 61.00
and 93.00.
General Bylaws Page 96
Section 29.2. Purpose
The purpose of the Stretch Energy Code shall be to provide the Town with a more
energy efficient alternative to the base energy code otherwise set forth under the State
Building Code.
Adopted: May 9, 2011
BYLAW 30. TAX TITLE PAYMENT AGREEMENTS
The Town Treasurer is authorized to enter into payment agreements with persons entitled to
redeem parcels in tax title. Such agreements shall be for a maximum term of one year. Each
agreement will require a minimum payment at the inception of 25% needed to redeem the parcel.
During the term of the agreement the Town Treasurer may not bring an action to foreclose the
tax title unless payments are not made in accordance with the schedule set out in the agreement
or timely payments are not made on other amounts due to the Town that are a lien on the same
parcel.
Adopted: October 17, 2011
BYLAW 31. REVOLVING FUNDS
There are hereby established in the Town of Sutton pursuant to the provisions of G.L.
c.44, §53E½, the following Revolving Funds:
FUND REVENUE
SOURCE
AUTHORITY
TO SPEND
FUNDS
USE OF FUND
Planning
Board
Applicant
receipts
Planning Board Professional services
and advertising.
Conservation
Commission
Applicant
fees
Conservation
Commission
Wetlands and Riverfront
District regulations
enforcement, including
salaries and expenses.
Fire
Department
Hazardous
materials
incidents
Fire Department Wages and expenses.
Public Shade
Tree
Payments for
service,
fines/penalties
Planning
Department
Tree maintenance
and/or replacement.
Board of
Health
Intermunicipal
Agreements
Town
Administrator
Public Health Nurse.
Board of
Health
Inspection
fees
Board of Health Professional Services.
Conservation
Commission
Bylaw Fees Conservation
Commission
Municipal Bylaw filing
fees, including salaries
& expenses
General Bylaws Page 97
Expenditure limit to be applicable for each fiscal year until such time as Town Meeting
votes, prior to July 1 in any year, to increase the same for the ensuing fiscal year; provided,
however, that at the request of the entity authorized to expend such funds, the Board of
Selectmen, with the approval of the Finance and Warrant Advisory Committee, may increase
such limit, for that fiscal year only.
Program or Purpose Spending Limit
Planning Board $50,000.00
Conservation Commission $50,000.00
Fire Department $25,000.00
Public Shade Tree $25,000.00
Board of Health – Public Health Nurse $50,000.00
Board of Health – Inspections $50,000.00
Conservation Commission $50,000.00
Adopted: May 8, 2017
Amended: May 13, 2019
BYLAW 32. RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
Consistent with G.L. c.94G, § 3(a)(2), all types of non-medical “marijuana establishments” as
defined in G.L. c.94G, §1, including marijuana cultivators, marijuana testing facilities, marijuana
product manufacturers, marijuana retailers or any other types of licensed recreational marijuanarelated
businesses shall be prohibited within the Town of Sutton.
Adopted: October 16, 2017
BYLAW 33. ENERGY EFFICIENCY
Energy Efficiency – Every municipal building constructed after the date of enactment of this
bylaw, must utilize the best available energy efficient systems as determined by the Board of
Selectmen in conjunction with the Building Commissioner, taking into consideration the
anticipated useful life of the systems and total system costs, including but not limited to all costs
related to the operation and maintenance of the systems.
Adopted October 20, 2014
ZONING BYLAW
SUTTON, MASSACHUSETTS
With Amendments Through October 16, 2017
Sutton Zoning Bylaw i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. GENERAL 1
A. Title, Authority and Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 1
B. Definitions ...................................................................................................................................................... 1
C. Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots ..................................................................................................... 7
II. ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS ........................................................................................ 9
A. Division Into Districts ..................................................................................................................................... 9
B. Interpretation and Application ...................................................................................................................... 10
III. USE AND DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS ......................................................................................... 11
A. Use Regulations and Table of Use Regulations ............................................................................................ 11
B. Area, Height and Bulk Regulations .............................................................................................................. 15
IV. COMMON REGULATIONS .................................................................................................................... 19
A. Signs ............................................................................................................................................................. 19
B. Off-Street Parking, Loading and Landscaping Regulations.......................................................................... 26
C. Site Plan Review ........................................................................................................................................... 31
D. Temporary Moratorium on Recreational Marijuana ..................................................................................... 40
V. OVERLAY DISTRICTS ............................................................................................................................ 41
A. Flood Plain District ....................................................................................................................................... 41
B. Groundwater Protection District ................................................................................................................... 45
C. Wireless Communication Services District .................................................................................................. 53
D. Route 146 Overlay District Bylaw ................................................................................................................. 58
E. Village Center Overlay District .................................................................................................................... 68
F. Solar Photovoltaic Overlay District ............................................................................................................... 73
VI. SPECIAL REGULATIONS ....................................................................................................................... 74
A. Condominium Development ......................................................................................................................... 74
B. Planned Business Development Bylaw ........................................................................................................ 81
C. Home Businesses .......................................................................................................................................... 87
D. Bed and Breakfast Facilities ......................................................................................................................... 89
E. Open Space Residential Development .......................................................................................................... 90
F. Traditional Neighborhood Development .................................................................................................... 100
G. Adult Entertainment Use Bylaw ................................................................................................................. 108
H. Retreat Lots ................................................................................................................................................. 111
I. Common Driveways ...................................................................................................................................... 113
J. Continued Care Retirement Community .................................................................................................... 114
K. Drive through Windows ............................................................................................................................... 120
L. Accessory Apartments .................................................................................................................................. 121
M. Small Wind Turbines .................................................................................................................................. 122
N. 43D Expedited Permitting ............................................................................................................................. 125
O. Large Scale Solar Photovoltaic ................................................................................................................... 128
P. Registered Medical Marijuana Dispensary ................................................................................................. 133
VII. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT ...................................................................................... 137
A. Administration ............................................................................................................................................ 137
B. Enforcement ................................................................................................................................................ 139
C. Amendment, Validity, Repealer and Effective Date ................................................................................... 140
Sutton Zoning Bylaw ii
LIST OF TABLES
1. Table of Use Regulations....................................................................................................................... 12
2. Table of Area Regulations ..................................................................................................................... 16
3. Table of Height and Bulk Regulations .................................................................................................. 19
4. Table of Off-Street Parking Standards ................................................................................................... 27
5. Table of Off-Street Loading Standards .................................................................................................. 28
6. Minimum Parking Space and Aisle Dimensions For Parking Areas ..................................................... 29
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 1
I. GENERAL
A. Title, Authority and Purpose
This Bylaw shall be known and may be sited as the "Sutton Zoning Bylaw" which herein is
called "this Bylaw" and is adopted by virtue of and pursuant to the authority granted the town
by Chapter 40A of the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts as now existing
or hereafter amended herein called "The Zoning Act" and in addition to the purposes stated in
the Zoning Act is for giving direction or effect to the development objectives, design
standards and recommendations contained in the Sutton Master Plan as most recently
amended.
B. Definitions
For the purpose of this bylaw certain terms and words shall have the meaning given herein.
Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural,
and the plural the singular; the words "building", "structure", "lot", "land", or "premises" shall
be construed as though followed by the words "or any portion thereof"; and the word "shall"
is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words not defined herein shall have the
meaning given in Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, Third Edition.
Uses listed in the Table of Use Regulations under the classes Retail and Service Trades and
Wholesale Trade and Manufacturing shall be defined or clarified by the North American
Industrial Classification System (NAICS).
Abandonment: The visible or otherwise apparent intention of an owner to discontinue a
nonconforming use of a building or premise, or the removal of the characteristic equipment or
furnishing used in the performance of the nonconforming use, without its replacement by
similar equipment or furnishings, or the replacement of the nonconforming use or building by
a conforming use or building.
Affordable Housing: Dwelling units available to low to moderate-income households as
defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
Alteration: Any construction, reconstruction or other action resulting in a change in the
structural parts or height, number of stories, size, use or location of a building or other
structure.
Amusement Facility: An indoor and/or outdoor venue for general amusement that may
include arcade games, bowling, laser tag, miniature golf, batting cages, driving range, roller
skating, ice staking/hockey, virtual reality activities. Said facility may also include accessory
uses such as a concession area. Said facility shall not include the field/court sports allowed
via “Sports Complex”
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 2
Automobile Services: Services, other than repair services, for the maintenance of
automobiles including car washes, detailing shops, shops for the installation of automobile
accessories such as audio equipment and sunroofs.
Building: A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, having a roof, to form a
structure for the shelter of persons, animals or property. For the purpose of this definition
"roof" shall include an awning or any similar covering, whether or not permanent in nature.
Building, Accessory: A detached subordinate building, the use of which is customarily
incidental and subordinate to that of the principal building, and which is located on the same
lot as that occupied by the principal building.
Community Facility: A place, structure, area, or other facility providing religious, fraternal,
social, recreational, and other services.
Convalescent Home: An institution or distinct part of an institution which is licensed by the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health to provide 24-hour care under medical
supervision to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness, or infirmity, are
unable to care for themselves.
Child Care Center: Facility operated on a regular basis whether known as a child nursery,
nursery school, kindergarten, child play school, progressive school, child development center,
or pre-school, or known under any other name, which receives children not of common
parentage under seven (7) years of age, or under sixteen (16) years of age if those children
have special needs, for nonresidential custody and care during part or all of the day separate
from their parents. Child care center shall not include: any part of a public school system; any
part of a private, organized educational system, unless the services of that system are
primarily limited to kindergarten, nursery or related preschool services; a Sunday school
conducted by a religious institution; a facility operated by a religious organization in which
children are cared for during short periods of time while persons responsible for the children
are attending religious services; a family child care home; an informal cooperative
arrangement among neighbors or relatives; or the occasional care of children with or without
compensation, all as defined in M.G.L. Chapter 15D, as it may be amended.
Dwelling, Multifamily: A building containing two (2) or more dwelling units.
Dwelling Unit: One or more living or sleeping rooms arranged for the use of one or more
individuals living as a single housekeeping unit, with cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping
facilities.
Earth Removal: Removing any form of soil, including without limitation, sod, loam, sand,
gravel, clay, peat, hardpan, rock, quarried stone, or mineral product.
Earth Removal, General: Any earth removal not defined as subdivision or miscellaneous.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 3
Earth Removal, Miscellaneous: That which is entirely incidental to construction for which a
building permit has been issued, or that which is less than three hundred (300) cubic yards.
Earth Removal, Subdivision: That which is entirely incidental to road construction for an
approved subdivision.
Family: One or more persons, including domestic employees, occupying a dwelling unit and
living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit.
Family Child Care Home: Private residence which on a regular basis, receives for temporary
custody and care during part or all of the day, children under seven (7) years of age, or under
sixteen (16) years of age if such children have special needs, and received for temporary
custody and care for a limited number of hours children of school age under regulations
adopted by the board. The the total number of children under sixteen (16) in a family child
care home shall not exceed six (6), including participating children living in the residence.
Family day care home shall not mean a private residence. Family child care home shall not
mean a private residence used for an informal cooperative arrangement among neighbors or
relatives, or the occasional care of children with or without compensation all as defined in
M.G.L. Chapter 15D, as it may be amended.
Floor Area, Net: The sum of the areas of the several floors of a building, measured from the
exterior faces of the walls. It does not include cellars, unenclosed porches, or attics not used
for human occupancy or any floor space in accessory buildings or in the main building
intended and designed for the parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking
requirements of this Bylaw, or any such floor space intended and designed for accessory
heating and ventilation equipment.
Height: The vertical distance from the adjacent ground to the top of the structure of highest
roof beams of a flat roof, or to the mean level of the highest gable or slope of a hip roof.
Home Business: An accessory use which is carried on within a dwelling unit or an existing
building accessory thereto by the occupants and no more than two (2) full-time equivalent
employees, which use is incidental and subordinate to the dwelling use, which does not in any
manner change the residential character of the building, and which does not create
unreasonable impacts on the surrounding neighborhood.
Home Occupation: An occupation, profession, activity, or use which is carried on entirely
within and only by the occupants of a dwelling unit, that is clearly an incidental and
secondary use of a residential dwelling unit, that does not have customers and clients
regularly coming to the premises, and that does not alter the exterior of the property or affect
the residential character of the neighborhood.
Lot: An area of land in one ownership, with definite boundaries, used, or available for use, as
the site of one or more buildings.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 4
Lot, Corner: A lot at the point of intersection of and abutting on two or more intersecting
streets, the angle of intersection of the street lot line, or in the case of a curved street extended
lot lines, being not more that 135 degrees. Corner lots shall not have rear lot lines.
Lot Depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line.
Lot line, Front: The property line dividing a lot from a street (right-of-way). On a corner lot
all lines abutting streets shall be considered front lot lines. The lines on only one of the streets
shall be used to meet the minimum lot frontage requirement, and that lot line shall be
considered the lot’s legal frontage.
Lot Frontage: The horizontal distance continuously measured along the front lot line
between the points of intersection of the side lot lines. The minimum required frontage shall
be provided along one street lot line and can not be accumulated along two(2) or more streets
Lot Line, Rear: The lot line opposite from the front lot line, except in the case of a corner lot,
where the lot shall have only front and side lot lines.
Lot Line, Side: Any lot line not a front or rear lot line.
Lot, Nonconforming: A lot lawfully existing at the effective date of this Bylaw, or any
subsequent amendment thereto, which is not in conformity with all provisions of this Bylaw.
Lot, Through: An interior lot, the front and rear lot lines of which abut streets, or a corner lot
two opposite lines of which abut streets.
Lot, Width: The minimum lot width is the minimum distance between side lot lines, when
measured anywhere between the frontage of a lot and the required minimum front yard
setback. However, for lots on the outer side of a curved street, lot width may be measured as
the straight line distance between points at the intersection of the side lot lines and the
required front yard setback. Said line indicating the minimum distance between side lot lines
shall be shown on all applicable plans. At no point prior to the rear lot line setback, shall the
lot narrow to less than 50 feet.
Membership Club: A building or area used by a social, sports or fraternal organization
exclusively by its members and their guests.
Municipal Sewers: The facilities of a Municipal Sewerage treatment system.
Municipal Water Suppliers: The facilities of a Municipal Water Supplier or a public utility
franchised to furnish water to all lots throughout the water district within which such lots are
situated.
Nursing Home: See Convalescent Home.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 5
Open Space: The portion of the lot area not covered by any structure and not used for drives,
parking, or storage. Man-made retention areas shall not be considered open space. All open
space shall be kept stabilized with natural vegetative cover.
Open Space Residential Development: A residential development in which the buildings are
clustered together with reduced lot sizes and frontage. The land not included in the building
lots is permanently preserved as open space.
Owner: The duly authorized agent, attorney, purchaser, devisee, trustee or any person having
vested or equitable interest in the use, structure or lot in question.
Personal Service Establishment: A facility providing personal care and services to people,
such as barber shops, beauticians, and manicurists.
Processing: Earth - Altering the character of earth material, including but not limited to
screening, crushing or washing. This does not include temporary processing of material, that
is, processing of material to remain on site in conjunction with site preparation or
improvements. or Food – The treatment of food substances (excluding live animals) in such a
manner as to change its properties with a view to preserving, improving its quality or making
it functionally more useful by passing it through a sequence of actions.
Recorded: Recorded in the Worcester County Registry of Deeds or registered in the Land
Court.
Restaurants, fast food – An establishment primarily engaged in quickly providing food
services to patrons who order from a menu board. Much of this food is generally prepared in
advance of a specific order and is provided to patrons in disposable containers/wrappers.
Patrons always pay in advance of receiving their food. Said establishments may also include a
drive-up window.
Self-storage Facility: Structures consisting of climate controlled individual, small, selfcontained
units that are leased or owned for the storage of business, and household goods,
automobiles, boats or contractor supplies; the majority of which self-storage units are
accessed by means of no more than two primary entrances to the building. No more than ten
percent (10%) of the total number of self-storage units on the site may be directly accessed
from the outside of a building. The facility may consist of several buildings, however at least
one must be multi-story and no more than one may be single story. If the site contains a
single story structure, all of its units shall be exterior access units and no more than 1/3 of the
total exterior access units on the site may be contained in this single story building.
Sign: Any permanent or temporary structure, device, letter, word model, banner, pennant,
insignia, trade flag, or representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an advertisement,
announcement, or direction, or is designed to attract the eye by intermittent or repeated
motion or illumination.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 6
Small hydropower installations: Hydro systems with an output of up to 500 kilowatts
(kW). Consisting of a system of turbines, generators, controls and switchgear. Said systems
shall not extend above the top of the dam and/or shall be housed in a structure of minimum
size that is consistent with the area architecture. Said system shall also not affect established
flows and impoundments in a manner that is detrimental to the environment and/or property
values in any substantial way. Said system shall also comply with all State regulations
including DEP regulations.
Sports Complex: A facility with indoor fields and/or courts that may be used for a variety of
sports such as soccer, field hockey, and basketball. Said facility may also include outdoor
fields as well as accessory uses such as a concession area, sports related retail, and sports
therapy.
Story or Stories: That part of a building above the basement or cellar, between the upper
surface of floor and the upper surface of the next floor or roof above.
Street: A way which is over twenty (20) ft. in right-of-way width which is dedicated or
devoted to public use by legal mapping by the user or by any other lawful procedure.
Structure: A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location to give support or
shelter, including but not limited to a building, wall or fence 6’ and taller or swimming pool
having a capacity of four thousand (4,000) gallons or more.
Structure, Nonconforming: A structure lawfully existing at the effective date of this Bylaw
or any subsequent amendment thereto; which is not in conformity with all provisions of this
Bylaw.
Tea Room: A restaurant, providing no more than thirty (30) seats, whether inside a structure
or exterior to the structure, without a full kitchen facility, typically serving sandwiches and
light fare and non-alcoholic beverages during the day.
Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND): A residential development in which the
form of development resembles and complements the existing historic village dwellings, in
terms of mass, spacing, height, and architectural style.
Trailer: Trailer means any vehicle or similar portable structure having no foundation other
than wheels, jacks or skirting and not having all of the following: running water, sanitary
facilities, bath facilities, and toilet and shall include the terms "Travel Trailer" and "Semi-
Trailer."
Trucking Services: Establishments primarily engaged in furnishing “over-the-road” trucking
services or trucking services with temporary storage, either as common carriers or under
special or individual contracts or agreements. (UPS, Federal Express, United Van Lines,
Yellow Freight, etc.)
Upland: Land area not comprised of wetlands as defined by M.G.L. Chapter 131, §40.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 7
Use: The purpose for which a structure or lot is arranged, designed, or intended to be used,
occupied or maintained.
Use, Accessory: A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of a
structure or lot including retail uses accessory to a wholesale trade when the retail use
occupies 20% or less of the total square footage of the building used for the wholesale trade.
Use, Nonconforming: A use lawfully existing at the effective date of this Bylaw or any
subsequent amendment there to which is not in conformity with the provisions of this Bylaw.
Use, Principal: The main or primary purpose for which a structure or lot is designed,
arranged, or intended, or for which it may be used, occupied or maintained under this Bylaw.
Variance: Such departure from the terms of this Bylaw as the Board, upon appeal in specific
cases, is empowered to authorize under the terms of this Bylaw.
Wireless Communication Facility: A wireless communication monopole, including
antennas and accessory structures, if any, which facilitates the provision of wireless
communications services.
Wireless Communication Services: The provision of the following types of services:
cellular telephone service, personal communications and enhanced specialized mobile radio
service.
Yard: An undeveloped, naturally vegetated and/or landscaped strip required per the Table of
Dimensional Regulations along the full length of a lot line on the same lot as a permitted
structure and/or use, and lying between said structure and/or use and the nearest lot line,
unobstructed from the ground upward and unoccupied except by specific structures and/or
uses allowed by the provisions of this Bylaw. Said yard is intended to provide aesthetic value
as well as serve as a spatial and visual buffer between lots.
Yard, Front: The minimum distance required between the front lot line and a permitted
principal or accessory structure or use on a lot.
Yard, Rear: The minimum distance required between the rear lot line and a permitted
principal or accessory structure or use on a lot.
Yard, Side: The minimum distance required between the side lot line and a permitted
principal or accessory structure or use on a lot.
C. Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots
1. Nonconformity Uses
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 8
a. Any legally nonconforming principle use may be extended in floor area and/or lot area
up to thirty percent (30%) of the existing area currently in use pursuant to a Special
Permit granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with Section VII.A.
b. Any legally nonconforming accessory use of a portion of a structure may be extended
by right up to a maximum of forty percent (40%) of the floor area of the existing
structure.
c. Any legally nonconforming use of a structure may be changed one time only to
another nonconforming use, provided that the new use is not substantially different,
and provided that the Zoning Board of Appeals finds in accordance with G.L. c. 40A,
§6 that such use shall not be substantially more detrimental than the existing
nonconforming use to the neighborhood.
d. Any nonconforming use which has been changed to a permitted use shall not be
changed back to a nonconforming use.
2. Nonconforming Structures
a. A structure that is located on a nonconforming lot, but that otherwise conforms to the
requirements of this bylaw, shall be treated as a conforming structure.
b. Any conforming principal use of a nonconforming structure may be extended by right
throughout the existing structure.
c. Any conforming accessory use of a portion of a nonconforming structure may be
extended by right up to a maximum of forty percent (40%) of the floor area of the
existing structure.
d. Any nonconforming structure may be extended by right up to thirty percent (30%) of
the square footage of its footprint as long as no nonconformities are created or
increased. Any increase beyond thirty percent (30%) or creation/increase of a
nonconformity shall only be allowed pursuant to a Special Permit granted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with section VII.A.
e. Any nonconforming structure or portion thereof which has come into conformity shall
not again become nonconforming.
f. Any nonconforming structure damaged by fire or an act of nature may be rebuilt by
right in its original foot print.
g. Any nonconforming structure shall not be moved to any other location on the lot or
any other lot unless every portion of such structure, the use thereof, and the lot shall be
conforming.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 9
h. Any nonconforming structure determined to be unsafe may be restored to a safe
condition by right, as long as no nonconformities are created or increased.
3. Nonconforming Lots
a. Any nonconforming lot shall not be reduced/altered so as to be in greater
nonconformity.
b. Any nonconforming lot which has come into conformity shall not again be changed to
a nonconforming lot.
c. An otherwise conforming structure on a nonconforming lot may be altered and/or
extended by right as long as no new nonconformities are created. New
nonconformities shall only be allowed pursuant to a Special Permit grant by the
Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with Section VII.A. A nonconforming
structure on a nonconforming lot may be altered in accordance with section 2.d.
d. A free standing accessory structure may be constructed on a nonconforming lot by
right as long as no new nonconformities are created. New nonconformities shall only
be allowed pursuant to a Special Permit granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals in
accordance with Section VII.A.
4. Abandonment/Discontinuance
Any nonconforming use of a structure and/or lot which has been abandoned or has not been in
use for a continuous period of two (2) years or more shall not be re-established. The structure
and/or lot shall only be used again for a conforming use.
II. ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
A. Division Into Districts
The Town of Sutton, Massachusetts is hereby divided into six (6) zoning districts to be
designated as follows:
Full Name Short
Residential-Rural R-1
Residential-Suburban R-2
Village V
Business-Highway B-2
Industrial I
Office and Light Industrial OLI
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 10
1. Zoning Map
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown on a
map titled "Zoning Map of the Town of Sutton, Massachusetts" updated periodically and
currently on file in the Office of the Town Clerk, which accompanies and is hereby
declared to be a part of this Bylaw.
2. Boundaries of Districts
Where any uncertainty exists with respect to the boundary of any district as shown on the
Zoning Map, the following rules apply:
a. Where a boundary is indicated as a street, railroad, watercourse or other body of water,
it shall be construed to be the centerline or middle thereof, or where such boundary
approximates a town boundary then to the limits of the town boundary.
b. Where a boundary is indicated as following approximately or parallel to a street,
railroad, watercourse, or other body of water, it shall be construed to be parallel
thereto and at such distance therefrom as shown on the Zoning Map. If no dimension
is given, such distance shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the
Zoning Map.
c. Where a dimensioned boundary coincides within ten (10) feet or less with a lot line,
the boundary shall be construed to be the lot line.
3. Amending Districts
Twice in two successive weeks, the first not being less than fourteen days prior tot he
public hearing dealing with such amendment, the Planning Board shall post and mail
notice of public hearing in accordance with M.G. L., Chapter 40A § 5.
B. Interpretation and Application
1. Interpretation
The provisions of this Bylaw shall be interpreted to be the minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the Town of Sutton,
Massachusetts; and except for the Zoning Bylaw adopted by the Town Meeting in 1955
and all subsequent amendments thereto, the provisions of this Bylaw are not intended to
repeal, or in any way impair, or interfere with any lawfully adopted Bylaw, regulations or
rules. Whenever the regulations made under the authority hereof differ from those
prescribed by any Bylaw or other regulations, the provision which imposes the greater
restriction or the higher standard shall govern.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 11
2. Application
Except as herein provided, or as specifically exempted by the Zoning Act, the provisions
of this Bylaw shall apply to the following: the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, or use of buildings and structures or use of land. Any existing conforming use,
structure or lot shall not become non-conforming or further nonconforming except as
provided herein.
III. USE AND DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
A. Use Regulations and Table of Use Regulations
1. Applicability of Use Regulations
Except as provided by the Zoning Act or in this Bylaw, in each district no building,
structure, or land shall be used or occupied except for the purposes permitted in the
district as described in this section. Any use not listed shall be construed to be prohibited.
Multiple Permitted and Special Permit uses may be located in the same structure and/or on
the same lot in separate structures/areas, as long as all requirements of the Zoning Bylaw,
including required lot area per use/structure, and State Building Code have been satisfied.
Only one dwelling unit shall be allowed on one lot or in one structure, unless specifically
permitted by the bylaw.
2. Permitted Uses
In the following Table of Use Regulations the uses permitted by right in the district shall
be designated by the letter (P). Those uses that may be permitted by Special Permit in the
district, in accordance with Section VII.A.2 shall be designated by the letter (S) and the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority. Where indicated
by “*”, the Special Permit Granting Authority is the Planning Board. Uses designated (-)
shall not be permitted in the district.
3. Uses Subject to Other Regulations
Use permitted by right or by special permit shall be subject to all other applicable
provisions of this Bylaw including but not limited to Site Plan Review, Off-Street
Parking, Loading and Landscaping Regulations, Sign Bylaw, and applicable Overlay
District Regulations.
4. Table of Use Regulations
See table on accompanying pages, which is declared to be a part of this Bylaw.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 12
Table 1- Table of Use Regulations
R-1 R-2 V B-2 I OLI
A. RESIDENTIAL USES:
1. One-family detached year-round or seasonal dwelling P P P - - -
2. Multifamily dwelling - S S - - -
3. Accessory residential building such as tool shed, boat
house, barn, playhouse, stables, private swimming pool
and private detached garage for non-commercial
vehicles
P P P - - -
4. Family day care P P P - - -
5. Home occupation P P P - - -
6. Home business S S S - - -
7. Bed and breakfast facility S S S - - -
8. Open Space Residential Development P P - - - -
9. Traditional Neighborhood Development - S* S* - - -
10. Condominium Development S* S* - - - -
11. Continued Care Retirement Communities S* S* S* S* S* S*
12. Accessory Apartment S* S* S* - - -
B. COMMUNITY FACILITIES & INSTITUTIONAL USES:
1. Church or other religious purpose, nonprofit educational
facility, Town building except equipment garage
P P P P P P
2. Country, hunting, fishing, tennis, or health clubs, golf
courses, day camps or other camps or outdoor athletic
fields, with structures not to exceed a 10,000 s.f.
footprint
S S S S S S*
3. Cemetery S S S S S S*
4. Town equipment garage S - - S P P
5. Public utility except power plant or refuse facility S S S S S P
6. Power plant and refuse facility - - - - S S*
C. AGRICULTURAL AND OPEN LAND USES:
1. Agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, or viticulture,
provided at least five acres are so used. A farm stand
may be maintained provided that the majority of products
for sale, measured based on either gross sales dollars or
volume, have been produced on the land.
P P P P P P
2. When less than five acres are used for agriculture,
horticulture, floriculture, or viticulture:
a. Agriculture, horticulture, and floriculture, or
viticulture
P S S S S S*
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 13
R-1 R-2 V B-2 I OLI
b. Temporary stand maintained during the harvest season
of the primary crop for retail sale of agriculture or
farm products produced primarily on the same
premises
P P P S S S*
c. Year round stand for retail sale of agriculture or farm
products produced primarily on the same premises
S S P S S S*
d. Raising and for keeping of livestock, horses and
poultry, not including the raising of fur animals for
commercial use
P S S S S S*
e. Raising of fur animals S - - - S -
f. Commercial stables, provided all animals are enclosed
within pens or other enclosures
S - - - S -
3. Year round or temporary stands for retail sale of
agriculture or farm products not produced primarily on
the same premises.
S S P S S S*
4. Veterinary office in which all animals are completely
enclosed in pens or other structures
S S S - - -
D. OFFICE USES:
1. Business and professional offices, including banks and
monetary institutions
- - P P P S*
2. Drive-through windows at banks and monetary
institutions and other offices
- - - S* S* S*
3. Free-standing automatic teller machines - - S P P P
4. Planned Business Development (PBD) - - - S* S* S*
5. Research and Development - - S S P S*
E. RETAIL, TRADE AND SERVICE USES:
1. Stores selling goods to the public - - S* S* - S*
2. Drive-through window for a pharmacy whether located
in a free-standing pharmacy building or as part of a
multi-use retail building
- - - S* - S*
3. Sales by vending machines located outside of a
building or structure
- - S S S -
4. Restaurants - - P S - S*
5. Restaurant, cafeteria, tea room or catering accessory to
permitted or allowed main use
S S P P P P
6. Drive-through window for a restaurant, but only when a
minimum of 1,000 s.f. is dedicated to the restaurant use.
- - - S* - -
7. Hotels and motels - - S P S S*
8. Personal service establishments - - P P - P
9. Funeral home or mortuary establishment S S P - - -
10. Hospital or medical clinic - - S S S S*
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 14
R-1 R-2 V B-2 I OLI
11. Convalescent or nursing home S S S S - S*
12. Repair services for appliances, furniture, and other
goods, except for vehicular and automotive repairs
- - P S - S*
13. Motion picture establishment, amusement facilities, or
sports complexes
- - S S - P
14. For profit educational establishments - - P S S S*
15. Communications and television towers (does NOT
include wireless communication facilities)
S - - - S S
16. Wireless communications facility (refer to Section V.C.
of this Bylaw)
- - - S S S
17. Antique Shop (retail sale of antique furniture, artwork,
collectible merchandise to the general public in a
premises occupying less than 1,000 square feet)
S*
-
-
-
-
-
18. Commercial Kennels S - - S S S*
19. Self Storage Facility - - - - - S*
F. VEHICULAR AND AUTOMOTIVE USES:
1. Establishments selling new and/or used automobiles,
trucks, motorcycles, trailers, construction equipment, or
boats
- - - - - -
2. Establishments selling new and/or used automobiles at
or over 26,000 gvw, including but not limited to trucks,
construction equipment, municipal equipment.
- - - - S* -
3. Automotive repair, automobile services (not including a
junk yard or open storage of abandoned automobiles
and other vehicles)
- - S S P -
4. Railroad and railway express service - - S P P P
5. Trucking services and warehousing - - - S P S*
6. Commercial Gas Station primarily for passenger
vehicles
- - S S S -
G. MANUFACTURING, PROCESSING, AND EARTH REMOVAL USES:
1. Processing - - - - P S*
2. Manufacturing, wholesale trade, wholesale sales of
construction material
- - S S P S*
3. Landscape contractors, arborists, and building
contractors
- - S* S P S*
4. Research and development facilities - - S S P S*
5. Accessory (whether or not on the same parcel)
scientific research and development
- - - S S S*
6. Earth removal - S - S P S
7. Earth removal incidental to an approved subdivision,
site plan, or duly issued building permit
P P P P P P
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 15
R-1 R-2 V B-2 I OLI
8. Paving and other contractors’ yards - - - - P -
9. Accessory uses - - - - - S*
H. RENEWABLE ENERGY RESOURCES
1. Small Hydropower Installations S* S* S* S* S* S*
2. Small Wind Turbines S* S* - S* S* S*
3. Small Solar Photovoltaic Installations (less than 250 kW) P P P P P P
4. Large Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations
(250 kW+)
- - - P P P
I. OTHER
1. Use, Accessory P P P P P P
B. Area, Height and Bulk Regulations
1. Applicability of Area, Height and Bulk Regulations
The regulations for each district pertaining to minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
maximum height of buildings, maximum number of stories, maximum building area,
minimum usable open space, minimum front yard depth, minimum side yard width,
minimum rear yard depth, and minimum residential net floor area shall be as specified in
this section and set forth in the Table of Area Regulations and Table of Height and Bulk
Regulations, and subject to the following provisions of this section.
2. Regularity Formula:
a. No building permit shall be issued for any new construction on a lot which has a
regularity factor of less than four-tenths (.40). The regularity factor shall be
determined by the formula:
Regularity = 16 x Area (in square feet)
Perimeter2(in feet)
b. That part of the lot’s area in excess of the required lot area may be excluded from the
Regularity Formula. However, the perimeter containing the required lot area shall
include the required distance along the front lot line.
3. Area, Height and Bulk Regulations
See Tables 2 and 3 plus attached notes which are declared to be a part of this Bylaw.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 16
Table 2
Table of Area Regulations
(numbers refer to footnotes)
District
Use
Minimum Required
Lots (1) Yards (2-17)
Area
(sq. ft.)
Width &
Frontage
(ft.)
Front
(ft.)
Side
(ft.)
Rear
(ft.)
R-1 Any permitted structure
or principal use
80,000 250 50 20 50
R-2 One family detached
dwelling or other
principal use
R-2 Not serviced by water
and sewer
60,000 175 40 15 40
R-2 Serviced by water or
sewer
40,000 175 40 15 40
R-2 - Serviced by water and
sewer
20,000 135 40 15 40
R-3 Multi-family dwelling
3,000
150
40
15
40
R4 One family detached
dwelling
20,000 100 25 20 25
R-3 Multi-family dwelling
3,000
100 25 20 25
B-2 Hotel or motel
- Per room
40,000
+2,000
200 50 20 40
Any other permitted
structure or principal use
40,000 200 50 20 50
I Any permitted structure
or principal use
40,000 200 50 20 50
OLI Any permitted structure
or principal use
80,000 200 50 20 50
FOOTNOTES:
1. At each end of a through lot, there shall be a setback depth required which is equal to the
front yard depth required for the district in which each street frontage is located.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 17
2. No building except a boathouse shall be within ten (10) feet of any watercourse or wetland
area or, if subject to flooding, within ten (10) feet beyond its flood line.
3. Projections into required yards or other required open spaces are permitted subject to the
following:
a. Balcony or bay window, limited in total length to one-half (½) the length of the
building, not more than two (2) feet.
b. Open terrace or steps or stoop, under four (4) feet in height, up to one-half (½) the
required yard setback.
c. Steps or stoop over four (4) feet in height, window sill, chimney, roof eave, fire
escape, fire tower, storm enclosure or similar architectural features, not more than two
(2) feet.
4. In any "R" district any permitted accessory building shall conform to the following
provisions:
a. It shall not occupy more than forty (40) percent of the required rear yard;
b. It shall be not less than fifty (50) feet for "R-1" and forty (40) feet for "R-2" from any
street lot line, except on a corner lot if used for garage purposes, then the same
distance as the required depth of the front yard for the adjacent lots and except for a
temporary stand for retail sale of agricultural or farm products where the accessory
structure may be within six (6) feet of the front lot line;
c. It shall not be less than ten (10) feet from any lot line;
d. It shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height; and,
e. If a private swimming pool, it shall be completely enclosed by a fence at least four (4)
feet in height capable of being secured by a self-closing gate secured with a latch or
padlock.
5. Multi-family dwelling in any permitted district shall be limited to four (4) dwelling units
per lot.
6. All lots in the OLI district shall have a lot frontage of at least two hundred (200) feet
except when the lot is completely situated on a cul-de-sac, in which case the minimum lot
frontage shall be one hundred (100) feet.
7. All lots in the OLI district shall be serviced by public water and sewer or a private sewage
treatment facility as approved by the Town. If a lot or lots is serviced by a private sewage
treatment facility, the owner shall furnish an operation and maintenance plan, provide
written permission for the Town to enter upon such facility for inspections, and post
adequate bonding related to the construction and maintenance of the facility. Such private
sewage treatment facility shall remain privately owned and maintained in perpetuity.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 18
8. All parking required in the OLI district shall be located on the site without use of abutting
lots.
9. Any principal use allowed per the Table of Use sections B. – H. in a non-residential
zoning district shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district
boundary as indicated on the Sutton Zoning Map, unless the use is permitted by right (P)
in the abutting residential district. Any principal use allowed per the Table of Use
sections B. – H. in a residential zoning district shall be at least one hundred (100) feet
from any abutting residential property line in separate ownership, unless the use is
permitted by right (P) abutting residential district. This buffer shall remain in its
undisturbed state or may be upgraded. The area of said buffer may be counted toward the
open space requirements on a lot. For the purpose of applying this requirement only, if
60% of more of a lot is zoned Business Highway (B-2), Office Light Industrial (OLI), or
Industrial (I), the entire lot shall be considered as located respectively within these
districts.
10. For the purposes of calculating required lot area, land area subject to easements and the
area contained in detention basins, retention basins and infiltration basins may not be
utilized. For the purpose of this Bylaw, this shall include the area in the basin itself and
the area of all inlet channels or pipes, outlet structures and channels and a minimum of ten
(10) feet beyond the toe of the slope on the outside of the pond berm. Where no berm is
provided, a minimum of ten (10) feet beyond the top of slope shall be included in the area.
11. No lot shall be considered buildable unless the building(s), well and septic system are
located in contiguous upland acreage equal to at least sixty percent (60%) of the minimum
required lot area for the zoning district where the lot is located. This upland must either
be directly accessible from the lot frontage, or via alternate access approved by the
Planning Board through a finding in open meeting, or via a common driveway special
permit.
12. Access to the primary structure on a lot shall be from the required legal frontage unless
the Planning Board makes findings in open meeting that 1) access from another way is
necessary due to extreme topographical or environmental constraints and/or safety issues
and 2) safe and adequate access exists entirely within said lot from an alternate roadway.
Alternate access shall not be granted solely for the convenience and/or preference of a
petitioner.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 19
Table 3
Table of Height and Bulk Regulations
R-1 R-2 V B-2 I OLI
Max bldg. height (ft.) 35 35 30 35 35 35
Max bldg. coverage of lot
(covered area as % of total
lot area)
10 20 50 50 50 *
Min habitable floor area per
dwelling unit (sq. ft.)
768 768 768 NP NP --
Min open space (%) -- -- 10 25 40 --
(NP) = not permitted use)
* Maximum coverage of lots in the OLI district by impervious surfaces including principal
and accessory buildings and structures, parking and loading areas, and roadways and
drives shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the lot.
3. Maximum Height:
Any maximum height permitted in this Bylaw shall not apply to:
a. Community facility or public utility structures.
b. Necessary appurtenant structures such as: church spire, smokestack, monument,
flagpole, radio or television tower, aerial, airplane hanger, chimney or parapet wall, or
any similar appurtenance.
c. Special industrial structures such as: a cooling tower and other similar structure where
the industrial process requires a greater height.
IV. COMMON REGULATIONS
A. Signs
1. Definitions
When used in this article and in this article only the following words shall have the
meaning set forth below.
Changeable, Message/Moveable Sign: Any sign intended to announce a changing
product, sale or other temporary condition within a premises and capable of being moved
without dismantling.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 20
Directional or Informational Sign: Any sign erected near a street or driveway area,
which is necessary for the safety and direction of vehicle or pedestrian traffic. Directional
or informational signs may not advertise, identify or promote any product, person,
premises or activity.
Directory Sign: Any sign listing the name and location of the occupants of a site or
building.
Electric Sign: Any sign which is illuminated by incandescent or florescent lamps or
luminous tubes.
Erected: Attached, constructed, reconstructed, altered, enlarged or moved. Erected shall
not mean repainted, cleaned, repaired or maintained except where a structural change is
made. Altered includes changes in the lettering or symbols on the sign.
Freestanding Sign: Any sign that is not attached to, erected on or supported by a
building.
Holiday Decorations: Any embellishment or ornament normally associated with the
celebration of a holiday.
Individual Letter Sign: Any sign made up of separate self-contained letters.
Industrial Use: Any use permitted in an Industrial District.
Multi-tenant Property: A property owned by an individual, partnership, corporation,
trust or other such entity with a portion or all of said property subdivided into individual
areas and/or buildings rented/leased to others for the purpose of conducting independent
business.
Outdoor Sign: Any sign placed out of doors in view of the general public.
Parking Area: A public or private parking area for motor vehicles.
Projecting Sign: Any sign other than a wall sign suspended from or supported by a
structure and projecting out therefrom.
Projection: The distance a sign extends beyond the structure to which it is attached.
Roof Sign: Any sign attached to or erected on the roof of a structure.
Sign: Any symbol, message, design or device used to advertise, identify or inform about
any product, premises, person or activity.
Sign Structure: The supports, uprights, braces and framework of the sign.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 21
Street: Any public way or private way open to the public.
Temporary Sign: Any sign intended to be used for fewer than 3 months.
Wall Sign: Any sign attached to or erected against the wall of a structure with the display
surface of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of the wall, which does not project more
than twelve (12) inches from the face of the structure.
Window Sign: Any sign designed to be visible from the exterior by being placed in or
behind a window or outside glass door, but does not include merchandise offered for sale.
2. Administration
a. Permits Required
1. No sign, including sign upgrades and replacement signs, shall be erected except as
provided by this section of the Bylaw and after a permit has been issued by the
Building Inspector.
2. Application for a sign permit shall be made in writing upon forms furnished by the
Building Inspector. An original application shall contain the location, by street
number, of the proposed sign, the name and address of the owner of the premises
where the sign is to be located, the name and address of the owner of the sign, the
name and address of the sign contractor or erector, if any, and a scale drawing
showing the construction, the method of installation or support, colors, dimensions
and position of the sign, method of illumination, and such other relevant
information as may be requested. The application must be signed by both the
owner of the premises where the sign is to be located and the owner of the sign
acknowledging responsibility for compliance with this Bylaw. An application
which is incomplete, as determined by the Building Commissioner, shall be
returned to the applicant
3. Within thirty (30) days after application for a permit has been made the Building
Inspector shall grant or deny the application. If thirty (30) days elapse without
action by the Building Inspector, the permit applied for shall be deemed approved.
4 A sign permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid to the Town of Sutton for
each permit granted.
5. A sign permit shall become null and void if the work for which the permit was
issued has not been completed within a period of six (6) months from the date of
the granting of the permit. The applicant shall notify the Building Inspector of
completion of work under a permit within ten (10) days of completion.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 22
b. Exceptions
1. No sign erected before the effective date of this Bylaw shall be required to comply
with the requirements of this Bylaw as to size or location
2. No permit shall be required for a name/profession, directional or informational
sign that does not exceed two (2) square feet as long as the activity is permitted in
the district where the sign is located. Said signs shall not be located more than six
(6) feet above ground level if mounted on a wall nor more than three and one half
(3 ½) feet above ground level if freestanding.
3. No permit shall be required for any sign erected by the Town or by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts or any agency thereof, or non-profit agency.
Although, placement, size and type must be reviewed by the Building
Commissioner, and be in compliance with the General Guidelines for signs in
Section 3.
4. No permit shall be required for holiday decorations when displayed within fortyfive
(45) days prior to and ten (10) days after the holiday for which they are
specifically identified and which do not advertise or promote the interests of any
person, premise or activity.
5.No permit shall be required for signs endorsing candidates or issues for public
elections. Such signs may be displayed as temporary or portable signs.
6. No permit shall be required for up to four (4) signs measuring not greater than
three (3) square feet each, calling attention to a location selling agricultural
produce. Although, placement, size and type must be reviewed by the Building
Commissioner, and be in compliance with the General Guidelines for signs in
Section 3.
7. No permit shall be required for real estate signs, provided that such sign shall be removed
within seven (7) days after the rental, sale or lease of the premises.
8. No permit shall be required during construction or renovations for a sign erected on the
premises to identify the building, the owner, the contractor, the architect, or the engineers,
provided such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet. Such sign shall be removed
within seven (7) days of issuance of an occupancy permit
c. Enforcement
1. The Building Inspector shall inspect every sign within thirty (30) days after it is
erected to determine whether the sign has been erected in accordance with the
provisions of the permit therefor and shall order the removal or modification of
any sign erected or maintained in a manner inconsistent with such permit. Thirty
(30) days notice in writing shall be given to the owner of such sign, and to the
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 23
owner of the premises on which such sign is located, to remove the sign or modify
it so as to be in accordance with the provisions of the permit. Immediate removal
may be ordered for any sign requiring a permit which is erected without first
obtaining such permit.
2. Any sign owner or owner of property on which a sign is located who violates, or
permits a violation of this Bylaw, shall be subject to a fine of not more than fifty
dollars ($50.00) a day.
3. General Guidelines
a. Sign Dimensions
The area of a sign shall be the area of the smallest rectangle within which the entire
sign can fit, excluding structural supports which do not contribute through shape,
color, or otherwise to the sign's message, but including any separate surface, board,
frame or shape on or within which the sign is displayed. The dimensions of a sign
shall be the length and width of such a rectangle. The height of a sign shall be
measured to the highest point of the sign including any structural or ornamental
projections above the sign proper, from the average ground level above which the sign
is located. A two-sided sign with messages on opposite sides (back to back) will be
deemed to be one sign. A sign with faces at any angle to each other shall be deemed
to consist of several signs, one for each direction faced.
b. Installation
1. No sign shall be erected that shall in any way create a traffic hazard, nor shall it in
any way obscure or confuse traffic control. Signs shall not be erected or displayed
so as to endanger public safety.
2. No sign or sign structure may project beyond the property line.
3. No sign shall be painted on the exterior surface of any wall, including windows
and doors.
4. Signs shall be designed, constructed and erected in accordance with the State
Building Code.
5. All signs shall be erected on the same lot as the premises, person or activity they
are intended to advertise, call attention to or identify except for agricultural signs
and directional signs.
6. No sign shall be erected on Town property without written permission. Any sign
erected without permission may be removed by the Building Commissioner. If an
owner can be identified, the Building Commissioner will attempt to contact the
owner to remove the sign. If the sign is not removed within 48 hours of
notification and/or the owner can not be identified, the Building Commissioner
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 24
may remove the sign. The sign shall be stored for a period of two weeks to allow
the owner to retrieve the sign, at which time the Building Commissioner may
dispose of said sign.
7. Signs shall be setback from the front property line(s) a minimum of 5 feet and the
side and rear property lines at least 15 feet.
c. Maintenance
Every sign shall be maintained by the owner in a safe and well-maintained condition.
Every freestanding sign shall be kept free and clear of all obnoxious substances,
rubbish, weeds and visual obstructions.
d. Prohibited Signs
Moving signs, swinging signs, changeable message/moveable signs, flashing signs,
revolving signs, signs consisting of pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners, strings of
light bulbs, revolving beacons, search lights, animated signs illuminated to create the
illusion of motions, billboards, and roof signs are prohibited in all districts.
4. Size and Type
a. The following signs shall be permitted in the Zoning Districts as follows:
Type of Sign S.F.
max
R1 R2 B2 V I OLI
Professional or Name Signs 2.0 Y Y Y Y Y Y
Identification Signs for
Estates, Residential
Developments, Schools,
Farms, Municipal Facilities
20.0 Y Y Y Y Y Y
Freestanding Businessexterior
illumination
75.0
N N Y Y Y Y
Freestanding Business –
internal illumination
50.0 N N Y Y Y Y
Freestanding Multi-tenant 100.0 N N Y Y Y Y
Projecting Signs 24.0
N N Y Y Y Y
Wall and Individual Letter varies N N Y Y Y Y
Temporary Real Estate
Signs in residential districts
6.0 Y Y N N N N
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 25
Type of Sign S.F.
max
R1 R2 B2 V I OLI
Temporary Real Estate
Signs in other districts
20.0 N N Y Y Y Y
Other Temporary Signs Varies Y Y Y Y Y Y
Bed and Breakfast Signs
and Home Business Signs
12.0 Y Y Y Y N N
Banners (no more
than one at a time)
21.0 N N Y Y N N
b. There shall be no more than two (2) exterior signs for each business premise, not
including directional or informational signs, and only one shall be freestanding. When
multiple businesses are located in one structure, only one multi-tenant free standing
sign is allowed. A free standing sign may not be erected for each tenant. Each
business may still have one additional building mounted sign.
c. A wall sign, or individual letter sign, shall not exceed an area of one (1) square foot
for each lineal foot of that wall for externally illuminated signs, and three quarters
(3/4) square foot for each lineal foot of that wall for internally illuminated signs. No
such sign shall extend beyond the full width of the premises wall on which it is
mounted. No sign shall project above the top of wall on which it is mounted.
d. A projecting sign shall not project more than six (6) feet and shall not contain more
than twenty-four (24) square feet of display surface. A sign which projects over a
sidewalk may not contain more than six (6) square feet of display surface.
e. A free standing sign may not exceed seventy (75) square feet in non-residential
districts and twelve (12) square feet in residential districts.
f. In addition to other allowed signage, there may be one directory sign listing occupants
or tenants of the building affixed to the exterior wall of the building at each entrance
to the building. A directory sign shall not exceed an area determined on the basis of
one (1) square foot for each occupant or tenant of the building.
g. The standard type of gasoline pump, bearing thereon in usual size and form, the name
or type of gasoline and the price thereof shall not be deemed to be a sign under this
Bylaw.
h. In addition to signs otherwise permitted, window signs are permitted in business
districts provided that their aggregate display surface does not exceed twenty-five
percent (25%) of the total exterior glass area, and that they are lighted by normal
exterior illumination only. Window signs less than three (3) by four (4) feet
promoting charitable events shall not count against the allowable twenty-five percent
(25%).
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 26
i. Temporary signs, other than real estate and contractor signs, may be allowed at the
discretion of the Building Commissioner, in compliance with the General Guidelines –
Section 3 of the bylaw, for periods not to exceed 3 months and size not to exceed 12
s.f. Banners may be up to 21 s.f. and allowed for no more than 3 months, and also
require permitting.
j. Internal illumination shall be allowed in non-residential districts; however, signs with
internal illumination may not have translucent or semi-translucent white or light
colored backgrounds. Said background colors produce glare that hinders reading of the
sign and creates a distraction to passing traffic. White or light background constructed
of fully opaque material that allows illumination of only the lettering/logo is
permitted.
5. Materials & Design
a. Sign applicants should utilize high quality, durable, materials such as wood, stone and
imitation resins for both sign and support construction.
b. Signs should be appropriate in scale and placement for both the specific site and
immediate surrounding area.
c. Design reflecting the unique facets and quality of the business as well as the Town and
Blackstone Valley is encouraged.
B. Off-Street Parking, Loading and Landscaping Regulations
1. General Standards
Parking or loading spaces being maintained in any district in connection with any existing
use on the effective date of this Section shall hereafter be maintained so long as said use
remains. Additional parking or loading spaces may be constructed elsewhere conforming
to the requirements hereunder, provided that this regulation shall not require the
maintenance of more parking and loading spaces than is required according to the
following tables. Parking, maneuvering and driveways shall not be located within the
applicable front, side and rear yard setbacks in the B2, Industrial, and OLI Districts.
Driveways may go through the front yard setback to provide access into the lot.
2. Definitions
As used herein the following words and phrases shall have and include the following
respective meanings:
Driveway: An area on a lot, in addition to parking spaces, maneuvering spaces, and
maneuvering aisles, which is designed or used to provide for passage of motor vehicles to
and from a street or way.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 27
Loading Space: An off-street space used for loading or unloading and which is not less
that fourteen (14) feet in width, forty-five (45) feet in length and fourteen (14) feet in
height and containing not less that one thousand three hundred (1,300) sq. ft. including
both access and maneuvering area.
Maneuvering Aisle: A maneuvering space, which serves two (2) or more parking spaces,
such as the area between two (2) rows of parking spaces.
Maneuvering Space: An open space in a parking area which is used or required for
maneuvering a motor vehicle into a parking space but not used for the parking or storage
of motor vehicles.
Net Floor Space (nfs): For the purposes of this section of the Zoning Bylaw, net floor
space (nfs) shall be the actual occupied area, not including unoccupied areas or thickness
of walls.
Parking Area: An open space either used or required for parking of five (5) or more
motor vehicles, including necessary maneuvering space, but not including parking on a lot
for the passenger cars of residents and guests of a one-family dwelling on said lot.
Parking Space: An open space exclusive of maneuvering area and driveway for the
parking of one motor vehicle.
3. Off-Street Parking and/or Loading Requirements
In any district, if any structure is constructed, enlarged and/or extended, and any use of
land established, or any existing use changed after the effective date of this section,
parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following tables. An
existing structure which is enlarged or an existing structure which is extended after the
effective date of this section shall be required to provide parking spaces, loading spaces,
and landscaping in accordance with the following tables for the entire structure or use
unless the increase in units or measurements amounts to less than twenty-five percent
(25%) of the existing structure whether such increase occurs at one time or in successive
stages.
Table 4
Table of Off-Street Parking Standards
Use Number of Parking Spaces
Residential
Single Family, Two-family, and Multi-
Family Dwelling Units
2 spaces/dwelling unit
Community Facilities Churches/Religious
Establishments
1 space/300 sq. ft. nfs
Places of Public Assembly 1 space/300 sq. ft. nfs
Schools 1 space/300 sq. ft. nfs
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 28
4. General Parking and Loading Provisions
a. The parking spaces required for the uses listed in the above tables shall be on the same
lots as the use they are intended to serve or, when practical difficulties prevent their
establishment upon the same lot, they shall be established no further than three
hundred (300) feet from the premises to which they are appurtenant. In no case shall
the required parking spaces be located on the other side of a public street.
b. The loading spaces required for the uses listed in the above table shall in all cases be
on the same lot as the use they are intended to serve. In no case shall the required
loading spaces be part of the area used to satisfy the parking requirements of this
section.
Use Number of Parking Spaces
Commercial
Professional/General office 1 space/250 sq. ft. nfs
General Retail 1 space/225 sq. ft. nfs
Banks/Financial Institutions 1 space/225 sq. ft. nfs
Restaurants 1 space for each 3 seats of seating
capacity plus one space each, for
the number of employees working
on the largest shift
Theatres 1 space/275 sq. ft. nfs
Home Occupations 1 space/200 sq. ft. nfs
Bowling Alley 2 spaces/lane
Industrial and Institutional
Industrial, Contractors 1 space/1,000 sq. ft. nfs
Wholesale Sales, Manufacturing 1 space/1,000 sq. ft. nfs
Wholesale Industrial 1 space/1000 sq. ft. nfs
Manufacturing 1 space/750 sq. ft. nfs
Hospital 1 space/3 beds
Convalescent or Nursing Home 1 space/3 beds
Medical Offices 1 space/250 sq. ft. nfs
Warehouse and/or Distribution 1 space/2000 sq. ft.
Table 5
Table of Off-Street Loading Standards
Use Number of Loading Spaces
Business, Industrial, Community Facility
(school, church, town building, recreation,
etc.) or public utility establishments
1 space per 7,500 sq. ft. nfs
and an additional space per each
additional 15,000 sq. ft nfs.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 29
c. The minimum dimensions of parking spaces and maneuvering aisles shall be in
accordance with the Table 6.
Table 6
Minimum Parking Space and Aisle
Dimensions For Parking Areas
Angle of
Parking
Width of
Parking Space
Depth of
Parking Space
Width of
Maneuvering Aisle
61º-90º 9.0' 18' 24'
46º-60º 9.0' 15' 18'
45º 9.0' 18' 15'
Parallel 8.0' 22' 12'
d. The number of driveways shall be limited to two (2) per street line. Driveways shall
be located so as to minimize conflict with traffic on public streets.
e. The width of a driveway for one-way traffic shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet as
measured at its narrowest point. The width of a driveway for two-way use shall be a
minimum of eighteen (18) feet as measured at its narrowest point and a maximum of
thirty (30) feet.
f. Driveways shall be arranged for the free flow of vehicles at all times. The
maneuvering spaces and aisles shall be so designed that all vehicles may exit from and
enter onto a public street by being driven in a forward direction.
g. All parking areas shall be so arranged and designed that the only means of access and
egress to and from such area is by driveway meeting the requirements of this section.
h. All portions of all parking spaces and maneuvering aisles shall be setback a minimum
of five (5) feet from any wall of any building. Each off-street parking space shall be
designed so that any motor vehicle may proceed to and from said space without
requiring the moving of any other vehicle.
i. Loading spaces shall be at least six hundred (600) sq. ft. in area for the first seven
thousand five hundred (7,500) sq. ft. nfs and five hundred (500) sq. ft. for each
additional fifteen thousand (15,000) sq. ft. nfs.
j. Parking and loading areas shall be graded, surfaced with a durable, all-season nondusting
material, drained and suitably maintained to the extent necessary to avoid the
nuisance of dust, erosion, or any water flow onto streets or adjoining property.
k. The applicant may be required to provide curbing, wheel stops, or other devices to
prevent motor vehicles from being parked or driven into the required setback area or
the landscaped area.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 30
5. Landscaping Provisions
Parking lots containing more than fifteen (15) parking spaces shall be effectively
landscaped to reduce the visual impact of glare, headlights and parking lot lights from the
public right-of-way and from adjoining properties. In addition, parking lots shall be
adequately shaded to reduce the amount of reflected heat. The provisions below are
intended to be used in conjunction with Site Plan Review.
a. Landscaping Adjacent to Street Right–of-Way
Within the required yard setbacks, a landscaped area consisting of existing and/or new
vegetation in addition to grass, shall be provided between parking areas and any
adjacent public street, sidewalk, or right of way as follows:
1. A landscaped area shall be at least fifteen (15) feet wide unless a lesser amount is
deemed adequate by the Planning Board.
2. The landscaped area will have sufficient trees arranged so that a vegetated buffer is
effectively provided from the public street.
3. A masonry wall, solid fence, earth berm or hedge maintained at least five (5) feet
in height may be required in the landscaped area.
b. Landscaping Adjacent to Contiguous Properties
Within the required yard setbacks, a landscaped area consisting of existing and/or new
vegetation in addition to grass, shall be provided between parking areas and
contiguous properties as follows:
1. A landscaped area at least ten (10) feet wide.
2. A masonry wall, hedge, solid fence, or combination thereof at least six (6) feet
high may be required if abutting property is a residential use. When contiguous
properties are located within a Business or Industrial district, only a naturally
vegetated or landscaped buffer shall be required to the rear and sides of the lots
when not abutting a public right-of-way.
c. Landscaping in Interior Areas
Landscaping areas shall be provided for interior parking areas so as to provide visual
and climatic relief from broad expanses of pavement and to channelize and define
logical areas for pedestrian and vehicle circulation.
1. Interior parking areas shall be deemed to be all parking areas except driveways
providing access and egress to the development.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 31
2. At least five percent (5%) of the gross parking area shall be landscaped. These
landscaped areas shall include trees sufficient to provide some shading of parking
areas.
3. Interior landscaped areas shall be dispersed so as to define aisles and limit
unbroken rows of parking to a maximum of one hundred (100) feet. Landscaping
between rows of parking shall be at least eight (8) feet in width.
d. Trees
Trees required by the provisions of this Section shall be at least two (2) inches in
diameter (measured at one (1) foot above ground level) and a height of five (5) feet at
the time of planting. Trees shall be of a species characterized by rapid growth and by
suitability and hardiness for location in a parking lot. To the extent practical, existing
trees shall be retained and used to satisfy the provisions of this Section.
e. Intersection Visibility
No landscaping, tree, fence, wall, or similar screening shall be maintained in the
vicinity of any corner, street intersection, or access-way intersecting a public right-ofway
that is determined to be an obstruction to visibility.
6. Exceptions
The Planning Board may modify or waive any requirement of this section upon finding
that the requirements of this section would unreasonably restrict the use of the property or
would be detrimental to the orderly development of the area. In granting such
modification or waiver, the Board shall impose conditions it deems necessary to protect
the public interest and to insure that the development will be consistent with the purpose
of this section.
C. Site Plan Review
1. Purpose and Intent
This section of the Sutton Zoning Bylaw is enacted under the authority of M.G.L. Chapter
40A to protect the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the
Town of Sutton. Site Plan Review regulates the development of structures and sites in a
manner which considers the following concerns and, where necessary, requires
modification of development proposals to eliminate or minimize potential problems and
nuisances. The principal areas of concern are:
a. The balancing of landowners' rights to use their land, with the corresponding rights of
abutting and neighboring landowners to live without undue disturbances (e.g. noise,
smoke, fumes, dust, odor, glare, storm water runoff, etc.);
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 32
b. The convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement within the site, and
in relation to adjacent areas or roads;
c. The adequacy of parking, loading facilities, drainage and methods of waste disposal to
protect from pollution of surface or groundwater; and
d. The protection of historic and natural environmental features on the site under review,
and in adjacent areas (i.e. hills, water bodies, trees and wooded areas, native plants,
rock outcrops, wildlife habitat, and other areas of aesthetic and ecological interest).
2. Projects Requiring Site Plan Review
No permit for the construction, exterior alteration, relocation, occupancy, or change in use
of any building or lot shall be given and no existing use shall be expanded except in
conformity with a site plan approved by the Planning Board. Site Plan Review shall also
be required for the resumption of any use discontinued for more than two (2) years.
“Expansion" shall include a proposed total increase in floor space and/or lot coverage of
twenty-five percent (25%) or more within any 10-year period, or the introduction of new
materials or processes not previously associated with the existing use. Site plan approval
is required for proposals for the following uses:
a. Commercial and retail
b. Industrial
c. General and professional office
d. Multifamily dwellings
e. Municipal, institutional, and utility purposes
f. Fraternal or recreational purposes
3. Exemptions from Site Plan Review
Site Plan Review shall not be required for:
a. The construction or enlargement of any single family or two family dwelling, or
building accessory to such dwelling;
b. The construction or alteration of any building used exclusively for agriculture,
horticulture, or floriculture;
c. Construction, expansion or alteration providing for not more than two hundred (200)
sq. ft. total floor area after construction;
d. Customary home occupations as defined in this Bylaw; or,
e. Condominium Development. (Separate site plan requirements are made under Section
VI.A. of this Bylaw.)
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 33
The Planning Board may waive Site Plan Review where the nature of the proposed
construction, alteration or use is such as to have minimal effect on any of the standards or
criteria provided for hereafter in this section when measured against existing conditions of the
site.
The Planning Board may also in any particular case, where such action is allowed by law, in
the public interest and not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this Site Plan Review,
waive strict compliance with the specific provisions of this bylaw.
4. Site Plan and Supporting Material Requirements
The site plan shall include the following data, plans, and supporting materials. The
amount of information submitted will depend on the proposal's size and complexity. All
of the requirements must be met in each plan, with notations explaining the reasons for
any omissions.
Site plans shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer, land surveyor, architect,
and/or landscape architect (as necessitated by the size and detail required), on standard
24” X 36” sheets, at a scale of one inch equals twenty feet (1"=20'), or other such scale
adequate to show all details required by the Site Plan Review regulations.
The site plans and supporting materials shall include the following information:
a. Name of the project, boundaries, and locus maps showing the site's location in town at
a scale adequate to show sufficient detail, date, north arrow, scale of the plan, and five
(5) signature lines for Planning Board approval.
b. Name and address of the owner of record, applicant, and seals of the engineer,
surveyor, architect or landscape architect.
c. Names and addresses of all owners of record of abutting parcels and those within three
hundred (300) feet of the property line.
d. All existing lot lines, easements, and rights-of-way. Include area in acres or square
feet, abutting land uses, and the location and use of structures within one hundred
(100) feet of the site. All minimum dimensional requirements in the underlying
district and setback requirements shall also be shown on the plan.
e. The locations and use of all existing and proposed buildings and structures within the
development tract. Include all dimensions of height and floor area, and show all
exterior entrances, and all anticipated future expansions and alterations within the next
ten (10) years, if possible.
f. The location of all present and proposed public and private ways, parking areas,
driveways, sidewalks, ramps, curbs, fences, paths, landscaping, and walls. Location,
type, and screening details for all waste disposal containers shall also be shown.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 34
g. The location, height, and intensity of all external lighting fixtures. The direction of
illumination and methods to eliminate glare onto adjoining properties shall also be
shown.
h. The location, height, size, materials, and design of all proposed signage.
i. The location of all present and proposed utility systems including:
1. Sewage or septic system;
2. Water supply system and hydrant location;
3. Telephone, cable and electrical systems;
4. Storm drainage system including existing and proposed drain lines, culverts, catch
basins, headwalls, end walls, manholes, and drainage swales; and
5. Location of any existing or proposed underground storage tanks.
The Planning Board may also request soil logs, percolation tests and storm runoff
calculations for large or environmentally sensitive developments.
j. Plans to prevent the pollution of surface water or groundwater, erosion of soil both
during and after construction, excessive run-off, excessive raising or lowering of the
water table, and flooding of other properties, as applicable. Stormwater management
calculations and designs shall be in accordance with the Stormwater Management
Guidelines issued by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
k. Existing and proposed topography at a two (2) foot contour interval. All elevations
shall refer to the nearest United States Coastal and Geodetic Bench Mark. If any
portion of the parcel is within the one hundred (100) year flood plain, the area will be
shown; and base flood elevations given. Indicate areas within the proposed site and
within fifty (50) feet of the proposed site, where ground removal or filling is required,
and give its approximate volume in cubic yards.
l. A landscape plan showing all existing natural land features, trees, forest cover and
water sources, and all proposed changes to these features including size and type of
plant material. Water sources will include ponds, lakes, brooks, streams, wetlands,
floodplains, and drainage retention areas.
m. Zoning district boundaries within five hundred (500) feet of the site's perimeter shall
be drawn and identified on the site plan and locus map.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 35
n. Traffic flow patterns within the site, entrances and exits, loading and unloading areas,
curb cuts on the site and within one hundred (100) feet of the site. The Planning
Board may require a detailed traffic study for large developments or for those in heavy
traffic areas to include:
1. The projected number of motor vehicle trips to enter or leave the site, estimated
daily and peak hour traffic levels;
2. The projected traffic flow pattern including vehicular movements at all major
intersections likely to be affected by the proposed use of the site; and
3. The impact of this traffic upon existing abutting public and private ways in relation
to existing road capacities.
o. For new construction or alterations to any existing building, a table containing the
following information must be included:
1. Area of building to be used for a particular use such as retail operation, office,
storage, etc;
2. Maximum number of employees;
3. Maximum seating capacity, where applicable; and
4. Number of parking spaces existing and required for the intended use.
p. Architectural elevation plans at a scale adequate to show required detail for all exterior
facades of the proposed structures (and/or existing facades, plus additions) showing
design features and indicating the type and color of materials to be used.
q. Information on the location, size and type of parking, loading, storage and service
areas; and parking calculation based on the requirements for off-street parking and
loading in Section IV.B of this Bylaw.
r. The Planning Board may require the applicant to submit a Community and Fiscal
Impact Assessment (including the methodology used) that shall address the following:
1. Projections of cost arising from increased demands on public services and
infrastructure;
2. Projections of increased tax revenue, employment (construction and permanent),
and value of public infrastructure to be provided;
3. Projections of the proposed impacts of the development on the values of adjoining
properties;
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 36
4. Evaluation of the relation of the proposed new or altered structure to the
surrounding community in terms of character and intensity of use (e.g., scale,
materials, color, setbacks, roof and cornice lines, and other major design
elements); and the location and configuration of proposed structures, parking
areas, and open space with respect to neighboring properties;
5. Identification of impacts on significant historical properties, districts or areas, or
archaeological resources (if any) in the vicinity of the proposed development;
6. Evaluation of the proposed project's consistency or compatibility with existing
local and regional plans; and
7. A copy of all permits, approvals, variances, and applications applied for and
obtained for the project and property including an application for public sewer and
water connection permits.
s. Waivers may be granted for any of the site plan requirements only if it is determined
that:
1. Literal compliance is impractical due to the nature of the proposed use;
2. The location, size, width, depth, shape, or grade of the lot makes compliance
impossible;
3. Such waiver would be in the public interest; and/or
4. Such waiver would not sacrifice the protection of natural features. Applicants
seeking waivers will submit a formal request for waiver of particular requirements
along with the site plan application.
5. Procedures
a. Submission
An applicant for Site Plan Review under this Bylaw shall file with the Planning Board,
at a regularly scheduled meeting, twelve (12) copies the site plan and six (6) copies of
all required written materials. The Planning Board shall acknowledge receipt of these
plans by endorsing them by signature and the date of receipt. A copy of the site plan
shall be given by the applicant to the Town Clerk to be kept on file.
b. Reasonable Fees
A filing fee of $2.00 per $1,000 of construction value, as reported by the proponent
and approved by the Board, with a minimum of $200, will be required at the time of
submission. The applicant must also submit a check covering the cost of the legal ad
and the certified mailings at the time of submission.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 37
For all developments requiring site plan review, the applicant will be responsible for
all reasonable fees or costs incurred in reviewing such plans. The Planning Board is
authorized to retain a registered professional engineer, architect, landscape architect,
attorney, or other professional consultant to review and advise the Board on any or all
aspects of the site plan.
A charge as noted below will be deducted from the filing fee to cover costs for
administration and staff review of the site plan, all billings received from the Town’s
consultants will be deducted from the filing fee. If the billings exceed the amount of
the filing fee, the Town will bill the applicant for the difference. All bills must be paid
prior to issuance of approval. If monies are left after all fees and billings are paid, any
excess funds will be returned to the applicant.
Project Size/Type Staff Review Fee Administration Fee
New – under 30,000 s.f. $200 $25
New – 30,000-100,000 s.f. $350 $40
New – 100,000+ $500 $60
Existing – change of
use/redevelopment
$200 $25
c. Review by Other Boards
After reviewing the application for completeness and determining that the site plan
requirements have been met, the Planning Board shall transmit to the Conservation
Commission, Board of Health, Board of Assessors, Building Inspector, Board of
Appeals, Selectmen, Fire and Police Departments, Town Planner, Town Engineer, and
other boards as deemed necessary, one copy of the site plan. Said boards and
departments shall submit recommendations in writing to the Planning Board within
twenty-one (21) days for as-of-right development and within forty-five (45) days for
special permit developments. Such recommendations may concern:
1. The adequacy of the data and procedures used by the applicant to determine the
impacts of the proposed development;
2. The effects of the projected impacts of the proposed development; and,
3. The recommended conditions or remedial measures to accommodate or mitigate
the expected impacts of the proposed development.
Failure of other boards and departments to submit recommendations within the
allotted time shall be interpreted as non-opposition to the submitted site plan.
d. Decision
For proposals not requiring special permit, the Planning Board shall deliver its
decision in writing to the Building Inspector within sixty (60) days after determining
that the application is compete, to allow the issuance of a building permit. For
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 38
proposals also requiring special permits, the Planning Board (when they are the
Special Permit Granting Authority) shall hold a public hearing within sixty-five (65)
days of receipt of an application and shall take final action within ninety (90) days
from the time of hearing, as provided in M.G.L. Chapter 40A, §§ 9 and 11. The
Planning Board's final action, rendered in writing, shall consist of either:
1. Approval of the site plan based upon a determination that the proposed plan will
constitute a suitable development and is in compliance with the standards set forth
in this Bylaw;
2. Disapproval of the site plan based upon a determination that the proposed project
does not meet the standards for review set forth in this Bylaw; or
3. Approval of the site plan subject to any conditions, modifications and restrictions
as required by the Board which will ensure that the project meets the Standards for
Review.
The time for review of said application may be extended by written concurrence of
both the Board and the applicant, and shall be placed on file in the Office of the Town
Clerk.
6. Standards for Review
The Planning Board shall review the site plan and supporting materials, taking into
consideration the reasonable fulfillment of the objectives listed below. Detailed design
guidelines and performance standards shall be adopted by the Planning Board to guide
decisions with respect to these objectives, and to help ensure consistency in the review of
all applications.
a. Legal: Conformance with the provisions of the Bylaws of the Town, the General Laws
of Massachusetts, and all applicable rules and regulations of local, state and federal
agencies.
b. Traffic: Convenience and safety of both vehicular and pedestrian movement within the
site and in relationship to adjoining ways and properties.
c. Parking: Provisions for the off-street loading and unloading of vehicles incidental to
the normal operation of the establishment, adequate parking, adequate lighting, and
internal traffic control.
d. Town Services: Reasonable demands placed on Town services and infrastructure.
e. Pollution Control: Adequacy of methods for sewage and refuse disposal, hazardous
substances, and the protection from pollution of both surface waters and groundwater.
This includes minimizing soil erosion both during and after construction.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 39
f. Nuisances: Protection of abutting properties and Town amenities from any undue
disturbance caused by excessive or unreasonable noise, smoke, vapors, fumes, dust,
odors, glare stormwater runoff, etc.
g. Existing Vegetation: Minimizing the area over which existing vegetation is to be
removed. Where tree removal is required special attention shall be given to planting
of replacement trees.
h. Amenities: The applicant's efforts to integrate the proposed development into the
existing landscape through design features such as vegetative buffers, roadside
planting, and the retention of open space and agricultural land.
i. Town Character: The setback areas and location of parking, architectural
compatibility, signage, and landscaping of the development, and how these features
harmonize with the surrounding townscape and the natural landscape.
In determining whether the proposed project meets the standards of Site Plan Review, the
Planning Board may seek input from abutters, which may include a public hearing.
7. Modification to Approved Site Plans
a. In the event a modification is made to an approved site plan, the applicant shall submit
to the Planning Board a written description of the proposed modifications and twelve
(12) copies of the revised plan showing such modification. Modified site instances
will be subject to the same review and hearing procedures as was the original filing.
b. However, for small and insignificant modifications, the Planning Board shall
determine that the particular modification does not warrant an additional public
hearing. Such a determination shall be made only after a written request and ten (10)
copies of the plan showing the modifications have been submitted to and reviewed by
the Planning Board. A determination that the modification does not require a public
hearing shall be made by the Planning Board within twenty-one (21) days of receipt
of the written request and plans. A copy of the determination and revised plans shall
be filed with the Town Clerk and Building Inspector. Failure to act within twenty-one
(21) days on the request for determination shall be deemed as approval.
8. Permit Expiration and Extension
a. Any Site Plan Approval issued under this section shall lapse after two (2) years if a
substantial use thereof has not commenced, except for good cause.
b. The Board may grant extensions of the permit for up to two (2) years at a time with
good cause. Extensions must be requested prior to the expiration of the original
permit. Requests must elaborate on the “good cause” that prevented the applicant
from utilizing the permit. Facts presented must demonstrate the applicant’s clear
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 40
intent and attempt to utilize the permit during the original permit period in order to be
granted an extension.
9. Enforcement
The Planning Board may require the posting of a bond or other similar performance
guarantee to ensure compliance with the plan and stated conditions of approval. It may
suspend any permit or license when work is not performed as required.
D. Temporary Moratorium on Recreational Marijuana
A. Purpose
On November 8, 2016, the voters of the Commonwealth approved a law regulating the
cultivation, processing, distribution, possession and use of marijuana for recreational purposes
(new G.L. c. 94G, Regulation of the Use and Distribution of Marijuana Not Medically
Prescribed). The law, which allows certain personal use and possession of marijuana, took
effect on December 15, 2016 and (as amended on December 30, 2016; Chapter 351 of the
Acts of 2016) requires a Cannabis Control Commission to issue regulations regarding the
licensing of commercial activities by March 15, 2018 and to begin accepting applications for
licenses on April 1, 2018. Currently under the Zoning Bylaw, a non-medical Marijuana
Establishment (hereinafter, a “Recreational Marijuana Establishment”), as defined in G.L. c.
94G, §1, is not specifically addressed in the Zoning Bylaw. Regulations to be promulgated by
the Cannabis Control Commission may provide guidance on certain aspects of local
regulation of Recreational Marijuana Establishments. The regulation of recreational
marijuana raises novel legal, planning, and public safety issues, and the Town needs time to
study and consider the regulation of Recreational Marijuana Establishments and address such
issues, as well as to address the potential impact of the State regulations on local zoning and
to undertake a planning process to consider amending the Zoning Bylaw regarding regulation
of Recreational Marijuana Establishments. The Town intends to adopt a temporary
moratorium on the use of land and structures in the Town for Recreational Marijuana
Establishments so as to allow sufficient time to address the effects of such structures and uses
in the Town and to enact bylaws in a consistent manner.
B. Definition
"Recreational Marijuana Establishment" shall mean a “marijuana cultivator, marijuana testing
facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or any other type of licensed
marijuana-related business.”
C. Temporary Moratorium
For the reasons set forth above and notwithstanding any other provision of the Zoning Bylaw
to the contrary, the Town hereby adopts a temporary moratorium on the use of land or
structures for a Recreational Marijuana Establishment and other uses related to recreational
marijuana. The moratorium shall be in effect through October 31, 2018 or until such time as
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 41
the Town adopts Zoning Bylaw amendments that regulate Recreational Marijuana
Establishments, whichever occurs earlier. During the moratorium period, the Town shall
undertake a planning process to address the potential impacts of recreational marijuana in the
Town, and to consider the Cannabis Control Commission regulations regarding Recreational
Marijuana Establishments, and shall consider adopting new Zoning Bylaws in response to
these new issues.
V. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
A. Flood Plain District
1. Purpose
The purposes of the Flood Plain District are to protect the public health, safety, and
general welfare, to protect human life and property from the hazards of periodic flooding,
to preserve the natural flood control characteristics and the flood storage capacity of the
flood plain, and to preserve and maintain the groundwater table and water recharge areas
within the flood plain.
2. District Delineation
a. The Flood Plain District is herein established as an overlay district. The District
includes all special flood hazard areas within the Town of Sutton designated as Zone
A and AE on the Worcester County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the
National Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the Worcester County FIRM
that are wholly or partially within the Town of Sutton are panel numbers
25027C0814E, 25027C0816E, 25027C0817E, 25027C0820E, 25027C0828E,
25027C0829E, 25027C0837E, 25027C0840E, 25027C0980E, 25027C0982E,
25027C0984E, 25027C0985E, 25027C1001E, 25027C1002E, 25027C1003E,
25027C1004E and 25027C1006E dated July 4, 2011. The exact boundaries of the
District shall be defined by the 100-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and
further defined by the Worcester County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated
July 4, 2011. The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by reference and are
on file with the Town Clerk, Planning Board, Building Inspector, Board of Appeals,
Conservation Commission and the Board of Health.
b. Flood Data – In Zone A and AE, along watercourses that have not had a regulatory
floodway designated, the best available Federal, State, local, or other floodway data
shall be used to prohibit encroachments in floodways which would result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
c. Base Flood Elevation Data – Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision
proposals or other developments greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the
lesser, with unnumbered A zones.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 42
3. Use Regulations
All development in the Flood Plain District, including structural and non-structural
activities, whether permitted by right or by special permit must be in compliance with
M.G.L. Chapter 131, §40 and with the requirements of the Mass. State Building Code
pertaining to construction in flood plains (currently 780 CMR 120G), as well as the
following regulations:
? Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP) (currently 310 CMR 10.00);
? Inland Wetlands Restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 13.00);
? Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage, DEP
(currently 310 CMR 15, Title 5);
a. Permitted Uses
The following uses of low flood damage potential and causing no obstructions to flood
flows shall be allowed provided they are permitted in the underlying district and they
do not require structures, fill or storage of materials or equipment:
1. Agricultural uses such as farming, grazing, truck farming, horticulture, etc.
2. Forestry and nursery uses.
3. Outdoor recreational uses, including fishing, boating, play areas, etc.
4. Conservation of water, plants, wildlife.
5. Wildlife management areas, foot, bicycle, and/or horse paths.
6. Temporary non-residential structures used in connection with fishing, growing,
harvesting, storage, or sale of crops raised on the premises.
7. Buildings lawfully existing prior to the adoption of these provisions.
b. Special Permits
No structure or building shall be erected, constructed, substantially improved, or
otherwise created or moved; no earth or other materials dumped, filled, excavated, or
transferred, unless a special permit is granted by the Board of Appeals. Said Board
may issue a special permit hereunder (subject to other applicable provisions of this
Bylaw) if the application is compliant with the following provisions:
1. The proposed use shall comply in all respects with the provisions of the underlying
District.
2. Within ten (10) days of receipt of the application, the Board shall transmit one
copy of the development plan to the Conservation Commission, Planning Board,
Board of Health, and the Building Inspector. Final action shall not be taken until
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 43
reports have been received from the above Boards or until thirty-five (35) days
have elapsed.
3. In a regulatory floodway all encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements to existing structures and other development are
prohibited unless certification by the applicant is provided demonstrating that such
encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence
of the 100-year flood.
4. The Board may specify such additional requirements and conditions it finds
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public and the occupants
of the proposed use.
5. Violation of any of the conditions and for requirements imposed pursuant to this
Bylaw shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day for
each day said violation is permitted to exist.
4. Rules and Regulations
The Planning Board, Board of Appeals, Conservation Commission, and Board of Health
shall promulgate and adopt rules and regulations governing activities and special permits
authorized and/or regulated by Sections V.A.3.a and V.A.3.b above, which rules and
regulations shall include, but not be limited to the following:
a. Health Regulations Pertaining to the Flood Plain District
The Board of Health, in reviewing all proposed water and sewer facilities to be located
in the Flood Plain District established under this Bylaw, shall require that:
1. New and replacement water supply systems be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems, and
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into floodwaters.
b. Conservation Commission Duties
1. Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the Mass. Division of
Water Resources, the State Coordinating Agency, prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse where an order of conditions has been issued, and
submit copies of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
Region 1 Office.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 44
2. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of
any watercourse is maintained.
c. Board of Appeals Rules and Regulations
Should the Board of Appeals consider a petition for a variance from the regulations set
forth in Flood Plain District section of this Bylaw, the following procedures will be
adhered to:
1. The Board of Appeals shall only issue a variance upon:
a. A showing of good and sufficient cause, and
b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant; and
c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense,
create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws, and
d. A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief.
2. A variance shall not be issued within any designated regulatory floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
3. If a variance is granted, the Board of Appeals shall notify the applicant in writing
over their signature that:
a. The issuance of such variance to construct a structure below the base flood
elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and
b. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and
property.
4. The Board of Appeals will maintain a record of all variance actions including
justification for their issuance and report such variances issued in the Annual
Report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration.
5. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of
structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or on State Inventory
of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth above.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 45
d. Subdivision Standards for the Flood Plain District
All subdivision proposals and other new development shall be reviewed to determine
whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding. If any part of a
subdivision proposal or other new development is located within the Flood Plain
District established under this Bylaw, it shall be reviewed to assure that:
1. The proposal is consistent with the need to minimize flood damage,
2. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage,
3. Adequate drainage systems shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
and
4. Base flood elevation (the level of the l00-year flood) data shall be provided for
proposals greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less, for that
portion within the Flood Plain District.
5. Disclaimer
Whereas flooding can, on rare occasions, occur within the Flood Plain District and areas
immediately surrounding said district, nothing contained in this Section shall be construed
as a representation of the Town of Sutton or any of its boards, commissions, agents,
servants that these areas will be free from flooding or that the uses permitted by this
Section will not be adversely affected in the event of flooding; nor shall the grant of a
special permit or the imposition of conditions or restrictions be construed as a
representation or warranty that there will be no flood damage experienced in these areas.
B. Groundwater Protection District
1. Purpose of District
The purpose of this Groundwater Protection District is to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the community by ensuring an adequate quality and quantity of
drinking water for the residents, institutions, and businesses of the Town of Sutton.
2. Scope of Authority
The Groundwater Protection District is an overlay district superimposed on the zoning
districts. This overlay district shall apply to all new construction, reconstruction, or
expansion of existing buildings and new or expanded uses. Applicable activities or uses,
which fall within the Groundwater Protection District, must comply with the requirements
of this district as well as with the underlying zoning. Uses that are prohibited in the
underlying zoning districts shall not be permitted in the Groundwater Protection District.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 46
3. Definitions
For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following
meanings:
Aquifer: Geologic formation composed of rock, sand, or gravel that contains significant
amounts of potentially recoverable water.
Groundwater Protection District: The zoning district defined to overlay other zoning
districts in the Town of Sutton. The groundwater protection district may include
specifically designated recharge areas.
Impervious Surface: Material or structure on, above or below the ground that does not
allow precipitation or surface water to penetrate directly into the soil.
Mining: The removal or relocation of geologic materials such as topsoil, sand, gravel,
metallic ores, or bedrock.
Public Water Supply: A system for the provision to the public of piped water for human
consumption, if such system has at least fifteen (15) service connections or regularly
serves as the primary source of water for an average of at least twenty-five (25)
individuals daily at least sixty (60) days of the year. Includes collection, treatment, storage
and distribution facilities.
Recharge Areas: Areas that collect precipitation or surface water and carry it to aquifers.
Toxic or Hazardous Material: Any substance or mixture of physical, chemical, or
infectious characteristics posing a significant, actual or potential hazard to water supplies
or other hazards to human health if such substance or mixture were discharged to land or
water of the Town of Sutton. Toxic or hazardous materials include, without limitation,
synthetic organic chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals, radioactive or infectious
wastes, acids and alkalis, and all substances defined as Toxic or Hazardous under M.G.L.
Chapters 21C and 21E and 310 CMR 30.00, and also include such products as solvents
and thinners in quantities greater than normal household use.
4. Establishment and Delineation of Groundwater Protection District
For the purposes of this district, there are hereby established within the Town certain
groundwater protection areas; consisting of aquifers or recharge areas which exist in the
Town of Sutton. The Groundwater Protection District is that area defined as follows:
? Wellhead with a projected/approved daily volume of at least 100,000 gpd – ½ mile radius
? Wellhead with a projected/approved daily volume of less than 100,000 gpd – 32 X
pumping rate in gallons per minute + 400’ or default radius per Massachusetts Drinking
Water Regulations
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 47
In those cases where an actual Zone II has been delineated around a public water supply
wellhead, the Zone II area will be the Groundwater Protection District as opposed to the
above radius.
5. District Boundary Disputes
a. If the location of the district boundary in relation to a particular parcel is in doubt,
resolution of boundary disputes shall be through the Special Permit Granting
Authority (SPGA). Any application for a special permit for this purpose shall be
accompanied by adequate documentation.
b. The burden of proof shall be upon the owner(s) of the land in question to show where
the bounds should properly be located. At the request of the owner(s) the town may
engage a professional engineer (civil or sanitary), hydrologist, geologist, or soil
scientist to determine more accurately the boundaries of the district with respect to
individual parcels of land, and may charge the owner(s) for all or part of the cost of
the investigation.
6. Use Regulation
In the Groundwater Protection District the following regulations shall apply:
a. Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted within the Groundwater Protection District, provided
that all necessary permits, orders, or approvals required by local, state or federal law
are also obtained:
1. Conservation of soil, water, plants, and wildlife:
2. Outdoor recreation, nature study, boating fishing, and hunting where otherwise
legally permitted;
3. Foot, bicycle and/or horse paths, and bridges;
4. Normal operation and maintenance of existing water bodies and dams, splash
boards, and other water control, supply and conservation devices;
5. Maintenance, repair, and enlargement of any structure, subject to section V.B.6.b
(prohibited uses) and section V.B.6.c (special permitted uses);
6. Residential development, subject to section V.B.6.b and section V.B.6.c; and,
7. Farming, gardening, nursery, conservation, forestry, harvesting, and grazing,
subject to Section V.B.6.b and Section V.B.6.c ; and,
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 48
8. Construction, maintenance, repair, and enlargement of drinking water supply
related facilities such as, but not limited to, wells, pipelines, aqueducts and tunnels.
Underground storage tanks related to these activities are not categorically
permitted.
b. Prohibited Uses:
The following uses are prohibited:
1. Landfills and open dumps as defined in 310 CMR 19.006;
2. Storage of liquid petroleum products, except the following:
a. Normal household use, outdoor maintenance, and heating of a structure;
b. Waste oil retention facilities required by statute, rule or regulation;
c. Emergency generators required by statute, rule or regulations; and
d. Treatment works approved under 314 CMR 5.00 for treatment of ground or
surface waters;
Provided that storage, listed in items a through d above, is in free-standing
containers within buildings or above ground with secondary containment adequate
to contain a spill the size of the container's total storage capacity.
3. Landfilling of sludge or septage as defined in 310 CMR 32.05;
4. Storage of sludge and septage, unless such storage is in compliance with 310 CMR
32.30 and 310 CMR 32.31;
5. Individual sewage disposal systems that are designed in accordance with 310 CMR
15.00 to receive more than one hundred ten (110) gallons of sewage per quarter
acre under one ownership per day, or four hundred forty (440) gallons of sewage
on any one acre under one ownership per day, whichever is greater, except the
replacement or repair of an existing system that will not result in an increase in
design capacity above the original design;
6. Storage of deicing chemicals unless such storage, including the loading areas, is
within a structure designed to prevent the generation and escape of contaminated
runoff or leachate;
7. Storage of animal manure is prohibited, unless such storage is within a structure
designed to prevent the generation and escape of contaminated runoff or leachate;
8. Earth removal, consisting of the removal of soil, loam, sand, gravel, or any other
earth material (including mining activities) within six (6) feet of historical high
groundwater as determined from monitoring wells and historical water table
fluctuation data compiled by the United State Geological Survey, except for
excavations for building foundations, roads, or utility works;
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 49
9. Facilities that generate, treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste subject to
M.G.L. Chapter 21C and 310 CMR 30.00, except the following:
a. Very small quantity generators as defined under 310 CMR 30.00;
b. Household hazardous waste collection centers and events under 310 CMR
30.390;
c. Waste oil retention facilities required by M.G.L. Chapter 21, §52A;
d. Water remediation treatment works approved under 314 CMR 5:00;
10. Automobile graveyards and junkyards, as defined in M.G.L. Chapter 140B, §1;
11. Treatment works that are subject to 314 CMR 5.00 including privately owned
sewage treatment facilities, except the following:
a. The replacement or repair of an existing treatment works that will not result in
a design capacity greater that the design capacity of the existing treatment
works;
b. The replacement of existing subsurface sewage disposal system(s) with
wastewater treatment works that will not result in a design capacity greater that
the design capacity of the existing system(s);
c. Treatment works approved by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection designed for the treatment of contaminated groundwater.
12. Storage of liquid hazardous materials is prohibited unless such storage is:
a. above ground level, and
b. on an impervious surface, and either;
i. in container(s) or above ground tanks(s) within a building, or;
ii. outdoors in covered container(s) or above ground tank(s) in an area that
has a containment system designed and operated to hold either 10% of the
total possible storage capacity of all containers, or 110% of the largest
container’s storage capacity, whichever is greater;
13. Industrial and commercial uses which discharge process wastewater on-site;
14. Stockpiling and disposal of snow and ice containing deicing chemicals if brought
in from outside the district;
15. Storage of commercial fertilizers and soil conditioners, as defined in M.G.L.
Chapter 128, §64, unless such storage is within a structure designated to prevent
the generation and escape of contaminated runoff or leachate;
16. The use of septic system cleaners which contain toxic or hazardous chemicals.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 50
c. Uses and Activities Requiring a Special Permit:
The following uses and activities are permitted only upon the issuance of a special
permit by the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) under such conditions as it
may require:
1. Enlargement or alteration of existing uses that do not conform to the Groundwater
Protection District;
2. The application of pesticides, including herbicide, insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticide, for non-domestic or non-agricultural uses in accordance with state and
federal standards. The special permit shall be granted if such standards are met. If
applicable, the applicant should provide documentation of compliance with a
Yearly Operating Plan (YOP) for vegetation management operations under
333 CMR 1.00 or a Department of Food and Agriculture approved Pesticide
Management Plan or Integrated Pest Management (IPM) program under 333 CMR
12.00;
3. The application of fertilizers for non-domestic or non-agricultural uses. Such
applications shall be made in a manner so as to minimize adverse impacts on
groundwater due to nutrient transport, deposition, and sedimentation;
4. Those activities that involve the handling of toxic or hazardous materials in
quantities greater than those associated with normal household use, permitted in
the underlying zoning (except as prohibited under section V.B.6.b). Such activities
shall require a special permit to prevent contamination of groundwater;
5. The construction of dams or other water control devices, ponds, pools or other
changes in water bodies or courses, created for swimming, fishing, or other
recreational uses, agricultural uses, or drainage improvements. Such activities
shall not adversely affect water quality or quantity;
6. Any use that will render impervious more than fifteen percent (15%) or two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of any lot, whichever is greater. A
system for groundwater recharge must be provided which does not degrade
groundwater quality. For non-residential uses, recharge shall be by stormwater
infiltration basins or similar system covered with natural vegetation; dry wells
shall be used only where other methods are infeasible. For all non-residential uses,
all such basins and wells shall be preceded by oil, grease, and sediment traps to
facilitate removal of contamination. Any and all recharge areas shall be
permanently maintained in full working order by the owner.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 51
7. Procedures for Issuance of Special Permit
a. The Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) under this bylaw shall be the Planning
Board. Such special permit shall be granted if the SPGA determines, in conjunction
with the Board of Health, the Conservation Commission, Town Engineer, and
Highway Superintendent that the intent of this Section, as well as its specific criteria,
are met. The SPGA shall not grant a special permit under this Section unless the
petitioner's application materials include in the SPGA’s opinion sufficiently detailed,
definite, and credible information to support positive findings in relation to the
standards given in this section. The SPGA shall document the basis for any departures
from the recommendations of the other Sutton boards or agencies in its decision.
b. Upon receipt of the special permit application, under M.G.L. Chapter 40A, §9, the
SPGA shall transmit one copy to the Board of Health, the Conservation Commission,
the Town Engineer and the Highway Superintendent for their written recommendations.
Failure to respond in writing within twenty-one (21) days of receipt by the
Board shall indicate approval or no desire to comment by said agency. The necessary
number of copies of the application shall be furnished by the applicant.
c. The SPGA may grant the required special permit only upon finding that the proposed
use meets the following standards, those specified in Section V.B.6 (Use Regulations)
of this Bylaw, and any regulations or guidelines adopted by the SPGA. The proposed
use must:
1. In no way, during construction or thereafter, adversely affect the existing or
potential quality or quantity of water that is available in the Groundwater
Protection District, and
2. Be designed to avoid substantial disturbance of the soils, topography, drainage,
vegetation, and other water-related natural characteristics of the site to be
developed.
d. The SPGA may adopt regulations to govern design features of projects. Such
regulations shall be consistent with subdivision regulations adopted by the Planning
Board.
e. The applicant shall file sixteen (16) copies of a site plan and attachments. The site
plan shall be drawn at a proper scale as determined by the SPGA and be stamped by a
professional engineer. All additional submittals shall be prepared by qualified
professionals. The site plan and its attachments shall at a minimum include the
following information where pertinent:
1. A complete list of chemicals, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, fuels, and other
potentially hazardous materials to be used or stored on the premises in quantities
greater than those associated with normal household use;
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 52
2. For those activities using or storing such hazardous materials, a hazardous
materials management plan shall be prepared and filed with the Hazardous
Materials Coordinator, Fire Chief, and Board of Health. The plan shall include:
a. Provisions to protect against the discharge of hazardous materials or wastes to
the environment due to spillage, accidental damage, corrosion, leakage, or
vandalism, including spill containment and clean-up procedures;
b. Provisions for indoor, secured storage of hazardous materials and wastes with
impervious floor surfaces; and
c. Evidence of compliance with the Regulations of the Massachusetts Hazardous
Waste Management Act, 310 CMR 30.00, including obtaining an EPA
identification number from the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection.
3. Proposed down-gradient locations for groundwater monitoring well(s), should the
SPGA deem the activity a potential groundwater threat.
f. The SPGA shall hold a hearing, in conformity with the provision of M.G.L. Chapter
40A, §9, within sixty-five (65) days after the filing of the application and after the
review by the Sutton Boards, Departments and Commissions. Notice of the public
hearing shall be given by publication and posting and by first class mail to "parties of
interest" as defined in M.G.L. Chapter 40A, §11. The decision of the SPGA and any
extension, modification, or renewal thereof shall be filed with the SPGA and Sutton
Town Clerk within ninety (90) days following the closing of the public hearing.
Failure of the SPGA to act within ninety (90) days shall be deemed as a granting of the
permit. However, no work shall commence until a certification is recorded as required
by said §9.
8. Violations
a. Written notice of any violations of this section shall be given by the Building
Inspector to the responsible person as soon as possible after detection of a violation or
a continuing violation. Notice to the assessed owner of the property shall be deemed
notice to the responsible person. Such notice shall specify the requirement or
restriction violated and the nature of the violation, and may also identify the actions
necessary to remove or remedy the violations and preventive measures required for
avoiding future violations and a schedule of compliance. A copy of such notice shall
be submitted to the Board of Health, Conservation Commission, Town Engineer,
Highway Superintendent and Water Department(s). The cost of containment, cleanup,
or other action of compliance shall be borne by the owner and operator of the
premises.
b. For situations that require remedial action to prevent adverse impact to the water
resources within the Groundwater Protection District, the Town of Sutton, the
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 53
Building Inspector, the Board of Health or any of their agents may order the owner or
the operator of the premises to remedy the violation. If said owner and/or operator
does not comply with said order, the Town of Sutton, the Building Inspector, the
Board of Health or any of their agents may order the owner or the operator of the
premises to remedy the violation. If said owner and/or operator does not comply with
said order, the Town of Sutton, the Building Inspector, the Board of Health, or any of
their agents, if authorized to enter upon such premises under the terms of the special
permit or otherwise, may act to remedy the violation. The remediation cost shall be
the responsibility of the owner and operator of the premises.
9. Severability
A determination that any portion or provision of this overlay protection district is invalid
shall not invalidate any other portion or provision thereof, nor shall it invalidate any
special permit previously issued thereunder.
C. Wireless Communication Services District
1. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish a district in which wireless communications
services may be provided with minimal harm to the public health, safety and general
welfare. Specifically, the Wireless Communications Services District has been created to
(a) protect the general public from any hazards associated with wireless communications
facilities; and (b) minimize visual impacts from wireless communications facilities on
residential districts within Sutton. This section does not apply to satellite dishes and
antennas for residential use.
2. Description of Areas Included in the Wireless Communications Services District
a. The Wireless Communications Services District shall include all land owned by the
Town of Sutton which is held in the care, custody, management and control of the
Board of Selectmen, the Recreation Commission, or the Sewer Commission and all
land located in the Village, Business-Highway, Industrial, and Office & Light
Industrial districts, and any existing town-owned antenna structures regardless of
zoning district.
b. The Wireless Communications Services District shall be construed as an overlay
district with regard to said locations. All requirements of the underlying zoning
district shall remain in full force and effect, except as may be specifically superseded
herein.
c. The Wireless Communication Services District shall be construed to include the entire
town when a camouflaged/stealth installation is proposed as defined and regulated in
section V.C.3. – Use Restrictions.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 54
3. Use Restrictions
A wireless communications facility (including antennas and accessory structures, if any),
antennas or satellite dish may be erected in a Wireless Communications Services District
upon the issuance of a special permit by the Board of Appeals pursuant to Section
VII.A.2, subject to all of the following conditions:
a. The only wireless communications facilities allowed are freestanding monopoles, with
associated antenna and/or panels. Lattice style towers and similar facilities requiring
three or more legs and/or guy wires for support are not allowed.
b. To the extent feasible, all service providers shall co-locate on a single facility.
Wireless communications facilities shall be designed to accommodate the maximum
number of users technologically practical, with particular consideration given to the
needs of local police, fire, ambulance, and other public emergency services. The intent
of this requirement is to reduce the number of facilities that will be required to be
located within the community.
c. Any proposed extension in the height, addition of cells, antennas or panels,
construction of a new facility, or replacement of a facility, shall be subject to a new
application for an amendment to the special permit.
d. New facilities shall be considered by the Board of Appeals only upon a finding by the
Zoning Board of Appeals that existing or approved facilities cannot accommodate the
wireless communications equipment planned for the proposed facility.
e. In no event shall any facility be located closer than a half mile to any other such
facility.
f. No facility or attached accessory antenna shall exceed ninety (90) feet in overall
height as measured from ground level at the base of the facility, unless it shall be
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Board of Appeals that a taller structure is
necessary for operation or co-location. In this event, the Zoning Board of Appeals
may permit a taller facility, provided that it shall not permit the overall height of the
facility or attached accessory antenna to exceed one hundred ninety five (195) feet.
g. All facilities shall be designed to be constructed at the minimum height necessary to
accommodate the anticipated and future use.
h. A new facility shall not be erected nearer to any property line than a distance equal to
the vertical height of the facility (inclusive of any appurtenant devices), measured at
the mean finished grade of the facility base. This shall not apply to any location upon
an existing town-owned antenna structure.
i. A new facility shall not be erected nearer to a residential lot line than two hundred
(200) feet; the Board of Appeals may require that additional setback footage be
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 55
provided for public health, safety, or aesthetic reasons. This shall not apply to any
location upon an existing town-owned antenna structure.
j. Siting shall be such that the view of the facility from adjacent abutters, residential
neighbors and other areas of Town shall be as limited as possible. All facilities shall
be painted or otherwise colored so they will blend in with the landscape or the
structure on which they are located. A different coloring scheme shall be used to blend
the facility with the landscape below and above the tree or building line. This shall not
apply to any location upon an existing town-owned antenna structure.
k. Wireless communications facilities shall be suitably screened from abutters and
residential neighborhoods. This shall not apply to any location upon an existing townowned
antenna structure.
l. Fencing shall be provided to control access to wireless communications facilities and
shall be compatible with the scenic character of the Town. This shall not apply to any
location upon an existing town-owned antenna structure.
m. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable.
n. There shall be no signs, except for mandatory announcement signs, No Trespassing
signs, and a required sign giving a phone number where the owner can be reached on a
twenty-four hour basis.
o. Night lighting of the facilities shall be prohibited unless required by the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA). Lighting shall be limited to that needed for
emergencies and/or as required by the FAA.
p. There shall be a minimum of one parking space for each facility, to be used in
connection with the maintenance of the facility and the site, and not to be used for the
permanent storage of vehicles. This shall not apply to any location upon an existing
town-owned antenna structure.
q. To the extent technologically feasible, all network interconnections from the facility
shall be via land lines.
r. Applicants proposing to erect facilities on municipally owned land or structures shall
provide evidence of authorization from the Town of Sutton to conduct wireless
communications services on municipally abutting ways.
s. Traffic associated with the facility and accessory facilities and structures shall not
adversely affect abutting ways.
t. Satellite dishes and/or antennas may be located on structures or may be freestanding.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 56
u. Satellite dishes and/or antennas shall be situated on a structure in such a manner that
they are screened, preferably not being visible from abutting streets. Freestanding
dishes or antennas shall be located on the landscape in such a manner so as to
minimize visibility from abutting streets and residences and to limit the need to
remove existing vegetation. All equipment shall be colored, molded and/or installed
to blend into the structure and/or the landscape.
v. Antennas or dishes located on a structure shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height above
the level of its attachment to the structure.
w. Annual certification demonstrating continuing compliance with the standards of the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), FAA and the American National
Standards Institute and required maintenance shall be filed with the Building Inspector
by the special permit holder.
x. All unused facilities or parts thereof or accessory facilities and structures which have
not been used for one year shall be dismantled and removed at the owner's expense.
y. Insurance in a reasonable amount determined and approved by the Board of Appeals
after consultation at the expense of the applicant with one (1) or more insurance
companies shall be in force to cover damage from the structure, damage from
transmissions and other site liabilities. Annual proof of said insurance shall be filed
with the Town Clerk.
z. Monitoring, testing and inspection shall be in accordance with the regulations of the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health, 105 CMR 122, Regulations Governing
Fixed Facilities Which Generate Electromagnetic Fields in the Frequency Range of
300kHz to 100 Ghz and Microwave Ovens, and other requirements of the Department.
aa. Camouflaged/Stealth Installation – A Wireless Communication Facility that is
disguised, hidden, an integrated part of an existing or proposed structure, or placed
within an existing or proposed structure so as to sincerely minimize or eliminate visual
impact on the landscape. Such installations may include, but not be limited to, church
steeples, flag poles 50 feet or less (measured from the ground), silos, chimneys, water
towers, bell towers, etc.
All provisions of the general Use Restrictions listed above for all installations shall apply to
camouflaged/stealth installations, except for those provisions contained in sections a., b., e., f.,
i., and t.
4. Procedure for a Special Permit:
a. All Wireless Communications Facilities shall require a special permit and site plan
approval. All applications for wireless communications facilities, antennas or satellite
dishes shall be made and filed on the applicable application forms for site plan and
special permit in compliance with the Sutton Board of Appeals Application
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 57
Instructions. In addition to the requirements for Site Plan Review under Section IV.C
of this Bylaw and the special permit requirements under section V.A.2 of this Bylaw,
seven (7) copies of the following information must be submitted for an application to
be considered complete:
1. A locus plan at a scale of 1" = 200' which shall show all property lines, the exact
location of the proposed structure(s), street landscape features, residential
dwellings and the neighborhoods and all buildings within five hundred (500) feet
of the facility. Said plan shall also show proposed accessory building(s),
topography, fencing and landscaping, access and parking, lighting, abutters, and
areas to be cleared of vegetation and trees.
2. A color photograph or rendition of the facility with its antennas and/or panels. For
satellite dishes or antennas, a color photograph or rendition illustrating the dish or
antenna at the proposed location is required. A rendition shall also be prepared
illustrating a view of the monopole, dish or antenna from the nearest street or
streets.
3. The following information must be prepared by a professional engineer:
a. A description of the facility and the technical, economic and other reasons for
the proposed location, height and design.
b. Confirmation that the facility complies with all applicable Federal and State
standards.
c. A description of the capacity of the facility including the number and type of
panels, antennas and/or transmitter receivers that it can accommodate and the
basis for these calculations.
d. If applicable, a written statement that the proposed facility complies with or is
exempt from applicable regulations administered by the FAA, FCC,
Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission and the Massachusetts Department of
Public Health.
e. The applicable review and advertising fees as noted in the application
guidelines.
4. Between the date of advertisement and the date of the public meeting, for a period
of at least seven (7) days, a balloon shall be put in place at the height of the
proposed tower. The balloon shall be of a size and color that can be seen from
every direction for a distance of one mile.
b. For all applications for Wireless Communications Facilities, the applicant shall be
responsible for all fees or costs incurred in reviewing such application. The Board of
Appeals is authorized to retain professional consultants to review the application and
advise the Board on any or all aspects of the application. The cost of this review and
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 58
advice shall be borne by the applicant and shall be paid prior to the issuance of a
special permit pursuant to the Wireless Communications Service District Bylaw.
5. Exemptions
The following types of wireless communications facilities are exempt from this Section
V.C:
a. Amateur radio towers used in accordance with the terms of any amateur radio service
license issued by the FCC, provided that (1) the tower is not used or licensed for any
commercial purpose; (2) the tower must have a cost or replacement value of less than
ten thousand dollars ($10,000); and (3) the tower must be removed if the use is
discontinued for one year.
b. Facilities used for the purposes set forth in M.G.L. Chapter 40A, §3.
c. Towers and antenna erected by the Town of Sutton for public safety and
communications purposes.
6. Waivers
The Board may modify or waive any requirement of this bylaw upon finding that due to
unusual conditions affecting the subject property, the requirements of this section would
unreasonably restrict the use of the property or effectively prohibit the placement,
construction, or modification of a facility in this specific geographic area, and that such
modification or waiver will be consistent with the purpose and intent of the provisions of
this bylaw. In granting such modification or waiver the Board may impose such
conditions as it deems necessary to protect the public interest.
D. Route 146 Overlay District Bylaw
1. Purpose
Route 146 is the Gateway to the Blackstone Valley, and preservation of its scenic qualities is
critical to the image residents and visitors have of this region. With the opening of the
Massachusetts Turnpike Interchange with Route 146 in 1998, increased opportunities for
economic development will provide fiscal benefits to Blackstone Valley communities and
create jobs for residents. The five Corridor communities of Millbury, Sutton, Northbridge,
Douglas, and Uxbridge recognize that joint planning and cooperation can insure that all
communities will benefit economically without causing haphazard and inefficient strip
commercial development or degradation of the environment. The Route 146 Corridor Overlay
District is intended to facilitate the long-term economic growth of the Corridor by
coordinating development among the five communities and by promoting high quality
development that preserves the scenic, natural, and cultural resources of the Blackstone
Valley.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 59
2. Application of District Regulations
a. Overlay District
This by-law is adopted as an overlay district and sets forth the design standards that apply to
development in the Route 146 Corridor Overlay District. These standards shall apply to any
development proposing a new building, or a re-development or addition containing one
thousand (1,000) or more square feet of floor area or requiring the alteration of five (5) or
more parking spaces. The use regulations of the underlying district remain in place and other
provisions of the Zoning By-Law will apply unless specifically superseded by the provisions
of this overlay district. The location of the overlay district is shown on a map entitled Route
146 Corridor Overlay District, which is on file in the office of the Town Clerk. The district
shall consist of all parcels currently zoned or zoned in the future to be Industrial(I), Business-
2 (B-2), and Office Light Industry (OLI), with frontage on Route 146.
3. Application Approval
a. Plan Review
The Planning Board (Board) shall be the special permit granting authority for
developments proposed under these regulations. Applicants shall comply with the
procedures for site plan approval and special permits as listed elsewhere in this by-law.
b. Waivers
The Board may modify or waive any requirement of the overlay district upon finding that
due to topography, location or other unusual conditions affecting the property, the
requirements of this section would unreasonably restrict the use of the property or would
be detrimental to the orderly development of the area. In granting such modification or
waiver, the Board may impose conditions it deems necessary to protect the public interest
and to insure that the development will be consistent with the purpose of this section.
c. Joint Use Agreements
For commercial, office, and industrial centers developed as a single entity, but which
include lots under separate ownership, the standards for parking, internal roads, lot
coverage and open space may be satisfied by all of the property included within the
center. In such event, permanent easements shall be recorded on the approved site plan
and subdivision plan, and covenants recorded in the Registry of Deeds providing for the
joint use and maintenance of parking, roadways, and open space by all occupants of the
center.
d. Review by Other Agencies
1. Inter-Municipal Review: Copies of the application shall be sent to the Planning
Boards of the other four communities in the Corridor, who shall have twenty-one
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 60
(21) days to submit comments to the Board. The purpose of this review is to
insure that regional implications are considered by the Board, and that significant
impacts of the project on corridor communities can be mitigated.
2. Development Coordination: Applicants shall submit documentation that they have
contacted owners of abutting land within the overlay district regarding their
proposed plans. The intent of this notice is to give those landowners the
opportunity to coordinate existing uses or future development plans with the
project before the Board. Where feasible, the parties shall work cooperatively to
solve common issues such as improving traffic access, sharing parking, creating
frontage roads, allowing connections between properties, buffering incompatible
uses, or preserving valuable open space and wetland resources.
4. Design Standards
a. Environmental Controls
1. Water Quality and Quantity: Drainage systems shall be designed using best management
practices as found in the most recent version of DEP's "Non-Point Source Management
Manual". The applicant shall submit a stormwater management plan implementing the
highest practicable level of stormwater treatment. The development shall conform to the
Stormwater Management Guidelines of the Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP).
2. Erosion and Sedimentation: Uncontrolled erosion during construction can cause
sedimentation of adjacent streams, ponds, and wetlands. The applicant shall submit an
erosion control plan, which is designed to prevent sedimentation by employing the
following best management practices:
a. Exposed or disturbed areas due to stripping of vegetation, soil removal, and regrading
shall be permanently stabilized as soon as practicable after construction
ends.
b. During construction, temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to
protect exposed areas from erosion. Until a disturbed area is permanently
stabilized, sedimentation in runoff shall be trapped by using staked hay bales,
sediment traps, or other acceptable methods as determined by the Planning Board.
c. Permanent erosion control and vegetation measures shall be in accordance with
erosion and vegetation practices recommended by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service.
3. Slope Protection: No structure, roadway, or earth disturbing activity shall be located or
occur on slopes of fifteen percent (15%) or greater.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 61
4. Preservation of Sensitive Natural Features: Development shall be located as to
preserve the natural features of the site, to avoid areas of environmental sensitivity,
and to minimize negative impacts and alteration of natural features. The following
features shall be identified on the site development plans by the developer and be
preserved as undeveloped open space:
a. Unique and/or fragile areas including wetlands, vernal pools, and 100-year flood
plains.
b. Habitats of rare species listed by the Mass. Natural Heritage and Endangered
Species Program.
c. Streams and water bodies, including a buffer strip one hundred (100) feet in width
along the centerlines of perennial streams, unless an order of conditions is obtained
from the Conservation Commission.
b. Open Space Preservation
1. A minimum of thirty-five percent (35%) of the tract shall be left as open space. Open
space shall not include land under right-of-ways for utilities and required yard setback
areas. Open space may be dedicated to public use subject to approval and acceptance
by Town Meeting. Open space in private ownership shall be protected by legal
arrangements sufficient to insure its maintenance and preservation for purposes for
which it is intended. Up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the required open space may
be developed with man-made features such as storm water detention devices, noncommercial
recreational structures and uses, septic systems, and similar features.
2. When a proposed development abuts a Residential district in any community, whether
presently developed or not, landscaped buffers shall be employed to shield the
residential property from view of the proposed development, and to minimize negative
impacts such as glare, noise, and odors. Such a buffer shall contain a screen of
plantings not less than three feet (3') in width and six feet (6') in height at the time of
planting. Individual shrubs or trees shall be planted not more than three feet (3') on
center, and shall thereafter be maintained by the owner or occupant so as to maintain a
dense screen year-round. At least fifty percent (50%) of the plants shall consist of
evergreens. A solid wall or fence, not to exceed six feet (6') in height, complemented
by suitable plantings may be substituted for such landscaped buffers.
3. Developments shall seek to leave large tracts as open space to serve as buffers from
incompatible land uses. Where existing protected open space abuts the proposed
development, the development shall insure proper access to such land, and where
possible, to set aside additional land that will complement the protected open space.
The Board may waive open space requirements of this By-Law if the proposed open
space is of exceptional value, will increase active recreational opportunities for local
residents, or will add important links to the Town’s trail and bicycle network.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 62
4. Where developments of different character are proposed within the same project, (e.g.
retail and industrial), such areas shall be separated by open space at least two hundred
feet (200’) in width to create defined edges between developments.
c. Site Design Standards
1. Landscaping
a. A registered landscape architect shall submit a landscape plan drawn to scale,
including dimensions and distances. The plan shall clearly delineate all existing
and proposed parking spaces or other vehicle areas, access aisles, driveways, and
the location, size and description of all landscaping materials and tree cover.
b. Access ways into the site and thoroughfares within the development shall be
provided with deciduous trees at intervals of approximately fifty feet (50') on both
sides of the road to provide an overhanging canopy at maturity. Such trees shall
be a minimum of two-inch (2") caliper at breast height when planted and shall
normally attain a height of at least fifty feet (50') at maturity.
c. The development shall contain a series of pedestrian paths linking the major
buildings and open space parcels on the property. Between buildings such paths
shall be hard-surfaced and at least six (6) feet in width. Landscaping shall be
provided on either side and contain varieties of plantings, including shade trees,
ornamental trees, shrubs, and flower beds. Paths connecting to open spaces may
be simple hiking trails without ornamentation.
d. There shall be provided one central gathering place of unique visual interest. This
may include elements such as a fountain, pond, sculpture, gazebo or similar open
space or structure. The area shall be provided with benches, stone walls, and
similar amenities, and shall be accessible to individuals in wheelchairs.
e. Outside storage areas for materials, equipment or trash shall be provided with an
opaque screen to shield such areas from view from adjacent streets and residential
districts. Such screens may be walls, fences, landscaped berms, evergreen
plantings, or any combination thereof. Fences shall consists of wood, stone, or
brick materials; chain link, plastic, or concrete materials are prohibited. Walls or
fences exceeding four and one-half (4½) feet shall have plantings on any side
facing a residential district.
f. Elements such as HVAC units, telephone boxes, or electrical transformers shall be
integrated into the site design through use of landscaping, berms, or fences and
shall be as unobtrusive as possible. HVAC units may be located behind roof ridge
lines so they are not visible from the front view of the building.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 63
2. Circulation and Access
a. Each development under common ownership within an overlay district shall be
limited to one entrance and one exit per street. At the main entrance, one combined
entrance/exit location is encouraged to facilitate traffic movement; such an entrance
shall be separated by a traffic island with separate in and out movements. If needed,
the applicant shall construct separate right and/or left turning lanes to facilitate entry
and exit from the site. Access shall not be provided through residential areas unless
authorized by the Board.
b. The main entrance to the development shall contain one ground sign announcing the
name of the development. Such sign shall consist of natural materials and shall be
reminiscent of the heritage of the Blackstone Valley. For example, the use of iron,
wood or brick surrounding the sign face is encouraged to reflect the Valley's
industrial heritage. Around the sign shall be placed grass, flowers, and shrubs to
provide color and visual interest. There may also be used fencing materials such as
split rail, granite, stone, or other materials as may be seen in the Valley's agricultural
areas. Applicants should incorporate design elements of specific themes from the
Valley’s past (e.g. mill village, agricultural, industrial) and not mix inappropriate
elements from different theme types.
c. To minimize turning movements onto adjacent public ways, developers are
encouraged to provide internal circulation systems that connect to adjacent
developments. When several adjacent lots front onto one street, the Board may
require such lots to share a single driveway, or that the lots be accessed by an
internal service road. Where such sharing cannot be achieved in the short run, the
means and location for future long term inter-parcel connections shall be required
through right-of-way reservation and/or dedication. Thought should be given to
continuing such internal ways between two public ways to facilitate town-wide
traffic flow. The Board may waive height, open space, or other requirements of this
by-law to achieve such purposes.
d. Each development shall contain facilities that will enhance transit services as a
means of reducing automobile travel. Shelters shall be installed at central locations
in the development to provide convenient access for buses. Secure bicycle racks
shall be installed to promote bicycle commuting.
e. Uses that propose drive-through facilities such as automatic teller machines (but not
fast food restaurants) shall be designed to be an integral component of the building
complex. Such uses shall be safely and conveniently accessible from surrounding
uses via a clearly defined pedestrian circulation system which minimizes points of
conflict between vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
f. Ways intended to become public shall comply with the design and construction
standards of the Planning Board's Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision
of Land.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 64
g. Private streets may be approved provided such streets are not through streets, and a
plan is submitted and approved by the Board for access for fire, ambulance, and
police vehicles and for snow clearance. Deeds for abutting property must state that
the street will not be maintained by the Town.
3. Parking
a. All off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided with safe and convenient
access. Access locations shall be designed to encourage unimpeded traffic flow with
controlled turning movements and minimum hazards to vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.
b. The number of parking and loading spaces required shall be determined by using the
standards for each use as provided elsewhere in this Zoning By-Law. The Board may
allow a reduction of the required number of spaces by up to twenty-five percent
(25%) if it can be demonstrated that two or more uses within a single development
can share parking areas due to different hours of normal activity. A change in use of
one of the businesses shall require the construction of the full amount of parking
otherwise required unless the Board grants a special permit to allow the parking
reductions to remain in effect.
c. When two (2) or more adjacent property owners agree to share parking and a
combined entrance, the required number of parking spaces may be reduced by as
much as fifteen (15) percent for each business. In addition, the side yards (including
associated landscaping) between the two parcels are not required. The property
owner(s) shall file a written agreement with the application, which shall be recorded
at the Worcester District Registry of Deeds. The agreement may be revoked by the
parties only if parking is provided in accordance with this Zoning By-Law, and a
revised plan is approved by the Planning Board.
d. Parking lots shall generally be sited to the side or rear of buildings in order to
minimize the obtrusiveness of large parking areas on the visual quality of the
Corridor. Up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the total parking spaces may be sited in
the front of the building to accommodate short-term parking needs of the proposed
uses.
e. Any parking lot of more than twenty (20) spaces shall be provided with interior
landscaping covering not less than five percent (5%) of the total area of the lot.
Landscaping shall also be provided around the perimeter of the lot for a width of ten
feet (10') and planted with trees and shrubs. In total, there shall be provided one
shade tree for every ten (10) spaces and complemented by shrubs and other planting
material. Such trees shall be at least two (2) inches in trunk diameter at the time of
planting, and shall be located in planting beds at least six feet (6') in width or
diameter. In case it can be shown to the Planning Board that the planting of trees is
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 65
impractical, the Planning Board may authorize plantings and shrubbery instead of
trees.
f. Sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall connect the lots to the principal uses they will
serve. Such walkways shall be constructed with brick, decorative pavers, or other
materials, and may be bordered with fencing or shrubbery to clearly separate
pedestrians from automobile traffic. Facilities and access routes for deliveries, service
and maintenance shall be separated, where practical, from public access routes and
parking areas. Car stops shall be provided to prevent parked cars from damaging trees
and shrubs or disrupting pedestrian walkways.
g. For non-retail uses, to facilitate alternatives to single occupancy automobiles, parking
lots shall have designated areas for car and van pool vehicles at a more convenient
location near building entrances than for other employee parking areas. Such areas
shall be shown on the site plan and when built shall be clearly signed for identification
purposes.
h. Parking garages are permitted as an alternative to extensive surface lots. Exterior
treatment of the garages shall consist of the same materials as the principal buildings
in the development. Above ground garages shall be sited behind the principal
structures and shall be limited in height by the requirement of the underlying district.
4. View Protection
a. The Route 146 Corridor offers many scenic vistas of the Blackstone Valley. Each
development shall recognize the visual quality of its site in relation to the scenic
qualities of the immediate area and the Corridor as a whole. The applicant shall
submit photographs of the area to the Board and describe the most prominent
features of existing visual quality. Through means of sketches or computer
simulations, the applicant shall document the impacts of the proposed development
on visual quality. This analysis shall present how the project will be viewed from
Route 146 in both directions and how views from the site to the surrounding area can
be integrated into the development to enhance the project design. Within the
development, the applicant shall preserve open vistas of important features such as
lakes, farms, forests, historic sites, etc.
b. Where possible, structures should not be located on ridge tops. The visual impact of
structures near ridge tops should be mitigated through reducing structure height
below the crown of a mature tree stand where possible or through innovative
architectural design.
5. Lighting and Utilities
a. All electric, telephone, television and other communication lines, both main and
service connections, servicing new developments shall be provided by underground
wiring within easements. These lines shall be installed in accordance with the
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 66
prevailing standards and practices of the utility company providing such services.
Electric transmission lines responsible for transporting power through the area and
provision of three-phase power are exempt from the underground requirement.
b. All exterior lights and illuminated signs shall be designed and installed in such a
manner as to prevent objectionable light at (and glare across) the property lines.
Externally lit signs, display, building and aesthetic lighting must be lit from the top
and shine downward. The lighting must be shielded to prevent direct glare and/or
light trespass.
c. Each outdoor luminaire shall be a full cutoff luminaire, and the use of decorative
luminaires with full cutoff optics is desired. A full cutoff luminaire is an outdoor
light fixture shielded in such a manner that all light emitted by the fixture, either
directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture is projected below the
horizontal plane. Light standard design shall be consistent with the architectural
objectives of the development.
d. The development shall eliminate glare onto adjacent properties through the use of
lighting shields, earthen berms, or retention of existing natural vegetation. All
outdoor lighting fixtures, including display lighting, shall be turned off after closeof-
business, unless needed for safety or security, in which case the lighting shall be
reduced to the minimum level necessary.
6. Signage
a. Unless specifically stated below, the sign requirements contained elsewhere in this
Zoning By-Law shall determine the number, size, and location of signs for buildings
and uses within the development.
b. The use of materials such as brick in entry signs, or the use of signboards that use
architectural motifs from the Valley’s mill or colonial heritage are to be used where
possible.
7. Building Layout
a. It is the intent of this overlay district to promote compact patterns of development
where buildings are clustered in close proximity in order to reflect historical
settlement patterns of the Blackstone Valley. Building layouts shall promote
pedestrian use by reducing walking distances between buildings and providing
walking paths to major entrances. Parking lots shall be sited in convenient
locations such that visitors can conveniently access more than one facility in the
development. Within the development, there is no minimum separation distance
between buildings.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 67
8. Redevelopment of Existing Property
a. Where it is proposed to re-develop property, existing curb cuts shall be re-designed
to improve traffic flow. Where possible, multiple curb cuts shall be combined to
minimize traffic entry points onto adjacent streets. There shall be no more than two
curb cuts onto each street to which the development has access.
b. If existing buildings are to remain, their facades shall be renovated to reflect the
architectural treatments noted above.
c. Parking lots shall be re-designed according to the standards noted above. The Board
may waive landscaping requirements or other standards upon demonstration that
such relief is necessary due to site constraints and other amenities will be substituted
that are consistent with the purpose of this by-law.
9. Infrastructure Availability
a. Each development shall tie-in to a public water system if an available connection is
located within one thousand feet (1000’) of the property, unless evidence is
submitted by the water supplier that its available capacity is insufficient to service
the development.
b. Each development shall tie-in to a public sewer system if an available connection is
located within one thousand feet (1000’) of the property line unless evidence is
submitted by the sewer provider that the sewer mains or treatment plant has
insufficient capacity to service the development. If an on-site package treatment
plant is proposed, the plant shall be built prior to the issuance of any occupancy
permits.
c. Intensity of development shall vary with the proposed sewage treatment method.
The floor area ratio (FAR) shall vary depending up the proposed sewage treatment
method, as follows:
Sewage Treatment Method FAR
Connection to Public Treatment Works 0.75
Package Treatment Plant 0.25
On-Site Septic System 0.10
10. Architectural Standards
a. Buildings shall be designed in keeping with the historical patterns of the
Blackstone Valley. Architects should research building types that typify the
region’s heritage and incorporate details in their structures that are based upon
examples from the region. Use of materials such as clapboard, stone, and brick
that reflect housing and mill styles should be used.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 68
b. Buildings should contain variation in detail to provide visual interest and to
avoid monotony. Use of pitched roofs, breaks in roof and wall lines, towers,
cupolas and building ornamentation are examples of measures to incorporate
Valley elements into contemporary life.
c. Architecture based upon generic franchise design is prohibited. Rather, where
franchise buildings of national chains are proposed, architects should rely upon
models of Blackstone Valley building types to incorporate elements of historic
design into the development.
11. Dimensional Regulations
a. Building height shall be limited to forty-five feet (45') if: 1) the development is
connected to a public water supply; 2) the Fire Chief determines that water pressure
is sufficient for fire fighting purposes; and 3) the Town has fire apparatus capable
of extinguishing fires at the highest part of the buildings. If such facilities are not
present, the height limit of the underlying district shall govern.
b. In lieu of minimum lot size and frontage requirements, the FAR and open space
requirements specified above shall govern the overall project development
intensity.
E. Village Center Overlay District
1.0 Purpose
The Town of Sutton finds that allowing a limited number of additional small scale uses in our
village centers may benefit the community by promoting continued use and investment in
historic structures. Additionally, allowing these uses may also provide for varied housing
needs and local services closer to home. However, it is important that these additions maintain
the historic (as defined in Section 8) patterns and appearance that make our villages unique.
Therefore, the Town implements this bylaw and designates certain Village Center Overlay
Districts (VCOD) to encourage re-use of historic structures and/or new economic and
residential growth that meets the following objectives.
The purposes of the Village Center Overlay District are to:
A. Encourage reuse of abandoned, vacant, or underutilized buildings consistent with the
character, massing, and density of the neighborhood as defined through this bylaw;
B. Allow for a mix of land uses that are appropriate to both the needs of the community
and the scale of structures in the surrounding neighborhood;
C. Build upon the historic development patterns in existing village centers to create new
development and redevelopment that is designed to follow historic development
patterns in terms of its physical layout and design, scale, mix of uses, and visual
character.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 69
D. Further the Town’s economic development potential by encouraging vibrant village
centers where people can live, shop, eat, conduct business, and enjoy arts and cultural
activities.
2.0 Establishment
This by-law is adopted as an overlay to existing zoning. The regulations of the underlying
district remain in place, however, the dimensional, parking and design standards of Sections
6-8 of this bylaw shall not only apply to all uses in the overlay, but also to those uses allowed
in the underlying district when proposed within the VCOD.
The location of the overlay district is shown on a map entitled Village Center Overlay
District, which is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
3.0 Definitions
Terms not defined here are as defined in Section I. B. of this Zoning Bylaw. Words not
defined in this Zoning Bylaw shall have the meaning given in Webster's Unabridged
Dictionary, latest edition. Uses listed in the Table of Use Regulations under Retail, Trade and
Service not otherwise defined shall be defined or clarified by the North American Industrial
Classification System (NAICS).
a. Artisan Live-Work Space: A dwelling unit occupied by an artisan in which up to 50% of
the floor area is used for the creation, display and sale of art produced by this resident
artisan.
b. Art studio: An establishment for the creation, display and sale of works of art, and may
also include instruction by an artist.
c. Bakery/café: An establishment that primarily produces and sells flour-based food
baked on premises in an oven such as bread, bagels, cookies, cakes, pastries, and pies. The
establishment may also provide non-alcoholic beverages. Products may be consumed on
or off the premises.
d. Bed & Breakfast: An establishment not to exceed four (4) guest rooms that provides
temporary lodging of up to two weeks for transient guests. A bed & breakfast is often a
converted single-family home or is designed as one, and typically includes living quarters
for the proprietor or manager of the establishment. Bed & breakfasts are characterized by
personalized service and inclusion of a full breakfast in the room rate. Bed & Breakfasts
may provide meals for guests, but do not include restaurants.
e. Catering Service: An establishment that prepares, serves, and supplies food in larger
quantities to be delivered and consumed off premises.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 70
f. Craft Shop: Establishments primarily engaged in retailing craft supplies including but not
limited to sewing, needlecraft, ceramic and clay, painting, jewelry, paper crafts, soap
making, candle making, glass work.
g. Floor Area, Gross: The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a
building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls but not including any space
where the floor to ceiling height is less than six feet, open porches, or unfinished
basements or attics.
h. Flower Shop: An establishment primarily engaged in retailing cut flowers, floral
arrangements, and potted plants purchased from others. These establishments usually
prepare the arrangements they sell.
i. Gallery: An establishment for the exhibition, display, and sale of works of art by one or
more artists.
j. Gift Shop: An establishment primarily engaged in retailing new gifts, novelty
merchandise, souvenirs, greeting cards, seasonal and holiday decorations, and curios.
k. Inn: An establishment not to exceed eight (8) guest rooms that provides temporary
lodging of up to two weeks for transient guests. The inn may include a full or limited
service restaurant open to both guests and the general public. An inn is often a converted
single-family home or is designed as one, and typically does not include permanent living
quarters for the proprietor or manager of the establishment.
l. Mixed-Use Structure/Lot: A single building or site designed to encourage a diversity of
compatible land uses which include a mixture of two or more permitted or special permit
uses.
m. Multi-Family dwelling: A building containing two (2) or more dwelling units, but not to
exceed four (4) units.
n. Neighborhood Market: An establishment primarily engaged in the sale of a limited
variety of daily food, beverage and household needs.
o. Restaurants, full service: An establishment primarily engaged in providing food services
to patrons who order from a menu and are served by waiters/waitresses while seated.
Patrons pay after eating. These establishments may provide this type of food service to
patrons in combination with selling alcoholic beverages, providing carryout services, or
presenting live nontheatrical entertainment. Shall not include “Restaurants, fast food”.
p. Restaurants, limited service: An establishment primarily engaged in providing food
services where patrons order from a menu board and most items are prepared to order.
There is no typical waiter/waitress service. Patrons generally pay before receiving their
food. Food and drink may be consumed on premises, carried out, or delivered to the
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 71
customer's location. Examples include delicatessen, sandwich shop, or pizza shop. Shall
not include “Restaurants, fast food”.
q. Tavern/Pub: An establishment primarily engaged in preparing and serving alcoholic
beverages for immediate consumption. These establishments may also provide limited
food items.
r. Theater/Dinner Theater: An establishment primarily engaged in producing the following
live theatrical presentations: musicals; operas; plays; and establishments, commonly
known as dinner theaters, engaged in producing live theatrical presentations along with
food and beverages for consumption on the premises.
4.0 Permit Procedures – Authority
The Planning Board shall serve as the Special Permit Granting Authority for any use that
requires a Special Permit in the VCOD.
5.0 Use Table and Regulations
a. Uses designated as “P” in the table below are allowed as of right, while uses
designated as “S” require a special permit from the Planning Board. All uses allowed
as of right or by special permit in the VCOD, as well as those uses allowed as of right
or by special permit in the underlying zoning district, shall require site plan review.
Compliance with the provisions of the VCOD bylaw shall be determined as part of the
site plan review process.
Table 1 – Additional Uses Allowed in the VCOD
A. RESIDENTIAL USES:
1. Multi-family dwelling (up to 4 units) S
D. OFFICE USES:
1. Business and professional offices P
E. RETAIL, TRADE AND SERVICE USES:
1. Neighborhood market S
2. Antique shop, art studio, gallery, gift shop, flower shop,
candy shop, craft shop
P
3. Artisan live work space P
4. Restaurants, full service S
5. Restaurant, limited service S
6. Catering accessory to main use P
7. Bakery/café, Tea room P
8. Tavern/Pub S
9. Theater/Dinner Theater S
10. Inn S
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 72
b. Mixed Use Structures/Lot – Permitted and/or Special Permit uses may be combined in
a structure or on a lot as long as the requirements for each use have been met.
c. Prohibited Uses – In keeping with the purposes of the VCOD, the following uses
otherwise allowed in the Rural Residential (R-1) District are prohibited within the
VCOD:
III.A. 4. Table 1 - B.2. Country, hunting, fishing, tennis, or health clubs, golf courses,
day camps or other camps or outdoor athletic fields, with structures not to exceed a
10,000 s.f. footprint
III.A.4. Table 1 – B.3. Cemetery
III.A.4. Table 1 – B.4. Town equipment garage
III.A.4. Table 1 – B.5. Public utility except power plant or refuse facility
III.A.4. Table 1 – C.2.a.-f. When less than five acres are used for agriculture,
horticulture, floriculture, or viticulture (Agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, or
viticulture)
III.A.4. Table 1 – C.4. Veterinary office
III.A.4. Table 1 – E.11. Convalescent or nursing home
III.A.4. Table 1 – E.15. Communications and television towers
III.A.4. Table 1 – E.18. Commercial Kennels
6.0 Dimensional Requirements
a. Maximum gross floor area – No structure in the VCOD shall exceed 6,000 s.f. gross
floor area.
b. Maximum front yard: New structures shall be set back no more than 25 feet or the
average of the setbacks of existing buildings on the abutting lots on either side,
whichever is less.
c. Side and rear yards: Setbacks shall be one half the distance otherwise required in the
underlying district.
7.0 Parking
a. The parking requirements in the VCOD will conform to Zoning Bylaw Section IV.B. – Off-street
Parking, Loading and Landscaping Regulations. Exceptions may be granted in accordance with Section
6 of Section IV.B. of the Zoning Bylaw, particularly in order to serve the overarching goals of
maintaining traditional development patterns in the VCOD while ensuring safe and adequate parking.
b. Required parking for uses in the VCOD may be provided off-site under the following
conditions:
a. If a public parking lot is available within 600’ of a proposed use, the SPGA may consider the
availability of this parking to meet a portion of the parking needs of a proposed project.
b. A covenant or easement between property owners within the overlay district
may be allowed and shall be presented in advance of final approval.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 73
8.0 Design Guidelines/Standards
These guidelines are intended to insure that renovations to existing structures and construction
of new structures will be in keeping with the architecture embodied by the historic structures
(1720-1900) in the Town’s villages. The Town’s villages retain an appearance unlike other
places and unlike many post 1950 neighborhoods because of the way they are laid out and
because of the types of buildings that have been maintained.
a. New structures or renovations/additions to existing structures must employ historic
architectural styles utilized in the National Historic District in which the VCOD is
located per the nomination document available in the Planning Department and must
utilize a majority of the following elements or an approved alternative.
Varying sloped roofs Ornamental casings on doors and
windows
Unique Chimneys Period doors and windows
Ornamental cornicing and brackets Distinct corner boards
Open Porches Gable ornamentation
Use of wood clapboard, brick and/or granite/stone exteriors
b. The following is a list of prohibited architectural elements.
Flat roofs – Roofs must have a minimum pitch of 5/12, except for open porch roofs
that can be as flat as 2/12
Corrugated or sheet metal buildings
9.0 Signage
Signage requirements in the VCOD will conform to Zoning Bylaw Section IV.A.– Off-street
parking, Loading and Landscaping Regulations, except as specified below:
a. All Freestanding Business (individual or multi-tenant) or Wall and Individual Letter
signage shall be limited to 30 s.f.
b. Internal illumination is prohibited
c. Signage is limited to 10’ in height
10.0 Severability
If any provision of this bylaw is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of the bylaw shall not be affected thereby.
F. Solar Photovoltaic Overlay District
1.0 Purpose: The Solar Photovoltaic Overlay District (SPOD) is intended to encourage
and enable the development of large ground-mounted solar energy sources in areas in
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 74
which such facilities can be developed without adverse impact on otherwise permitted
uses, but which may not be suitable for general commercial or industrial uses.
2.0 The Solar Photovoltaic Overlay District is an overlay to the underlying zoning district
in which Large Ground Mounted Solar Photovoltaic systems are allowed as of right
subject to the provisions of Section VI.O. – Large Scale Solar Photovoltaic of the
Zoning Bylaw. The uses and requirements of the underlying district shall remain in
effect unless they are in conflict with the provisions of Section VI.O., in which case
the provisions of Section VI.O. shall apply.
3.0 The following area is designated as a Solar Photovoltaic Overlay District (SPOD):
BEGINNING at a point at the intersection of the easterly right of way line of the
Worcester Providence Turnpike, (Route 146) and the
Sutton/Northbridge town line just north of Purgatory Road;
THENCE running Northerly along the easterly right of way line of the Worcester
Providence Turnpike 2630.1’ to a drill hole at the end of a stone wall;
THENCE running N. 83° E. and partially along a stone wall to a point 1200 feet
easterly of the easterly right of way line of the Worcester Providence
Turnpike;
THENCE running Southerly along a line parallel to and 1200 feet Easterly of the
easterly right of way line of the Worcester Providence Turnpike to a
point on the Northbridge/Sutton town line;
THENCE running Southwesterly by the Northbridge/Sutton town line to the point
of beginning.
Said area containing approximately 40 acres of land;
VI. SPECIAL REGULATIONS
A. Condominium Development
1. Intent
This Bylaw seeks to protect and enhance the rural character of the Town of Sutton by
encouraging the orderly development of condominium developments, and regulating such
growth. To this end, it shall be determined that a proposed development offered
hereunder:
a. Promotes the more efficient use of land in harmony with its natural features;
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 75
b. Encourages the preservation of open land for conservation, agriculture, open space and
recreational use;
c. Preserves historical and archaeological resources;
d. Protects existing and potential water supplies; and/or,
e. Protects and promotes the health, safety and convenience and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the Town of Sutton.
2. Special Permit Granting Authority
The Planning Board is hereby designated as the Special Permit Granting Authority for all
purposes under this section and shall adopt rules and regulations with respect to the
administration of applications under this section of the Zoning Bylaw.
3. Definitions
In addition to the definitions contained in Section I.B, the following shall apply for
purposes of this Section:
Board: Planning Board, Town of Sutton.
Buffer: A perimeter area of the tract designed to separate the proposed development from
abutting properties.
Common Land and Facilities: All open land, interior ways, permitted supporting
facilities, and land on which such supporting facilities are located.
Home Association: A corporation, trust, or unincorporated association, the membership
of which consists of the owner or owners of dwelling units within the tract, which shall
own and/or manage all interior ways and the land not occupied by residential units,
including facilities and structures thereon, in perpetuity.
Interior Way: Vehicular access within the tract, not including parking spaces or
individual unit driveways.
Open Land: All land within the tract not occupied by structures or interior vehicular
ways or parking areas. The open space shall be situated so it is usable by all residents of
the Condominium Development, and is not located to imply use or “ownership” by only
the unit or units in its proximity. There shall be at least one bulk area of open space equal
to at least one third of the total required open space. The open space shall be delineated
on the site plans and shall be protected by a recorded restriction enforceable by the Town
of Sutton.
Tract: Single parcel or group of contiguous parcels under common ownership or
proposed for common ownership.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 76
4. Minimum Requirements for Initial Review
a. Tract Size: Minimum twenty-five (25) and maximum one hundred (100) acres in R-1
or R-2 zones. A tract bisected by a public way shall be deemed two tracts.
b. Frontage: Minimum of fifty (50) feet on a public way as defined in the Subdivision
Control Law and the Sutton Zoning Bylaw.
c. Density: The overall tract density (i.e., total dwelling units divided by total acres) shall
not exceed eight-tenths (.8) dwelling units per acre, except as otherwise expressly
provided in this section VI.A.4. For a tract or tracts contiguous to a professionally
managed, full service golf course of at least eighteen holes and at least as many acres
as the tract or tracts being developed, the overall tract density shall not exceed one and
six-tenths (1.6) dwelling units per acre if the land on which such golf course is located
contains deed restrictions requiring such land to be used for purposes of at least an
eighteen hole professionally managed full service golf course for no less than ninetynine
(99) years from the date that the special permit for such Condominium
Development is approved by the Planning Board, and the special permit shall contain
a condition to that effect. The land on which the golf course is located shall not be
considered open land for purposes of the open land requirements of each tract as
provided in this Bylaw and in M.G.L. Chapter 40A, §9. No more than one
Condominium Development may be located on any one golf course.
A density bonus may be permitted when the proposed project provides permanently
affordable housing opportunities for households earning less than or equal to 80% of
the median income for Worcester County. Affordable units shall be developed
concurrently with the market rate units and shall be dispersed evenly throughout the
entire project with no two units adjacent. For each affordable dwelling unit provided
under this section, one additional dwelling unit may be permitted, up to a maximum
fifteen percent (15%) increase in number of dwelling units.”
d. Layout: Structures shall be no closer than seventy-five (75) feet to an adjacent
structure. The minimum building space requirement is intended to provide privacy.
Where windows are placed in only one of two facing walls, or there are no windows,
or where the windows are at a height or location to provide adequate privacy, the
building spacing can be reduced to fifty (50) feet. No structure shall be closer than
fifty (50) feet to an interior way.
e. Utilities: Each structure shall be served by public water and sewerage. All utility
services shall be underground.
e. Design: Each structure shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height nor contain more
than four (4) dwelling units. The exterior design shall reflect the rural residential
character of Sutton and achieve architectural diversity. The interior design of the
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 77
dwelling units shall be limited to two (2) bedrooms, except that up to five percent
(5%) of the units may contain three (3) bedrooms.
f. Parking: There shall be two and one-half (2½) parking spaces for each dwelling unit.
A one-car garage shall be deemed one (1) parking space.
g. Interior Way: Access within the tract shall consist of vehicular ways of minimum
twenty-four (24) feet in width and shall otherwise be constructed in accordance with
the design standards of the "Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land
in the Town of Sutton."
h. Open Land: At least forty percent (40%) of the tract area shall be maintained as Open
Land. No more than fifty percent (50%) of Open Land shall be wetlands and/or land
with slopes in excess of 2:1.
i. Further Subdivision: There shall be no further subdivision of the tract proposed.
j. Construction Activity: All construction activity shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the Wetlands Protection Act and the River Protection Act.
k. Buffer: There shall be a perimeter buffer, as determined by the Planning Board, to
provide visual separation from abutting properties, planted with a mixture of
coniferous and deciduous trees and shrubs.
l. Supporting Facilities: In addition to residential structures, structures and facilities
supporting recreational or maintenance use may be permitted in an appropriate
proportion to the development. Such new structures shall not exceed twenty-five (25)
feet in height.
m. Ownership and Maintenance Responsibility: All Common Land and Facilities shall be
owned and maintained by a private corporation, in the form of a Homes Association,
as set forth in M. G. L. Chapter 40A, § 9. The Town shall not be responsible for such
ownership or maintenance.
5. Procedure for Application and Review by Planning Board
Any person who desires a special permit under this section shall submit an application,
including all supporting documents, in writing to the Board in such form and number as
the Board may require. Applicant agrees to pay required fees prior to commencing the
Condominium Development Definitive Plan process, and all subsequent fees, as specified
herein, which may result from revisions, whether by the applicant or the Board, in the
process of obtaining a special permit or during any phase of construction under said
special permit.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 78
a. Plan Requirements
Application for a special permit under this section shall be accompanied by a Plan
which shall show all of the information required for a Condominium Development
Definitive Subdivision Plan as specified in the Subdivision Rules and Regulations and
any additional information required under Site Plan Review. Review under this
section shall constitute review under Site Plan Review.
b. Other Requirements
The Applicant shall also include other information the Board may require, including
but not limited to:
1. Proposed building plans of a general nature to indicate building elevations, and a
plan view of the individual dwelling units by floor.
2. Proposed informational, identification, and directional signage.
3. Proposed features relating to safety including but not limited to: proposed street
names, unit and structure numbering sequence; street and exterior lighting; and,
screened trash collection facilities.
4. Environmental and traffic impact studies.
5. All proposed instruments to be recorded with the plans, including the Open Land
perpetual restriction, the Home Association articles of incorporation including
provision for ownership and maintenance of Open Land and Common Land and
Facilities, and a typical deed for transfer of individual interests.
6. A Development Statement which shall consist of a list of the parties of interest; the
names of the development team; a long-range plan for maintaining the
development after construction, including provision for a permanent organization
responsible for such maintenance; proposed measures and schedules to guarantee
construction in accordance with the plan which may include but are not limited to
cash deposits, bonds, covenants, easements and grants which are enforceable by
the Town and will oblige in a like manner subsequent holders of all or part of the
applicant's interest. No application shall be approved until the Planning Board has
in its possession all items listed above.
6. Review by Other Boards:
a. The Planning Board shall forward copies of the application and plan, including all
supporting documents to the following boards and agencies which may review it
jointly or separately: Board of Health, Conservation Commission, Building Inspector,
Police Department, Highway Department, Fire Department, Earth Removal Board,
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 79
Board of Appeals, Board of Selectmen, Sewer Commission, and the appropriate Water
District Commission.
b. Each such board or agency shall submit such comments or recommendations as it
deems appropriate to the Board with copy to the Applicant. Failure to make
recommendations within thirty-five (35) days of receipt of the application shall be
deemed lack of opposition.
7. Homes Association
a. The developer, in deeding rights of ownership to individual dwelling units, shall
include beneficial rights to all Common Land and Facilities. He shall also ensure
through deed restrictions that Open Land be kept in an open or natural state and not be
built upon for residential use or developed for accessory uses such as parking or
interior ways. In addition, the developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of
the Common Land and Facilities until such time as a Homes Association is able to
assume such responsibility. In order to insure that the Association will properly
maintain the land deeded to it under this section, the developer shall cause to be
recorded in the Worcester County Registry of Deeds a Declaration of Covenants and
Restrictions which shall, at a minimum, provide for the following:
1. Mandatory membership in an established Homes Association as a requirement of
individual ownership of any dwelling unit within the tract.
2. Provisions for maintenance assessments on all individual dwelling units in order to
ensure that the Common Land and Facilities be maintained in perpetuity in a
condition suitable for the uses approved by the Homes Association. Failure to pay
such an assessment shall create a lien on the property assessed, enforceable by
either the Homes Association or the owner of any individual dwelling unit
membership in the Homes Association.
3. Provisions, which so far as possible under existing law, will ensure that the
restrictions placed on the use of the Open Land will not terminate by operation of
law.
b. The Homes Association shall be structured as an organization in accordance with the
laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and an instrument shall be recorded at
Worcester County Registry of Deeds, which shall at a minimum provide:
1. The type and name of the Homes Association which will own, manage and
maintain the Common Land and Facilities in perpetuity.
2. The ownership or beneficial interest in the Homes Association of each owner of a
dwelling unit and a provision that such ownership or beneficial interest shall be
appurtenant to the dwelling to which it relates and may not be conveyed or
encumbered separately therefrom.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 80
3. Provisions for the number, term of office, and the manner of election to office,
removal from office and the filling of vacancies in the office of directors and/or
officers of the organization.
4. Procedures for the conduct of the affairs and business of the corporation including
provisions for the calling and holding of meetings of members and directors and/or
officers of the corporation and provision for quorum and voting requirements for
action to be taken. Each owner of a dwelling unit shall have voting rights
proportional to his ownership or beneficial interest in the organization.
5. A legal description of the Common Land and Common Facilities.
6. A statement of the purposes for which the Common Land is intended to be used
and the restrictions on its use and transfer.
7. Provision for the management, maintenance, operation, improvement and repair of
the Common Land and Facilities, including provisions for obtaining and
maintaining adequate insurance and levying and collecting from the dwelling
owners common charges to pay for expenses associated with the Common Land
and Facilities, including real estate taxes. It shall be provided that common
charges are to be allocated among the dwelling unit owners in proportion to their
ownership or beneficial interest in the corporation and that each dwelling owner's
share of the common charge shall be a lien against his real estate in the
development, which shall have priority over all other liens with the exception of
municipal liens and first mortgages of record.
8. The method by which such instrument or instruments maybe amended.
8. Hearing
a. Following filing of the application with the Board with a copy to the Town Clerk, the
Board shall advertise and hold a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of
M.G.L. Chapter 40A §§ 9 and 11. After such hearing and within ninety (90) days, the
Board shall act on the application for special permit. Failure of the Board to take final
action as above shall be deemed to be an approval of the application unless an
extended time shall be agreed upon at the request of the applicant.
b. Unfavorable action by the Board shall cause the applicant to be governed by M.G.L.
Chapter 40A, §16, with regard to Repetitive Petitions.
9. Fee Schedule and Security
a. The applicant shall, with initial submittal of his application for a special permit,
include a fee as set by the Planning Board to cover the cost of administration and
professional review of plans. The applicant shall also pay the cost of legal review as
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 81
necessary, and inspection of interior way construction and other required site
improvements and/or required off-site improvements.
b. Prior to issuance of building permits pursuant to any special permit granted under this
section, the applicant shall provide performance security in a form acceptable to the
Board and an amount to be determined to assure the completion of interior ways and
required site improvements.
c. All fees tendered to the Board are non-refundable and shall be by certified check or
money order made out to "Town of Sutton". No cash will be accepted.
10. Administration
a. Enforcement of this Bylaw shall be by the Building Inspector or a duly appointed
inspector working for the Building Department.
b. If a special permit is granted under this section, substantial performance must
commence within six (6) months. Should substantial performance fail to commence,
the special permit shall be revoked and the land returned to the normally applicable
density regulations of this Bylaw unless the applicant has received a written extension
from the Board, such extension being of six (6) months duration. Time of completion
of all phases of construction shall be as determined by the Board and stated as a
condition of granting the special permit.
c. The Building Inspector shall periodically inspect progress and compliance with this
Bylaw and shall take whatever actions may be necessary in the event of noncompliance.
No required performance bond or other security shall be released, nor
shall occupancy permits be granted, until the Conservation Commission, Highway
Surveyor, and Board of Health shall have notified the Board that the development
conforms in all respects to those requirements for which each is responsible. No title
to any dwelling unit shall pass nor shall any beneficial rights to Open Land be granted
until the requirements of individual Certificates of Occupancy and Certificates of
Compliance have been issued. Certificate of Occupancy shall only be issued to cover
an entire structure and not any single dwelling unit therein.
d. Should completion of the development fail to occur within the time stated in the
Special Permit, all securities held shall be called and the Town of Sutton or its agent
may enter the premises to engage in and complete such works as will, in its opinion,
bring the development to a state acceptable to state and local regulations.
B. Planned Business Development Bylaw
1. Purpose and Intent
It is the purpose of this Planned Business Development (PBD) Section to allow and
encourage the efficient and creative use of land in Sutton that is particularly suited for
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 82
commercial and industrial use. It is also the purpose of this overlay district to encourage a
diversity of compatible land uses including a mix of office, retail, light industrial and
other compatible land uses. The Town of Sutton desires to encourage development in the
Planned Business District that meets market demands and improves the economic base of
the community, provides substantial and quality employment opportunities, is designed
within the natural constraints of the land, and preserves the Town's rural character.
2. Definitions
In addition to the definitions contained in Section I of this Bylaw, the following
definitions shall apply for the purposes of this Section:
Applicant: The person or people, including a corporation or other legal entity, who
applies for issuance of a special permit hereunder. An agent, representative or his assigns
may act for an owner, provided that written evidence of such fact is submitted. Evidence
in the form of a list of its officers and designated legal authority to sign legal documents
shall be required for a corporation.
Board: Planning Board, Town of Sutton
Buffer: A perimeter area of the tract designed to separate the proposed PBD from
abutting properties.
Interior Ways: Vehicular access within the tract, not including parking spaces or
individual unit driveways. All interior ways shall be privately owned and maintained
unless the PBD contains a conventional subdivision plan.
Impervious Surfaces: Any surface on which water cannot penetrate.
Open Space: All lands within the PBD tract in their natural state, which are not
landscaped, covered by principal or accessory structures, or any other impervious
surfaces.
Planned Business Development (PBD): The development of an area of land as a single
entity, in which a mixture of business, light industrial and other compatible uses as
determined by the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) under section VI.B.4, in a
variety of building types and designs, are determined to be sufficiently advantageous to
render it appropriate to grant a special permit to depart from the normal requirements of
the zoning district, to the extent authorized by this section of the Bylaw.
Tract: Single parcel or group of parcels under common ownership or proposed for
common ownership.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 83
3. Special Permit Granting Authority
The Planning Board is hereby designated as the Special Permit Granting Authority
(SPGA) for all purposes under this section and each applicant shall be required to obtain
special permit approval from the Planning Board in the review process. The Planning
Board shall base its review and decision on all PBD proposals on the criteria listed below.
A special permit shall not be granted if the applicant cannot demonstrate compliance
herewith:
a. The site plan and written materials meet all the requirements as listed under this
section.
b. Methods satisfactory to the Planning Board of ensuring the performance of any
conditions included in the site plan have been submitted by the applicant.
c. The PBD is consistent with the purpose and intent of this section.
d. The applicant successfully demonstrates to the Planning Board that this method of
land design will be as, or more, appropriate for the tract than a conventional
subdivision.
4. Permitted Uses
a. The applicant shall submit a program of uses to be incorporated within the proposed
Planned Business Development. Uses which may be included in the proposal are
those institutional, agricultural, office, retail, trade and service, vehicular and
automotive, and manufacturing uses allowed by right or by special permit in the B-2
Business-Highway, I Industrial, or OLI Office Light Industrial districts as specified in
the Table of Use Regulations.
b. Uses within the PBD may change over time and such changes do not necessarily
require amendment of the PBD special permit. Notice of a proposed change in use
shall be given in writing to the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall discuss the
proposed change in open meeting. If the Planning Board finds that the new use will
not result in such impacts, then no amendment will be made. If the Planning Board
finds that there may be significantly increased impacts on abutters, the Planning Board
shall schedule a public hearing to review the changes and amend the existing special
permit and impose additional conditions or require that a new application be submitted
for review and approval.
5. Minimum Development Standards
a. Applicable Zoning Districts: Planned Business Developments shall be allowed by
special permit hereunder in the Industrial (I) District, Office and Light Industrial (OLI)
District, and the Business-Highway (B-2) District.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 84
b. Minimum Tract Dimensions: The minimum tract size for a PBD project shall be
twenty (20) acres. Minimum tract width along a public way shall be a total of two
hundred fifty (250) feet located in either one contiguous area, or in two areas of the
property with the condition that each frontage area must have a minimum of seventyfive
(75) contiguous feet. The minimum tract width at any point shall be one hundred
fifty (150) feet and the minimum tract depth shall be at least three hundred (300) feet.
c. Maximum Coverage: The maximum coverage of a PBD tract by impervious surfaces
including principal and accessory buildings, parking and loading facilities, interior
way and drives, sidewalks and recreational facilities, shall not exceed forty percent
(40%) of the total tract size.
d. Open Space: At least forty percent (40%) of a PBD tract shall be left in its natural state
and preserved as open space. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the open space
shall be wetlands (as defined in M.G.L. Chapter 131, §40), slopes in excess of fifteen
percent (15%), and utility or other restrictive easement, or any combination thereof.
Open space shall be predominantly vegetated and no principal or accessory uses other
than passive recreational uses will be permitted.
e. Perimeter and Interior Buffers: There shall be a perimeter buffer of at least one
hundred (100) feet in a PBD tract consisting of natural vegetation. On certain PBD
tracts additional planting and landscaping may be required to effectively screen
abutting lands. The perimeter buffer may be considered part of the open space and
passive recreational uses may be permitted within. An interior buffer of fifty (50) feet
will be required between principal buildings and between their associated parking
areas.
f. Interior Ways: Access within the tract shall consist of vehicular ways with a minimum
lane pavement width of fifteen (15) feet. Interior ways shall include two lanes,
separated by a vegetated traffic island ten (10) feet in width and broken at certain
points to allow turns. Interior ways will be paralleled on one side by a five (5) foot
wide sidewalk, which is to be placed ten (10) feet from the paved roadway. Interior
ways shall otherwise by constructed in accordance with the Town of Sutton Rules and
Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land. Where a PBD contains a
conventional subdivision, interior ways shall be publicly maintained and a sixty (60)
foot public right-of-way shall be required to allow efficient maintenance.
g. Parking: Parking, loading and landscaping requirements shall be consistent with the
requirements listed in Section IV.B. of this Bylaw.
h. Utilities: All principal buildings and uses in a PBD project shall be serviced by public
water and sewer. All utilities including, but not limited to, gas, electric, water, and
sewer shall be placed underground.
i. Lighting: Exterior illumination shall only be located as necessary for safety, lighting
of buildings, walks, and interior ways and drives, and shall be subject to approval and
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 85
limitation by the SPGA. All lighting shall be placed so that no light source is visible
beyond the PBD tract boundary.
j. Public Dangers and Disturbances: Other than time and emergency signals and noise
necessary for the construction or demolition of buildings on the tract, no unreasonable
or objectionable noise shall be transmitted from the PBD tract, nor shall any offensive
odor, noxious, toxic, or corrosive fumes or gases, dirt, dust, smoke, or materials be
emitted into the air or water so as to endanger public health or safety.
k. Landscaping: Landscaping shall be required in the PBD tract in certain areas to ensure
proper sound and visual screening, and to enhance or maintain the aesthetic quality of
the tract. All land not considered part of the natural open space or covered by
impervious surfaces will be areas of landscaping.
l. Height: No principal or accessory building shall be greater than two (2) stories or
thirty-five (35) feet in height unless the SPGA determines that the higher building is
properly protected against fire hazard and will not be detrimental to the character or
aesthetic quality of the PBD tract or surrounding area.
m. Compatibility: No PBD will be approved within a permitted zoning district if the
SPGA determines that such land use would have a detrimental effect on the
surrounding area.
n. Further Development: There shall be no further development beyond those of an
approved site plan.
o. Compliance with Subdivision Regulations: All proposed PBD projects shall comply
with all other provisions of the Town of Sutton Rules and Regulations Governing the
Subdivision of Land in effect at the time of application, insofar as they are applicable.
6. Special Permit Procedures
a. Special Permit Application and Site Plan
Each PBD applicant shall submit a special permit application along with a site plan
and application. The site plan and written materials shall be consistent with the
requirements of Site Plan Review in this Bylaw.
b. Definitive Subdivision Plan
All PBD projects containing a conventional subdivision shall submit a definitive plan
complying with the Sutton Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land
in addition to the Special Permit and Site Plan applications required above.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 86
c. Public Hearing
The SPGA shall conduct a public hearing within sixty-five (65) days of the filing of
the site plan, site plan application, and special permit application with the Board. A
public hearing shall not be scheduled until all information and materials that constitute
a complete application are filed.
d. SPGA Decision
The SPGA shall within ninety (90) days following the public hearing certify in writing
that the application and site plan are approved as submitted; approved subject to
modifications; or denied. If the SPGA fails to issue its findings within ninety (90)
days, the plan shall be deemed approved.
7. Administration and Enforcement
a. Enforcement of this section of the Bylaw shall be the duty of the Building Inspector or
duly appointed inspector.
b. The Building Inspector shall periodically inspect progress and compliance with this
section and shall take whatever actions necessary in the event of non-compliance. No
required performance bond or other security shall be released nor shall occupancy
permits be issued until the Conservation Commission, Town Engineer, and Board of
Health shall have been notified by the Planning Board that the development conforms
in all respects to those requirements for which each is responsible. No title to any
principal building shall pass nor shall any beneficial rights to open space be granted
until the requirements of individual certificates of occupancy have been issued.
Certificates of occupancy shall only be issued to cover an entire structure and not any
single unit therein.
c. Should completion of the development fail to occur within the time frame allowed for
special permits, all securities held shall be called and the Town of Sutton or its agent
may enter the premises to engage in the completion of such work as will, in the
opinion of the Board, bring the development to a state acceptable to state and local
regulations.
8. Fee Schedule and Security
a. The applicant shall, with the initial submission of the application for special permit,
include a fee as set by the SPGA to cover the cost of professional review of plans and
materials, legal review as necessary, and general administration and processing of
such application. If the application is approved, the applicant will have to submit
inspection fees to cover the cost of inspecting interior way construction and other
required site improvements.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 87
b. Prior to the issuance of building permits, the applicant shall provide performance
security in a form acceptable to the SPGA in an amount sufficient to assure the
completion of interior ways and other required site improvements.
c. All fees tendered the SPGA are non-refundable and shall be by certified check or
money order made out to the Town of Sutton. No cash will be accepted.
9. Severability
A determination that any portion of this section is invalid shall not render any other
portion thereof invalid.
C. Home Businesses
1. Purpose
Home businesses, as accessory uses within single family dwellings, or buildings accessory
thereto, may be permitted to allow for local economic development, encourage the
creation of new businesses, and to provide flexible or accessible working conditions for
town residents.
2. Special Permit Granting Authority
The Board of Appeals is designated as the special permit granting authority under this
section and may adopt rules and regulations to administer applications under this section.
3. Home Business Conditions
Home businesses may be permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The home business shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling
as a residence, shall be located within the dwelling unit or a single building accessory
thereto, and shall not change the residential character of the premises.
b. The area utilized for the purpose of the home business shall not exceed twenty-five
percent (25%) of the total floor area of the dwelling unit.
c. In a home business, not more than two (2) non-resident full-time employees, or
equivalent thereof, may be employed.
d. Not more than three (3) customers, clients, pupils, or patients for business or
instruction shall be present at any one time. The Board of Appeals shall establish
allowable hours of operation for the business.
e. There shall be one (1) parking space per each full-time equivalent employee plus the
number required to serve customers, clients, pupils, or patients in addition to the
parking spaces required for the residence. Newly created parking spaces shall be
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 88
screened from adjacent properties and roadways. No more than a single commercial
vehicle belonging to the resident business person, with total vehicle weight including
chassis, body, and payload not exceeding fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds, shall be
parked on the lot in the rear yard or in the side yard set back from the street at least as
far as the front line of the dwelling and shall be screened from adjacent properties and
ways, or stored within a structure.
f. There shall be no exterior display or storage of goods or materials, and no exterior
indication of the home business or occupation other than one (1) non-illuminated
identification sign not to exceed two (2) square feet in area.
g. There shall be no noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
beyond what normally occurs in a residential area.
4. Approval
Approval for the home business shall be issued initially for a period not to exceed three
(3) years. The permit may be extended for additional three (3) year periods prior to the
expiration of the preceding permit upon determination of the Board of Appeals that all the
required conditions have been met.
5. Changes in the Home Business
Any increases in the number of non-resident employees, increases in the number of
clients, customers, or patients, changes in type of business, changes in the portions of the
premises utilized for the business, or other circumstances detailed in the submission and
application shall be reviewed by the Board of Appeals and upon determination that the
impacts on the surrounding neighborhood have increased, the Board of Appeals shall hold
a public hearing to determine whether additional conditions shall be imposed.
6. Violations
Upon notification from the Building Inspector of a violation of any conditions of the
permit, the Board of Appeals may hold a public hearing. The Board may impose
additional conditions or rescind the permit if it determines that the impacts of the home
business on the surrounding neighborhood cannot be mitigated, or if the home business
negatively impacts the residential character of the neighborhood.
7. Continued Ownership of the Home Business
All special permits granted for a home business shall be conditioned upon the continued
ownership of the premises by the applicant.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 89
D. Bed and Breakfast Facilities
1. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to preserve the existing housing stock and neighborhood
character while providing efficient use of larger homes, providing tourist accommodations
at a scale appropriate for residential districts in the town, and providing stimulus for
further local economic development efforts.
2. Special Permit Granting Authority
The Board of Appeals is designated as the Special Permit Granting Authority under this
section and may adopt rules and regulations to administer applications under this section.
3. Applications
Applications shall include a written description of the premises, evidence of ownership of
the premises, with details of any changes or additions necessitated by the alteration of the
premises to a bed and breakfast facility, a list of abutters as they appear on the most recent
tax list certified by the Assessors, application and advertising fees as specified in the
Board's Schedule of Fees, a sketch plan of the premises showing the location of the sign
(if any) and the screened parking spaces for guests, and any determinations or inspections
as required by this section or the Board. If changes or additions are proposed to the
dwelling, photographs or elevation sketches shall be submitted as part of the application.
4. Bed and Breakfast Regulations
Bed and breakfast operations shall be subject of the following regulations:
a. Meals shall only be served to guests taking lodging in the facility.
b. Rooms used for sleeping shall be part of the existing residential structure or existing
accessory building thereto (such as a barn or carriage house) and shall not have been
specifically constructed for rental purposes.
c. The premises shall retain the appearance of a single-family residence. If an accessory
building is converted to a bed and breakfast operation, it shall retain its previous
appearance from the street. No exterior alterations other than a single wall or freestanding
sign not exceeding two (2) square feet in area and those required by law to
ensure the safety of the structure shall be made.
d. The bed and breakfast operation shall not use more than fifty percent (50%) of the
floor area of the principal residence. Common areas such as the kitchens are not
included in this calculation.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 90
e. A bed and breakfast operation shall not allow any guest to stay at the bed and
breakfast operation for more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
f. If the premises are not connected to public sewer, the Board of Health shall determine
the existing septic system is adequate to serve the premises.
g. One (1) parking space per guestroom in addition to the two (2) required parking
spaces for the residence shall be provided. Newly created parking spaces may be
located only in the rear and side yard and shall be screened from adjacent properties
by a four-foot high wood or masonry fence or by sight-obscuring vegetation of the
same height.
h. No areas shall be floodlit. Drives and parking areas shall not be illuminated by lighting
fixtures higher than fifteen (15) feet. Sidewalks shall not be illuminated by lighting
fixtures higher than ten (10) feet. All lighting fixtures shall be shielded to have a total
cutoff of all light at less than ninety (90) degrees. The total cutoff of all light shall
occur within the property lines of the parcel on which the bed and breakfast operation
is located.
i. All special permits granted for the bed and breakfast operation shall be conditioned on
the continued ownership of the premises by the applicant.
j. A bed and breakfast facility shall contain no more than three (3) guest rooms.
k. The owner or their agent/manager must be on the premises the majority of the time
that guests are being lodged including overnight hours.
E. Open Space Residential Development
1. Purpose and Intent
Open Space Residential Development is the preferred form of residential development in
the Town of Sutton for residential developments in the R-1 Residential-Rural district and
R-2 Residential-Suburban district. Use of this Open Space Residential Development
bylaw will:
a. Allow for greater flexibility and creativity in the design of residential developments.
b. Encourage the permanent preservation of open space, agricultural and forestry land,
other natural resources including water bodies and wetlands, and historical and
archeological resources.
c. Maintain the town's traditional character and land use pattern in which small villages
contrast with open land.
d. Protect scenic vistas from the town's roadways and other places.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 91
e. Facilitate the construction and maintenance of streets, utilities and public services in a
more economical and efficient manner.
f. Protect existing and potential municipal water supplies.
g. Encourage a less sprawling and more efficient form of development that consumes
less open land and conforms to existing topography and natural features better than a
conventional or grid subdivision.
h. Minimize the total amount of disturbance on the site.
i. Preserve open space areas for active and passive recreational use, including the
provision of neighborhood parks and trails.
j. Encourage the provision of diverse housing opportunities and the integration of a
variety of housing types.
2. Applicability
The Planning Board may grant definitive subdivision approval for an Open Space
Residential Development for any parcel or contiguous parcels in the same ownership
totaling at least five (5) acres.
3. Procedural Requirements
a. Rules and Regulations
The Planning Board shall adopt Rules and Regulations consistent with the provisions of
this Bylaw and shall file a copy of said Rules and Regulations with the Town Clerk. Such
rules shall address the size, form, contents, and number of copies of plans and other
submittals and the procedure for the review of special permits. The Planning Board shall
establish fees for the submission, processing, and administration of the application and
shall assess review fees for the engineering and technical review of any proposal.
b. Pre-Application Meeting
A pre-application meeting between the Planning staff and the applicant is strongly
encouraged.
c. Preliminary Plan/Open Space Concept Plan
1. Applicants considering Open Space Residential Development are strongly
encouraged to submit an Open Space Concept Plan along with a Preliminary
Subdivision Plan for review by the Planning Board. An Open Space Concept Plan
consists of the existing conditions plan required in Section VI.E.3.e below, clearly
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 92
indicating areas suitable for preservation or conservation as described in Section
VI.E.5 and 6 of this Bylaw and a sketch plan of the overall development concept.
2. In addition to identifying appropriate areas for open space preservation, one of the
purposes of this review is to determine the maximum number of lots which may be
created in the Open Space Residential Development. Approval of a preliminary
plan pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 41, §81-S will also shorten the period of review
for the Definitive Subdivision and Open Space Residential Development Plan.
d. Definitive Subdivision and Open Space Residential Development Plan
The Definitive Open Space Residential Development Subdivision Plan shall be
prepared by a team including a Registered Civil Engineer, Registered Land Surveyor,
and a Registered Landscape Architect. The plan shall show:
1. Location and boundaries of the site
2. Proposed land and building uses
3. Lot lines
4. Location of open space
5. Proposed grading
6. Location and width of streets and ways, parking, landscaping
7. Existing vegetation to be retained
8. Water supply or approximate location of wells
9. Drainage
10. Proposed easements and methods of sewage disposal.
e. Existing Conditions Plan
An accompanying Existing Conditions Plan shall depict:
1. Existing topography
2. Wetlands, water bodies and the 100 year flood plain
3. All existing rights of way
4. All existing easements and structures
5. The location of significant features such as woodlands, tree lines, open fields or
meadows and scenic views
6. Watershed divides and drainage ways
7. Fences and stone walls
8. Roads, driveways, and cart paths
9. Priority areas for open space preservation and conservation as described in
Sections VI.E.5 and 6 below
10. Historic and archaeological resources
11. Boundaries of any National Register Historic District
12. The application shall also show locations of soil test pits and percolation tests,
with supporting documentation on test results. Applicants shall also include a
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 93
statement indicating the proposed use and ownership of the open space as
permitted by this Bylaw, number and types of dwelling units, and lot plans, if any.
Applicants shall refer to the Subdivision Rules and Regulations for provisions
regarding preparation and submittal of definitive subdivision plans.
f. Density/Number of Dwelling Units
1. The number of dwelling units permitted shall generally not exceed that which
would be permitted under a conventional ("grid") subdivision that complies with
the Town Zoning Bylaw and the Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the
Planning Board and any other applicable laws and regulations of the Town or the
state.
2. The Planning Board may require that a preliminary subdivision plan be submitted
to assist in demonstrating the allowable number of units.
g. Review and Decision
With respect to materials submitted, time limits for action and other such procedural
matters, the Planning Board shall act in accordance with the procedures specified in
the Town of Sutton Subdivision Rules and Regulations regarding Definitive
Subdivision submittal, review and decision. Where this bylaw requires additional
submittals, those items shall also be submitted.
h. Approval Criteria
1. Findings: The Planning Board may approve the development upon finding that it
complies with the purposes and standards of the Open Space Residential
Development bylaw and is superior in design to a conventional subdivision with
regard to protection of natural features and scenic resources of the site. The
Planning Board shall consider the following criteria in making its decision:
a. Upland open space as required by this Bylaw has been provided and generally
conforms to the Design Requirements in Section VI.E.5 of this Bylaw.
b. Approximate building sites have been identified and are not located closer than
one hundred (100) feet to wetlands and water bodies.
c. Proposed streets have been aligned to provide vehicular access to each house
in a reasonable and economical manner. Lots and streets have been located to
avoid or minimize adverse impacts on open space areas and to provide views
of and access to the open space for the lots.
d. All lots and structures meet the applicable dimensional requirements of Section
VI.E.4 of this Bylaw.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 94
2. The Planning Board's findings, including the basis of such findings, shall be stated
in the written decision of approval, conditional approval or denial of the
application for special permit.
i. Conditions
The Planning Board shall impose conditions in its decision as necessary to ensure
compliance with the purposes of this Bylaw. If individual or separate lots are
proposed, approval of an Open Space Residential Development shall be conditioned
upon Definitive Subdivision approval and shall be conditioned to provide that no
further division of land which increases the number of lots or results in an alteration to
the area to be set aside as open space may occur without a modification of the special
permit. Any alteration of lot lines or layout of ways shall require approval of the
Planning Board and shall be in compliance with the requirements of the Open Space
Residential Development Bylaw and the Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
j. Time Limit
A special permit is granted for a period of two (2) years and shall lapse if substantial
use or construction has not commenced by such date, except for good cause shown.
The Planning Board is encouraged to grant extensions to allow construction of
subdivisions within the grandfathering limits set forth in M.G.L. Chapter 40A, §6,
except where such extension would derogate from the intent and purpose of this
Bylaw.
k. Relationship to Subdivision Control Law
Nothing contained herein shall exempt a proposed subdivision from compliance with
other applicable provisions of this Bylaw or the Subdivision Rules and Regulations of
the Planning Board, nor shall it affect the right of the Board of Health and of the
Planning Board to approve, condition or disapprove a subdivision plan in accordance
with the provision of such Rules and Regulations and of the Subdivision Control Law.
To the extent possible, the application for approval of an Open Space Residential
Development and a definitive subdivision application shall be processed and
administered contemporaneously.
4. Standards and Dimensional Requirements
Where the requirements of this section differ from or conflict with the requirements in the
Table of Area Regulations and Table of Height and Bulk Regulations found elsewhere in
this Bylaw, the requirements of this section shall prevail.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 95
a. Dwelling Units per Structure
The Planning Board may permit structures to be constructed containing more than one
(1) dwelling unit, but not more than four (4) dwelling units per structure. If multiple
unit structures are to be constructed, the number of dwelling units per structure shall
be varied within the Open Space Residential Subdivision, but structures containing
four (4) dwelling units shall be limited to two (2) bedrooms per dwelling unit, and
structures containing three (3) dwelling units shall be limited to three (3) bedrooms per
dwelling unit.
b. For Structures on Individual Lots
1. Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size shall be not less than one-third (1/3) the
square footage otherwise required by the Zoning District in which the subdivision
is located or fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, whichever is less.
2. Minimum Frontage: The minimum frontage may be reduced from the frontage
otherwise required in the Zoning District, provided, however, that no lot shall have
less than fifty (50) feet of frontage and provided further that such frontage
reduction shall apply only to lots fronting on proposed internal roadways. The
sharing of driveways to reduce curb cuts is encouraged.
3. Lot Shape: All building lots must be able to contain a circle of a minimum
diameter of fifty (50) feet from the front lot line to the rear building line.
4. Setbacks: The Planning Board may reduce by up to one-half the setbacks
otherwise listed in Section III.B.3, the Table of Area Regulations, in this Bylaw, if
the Board finds that such reduction will result in better design, improved
protection of natural and scenic resources, and will otherwise comply with this
Bylaw.
c. Minimum Spacing
If structures, regardless of the number of dwelling units contained therein, are not
located on individual lots, the minimum spacing between structures shall be not less
than twenty (20) feet, unless the Fire Chief specifically recommends a greater
separation.
d. Road and Perimeter Setbacks
Every dwelling fronting on the proposed roadways shall be set back a minimum of
twenty-five (25) feet from the roadway right-of-way, and a minimum of fifty (50) feet
from the outer perimeter of the land subject to the application. This fifty (50) foot
setback shall be maintained in a naturally vegetated state to screen and buffer the
development. The Planning Board may waive this requirement if it finds the proposed
development abuts existing permanent open space.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 96
e. Required Open Space
All land area not utilized for lots or building sites, roads, and drainage shall be set
aside as open space. A minimum of forty percent (40%) of the area of the parcel shall
be provided as open space. Roadway rights-of-way shall not count toward the area to
be provided as open space.
5. Open Space Design Requirements
The location of open space provided through this bylaw shall be consistent with the
policies contained in the Master Plan and the Open Space and Recreation Plan of the
Town. The following design requirements shall apply to open space and lots provided
through this bylaw:
a. Open space shall be planned as large, contiguous areas whenever possible. Long thin
strips or narrow areas of open space (less than one hundred (100) feet wide) shall
occur only when necessary for access, as vegetated buffers along wetlands or the
perimeter of the site, or as connections between open space areas.
b. Open space shall be arranged to protect valuable natural and cultural environments
such as stream valleys, wetland buffers, unfragmented forestland and significant trees,
wildlife habitat, open fields, scenic views, trails, and archeological sites, and to avoid
development in hazardous areas such as flood plains and steep slopes. The
development plan shall take advantage of the natural topography of the parcel, and
cuts and fills shall be minimized.
c. Open space may be in more than one parcel provided that the size, shape and location
of such parcels are suitable for the designated uses. Where feasible, these parcels shall
be linked by trails.
d. Where the proposed development abuts or includes a body of water or a wetland, these
areas and the one hundred (100) foot buffer to such areas shall be incorporated into the
open space. Where appropriate; reasonable access shall be provided to shorelines.
e. The maximum number of dwelling units compatible with good design shall abut the
open space and all homeowners within the Open Space Residential Subdivision shall
have reasonable physical and visual access to the open space through internal roads,
sidewalks or paths. Such access may be limited where the Planning Board finds that
resource areas are vulnerable to trampling or other disturbance.
f. Open space shall be provided with adequate access, by a strip of land at least twenty
(20) feet wide, suitable for a footpath, from one or more streets in the development.
g. The visual impact of new development shall be minimized from scenic and historic
roads by open space parcels or buffers separating the Open Space Residential
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 97
Development from the road. Creation of new driveway openings on existing arterial
roadways and existing scenic roads shall be minimized.
h. Where a proposed development abuts land held for conservation purposes, the
development shall be configured to minimize adverse impacts to abutting conservation
land. Trail connections shall be provided where appropriate.
6. Allowable Uses of Open Space:
a. Purposes
Open space shall be used solely for recreation, conservation, agriculture or forestry
purposes by residents and/or the public. Where appropriate, multiple use of open
space is encouraged. At least one-half (½) of the required open space may be required
by the Planning Board to be left in a natural state. The proposed use of the open space
shall be specified in the application. If several uses are proposed, the plans shall
specify what uses will occur in what areas. The Planning Board shall have the
authority to approve or disapprove particular uses proposed for the open space.
b. Recreation Lands
Where appropriate to the topography and natural features of the site, the Planning
Board may require that at least ten percent (10%) of the open space or two (2) acres
(whichever is less) shall be of a shape, slope, location and condition to provide an
informal field for group recreation or community gardens for the residents of the
subdivision.
c. Leaching Facilities
If not connected to public sewerage, and subject to the approval of the Board of
Health, or as otherwise required by law, the Planning Board may permit a portion of
the open space to be used for components of sewage disposal systems serving the
subdivision, where the Planning Board finds that such use will not be detrimental to
the character, quality, or use of the open space, wetlands or water bodies, and
enhances the site plan. The Planning Board shall require adequate legal safeguards
and covenants, to be included in the deeds to the lots in the Open Space Residential
Development, that such facilities shall be adequately maintained by the lot owners
within the development.
d. Accessory Structures
Up to five percent (5%) of the open space may be set aside and designated to allow for
the construction of structures and facilities accessory to the proposed use of the open
space including parking.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 98
e. Agriculture and Forestry
Agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, or forestry provided, if the land is
not conveyed to the Town, the owner shall submit a long-term management plan for
the use of the land, including, as appropriate, sustainable forestry or agricultural
processes, pesticide, insecticide, fertilizer, and animal waste management plans, and
other issues pertaining to the stewardship of the land. The Planning Board shall
review and approve the plan in making its decision.
7. Ownership of Open Space
a. Ownership Options
At the developer's option and subject to approval by the Planning Board, all areas to
be protected as open space shall be either:
1. Conveyed to the Town to be placed under the care, custody and control of the
Conservation Commission, and be accepted by it for open space use. Land
conveyed to the Town shall be open for public use;
2. Conveyed to a non-profit organization, the principal purpose of which is the
conservation or preservation of open space, with a conservation restriction as
specified in Section VI.E.7.b below. Such organization shall be approved by the
Planning Board as a non-profit conservation organization.
3. Conveyed to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned by the owners of lots or
residential units within the development (i.e. “homeowners association”) and
placed under a conservation restriction. If such a corporation or trust is utilized,
ownership thereof shall pass with conveyance of the lots or residential units. The
developer is responsible for the maintenance of the open space and other facilities
to be held in common until such time as the homeowners association is capable of
assuming such responsibility. Thereafter, the members of the association shall
share the cost of maintaining the open space. The Planning Board shall require the
applicant to provide documentation that the homeowners association is an
automatic (mandatory) association that has been established prior to the
conveyance of any lots within the subdivision.
b. Permanent Restriction
In any case where open space is not conveyed to the Town, a permanent conservation
or agricultural preservation restriction in accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 184, §31,
approved by the Planning Board and Board of Selectmen and enforceable by the
Town, conforming to the standards of the Massachusetts Executive Office of
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 99
Environmental Affairs, Division of Conservation Services, shall be recorded to ensure
that such land shall be kept in an open or natural state and not be built for residential
use or developed for accessory uses such as parking or roadways except as permitted
by this bylaw and approved by the Planning Board. Restrictions shall provide for
periodic inspection of the open space by the Town. Such restriction shall be submitted
to the Planning Board prior to approval of the project and recorded at the Registry of
Deeds/Land Court simultaneously with recording of the definitive subdivision plan. A
management plan may be required by the Planning Board which describes how
existing woods, fields, meadows or other natural areas shall be maintained in
accordance with good conservation practices.
c. Encumbrances
All areas to be set aside as open space shall be conveyed free of any mortgage interest,
security interest, liens or other encumbrances.
d. Maintenance of Open Space
In any case where open space is not conveyed to the Town, the Town shall be granted
an easement over such land sufficient to ensure its perpetual maintenance as
conservation or recreation land and to allow the Town to enter the property for the
purposes of inspecting the maintenance of the property. Such easement shall provide
that in the event the trust or other owner fails to maintain the open space in reasonable
condition, the Town may, after notice to the lot owners and public hearing, enter upon
such land to maintain it in order to prevent or abate a nuisance. The cost of such
maintenance by the Town shall be assessed against the properties within the
development and/or to the owner of the open space. The Town may file a lien against
the lot or lots to ensure payment of such maintenance expenses.
e. Monumentation
Where the boundaries of the open space are not readily observable in the field, the
Planning Board may require placement of surveyed bounds sufficient to identify the
location of the open space.
8. Density Bonuses
The Planning Board may approve density bonuses pursuant to one or both of the
following provisions, provided, however, that in no case shall the density bonus permit
greater than a fifteen percent (15%) increase in the number of lots permitted in the
subdivision.
a. A density bonus may be permitted when the proposed subdivision provides
permanently affordable housing opportunities, whether within the Open Space
Residential Subdivision or elsewhere in Sutton. When located within the Open Space
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 100
Residential Subdivision, affordable units shall be developed concurrently with the
market rate units.
1. For each affordable dwelling unit provided under this section, one additional
dwelling unit may be permitted, up to a maximum fifteen percent (15%) increase
in number of dwelling units. For Open Space Residential Subdivisions with
individual lots for each dwelling unit or structure, the increase in dwelling units
shall correspond with an increase in the number of lots otherwise allowed to be
created in the subdivision.
b. A density bonus may be permitted when the proposed subdivision provides for public
access to open space areas within the subdivision. For every five (5) acres of land that
is donated to the municipality and open to public use, one additional building lot may
be permitted, up to a maximum fifteen percent (15%) increase in the number of
building lots. Open space that is open to public use shall be accessible from a public
way and adequate parking shall be provided to meet anticipated demand for the use.
9. Severability
If any provision of this Bylaw is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of the Bylaw shall not be affected thereby. The invalidity of any section or
sections or parts of any section or sections of this Bylaw shall not affect the validity of the
remainder of the Sutton Zoning Bylaw.
F. Traditional Neighborhood Development
1. Purpose and Intent
Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) is an alternative form of residential
development in the Town of Sutton for new residential developments in the Residential-
Suburban (R-2) and Village (V) zoning districts. Use of this Traditional Neighborhood
Development bylaw will:
a. Maintain the Town's traditional character and land use pattern in which small villages
contrast with open land.
b. Create a buffer of new, complementary residential development between the historic
village centers and the remainder of the Town.
c. Facilitate the construction and maintenance of streets, utilities and public services in a
more economical and efficient manner.
d. Preserve small-scale neighborhood open space areas for active and passive
recreational use, including the encouraging of the construction of new neighborhood
parks and playgrounds.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 101
f. Encourage the provision of diverse housing opportunities and the integration of a
variety of housing types.
2. Applicability
The Planning Board may grant a special permit for Traditional Neighborhood
Development (TND) for any parcel or contiguous parcels for twelve (12) or more
dwelling units, as calculated in this section.
3. Procedural Requirements
a. Rules and Regulations
The Planning Board shall adopt Rules and Regulations consistent with the provisions
of this bylaw and shall file a copy of said Rules and Regulations with the Town Clerk.
Such rules shall address the size, form, contents, and number of copies of plans and
other submittals, the procedure for the review of special permits for a TND, and
specify fees for the submission, administration, review, and inspection of TNDs. The
Planning Board, in concert with the Historical Commission and others, may adopt a
“pattern book” or manual providing design and layout guidance for TNDs.
b. Pre-Application Meeting
A pre-application meeting to identify issues relating to the proposed TND between the
Planning staff and the applicant is strongly encouraged. At this pre-application
meeting, applicants are encouraged to submit a TND Concept Plan for review and
comments by the Planning Board. A pre-application meeting between the applicant
and the Historical Commission or historic district commission, if any, is also
encouraged.
c. TND Concept Plan
A TND Concept Plan consists of a sketch plan showing the possible configuration of
new development and the street layouts, lotting, and number of dwelling units on all
land within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed development. This sketch plan
shall show the proposed TND in a general or schematic way. The applicant is further
encouraged to submit several alternative plans where appropriate.
d. Traditional Neighborhood Development Plan
The TND Plan shall be prepared by a team including a Registered Civil Engineer,
Registered Land Surveyor, and a Registered Landscape Architect. The plan shall
show:
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 102
1. Location and boundaries of the site
2. Proposed land and building uses
3. Lot lines
4. Location of open space
5. Proposed grading
6. Location and width of streets and ways, parking, landscaping
7. Existing vegetation and development to be retained
8. Drainage
9. Proposed easements and methods of sewage disposal
10. Historic and archaeological resources
11. Boundaries of any National Register Historic District
12. The application shall also show locations of soil test pits and percolation tests,
with supporting documentation on test results. Applicants shall also include a
statement indicating the proposed use and ownership of the open space as
permitted by this bylaw, number and types of dwelling units, and lotting plans, if
any. If the plan shows either the creation of lots approval under subdivision
control not required ("Form A lots" or "ANR plans") or a definitive subdivision
plan, applicants shall refer to the Subdivision Rules and Regulations for
provisions regarding preparation and submittal.
e. Density/Number of Dwelling Units
1. The number of dwelling units shall be determined by dividing the total
developable area by thirty thousand (30,000) square feet if the land to be
developed as a TND is serviced by municipal water and municipal sewer or if
municipal sewer is not available, a package wastewater treatment plant approved
by the Board of Health, which is constructed to accommodate twice the design
flow for the TND, the surplus to be utilized for remediation of existing dwellings
and other uses adjacent to or near the proposed TND.
[Total area of land subject to the application] - [60% of the Area of wetlands
and 100% of the area of water bodies] = Total Developable Land Area
90% [Total Developable Land Area] / 30,000 = Maximum number of
dwelling units allowed
f. Density Bonuses
The Planning Board may approve density bonuses pursuant to one or more of the
following provisions, provided, however, that in no case shall the density bonus permit
greater than a twenty-five percent (25%) total increase in the number of dwelling units
permitted in the TND as calculated above.
1. A density bonus may be permitted when the proposed TND provides permanently
affordable housing opportunities. For each affordable dwelling unit provided under
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 103
this section, one (1) additional dwelling unit may be permitted, up to a maximum
fifteen percent (15%) increase in number of dwelling units.
2. A density bonus may be permitted when the proposed TND develops and
constructs a playground or park on required open space areas within the
development. For every one-half (½) acre of land developed and constructed as a
playground, playing field, tot lot, or other active recreation area for children and
donated to the Town, one (1) additional dwelling unit may be permitted, up to a
maximum fifteen percent (15%) increase in the number of dwelling units. When
deemed necessary by the Planning Board, adequate parking shall be provided to
meet anticipated demand for the use.
g. Design Standards
1. Lots: The parcel as a whole shall be systemically divided into streets or ways, lots,
and public space. The minimum lot size shall be relatively uniform throughout the
TND, varying for the number of dwelling units per structure if necessary. Unless
the existing lotting and street layout pattern abutting the TND would indicate
otherwise, the lots shall be nominally rectangular. Whenever possible, lots shall
not be created such that dwellings on them face or front on existing arterial roads
in town.
2. Buildings within the TND shall be orientated to face the sidewalk and street.
Parking shall locate along the side of buildings, setback equal to the structure and
screened from the street, or in the rear of the lot. Lighting, including street lights,
shall be generally historic in nature and not exceeding sixteen (16) feet in height.
The architecture of the dwellings and other structures shall be consistent with the
historic and design context of the abutting neighborhood. Accessory buildings, if
any, shall set-back deeply on lots.
3. The Planning Board shall establish standards and specifications for streets,
sidewalks, street trees, and the paved width of streets.
4. Open Space: Two thousand (2,000) square feet of public open space is required for
each dwelling unit. This open space may take any one of the following forms:
a. An area of land suitably located and configured to be developed and used as a
playground, playing field, tot lot, or other active recreation area for children.
b. Community garden plots for TND and neighborhood residents.
c. Greens, commons, or other public green spaces for passive recreation.
d. Conservation land.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 104
e. Greenspace buffer between the TND and an existing abutting nonresidential
use.
f. Public trails or bikeways.
g. Leaching Facilities: If not connected to public sewerage, and subject to the
approval of the Board of Health, as otherwise required by law, the Planning
Board may permit a portion of the open space to be used for components of
sewage disposal systems serving the TND, where the Planning Board finds that
such use will not be detrimental to the character, quality, or use of the open
space, wetlands or water bodies, and enhances the overall plan of the TND.
The Planning Board shall require adequate legal safeguards and covenants to
be included in the deed to the lots in the TND that such sewage disposal
facilities shall be adequately maintained by the homeowners. The Planning
Board may require that such septic disposal system be conveyed to the Town at
no cost.
h. Accessory Structures: Up to five percent (5%) of the open space may be set
aside and designated to allow for the construction of structures and facilities
accessory to the proposed use of the open space including parking.
i. Another open space or conservation use approved by the Planning Board.
j. Any combination of the above as approved by the Planning Board.
h. Standards and Dimensional Requirements
Where the requirements of this section differ from or conflict with the requirements in
the Table of Area Regulations and Table of Height and Bulk Regulations found
elsewhere in this Bylaw, the requirements of this section shall prevail.
1. Dwelling Units per Structure
Consistent with the character, scale, and massing of existing adjacent residential
developments, the Planning Board may permit structures to be constructed
containing more than one (1) dwelling unit, but not more than four (4) dwelling
units per structure. If multiple unit structures are to be constructed, the number of
dwelling units per structure shall be varied, but structures containing four (4)
dwelling units shall be limited to two (2) bedrooms per dwelling unit and
structures containing three (3) dwelling units shall be limited to three (3) bedrooms
per dwelling unit.
2. Front Set-Back
Instead of a minimum setback for dwellings within the TND, structures shall be
built to the "build-to" line twenty (20) feet back from the street right-of-way line
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 105
for minor streets, twenty-five (25) feet back from the street right-of-way line for
arterial and collector streets (unless a greater distance is recommended by the
police chief, highway superintendent, or the Board's engineer). Corner lots shall
have front build-to dimensions facing both streets, although the side lot lines shall
have a minimum setback of ten (10) feet (or one-half (½) the greater distance if
required by the fire chief.)
3. For Structures Not on Individual Lots
If structures, regardless of the number of dwelling units contained therein, are not
located on individual lots, the minimum spacing between structures shall be not
less than twenty (20) feet, unless the Fire Chief specifically recommends a greater
separation.
4. For Structures on Individual Lots:
a. Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size shall be not less than one-third (1/3)
the square footage otherwise required by the zoning district in which the
subdivision is located or eight thousand (8,000) square feet, whichever is less.
b. Minimum Frontage: The minimum frontage may be reduced from the frontage
otherwise required in the zoning district, provided, however, frontage shall be
determined as the linear distance needed per lot, based on either the average
frontages on existing residential lots abutting and adjacent to the TND, or the
linear measure generated by separating structures by twenty (20) feet (or
greater distance if required by the fire chief). In only the most exceptional
situations shall the frontage be less than sixty (60) feet.
c. For rear setbacks, the Planning Board may reduce by up to one-half (½) the
setbacks otherwise listed in the Table of Area Regulations in this Bylaw, if the
Board finds that such reduction will result in better design of the TND as a
whole.
i. Ownership of Open Space
Ownership Options: At the developer's option and subject to approval by the Planning
Board, all areas to be protected as open space shall be either:
1. Conveyed to the Town to be placed under the care, custody and control of the
Conservation Commission, and be accepted by it for a park or open space use.
Land conveyed to the Town shall be open for public use.
2. Conveyed to a non-profit organization, the principal purpose of which is the
conservation or preservation of open space, with a conservation restriction as
specified in Section VI.F.9 below. Such organization shall be approved by the
Planning Board as a non-profit conservation organization.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 106
3. Conveyed to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned by the owners of lots or
residential units within the development (i.e. "homeowners association") and
placed under a conservation restriction. If such a corporation or trust is utilized,
ownership thereof shall pass with conveyance of the lots or residential units. The
developer is responsible for the maintenance of the open space and other facilities
to be held in common until such time as the homeowners association is capable of
assuming such responsibility. Thereafter, the members of the association shall
share the cost of maintaining the open space. The Planning Board shall require the
applicant to provide documentation that the homeowners association is an
automatic (mandatory) association that has been established prior to the
conveyance of any lots within the subdivision.
j. Permanent Restriction
In any case where open space is not conveyed to the Town, a permanent conservation
or agricultural preservation restriction in accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 184, §31,
approved by the Planning Board and Board of Selectmen and enforceable by the
Town, conforming to the standards of the Massachusetts Executive Office of
Environmental Affairs, Division of Conservation Services, shall be recorded to ensure
that such land shall be kept in an open or natural state and not be built for residential
use or developed for accessory uses such as parking or roadways except as permitted
by this Bylaw and approved by the Planning Board. Restrictions shall provide for
periodic inspection of the open space by the Town. Such restriction shall be submitted
to the Planning Board prior to approval of the project and recorded at the Registry of
Deeds/Land Court simultaneously with recording of the definitive subdivision plan. A
management plan may be required by the Planning Board which describes how
existing woods, fields, meadows or other natural areas shall be maintained in
accordance with good conservation practices.
k. Encumbrances
All areas to be set aside as open space shall be conveyed free of any mortgage interest,
security interest, liens or other encumbrances.
l. Maintenance of Open Space
In any case where open space is not conveyed to the Town, the Town shall be granted
an easement over such land sufficient to ensure its perpetual maintenance as
conservation or recreation land. Such easement shall provide that in the event the trust
or other owner fails to maintain the open space in reasonable condition, the Town
may, after notice to the lot owners and public hearing, enter upon such land to
maintain it in order to prevent or abate a nuisance. The cost of such maintenance by
the Town shall be assessed against the properties within the development and/or to the
owner of the open space. The Town may file a lien against the lot or lots to ensure
payment of such maintenance expenses.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 107
m. Monumentation
Where the boundaries of the open space are not readily observable in the field, the
Planning Board may require placement of surveyed bounds or other permanent
markers sufficient to identify the location of the open space.
4. Review and Decision
a. Comments and Recommendations from Local Boards
Upon receipt of the application and the required plans, the Planning Board shall
transmit one copy each to the Board of Health, the Conservation Commission, the
Park and Recreation Commission, and the Historical Commission or historic district
commission, if any. Within forty (45) days of their receipt of the application/plans,
these agencies shall submit any recommendations to the Planning Board. The
Planning Board shall act on applications according to the procedure specified in
M.G.L. Chapter 40A, §9. Notice shall be provided of hearings in accordance with
Chapter 40A, §11 and Chapter 41, §81-T. Public hearings for a definitive subdivision
application if required and the special permit application shall be conducted
concurrently.
b. Approval Criteria
1. Findings
The Planning Board may approve the development upon finding that:
a. The proposed development complies with the purposes and standards of this
Traditional Neighborhood Development Bylaw.
b. The proposed development is superior in design and layout to a conventional
development with regard to the historic and scenic resources near the site .
c. The proposed streets and ways have been aligned to provide vehicular access
to each house in a reasonable and economical manner.
d. All lots and structures meet the applicable dimensional requirements of the
Sutton Zoning Bylaw, except as provided for in the TND section of this
Bylaw.
e. The Planning Board's findings, including the basis of such findings, shall be
stated in the written decision of approval, conditional approval or denial of the
application for special permit.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 108
2 Conditions
The Planning Board shall impose conditions in its decision as necessary to ensure
compliance with the purposes of this Bylaw. Approval of a Traditional
Neighborhood Development shall be conditioned upon Definitive Subdivision
approval and shall be conditioned to provide that no further division of land which
increases the number of lots or results in an alteration to the area to be set aside as
open space may occur without a modification of the special permit. Any alteration
of lot lines or layout of ways shall require approval of the Planning Board and
shall be in compliance with the requirements of the Traditional Neighborhood
Development Bylaw and the Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
c. Time Limit
A special permit is granted for a period of two (2) years and shall lapse if substantial
use or construction has not commenced by such date, except for good cause shown.
The Planning Board is encouraged to grant extensions to allow construction of
subdivisions within the grandfathering limits set forth in M.G.L. Chapter 40A, §6,
except where such extension would derogate from the intent and purpose of this
Bylaw.
d. Relationship to Subdivision Control Law
Nothing contained herein shall exempt a proposed subdivision from compliance with
other applicable provisions of this Bylaw or the Subdivision Rules and Regulations of
the Planning Board, nor shall it affect the right of the Board of Health and of the
Planning Board to approve, condition or disapprove a subdivision plan in accordance
with the provision of such Rules and Regulations and of the Subdivision Control Law.
To the extent possible, the application for approval of a Traditional Neighborhood
Development and a definitive subdivision application shall be processed and
administered contemporaneously.
5. Severability
If any provision of this bylaw is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of the bylaw shall not be affected thereby. The invalidity of any section or
sections or parts of any section or sections of this bylaw shall not affect the validity of the
remainder of the Sutton Zoning Bylaw.
G. Adult Entertainment Use Bylaw
1. Authority
This bylaw in enacted pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 40A and pursuant to the Town’s
authority under the Home Rule amendment to the Massachusetts Constitution to serve the
compelling Town interests in limiting the location of and preventing the clustering and
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 109
concentration of certain adult entertainment enterprises, as defined and designated herein,
in response to studies demonstrating their deleterious effect in generating crime and
blight.
2. Purpose
a. It is the purpose of this bylaw to address and mitigate the secondary effects of adult
entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses that are referenced and
defined herein. Secondary effects have been shown to include increased crime,
adverse impacts on the business climate of the town, adverse impacts on the property
values of residential and commercial property, and adverse impacts on the quality of
life in the Town. All of said secondary impacts are adverse to the health, safety and
general welfare of the Town of Sutton and its inhabitants.
b. The provisions of this bylaw have neither the purpose nor intent of imposing a
limitation on the content of any communicative matter or materials, including sexually
oriented matter or materials.
c. Similarly, it is not the purpose or intent of this bylaw to restrict or deny access by
adults to adult entertainment establishments or to sexually oriented matter or materials
that are protected by Constitution of the United States or of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, nor to restrict or deny rights that distributors or exhibitors of such
matter or materials may have to sell, rent, distribute or exhibit such matter or
materials.
d. Neither is it the purpose or intent of this bylaw to legalize the sale, rental, distribution
or exhibition of obscene or other illegal matter or materials.
3. Definitions
Adult Entertainment Uses shall include the following:
a. Adult Bookstores, as defined by M.G.L. Chapter 40A, §9A;
b. Adult Motion Picture Theaters, as defined by M.G.L. Chapter 40A, §9A;
c. Adult Paraphernalia Store, as defined by M.G.L. Chapter 40A, §9A;
d. Adult Video Store, as defined by M.G.L. Chapter 40A, §9A;
e. Establishment which displays live nudity for its patrons, as defined by M.G.L. Chapter
40A, §9A.
4. Adult Entertainment Uses by Special Permit
Adult entertainment uses shall only be allowed by special permit granted by the Zoning
Board of Appeals. Such special permit shall not be granted unless each of the following
standards has been met:
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 110
a. The application for a special permit for an adult entertainment use shall provide the
name and address of the legal owner of the establishment, the legal owner of the
property, and the manager of the proposed establishment.
b. No adult entertainment use Special Permit shall be issued to any person convicted of
violating the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 119, §63 or M.G.L. Chapter 272, §28.
c. Adult entertainment uses shall not be located within:
1. Seven hundred fifty (750) feet of the nearest residential or village zoning district;
or
2. One thousand (1000) feet of the nearest church, school, licensed child care facility,
public library, park, playground, play field, youth center; or
3. Five hundred (500) feet from the nearest adult entertainment use as defined herein;
or
4. Five hundred (500) feet from the nearest establishment licensed under M.G. L.
Chapter 138, §12 (liquor license).
d. All building openings, entries and windows shall be screened in such a manner as to
prevent visual access to the interior of the establishment by the public
e. No adult entertainment use shall be allowed to display for advertisement or other
purposes any signs, placards or other like materials to the general public on the
exterior of the building or on the interior where the same may be seen through the
glass or other like transparent material any sexually explicit figures or words as
defined in M.G.L. Chapter 272, §31.
f. No adult entertainment use shall be allowed to disseminate or offer to disseminate
adult matter or paraphernalia to minors or suffer minors to view displays or linger on
the premises.
g. No adult entertainment use shall have flashing lights visible from outside the
establishment.
h. No adult entertainment use shall have a freestanding accessory sign.
i. No adult entertainment use shall exceed two thousand (2,000) sq. ft. per building.
j. Adult entertainment uses shall also undergo Site Plan Review per section IV.C of this
Bylaw.
5. Conditions
The Special Permit Granting Authority may impose reasonable conditions, safeguards and
limitations on time or use of any special permit granted. The Special Permit Granting
authority shall require that the any such special permit granted shall be personal to the
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 111
applicant, shall not run with the land and shall expire upon the expiration of the
applicant’s lease or upon sale or transfer of the subject property.
6. Expiration
A special permit to conduct an adult entertainment use shall expire after a period of three
(3) calendar years from its date of issuance and shall be automatically renewable for
successive three year periods thereafter, provided that a written request for such renewal is
made to the Special Permit Granting Authority prior to said expiration and that no
objection to said renewal is made and sustained by the Special Permit Granting Authority
based upon the standards applied at the time that the original permit was granted.
7. Severability
The provisions of this section are severable and, in the event that any provisions of this
article are determined to be invalid for any reason, the remaining provisions shall remain
in full force and effect.
H. Retreat Lots
For the purposes of creating reasonable and safe residential use of backland, there may be
established so-called retreat lots. A Form A plan creating a buildable retreat lot may be
endorsed by the Planning Board after the issuance of a special permit by the Planning
Board in accordance with this Section with the exception of access to a retreat lot via a
common driveway for which a legal Special Permit has been acquired.
1. Procedure
The applicant shall file seven (7) copies of the proposed Form A land division plan as well
as all other materials required for an application for Special Permit.
At a minimum the Form A shall show:
a. Property owner
b. Name of Registered Professional Land Surveyor and stamp
c. Zoning district
d. Lot area
e. Lot dimensions
f. Regularity factor or buildable area notation
g. Locus
h. Notation: “The retreat lot depicted on this Form A shall never be further divided.”
The plan shall also comply with the standards for Form A plans detailed in the Sutton
Subdivision Rules and Regulations and M.G.L. Chapter 41, §81K-GG.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 112
2. Requirements
A Special Permit may not be granted unless the following conditions have been met:
a. Said lot shall be entirely within a residential zoning district.
b. Said lot shall have a minimum street frontage of fifty (50) feet and a width of not less
than fifty (50) feet at all points.
c. The area of said lot shall be at least three (3) times the minimum required lot area in
the applicable residential zoning district. Said lot shall also have at least three (3)
times the required upland area.
d. Said lot shall be at least two hundred fifty (250) feet from any other lot granted a
special permit pursuant to this section, measured at the road frontage.
e. Said lot shall not be further divided. The Form A plan submitted to the Planning
Board for endorsement after grant of the special permit pursuant to this section, shall
contain a notation as in section VI.H.1.h above. Prior to granting of the special
permit, the proponent shall provide a covenant, in a form acceptable to the Planning
Board, prohibiting further division of said retreat lot in perpetuity.
f. Access from the frontage of said lot to the principal structure on said lot shall be
within the boundary lines of said lot and shall not be via a right-of-way or any public
or private easement over an adjacent lot with the exception of access to a retreat lot via
a common driveway for which a legal Special Permit has been acquired.
g. Frontage of said lot shall be situated entirely on a public way.
h. Said lots shall either (1) meet the regularity factor established in Section III.B.2 of this
Bylaw , or (2) contain a contiguous buildable area of at least 200’ X 200’.
i. Said lot shall comply with the Sutton Zoning Bylaw and Subdivision Rules and
Regulations in all other respects.
j. The special permit shall contain a condition requiring that the access from the frontage
of said lot to the principal structure (driveway) shall be of bituminous surface, no
greater than twelve percent (12%) grade with a minimum paved width of twelve (12)
feet and cleared width of fifteen (15) feet. If a retreat lot is being created containing a
pre-existing home that is to remain, and installation of a bituminous driveway is not
practical, safe, and/or would cause environmental issues, the Planning Board may
waive this requirement after findings in open meeting that a waiver may be made to
allow an environmentally and structurally sound non-bituminous driveway.
k. Underground utilities shall be provided on retreat lots, unless the Planning Board
makes findings in open meeting that underground utilities are not practical due to
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 113
extreme topographical or environmental constraints and/or safety issues. Above
ground utilities shall not be allowed solely for the convenience and/or preference of a
petitioner. If a Retreat Lot contains an existing dwelling that is to remain, the
applicant may maintain existing above ground utilities.
l. The house number of the retreat lot shall be clearly visible at the street.
m. An occupancy permit for any structure on the retreat lot shall not be granted until all
conditions of the special permit are 100% complete including driveway construction.
3. Recording
After the grant of the special permit by the Planning Board and endorsement of the Form
A plan by the Planning Board, the proponent shall provide said board with recorded
copies of both the Form A plan and covenant. The recorded plan and covenant must be
received prior to the building permit being issued.
I. Common Driveways
Common Driveway - A driveway which provides access to more than one lot, each of which
has at least the minimum required frontage on a town way as required by the Zoning Bylaw.
Private Driveway – A driveway which serves a singular private house lot.
Common driveways may be allowed by Special Permit from the Planning Board in all zoning
districts when deemed in the best interest of the Town under the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter
40A §9 and in accordance with the following provisions:
1. Lots to be served by a common drive must meet the minimum dimensional standards of
the Zoning Bylaw in effect at the time they were created.
2. Common drives may only access the street where the lots served have required legal
frontage.
3. Minimum width of eighteen feet (18’)
4. Maximum grade of ten percent (10%), three percent (3%) within 50 feet of the street line.
5. Maximum length of five hundred feet (500’)
6. No closer than 50’ to any intersecting way
7. Construction: 6” gravel road base, 1 ½” binder course, 1” top course
8. Maximum number of lots that may be served by a common drive is three (3)
9. Minimum center line radius of 60’
10. Said driveway shall be located entirely within the lots served.
11. Sight distance at the street line shall be in accordance with MHD standards, in no case
shall it be less than 200 feet.
12. The plan for the common driveway and the deed to lots serviced by a common driveway
shall contain a restriction that said common driveway shall remain private in perpetuity,
no parking will be allowed on the common drive and all roadway maintenance, snowplowing
and rubbish collection shall be the land owners responsibility. A copy of said
recorded deeds shall be provided to the Board prior to issuance of a Building Permit for
the homes located on said lots.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 114
13. Private driveways branching off the common drive shall be reviewed and approved in
each case by highway, fire and police to ensure emergency vehicle access. This
stipulation applies specifically to private drives off a common driveway.
14. Underground utilities shall be provided on common driveways, unless the Planning Board
makes findings in open meeting that underground utilities are not practical due to extreme
topographical or environmental constraints and/or safety issues. Above ground utilities
shall not be allowed solely for the convenience and/or preference of a petitioner.
15. An occupancy permit for any structure accessed via the common driveway shall not be
granted until the house numbers of the lots serviced by the common driveway are clearly
posted on a single permanent post at the street so as to be visible from both directions of
travel, and are also posted on a permanent post at the point at which each private driveway
splits from the common driveway.
16. Applicants must provide drainage calculations relative to the design of the common
driveway in accordance with the standards of Section 4.B. of the Subdivision Rules &
Regulations, and propose appropriate mitigation for impacts to stormwater quantity and
quality.
17. An occupancy permit for any structure accessed via the common driveway shall not be
granted until the common driveway site work is 100% complete. In order to be
considered complete, the design engineer must submit a stamped letter certifying the
common driveway site work has been constructed as shown on the approved plans.
J. Continued Care Retirement Community
Section 1 – Intent and Applicability
The intent of this section is to allow flexibility in development of parcels for housing and
related services for retired and aging persons, with particular interests in meeting the needs of
residents of Sutton. Continued Care Retirement Communities (CCRC), as defined herein, may
be allowed upon grant of a Special Permit from the Planning Board.
Section 2 – Definition
As used in this bylaw, Continued Care Retirement Community (CCRC) shall mean a
development on a parcel of five (5) acres or more which may be comprised of any type or
combination of dwelling units as defined herein. Said development may include independent
housing, congregate housing, assisted living and restorative care/skilled nursing facilities. A
CCRC shall operate under common management serving the principal purpose of assisting the
elderly in maintaining an independent lifestyle. Said development shall be limited to persons
at least one of whom is each household shall have attained an age of fifty-five (55) years. No
persons under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed to permanently reside in said
dwellings. The program of in house resident services offered by a CCRC shall be primarily
for the benefit of residents and their guests and shall include a majority of the following:
? Restorative care/skilled nursing
? Transportation services
? Financial assistance
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 115
? Barber/beautician
? Medical evaluation/health care maintenance
? Home health
? Assisted care
? Adult day care and respite care services
? Food services
? Cleaning services
? Exercise, recreational, educational and social services
? Other services, activities and accessory uses incidental to the operation of a continued care
development as individually approved at the discretion of the Planning Board.
In house services may only be provided to residents and their guests and may not display
exterior advertising. The program of in house services offered by the CCRC shall be
specified in the special permit application and the scale of each service shall be in proportion
to the number of dwelling units in the CCRC and subject to approval by the Planning Board.
Section 3 – Types of dwellings and facilities permitted
The Planning Board may grant a Special Permit to allow a CCRC in any zoning district. A
Special Permit granted by the Planning Board may allow the construction of detached or
attached dwellings of any combination, and may also allow the construction of a restorative
care center/skilled nursing facility/clinic, congregate housing, assisted living facility and
accommodation for in house resident services. All facilities shall fully comply with standards
of the Architectural Access Board. Enclosed or non-enclosed walkways connecting buildings
shall be permitted.
Independent Living Retirement Housing - As used in this bylaw, independent Living
Retirement Housing means private residential dwelling units, individually equipped with a
minimum of a kitchen, bedroom, bathroom and living area. Geared toward independently
functioning adults, this housing typically may offer on-site supportive services and is
designed to be barrier free and may include emergency call features complemented by
housing management and maintenance services.
Congregate Housing – As used in this bylaw, Congregate housing means private dwelling
units /apartments which may have kitchen facilities within a complex containing central
dining and other common areas and is designed for an adult population requiring some
supportive services including but not limited to meals, housekeeping, home health, and other
supportive services. Congregate Housing under this section of the bylaw must obtain all
required permits and/or licenses that are required to operate such facility by any department of
the United States of America, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the Town of Sutton.
Assisted Living Facility – As used in this bylaw, as Assisted Living Facility means a twentyfour
(24) hour staff along with private dwelling units which may contain independent
efficiency kitchens, but which contain common kitchen, dining and other activity areas.
Assisted Living facilities are geared to an adult population which may have difficulty
functioning independently and may require oversight including, but not limited to the
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 116
provision of a full meal plan, transportation services, personal care and assistance with
medications. Special care programs specifically designed for adults with memory loss are
included in this category. Assisted Living facilities under this section of the bylaw must
obtain all required permits and/or licenses required to operate such facility by any department
of the United States of America, the Common wealth of Massachusetts including Certification
by the Executive Office of Elder Affairs pursuant to M.G.L., Chapter 19D and the Town of
Sutton.
Restorative Care/Skilled Nursing Facility - Includes any institution which provides services
primarily to three or more individuals admitted thereto with long-term nursing, convalescent
or rehabilitative care; supervision and care incident to old age; or retirement home care for
elderly persons and includes services provided by nursing homes, convalescent homes, long
term care facilities, rest homes, infirmaries for older adults, charitable homes for the aged.
Restorative care/Skilled nursing facilities under this section of the bylaw must obtain all
applicable permits and licenses required by any agency of the United States of America, the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the Town of Sutton.
Dwelling Units – One or more living or sleeping rooms arranged for the use one or more
individuals living as a single housekeeping unit with individuals or congregate cooking,
living, sanitary and sleeping facilities, excluding mobile homes and trailers. The intent of this
definition is to define a “home” with private sleeping rooms rather than a dormitory
arrangement of sleeping quarters.
Section 4 – Specific Requirements
A CCRC as provided herein shall also be subject to the following specific requirements.
Frontage & Acreage
The minimum contiguous road frontage for any project developed under this bylaw shall be
100’. Said frontage shall be on a public way.
The minimum acreage of a project developed under this bylaw shall be 5 acres.
Density, Affordability & Preference
The maximum number of dwelling units permitted shall be determined as follows:
Land area contained in wetlands, as defined by M.G.L., Ch. 131, and permanent easements
may not be utilized when calculating density. The Site Plan shall show this calculation.
? Independent Living detached – ½ acre per dwelling unit
? Independent Living attached – 20,000 s.f. for the first unit + 12,000 for each additional
unit
? Congregate housing, assisted living, restorative care/skilled nursing. - 7 dwelling/care
units per acre
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 117
Ten percent (10%) of the dwelling units in the Continued Care Retirement Community shall
be available to households that qualify as low to moderate income under HUD guidelines.
An increase in the number of units of up to twenty percent (20%) of the maximum dwelling
units allowed may be permitted on a one to one basis for units above and beyond the required
ten percent (10%). The Planning Board shall require that the developer provide legally
enforceable assurances, which are acceptable to the Planning Board that the affordable
dwelling units will continue to be affordable in perpetuity. Affordable units shall be dispersed
throughout the development and shall be indistinguishable from market rate units.
Except for restorative care/skilled nursing facilities, individual dwelling units shall be a
minimum of 1,000 s.f. Care units in restorative care/skilled nursing facilities shall be a
minimum of 700 s.f. Dwelling units shall have a maximum of 2 bedrooms.
The developer shall provide a plan and evidence their efforts to attract existing Sutton
residents to the project.
Setback & Height
All dwelling units and group facilities shall be setback from property lines a minimum of 70
feet. This setback is intended to remain in a vegetated state. Where alterations to this area are
determined necessary by the Planning Board, the Board may require fencing, plantings or
other means to make this setback a visual buffer to abutting properties.
Minimum separation between structures is 75’.
The maximum height of any structure within a CCRC shall be 35 feet in height, not including
uninhabited appurtenant/decorative structures.
No more than 25,000 s.f. shall be allowed in a single structure. Massing shall be carefully
considered particularly when siting larger structures that should be located to minimize their
impact on abutting uses.
Structures shall be designed with a goal of being consistent with adjacent/area architecture
(ie: farm village, mill village, Victorian era neighborhood), when applicable. When no unique
context exists, said structures shall contain elements of architectural interest such as Victorian
or art deco ornamentation, porches, cornices, unique windows and doors, varying roof lines,
use of stone, etc… that provide the project with a distinctive identity.
Coverage & Open Space
Lot coverage for building footprints shall not exceed 25% and for all impervious surfaces
shall not exceed 50% of the total parcel.
The remainder of the parcel shall remain as open space. No more than 50% of the open space
area shall be wetlands or contain infrastructure facilities such as detention basins. Said open
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 118
space may contain active and passive recreational and social facilities and uses as approved
by the Planning Board.
The Open Space shall be situated so it is usable by all residents of the CCRC, and is not
located to imply use or “ownership” by only the unit or units in its proximity. There shall be
at least one bulk area of open space equal to at least one third of the total required open space.
The open space shall be delineated on the site plans and shall be protected by a recorded
restriction enforceable by the Town of Sutton.
Parking & Loading
Off street parking spaces shall be provided as follows:
Single family detached dwellings - one and one half (1.5) per dwelling unit
Congregate housing – one per dwelling unit
Assisted living and restorative care/skilled nursing - .5 per dwelling unit
Loading – One per 40,000 s.f., at least one loading space per project
Infrastructure
All roads, driveways, utilities and drainage facilities shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the Town of Sutton Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
Section 5 – Other Objectives
The Following objectives are important in the development of CCRC and are to be considered
by the Planning Board in determining whether to grant a Special Permit for a CCRC.
a. It is desirable to minimize maintenance costs and environmental impacts through
reduction, to the extent reasonable, in the amount of impervious areas, utilities and
drainage systems per dwelling unit served.
b. It is desirable to increase the size of contiguous areas assured of preservation in a
natural state and the number of off-street pathways and trails, recreational areas and
wilderness areas open to all residents of the CCRC.
c. It is desirable that all existing scenic vistas be respected and preserved and that new
scenic vistas be created.
d. It is desirable to increase vehicular safety by having fewer, better located and designed
egresses onto existing streets.
e. It is desirable to preserve environmental quality by reduction of 1) the total area over
which vegetation is disturbed by cut , fill or displacement; 2) work on slopes over
15%; 3) work in the buffer area and river way protection areas as defined by M.G.L.,
Chapter 131
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 119
f. It is desirable that the design of dwellings and facilities be sensitive to the traditional
architectural styles in the area of the development and that building mass and siting is
carefully considered to reduce the impact of the development on the natural landscape.
Section 6 – Application and Submission Requirements
The general procedure to obtain a Special Permit from the Planning Board for a continued
care development shall conform to M.G.L. Chapter 40A §9.
A. Application – 2 originals Special Permit Application
B. Plans – 12 sets to include existing and proposed site plan, road profiles, open space and
landscaping plan, elevations (detailing color and materials), floor plans, detail sheets
related to previous plans. Said plans shall meet the specific requirements as detailed in the
Town of Sutton Site Plan Review Bylaw and Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
C. Fees – Filing fee - $1,000 + $50 per dwelling unit with a minimum of $1,500 and
maximum of $15,000, will be required at the time of submission. The applicant must also
submit a check covering the cost of the legal ad and the certified mailings at the time of
submission.
Five hundred dollars ($500) will be deducted from the filing fee to cover costs for
administration and staff review of the plans, all billings received from the Town’s
consultants will be deducted from the filing fee. If the billings exceed the amount of the
filing fee, the Town will bill the applicant for the difference. All bills must be paid prior
to action on the project. If monies are left after all fees and billings are paid, any excess
funds will be returned to the applicant.
The applicant will be responsible for all reasonable fees or costs incurred in reviewing
such plans. The Planning Board is authorized to retain a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, attorney or other professional consultant to review and
advise the Board on any or all aspects of the plan and/or related documents.
Senior Services Fee – As it is likely that many of the residents of the CCRC will utilized
services supported by the Sutton Senior Center, a one time fee of $100 per unit shall be
required to be paid to the Sutton Senior Center prior to issuance of a building permit. Said
fee shall be used to on and off site support services available to seniors through the Sutton
Senior Center.
D. Support Material – The applicant shall provide a traffic study and impact statement as
detailed in the Town of Sutton Site Plan Review Bylaw.
Section 7 – Waivers
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 120
The Board may waive strict compliance with any provision of this bylaw if it deems it in the
public interest and determines that the intent of the bylaw has been maintained. Written record
must be kept of such waivers including the reasons for them.
Section 8 – Conditions
The Planning Board may impose reasonable conditions to safeguard the surrounding area, or
otherwise serve the purpose of the bylaw.
Section 9 – Appeals
Any appeal to the Planning Board’s decision under this section of the bylaw may be made in
accordance with M.G.L., Chapter 40A §17.
K. Drive through Windows
The intent of this section of the bylaw is to recognize that this use produces unique traffic
generation and visual concerns. This bylaw is intended to carefully regulate the establishment
of drive through windows to ensure a higher visual quality of development as well as safe
operation of the use both on the parcel and in relation to abutting ways.
The Board may waive strict compliance with any provision of this bylaw if it deems it in the
public interest and determines that the intent of the bylaw has been maintained. Written record
must be kept of such waivers including the reasons for them.
a. Minimum drive through queue on site shall comply with the following table. In addition,
the applicant shall design and designate an additional 50% of the required number of queue
spaces on the plan should it become necessary to construct them in the future. If queuing
issues arise in the future, the Board shall have the right to require the applicant to construct
these additional spaces immediately.
Restaurants and fast food establishment 20 cars
Bank 4 cars
Pharmacy 4 cars
b. Queue lines may not pass through and/or divide parking areas.
c. All buildings, parking and circulation areas shall be setback a minimum of 100 feet off the
roadway. This area shall remain undisturbed except for where the Planning Board gives
permission for alterations.
d. Landscaping and other aesthetic means shall be utilized to contain and screen the queue
line.
e. On site circulation plans shall carefully minimize conflicts between drive through
customers and walk in customers as well as deliveries to the site.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 121
f. A minimum 50’ buffer shall be maintained along all side and rear lot lines. This area shall
remain undisturbed except for where the Planning Board gives permission for alterations.
A larger buffer may be required in areas abutting residential uses to further reduce visual
and audible impacts.
g. Due to sight distance and traffic concerns, there shall be no less than 1000’ separation
between lots with restaurant drive through windows.
h. There shall be separate parking and circulation for cars and large trucks/vehicles to
maximize safety and facilitate smooth traffic flow on site.
L. Accessory Apartments
The intent of this section of the bylaw is to 1) increase the diversity of housing options for
town residents in response to demographic changes, particularly the demand for housing for
senior family members; 2) encourage better utilization of existing housing stock while
maintaining the appearance and character of the town’s single family neighborhoods; and 3)
eliminate the continued construction of illegal unregulated apartment units, and 4) create
another potential source of affordable housing units.
An accessory apartment is a dwelling unit constructed within and/or added onto a single
family dwelling or detached accessory building. Accessory apartments must be complete
separate housekeeping units that can be isolated from the original unit of the single family
dwelling.
The Board may waive strict compliance with any provision of this bylaw if it deems it in the
public interest and determines that the intent of the bylaw has been maintained. Written record
must be kept of such waivers including the reasons for them.
a. An accessory apartment shall only have no more than one bedroom.
b. Only one (1) accessory apartment shall be allowed per lot.
c. The owner(s) of the property shall reside on the premises.
d. An accessory apartment shall be designed to maintain the appearance of the single family
dwelling or which it is a part, and shall be clearly subordinate to the single family
dwelling. A detached accessory apartment shall look like a barn or garage.
e. Accessory apartments shall not exceed 1,200 s.f. No floor area may be excluded from this
calculation, other than unfinished attic or basement areas, or storage areas that cannot be
accessed directly from the accessory apartment.
f. No more than two (2) persons may occupy an accessory apartment.
g. Board of Health must approve the addition of the unit before the permit can be granted.
h. An accessory apartment cannot be its own stand-alone structure. It must be a portion of
the main dwelling, or no more than 50% of a detached accessory structure such as a
garage or barn.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 122
M. Small Wind Turbines
Purpose: It is the purpose of this regulation to promote the safe, effective and efficient use of
small wind energy systems installed to reduce the on-site consumption of utility supplied
electricity.
Additionally the purpose of the regulation is to promote alternative energy sources, reduce
peak power demands in existing utility power grids, reduce reliance on fossil fuels, and
provide choices to property owners that have possible cost savings and positive environmental
impacts.
Definitions:
Small Wind Turbine – A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a
tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of not
more than 20 kW and which is intended to provide power primarily for on site uses as
opposed to generation for sale to the commercial power grid.
Tower Height - The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, excluding the wind
turbine itself.
Submission Requirements: The applicant shall provide thirteen (13) copies of each of the
following to the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA):
1. A completed application form with a review fee as required by Section IV.C.5.b.
2. Existing conditions site plan prepared by a Professional Engineer and Professional
Registered Land Surveyor drawn in sufficient detail to show the following:
a. Property lines, dimensions, landowners, acreage, and contours at two-foot
intervals of the subject property and properties within three hundred (300’) of
the small wind turbine.
b. Location and dimensions of all existing buildings, accessory structures and
uses, public and private roads, driveways, easements, stone walls, and fence
lines within 300 feet of the system.
c. Height of any structures over 35 feet, and the location and average height of
trees on the subject property and adjacent properties, within 300 feet of the
proposed small wind turbine.
3. Proposed conditions site plan prepared by a Professional Engineer and Professional
Registered Land Surveyor drawn in sufficient detail to show the following:
a. The location of the proposed small wind turbine and any appurtenances and
equipment. Indicate property boundaries and distances to the base(s) of the
wind turbine(s) and to the nearest corners of each of the appurtenant structures
and equipment.
b. Limits of areas where vegetation is to be cleared or altered and justification for
any such clearing or alteration.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 123
c. Detailed storm water management plans and plans to control erosion and
sedimentation both during construction and as a permanent measure.
d. Plans indicating locations and specifics of proposed screening, landscaping,
ground cover, fencing, exterior lighting or signs.
e. Plans of proposed access driveway or roadway and parking area at the small
wind turbine whether temporary or permanent; include grading, drainage, and
traveled width. Include a cross section of the access drive indicating the width,
depth of gravel, paving or surface material.
f. Location of access easements or rights-of-way, if any, needed for access to the
small wind turbine from a street.
4. Standard drawings of the structural components of the small wind turbine, including
structures, tower, base and footings. Said drawings, and any necessary calculations
shall be certified by a registered engineer that the system complies with the State
Building Code.
5. A technical report from a qualified individual that the site is feasible for wind power,
that documents wind speed at the proposed site, that anticipates energy that will be
created from the small wind turbine unit, and that estimates the amount of energy
necessary to serve the on site uses.
6. Post construction simulation views of the site from at least four locations where the
small wind turbine will be visible from as determined by the Planning Board through
means of sketches or computer simulations.
7. A proposed maintenance schedule for the small wind turbine and related equipment.
Design and Siting Requirements:
1. Setbacks: A small wind turbine shall not be located closer to a property line than the
height of the tower plus the height of the blade in its vertical position. It is
recommended that the setback areas be kept free of all habitable structures while the
small wind turbine is in place.
2. Noise: The small wind turbine and associated equipment shall conform to
Massachusetts noise regulations (310 CMR 7.10). In no case shall the sound created
by said facility exceed 70 decibels (dba) at the nearest property line.
3. Height: The small wind turbine shall not exceed 120’ in height, and must comply with
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Regulations.
4. Visual Impact: Installation of the small wind turbine will not create a substantially
adverse visual impact. The small wind turbine shall have a non-reflective finish of an
unobtrusive color. The SPGA may require the structure to be painted or otherwise
camouflaged to minimize visual impact.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 124
5. Electromagnetic Interference: The small wind turbine shall cause no disrupting
electromagnetic interference. If it is determined that a small wind turbine is causing
interference, the operator shall take the necessary corrective action to eliminate this
interference, subject to the approval of the Building Commissioner.
Approval:
In acting on the special permit application, the SPGA shall proceed in accordance with the
procedures and timelines for special permits in Chapter 40A Section 9 of MGL as well as
Section VII.A.2. of this bylaw. As authorized by Section IV.C.5.b., the SPGA may hire
professional consultants at the expense of the applicant to assist it in evaluating the proposed
small wind turbine and the impacts on the community.
Said Special Permit approval will run with the property and shall not be specific to a
particular owner unless otherwise noted.
Maintenance Requirements:
1. At all times the applicant shall maintain the small wind turbine and related equipment
in good working condition and perform regular maintenance in accordance with the
approved maintenance schedule. A record shall be kept of all maintenance performed,
and said record must be provided to Town officials whenever requested to verify
maintenance.
2. Should the turbine fall into disrepair and/or experience a situation where it is
producing unusual noise or other emissions, the applicant shall have no more than 24
hours to implement actions to correct the situation.
3. Failure to properly maintain the small wind turbine or correct other issues may result
in revocation of the Special Permit.
Removal Requirements:
1. A small wind turbine that is not used for twelve (12) successive months shall be
deemed abandoned and shall be dismantled and removed from the property at the
expense of the small wind turbine owner. Removal of the system shall include the
structure, foundation, transmission equipment, fencing and other appurtenances. The
site shall be re-vegetated to prevent erosion.
2. The owner of the small wind turbine shall submit a letter to the Planning Board in
December of each year confirming the turbine is still in use and verifying compliance
with standards of the bylaw and the special permit that was granted.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 125
Waiver Provisions:
The Board may waive strict compliance with any provision of this bylaw if it deems it in the
public interest and determines that the intent of the bylaw has been maintained. Written record
must be kept of such waivers including the reasons for them.
N. 43D Expedited Permitting
In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 43D of Mass General Law as amended pursuant
to Section 11 of Chapter 205 of the acts of 2006, the Town of Sutton has established an
expedited permitting process on sites that have been designated as Priority Development Sites
(PDS) in accordance with the statute.
Review and development on these sites will be conducted in accordance with the provisions
of the statute and with local regulations contained herein.
A. General
The municipal point of contact for streamlined permitting under this regulation is the Sutton
Planning Director.
The Planning Director and Town Administrator will assist in determining what permits are
necessary for each project presented, and will review each application on behalf of the
governing body to determine, within 20 days, whether the application is complete.
B. Review Periods
Priority development permit reviews and final decisions shall be completed within 180 days
subject to the extension herein. The time period shall begin the day after the issuance of the
notice that the application materials are complete pursuant to clause (e) of G.L. c. 43D §4.
The governing body shall notify the applicant in writing within 20 business days from receipt
of the completed form of additional information needed or requirements that it may have.
The resubmission of the application or the submission of such additional information required
by the governing body shall commence a new 30-day period for review of the additional
information.
If, at any time, an issuing authority determines that a permit or other predevelopment review
is required which it did not previously identify, it shall immediately notify the applicant by
certified mail and shall where public notice and comment or hearings are not required
complete action on the application filed for the previously unidentified permit within 30 days
of receipt of the completed application or not later than the latest required decision date for a
pending permit, whichever is later. Where public notice and comment or hearing are required
for the previously unidentified permit, the required action date shall be not later than 30 days
from the later of the close of the hearing or comment period, which shall be scheduled to
commence as quickly as publication allows. The failure of the governing body to notify an
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 126
applicant of the requirement of a public hearing or comment period shall not constitute a
waiver of the requirement.
The 180 day time period may be waived or extended for good cause upon written request of
the applicant with the consent of the governing body or upon written request of the issuing
authority with the consent of the applicant. The 180-day period may be extended for up to 30
days by the governing body in the event an additional permit or other predevelopment review
is required in accordance with subsection (c) of G.L. c. 43D §5, if the requirement for the
previously unidentified permit or review has been determined no less than 150 days after the
issuance of the notice of completeness. The 180 day time period shall be extended when the
issuing authority determines either: (1) that action by another federal, state or municipal
government agency is required before the issuing authority may act; (2) that judicial
proceedings affect the ability of the issuing authority or applicant to proceed with the
application; or (3) that enforcement proceedings that could result in revocation of an existing
permit for that facility or activity and denial of the application have been commenced. In
those circumstances, the issuing authority shall provide written notification to the secretary.
When the reason for the extension is no longer applicable, the issuing authority shall
immediately notify the applicant, and shall complete its decision within the time period
specified in this section, beginning the day after the notice is issued.
An issuing authority may not use lack of time for review as a basis for denial of a permit if the
applicant has provided a complete application and met all other obligations in accordance
with this chapter.
C. Project Review
Projects submitted in accordance with this regulation shall complete a Priority Development
Site – Streamlined Permit Application and shall also comply with the submission
requirements for each permit determined necessary by the Planning Director and Town
Administrator, as already established through bylaws, laws and regulations. However, a
Community Fiscal Impact Assessment, Stormwater Management Plan, and a Traffic Study
will be required in all cases.
Pre-filing and Issue Reviews: The applicant is encouraged to request a pre-filing review of the
application to assist in formulation of a complete application. The applicant may also request
reviews at any time with specific departments to aid in resolution of any issues with the
application. Said reviews shall be requested through the Planning Director and/or Town
Administrator. Said reviews are not intended to be “Advisory or Technical Reviews” as
referenced in the statute.
Each project shall undergo the permitting processes as identified by the Planning Director and
Town Administrator and/or prescribed by law or local regulation. Every effort shall be made
to conduct joint permit hearings.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 127
D. Fees
The applicant shall submit fees for each permit that has been determined necessary by the
Planning Director and Town Administrator, as already established by existing bylaws, laws
and regulations. A PDS permit coordination fee of $500 shall also be submitted to cover cost
for administration of this coordinated process.
E. Automatic Grant of Approval
Failure by any issuing authority to take final action on a permit or approval within the 180-
day period or extended time, if applicable, shall be considered a grant of the relief requested
of that authority. In that event, within 14 days after the date of expiration of the time period,
the applicant shall file an affidavit with the city or town clerk, attaching the application,
setting forth the facts giving rise to the grant and stating that notice of the grant has been
mailed, by certified mail, to all parties to the proceedings and all persons entitled to notice of
hearing in connection with the application.
The grant shall not occur where: (1) the governing body has made a timely determination that
the application is not complete in accordance with its requirements and notified the applicant
as set forth herein and the applicant has not made a timely response to complete the
application; (2) the governing body has determined that the final application contained false
or misleading information; or (3) the governing body has determined that substantial changes
to the project affect the information required to process the permit application have occurred
since the filing of the application.
F. Consolidated and streamlined appeals
Appeals of issuing authority decisions or automatic grants of approval must be filed in
accordance with G.L. c. 43D §10, within 20 days of the last permit issued or within 20 days of
the 180 day expiration, which ever is later.
All appeals must be consolidated and filed within the Division of Administrative Law
Appeals (DALA) within 20 days. The consolidated appeal does not apply to wetlands.
DALA shall render appeals decisions within 90 days and aggrieved parties may further appeal
to the Superior Court within 20 days of the DALA decision.
G. Transfers, renewals, permit modification requests, expiration
Permits shall not transfer automatically to successors in title, unless the permit expressly
allows the transfer without the approval of the issuing authority.
Issuing authorities having substantive jurisdiction over permit issuance may develop
procedures for simplified permit renewals and annual reporting requirements. If the
procedures are not developed, renewals of permits shall be governed by the same procedures
and timelines as specified in conjunction with this chapter.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 128
Issuing authorities shall make reasonable effort to review permit modification requests within
as short a period as is feasible to maintain the integrity of the expedited permitting process.
An issuing authority shall inform an applicant within 20 business days of receipt of a request
whether the modification is approved, denied, determined to be substantial or additional
information is required by the issuing authority in order to issue a decision. If additional
information is required, the issuing authority shall inform an applicant within 20 business
days after receipt of the required additional information whether the modification is approved
or denied or that additional information is still required by the issuing authority in order to
render a decision. In cases in which the issuing authority determines that a requested
modification is substantial, the original review period for permit categories as set forth in
section 5 shall apply.
Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire 5 years from the date of the expiration of
the applicable appeal period unless exercised sooner. Where permits cover multiple buildings,
commencement and continuation of construction of 1 building shall preserve the permit
validity. Changes in the law subsequent to the issuance of permits based upon the priority
proposal shall not invalidate the permits or review certificates. Nothing in this section shall
limit the effectiveness of G.L. c.40A §6.
O. Large Scale Solar Photovoltaic
1.0 Purpose
The purpose of this bylaw is to reasonably regulate large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installations by providing standards for the placement, design, construction,
operation, monitoring, modification and removal of such installations that address public
safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources, and to provide adequate
financial assurance for the eventual decommissioning of such installations.
1.1 Applicability
This bylaw applies to large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations, as
defined herein, proposed to be constructed after the effective date of this bylaw. This
bylaw also pertains to physical modifications that materially alter the type, configuration,
or size of these installations or related equipment.
The bylaw in not intended to regulate systems of less than 250 kW or roof-mounted systems
It is also not intended to regulate systems that are consumptive power systems, where all
power that is generated is utilized to power onsite operations.
2.0 Definitions
Building Permit: A permit issued by the Building Inspector allowing for the construction of
a large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation consistent with the state and
federal building codes and the Zoning Bylaw.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 129
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation (LGSPI): A solar
photovoltaic system that is structurally mounted on the ground and is not roof-mounted,
has a minimum nameplate capacity of 250 kW DC, and generates power utilized at least
in part off-site.
Rated Nameplate Capacity: The maximum rated output of electric power production of
the Photovoltaic system in Direct Current (DC).
Zoning Bylaw: The Sutton Zoning Bylaw.
3.0 General Requirements for all Large Scale Solar Power Generation Installations
The following requirements are common to all LGSPI.
3.1 Compliance with Laws, Ordinances and Regulations
The construction and operation of all LGSPI shall be consistent with all applicable local,
state and federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable safety,
construction, electrical, and communications requirements. All buildings and fixtures
forming part of a solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed in accordance with the
State Building Code.
3.2 Building Permit
No LGSPI shall be constructed, installed or modified except pursuant to a building permit.
The building permit application for a LGSPI must be accompanied by the required fee.
3.3 Site Plan Review
No LGSPI shall be constructed, installed or modified except in conformity with a site plan
approved by the Planning Board in accordance with the Zoning Bylaw. The Planning
Board shall consider and apply the requirements set forth in this bylaw in reviewing and
deciding an application for site plan approval. Upon receipt of an application for site plan
approval of a LGSPI, the Planning Board may engage, at the applicant’s cost, professional
and technical consultants, including legal counsel, to assist the authority with its review of
the application, in accordance with the requirements of Section 53G of Chapter 44 of the
Massachusetts General Laws. The Planning Board may direct the applicant to deposit
funds with the Planning Board for such review at the time the application is accepted, and
to add additional funds as needed upon notice. Failure to comply with this section shall be
good grounds for denying the application. Upon approval of the application, any excess
amount in the account attributable to that project, including any interest accrued, shall be
repaid to the applicant.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 130
3.4 Site Control
The project proponent shall submit documentation of actual or prospective access and
control of the project site sufficient to allow for construction and operation of the
proposed solar photovoltaic installation.
3.5 Operation & Maintenance Plan
The project proponent shall submit a plan for the operation and maintenance of the
LGSPI, which shall include measures for maintaining safe access to the installation, storm
water controls, and general procedures for operational maintenance of the installation.
3.6 Utility Notification
No LGSPI shall be constructed until evidence has been given to the Planning Board that
the utility company that operates the electrical grid where the installation is to be located
has been informed of the solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator’s intent to
install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt
from this requirement.
3.7 Design Standards
3.7.1 Setbacks and Screening
Front, side and rear yards for LGSPI shall be as follows:
(a) Front yard: The front yard depth shall be at least 100 feet
(b) Side yard. Each side yard shall have a depth at least 50 feet
(c) Rear yard. The rear yard depth shall be at least 50 feet
(d) Every abutting property shall be visually screened from the LGSPI through any
one or combination of the following: location, distance, plantings, existing
vegetation and fencing (not to exceed 6 feet in height)
3.7.2 Appurtenant Structures
All appurtenant structures to a LGSPI shall be subject to the same regulations that
pertain to primary structures as set forth in the Zoning Bylaw.
3.7.3 Landscaping
The project proponent shall submit a landscape plan detailing all proposed changes
to the landscape of the site, including temporary or permanent roads or driveways,
grading, vegetation clearing and planting and screening vegetation and/or
fences/walls.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 131
3.7.4 Land Clearing & Grading, Soil Erosion and Habitat Impacts
Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the
construction, operation and maintenance of the LGSPI or otherwise prescribed by
applicable laws, regulations, and bylaws. Land clearing and grading plans shall
avoid practices that cause erosion and shall minimize habitat disruption.
3.7.5 Lighting
Lighting of LGSPI, including appurtenant structures, shall be consistent with local,
state and federal law, and otherwise shall be limited to that required for safety and
operational purposes. It shall be designed to minimize glare on abutting properties
and be directed downward with full cut-off fixtures to reduce light-pollution.
3.7.6 Signage
Signs on LGSPI shall comply with all applicable legal requirements, including the
Zoning Bylaw. One sign consistent with the Zoning Bylaw shall be required to
identify the owner and provide a 24-hour emergency contact phone number.
Solar photovoltaic installations shall not be used for displaying any advertising
except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the solar
photovoltaic installation.
3.7.7 Utility Connections
Reasonable efforts, as determined by the Planning Board, shall be made to place
all utility connections from the solar photovoltaic installation underground,
depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape, and topography of the site and
any requirements of the utility provider. Electrical transformers for utility
interconnections may be above ground if required by the utility provider.
3.8 Monitoring and Maintenance
3.8.1 Solar Photovoltaic Installation Conditions
The owner or operator of the LGSPI shall maintain the facility in good condition.
Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs, and
integrity of security measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable
to the Fire Chief and local emergency medical services. The owner or operator
shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining the solar photovoltaic installation
and any access road(s), unless accepted as a public way.
3.8.2. Emergency Services
Prior to issuance of a building permit, the LGSPI owner or operator shall provide a
project summary, electrical schematic, and approved site plan to the town’s local
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 132
safety officials, including the Police Chief, Fire Chief and Building Inspector.
Upon request the owner or operator shall cooperate with local safety officials in
developing an emergency response plan, which may include ensuring that
emergency personnel have immediate, 24-hour access to the facility. All means of
shutting down the solar photovoltaic installation shall be clearly marked. The
owner or operator shall identify a responsible person for public inquiries
throughout the life of the installation, and shall provide a mailing address and
telephone number for such person(s).
3.9 Modifications
All material modifications to a LGSPI made after issuance of the required building
permit shall require approval by the Planning Board through Site Plan Review.
3.10 Discontinuance and Removal
3.10.1 Removal Requirements
Any LGSPI, or any substantial part thereof, not used for a period of one continuous
year or more without written permission from the Planning Board, or that has reached
the end of its useful life, shall be considered discontinued, and shall be removed.
Upon written request from the Building Inspector addressed to the contact address
provided and maintained by the owner or operator as required above, the owner or
operator shall provide evidence to the Building Inspector demonstrating continued use
of the LGSPI. Failure to provide such evidence within thirty days of such written
request shall be conclusive evidence that the installation has been discontinued.
Anyone intending to decommission and/or remove such an installation shall notify the
Planning Board and Building Inspector by certified mail of the proposed date of
discontinued operations and plans for removal.
The owner or operator shall physically remove the installation no more than 150
days after the date of discontinued operations. Removal shall consist of:
(a) Physical removal of all parts of and appurtenances to the LGSPI, including
structures, equipment, security barriers and transmission lines from the site.
(b) Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local, state, and
federal waste disposal regulations.
(c) Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion. The
Planning Board may allow the owner or operator to leave landscaping or
designated below-grade foundations in order to minimize erosion and
disruption to vegetation.
(d) Gravel or ground cover consistent with landscape.
If the owner or operator of the LGSPI fails to remove the installation in accordance
with the requirements of this section, the town shall have the right, to the extent it is
otherwise duly authorized by law, to enter the property and remove the installation at
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 133
the expense of the owner of the installation and the owner(s) of the site on which the
facility is located.
3.10.2 Financial Surety
Proponents seeking to construct and operate an LGSPI shall provide, prior to
construction, a form of surety, either through escrow account, bond or otherwise,
to cover the cost of removal in the event the town must remove the LGSPI and
remediate the landscape. The amount and form of such surety shall be determined
by the Planning Board. Such surety will not be required for municipally- or stateowned
facilities. The project proponent shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of
the costs associated with removal, prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount
shall include a mechanism for calculating increased removal costs due to inflation.
P. Registered Medical Marijuana Dispensary
1. Purpose
To provide for the placement of Registered Marijuana Dispensaries (RMD), in
accordance with the Humanitarian Medical Use of Marijuana Act, G.L. c.94C, App.
§1-1, et seq., in locations suitable for lawful medical marijuana facilities and to
minimize adverse impacts of RMDs on adjacent properties, residential neighborhoods,
historic districts, schools, playgrounds and other locations where minors congregate
by regulating the siting, design, placement and security of RMDs within the Town of
Sutton.
2. Definitions
Where not expressly defined in the Zoning Bylaw, terms used in this section shall be
interpreted as defined in the Humanitarian Medical Use of Marijuana Act, G.L. c.94C,
App. §1-1, et seq. and the Department of Public Health Regulations promulgated
thereunder, 105 CMR 725.001, et seq., and otherwise by their plain language.
Registered Marijuana Dispensary: also known as a Medical Marijuana Treatment
Center, means a not-for-profit entity registered under 105 CMR 725.100, that
acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes (including development of related products
such as edible marijuana-infused products (“MIPs”), tinctures, aerosols, oils, or
ointments), transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or administers marijuana,
products containing marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials to registered
qualifying patients or their personal caregivers. Unless otherwise specified, RMD
refers to the site(s) of dispensing, cultivation, and preparation of marijuana.
3. Location
a. RMDs may be permitted by Special Permit within the Medical Marijuana Overlay
District (MMOD) as defined on the MMOD Map in the Town Clerk’s Office dated
2/28/2017.
b. RMDs may not be located within 500 feet of the following:
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 134
1. School, including a public or private elementary, vocational, or secondary
school or a public or private college, junior college, or university;
2. Child Care Facility;
3. Library;
4. Playground;
5. Public Park;
6. Youth center; or
7. House of Worship
c. The distance under this section is measured in a straight line from the nearest point
of the property line of the protected uses identified in Subsection C.1. to the
nearest point of the property line of the proposed RMD.
d. The distance requirement may be reduced by twenty-five percent or less, but only
if:
1. The applicant demonstrates that the RMD would otherwise be effectively
prohibited within the Town;
2. The applicant demonstrates that the RMD will employ adequate security
measures to prevent diversion of medical marijuana to minors who are not
qualifying patients pursuant to 105 CMR 725.004.
4. Procedure
The Planning Board shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) for a
RMD special permit.
a. In addition to the materials to be submitted required under Section IV.C. - Site
Plan Review, the applicant shall provide the following:
1. A copy of its registration as an RMD from the Massachusetts Department
of Public Health (“DPH”);
2. A detailed floor plan of the premises of the proposed RMD that identifies
the square footage available and describes the functional areas of the RMD,
including areas for any preparation of MIPs;
3. A detailed site plan that includes the following information:
i. Compliance with the requirements for parking and loading
spaces, for lot size, frontage, yards and heights and coverage
of buildings, and all other provisions of this Bylaw;
ii. Convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement
on the site and for the location of driveway openings in
relation to street traffic;
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 135
iii. Convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement
off the site, if vehicular and pedestrian traffic off-site can
reasonably be expected to be substantially affected by on-site
changes;
iv. Adequacy as to the arrangement and the number of parking and
loading spaces in relation to the proposed use of the premises,
including designated parking for home delivery vehicle(s), as
applicable;
v. Design and appearance of proposed buildings, structures,
freestanding signs, screening and landscaping; and
vi. Adequacy of water supply, surface and subsurface drainage and
light.
4. A description of the security measures, including employee security
policies, approved by DPH for the RMD;
5. A copy of the emergency procedures approved by DPH for the RMD;
6. A copy of the policies and procedures for patient or personal caregiver
home-delivery approved by DPH for the RMD;
7. A copy of the policies and procedures for the transfer, acquisition, or sale
of marijuana between RMDs approved by DPH;
8. A copy of proposed waste disposal procedures; and
9. A description of any waivers from DPH regulations issued for the RMD.
b. The SPGA shall refer copies of the application to the Building Department, Fire
Department, Police Department, Board of Health, the Conservation Commission,
the Highway Department, and Water and Sewer Departments if necessary. These
boards/departments shall review the application and shall submit their written
recommendations. Failure to make recommendations within 21 days of referral of
the application shall be deemed lack of opposition.
c. After notice and public hearing and consideration of application materials,
consultant reviews, public comments, and the recommendations of other Town
boards and departments, the SPGA may act upon such a special permit application.
5. Special Permit Conditions on RMDs
a. The SPGA shall impose conditions reasonably appropriate to improve site design,
traffic flow, public safety, protect water quality, air quality, and significant
environmental resources, preserve the character of the surrounding area and
otherwise serve the purposes of this section. In addition to any specific conditions
applicable to the applicant’s RMD, the SPGA shall include the following
conditions in any special permit granted under this Bylaw:
1. Hours of Operation, including dispatch of home deliveries.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 136
2. The permit holder shall file a copy of any Incident Report required under
105 CMR 725.110(F) with the Building Inspector, local Law Enforcement,
Board of Health and the SPGA within 24 hours of creation by the RMD.
Such reports may be redacted as necessary to comply with any applicable
state or federal laws and regulations.
3. The permit holder shall file a copy of any summary cease and desist order,
quarantine order, summary suspension order, order limiting sales, notice of
a hearing, or final action issued by DPH or the Division of Administrative
Law Appeals, as applicable, regarding the RMD with the Building
Inspector and SPGA within 48 hours of receipt by the RMD.
4. The permit holder shall provide to the Building Inspector and Chief of the
Police Department, the name, telephone number and electronic mail
address of a contact person in the event that such person needs to be
contacted after regular business hours to address an urgent issue. Such
contact information shall be kept updated by the permit holder.
5. The special permit shall lapse within five years of its issuance. If the
permit holder wishes to renew the special permit, an application to renew
the special permit must be submitted at least 120 days prior to the
expiration of the special permit.
6. The special permit shall be limited to the current applicant and shall lapse
if the permit holder ceases operating the RMD.
7. The special permit shall lapse upon the expiration or termination of the
applicant’s registration by DPH.
8. The permit holder shall notify the Building Inspector and SPGA in writing
within 48 hours of the cessation of operation of the RMD or the expiration
or termination of the permit holder’s registration with DPH.
6. Prohibition Against Nuisances
a. No RMD use shall be allowed which creates a nuisance to abutters or to the
surrounding area, or which creates any hazard, including but not limited to, fire,
explosion, fumes, gas, smoke, odors, obnoxious dust, vapors, offensive noise or
vibration, flashes, glare, objectionable effluent or electrical interference, which
may impair the normal use and peaceful enjoyment of any property, structure or
dwelling in the area.
7. Severability
a. The provisions of this Bylaw are severable. If any provision, paragraph, sentence,
or clause of this Bylaw or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or
circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other
provisions or application of this Bylaw.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 137
VII. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
A. Administration
1. Board of Appeals:
a. Membership: There shall be a Board of Appeals of five members and two associate
members.
b. Appointment: Members of the Board in office at the effective date of this Bylaw shall
continue in office. Hereafter, as terms expire or vacancies occur, the Board of
Selectmen shall make appointments pursuant to The Zoning Act.
c. Powers: The Board shall have those powers granted under The Zoning Act.
d. Adoption of Rules: The Board shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings pursuant to
The Zoning Act.
e. Appeals: Appeals to the Board shall be taken in accordance with the Rules of the
Board and The Zoning Act.
2. Special Permit
Certain uses, structures or conditions are designated as special permit in Section III, Table
of Use Regulations, and elsewhere in this Bylaw. Upon application duly made to the
Board, the Board may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and
safeguards, grant a special permit for such uses, structures or conditions and no others.
a. In acting upon an application for a special permit, the Board shall take into
consideration:
1. The appropriateness of the specific site as a location for the use;
2. The adequacy of public sewerage and water systems;
3. The effect of the developed use upon the neighborhood;
4. Whether there will be undue nuisance or serious hazard to vehicles or pedestrians;
and,
5. Whether adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided to ensure the proper
operation of the proposed use, structure, or condition.
The Board shall authorize such special permit only when it finds that, in view of these
considerations, such special permit is consistent with the spirit of this Bylaw and
generally in conformity with the Master Plan for the Town.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 138
b. The Board shall impose, in addition to the conditions specified for the following uses,
such additional conditions to those specified in this Bylaw as it finds reasonably
appropriate to safeguard the neighborhood, or otherwise serve the purpose of this
Bylaw, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Front, side or rear yard greater than the minimum required by this Bylaw;
2. Screening, buffers or planting strips fences or walls, as specified by the Board;
3. Modification of the exterior appearance of the structures;
4. Limitation upon the size, number of occupants, method and time of operation, or
extent of facilities;
5. Regulation of the number and location of driveways, or other traffic features; and,
6. Off-street parking or loading or other special features beyond the minimum
required by this Bylaw.
c. For the use of a trailer located in a trailer camp in any R-1 district provided that any
trailer shall not be used for more than one hundred twenty (120) days by any family;
no wheels, tires, or other means of keeping the trailer mobile shall be removed; any
trailer shall have a current state motor vehicle license; and no skirts, porches, fences or
similar materials or equipment shall be added to any trailer which would detract from
its mobility. Each trailer and its lot shall be subject to the same requirements as for a
one-family detached dwelling, in a R-2 District.
d. Construction or operations under a special permit shall conform to any subsequent
amendment of the by-law unless the use or construction is commenced within a period
of not more than six months after the issuance of the permit and in cases involving
construction, unless such construction is continued through to completion as
continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable.
e. A special permit granted under these bylaws shall lapse after two years if a substantial
use thereof has not sooner commenced except for good cause.
The SPGA may grant extensions of the permit for up to two (2) years at a time with
good cause. Extensions must be requested prior to the expiration of the original
permit. Requests must elaborate on the “good cause” that prevented the applicant
from utilizing the permit. Facts presented must demonstrate the applicant’s clear
intent and attempt to utilize the permit during the original permit period in order to be
granted an extension.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 139
3. Associate Member of the Planning Board
The Board of Selectmen may appoint an associate member of the Planning Board. Such
associate member, when designated by the chairman of the Planning Board, may sit on the
Planning Board for the purpose of acting on any matter before the Board, in case of
absence, inability to act, or conflict of interest on the part of any member of the Planning
Board or in the event of a vacancy on the Board.
B. Enforcement
1. Building Commissioner
The Building Commissioner, who shall be appointed by the Town Manager, shall enforce
the provisions of this Bylaw, and to that end, shall have the authority to institute legal
proceedings to enforce and prevent violations of said provisions. He shall immediately
report all such violations to the Town Manager and to the Planning Board.
2. Permit Required
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person to erect, construct, reconstruct, or alter a
structure or change the use, increase the intensity of use, or extend or displace the use of
any building, other structure or lot without applying for and receiving from the Building
Commissioner, the required permit therefore.
3. Previously Approved Permits
The status of previously approved permits shall be as determined by The Zoning Act.
4. Certificate of Use and Occupancy Required
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy any structure or lot for which a permit is required
herein without the owner applying for and receiving from the Building Commissioner, a
certificate of use and occupancy.
5. Permit and Certificate Fees
Fees shall be established by the Selectmen but not less than the annual cost usually
necessary to administer and enforce this Bylaw.
6. Violations
The Selectmen, or if so appointed, the Building Inspector, shall serve notice of
VIOLATION and ORDER to any owner or person responsible for the erection,
construction, reconstruction, conversion, or alteration of a structure or change in use,
increase in intensity of use, or extension or displacement of use of any structure or lot in
violation of the provisions of this Bylaw or in violation of any approved plan, drawing,
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 140
information or drawing pertinent thereto; or in violation of a permit or certificate issued
under the provisions of this Bylaw, and such order shall direct the discontinuance of the
unlawful action, use or condition and the abatement of the violation within a time to be
specified by the Selectmen, or if so appointed, the Building Inspector. Any owner, who
having been served with a notice and who ceases any work or other activity, shall not
leave any structure or lot in such condition as to be a hazard or menace to the public
safety, health, morals or general welfare.
7. Prosecution of Violation
If the notice of VIOLATION and ORDER is not complied with promptly, the Selectmen
shall institute the appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity to prevent any
unlawful action, use or condition and to restrain, correct or abate such violation.
a. Penalty for Violation
The penalty for violations of this Bylaw shall be three hundred dollars ($300) for each
such violation. Each day any violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
b. Non-Criminal Disposition
In addition to civil and criminal procedures available for enforcement of this Bylaw,
the provisions of this Bylaw may also be enforced by the Building Inspector or his
agent, by non-criminal complaint issued pursuant to the provisions of Mass. General
Laws, Chapter 40, §21D. Each day on which a violation exists shall be deemed to be
a separate offense. The penalty for violation of any provision of this bylaw shall be
fifty dollars ($50) for the first offense; one hundred dollars ($100) for the second
offense; and three hundred dollars ($300) for the third and each subsequent offense.
C. Amendment, Validity, Repealer and Effective Date
1. Amendment
This Bylaw may be amended from time to time in accordance with The Zoning Act.
During the amendment procedure, subdivision plans in process of review by the Planning
Board under the Subdivision Control law shall be subject to The Zoning Act.
2. Validity
The invalidity, unconstitutionality or illegality of any provisions of this Bylaw or
boundary shown on the Zoning Map shall not have any effect upon the validity,
constitutionality or legality of any other provision or boundary.
Sutton Zoning Bylaw 141
3. Repealer
The Zoning By-Laws for the Town of Sutton Massachusetts, adopted in 1955 and all
subsequent amendments thereto are repealed in whole.
4. Effective Date
This Bylaw shall take effect upon the date resulting from this procedure provided for in
M.G.L Chapter 40, §32.
SUBDIVISION RULES & REGULATIONS
SUTTON, MASSACHUSETTS
With Amendments Through October 30, 2006
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION I – TITLE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
A. TITLE 1
B. PURPOSE 1
C. AUTHORITY 1
SECTION II – GENERAL
A. DEFINITIONS 2
B. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 2
1. SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW IN EFFECT 2
2. LIMITATION OF ONE DWELLING ON
ANY LOT 3
3. WAIVERS 3
4. SUBMISSION OF PLANS 3
5. NOTICE TO CLERK & PUBLIC HEARING
REQUIREMENTS 3
C. FEE SCHEDULE 3
1. APPROVAL NOT REQUIRED PLANS 3
2. PRELIMINARY PLANS 3
3. DEFINITIVE PLANS 3
4. INSPECTION FEES 4
5. ADDITIONAL FEES 4
6. PAYMENT OF FEES 4
D. LIMITATIONS OF SITE PREPARATION 4
SECTION III – PROCEDURE FOR THE SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF PLANS
A. PLAN BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE APPROVAL 5
1. SUBMISSION 5
2. CONTENTS 5
3. BOARD ACTION 6
4. ADMINISTRATION 6
B. PRELIMINARY PLAN 7
1. GENERAL 7
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 ii
2. SUBMISSION 7
3. CONTENTS 7
4. BOARD ACTION 8
5. RELATION OF PRELIMINARY PLAN TO
DEFINITIVE PLAN 8
C. DEFINITIVE PLAN 9
1. GENERAL 9
2. CONTENTS 10
3. REVIEW BY THE BOARD OF HEALTH AS TO
THE SUITABILITY OF THE LAND 12
4. SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 12
5. PUBLIC HEARING 13
6. APPROVAL UNDER MASSACHUSETTS GENERAL
LAW, CHAPTER 131, SECTION 40, 40A,
WETLANDS PROTECTION ACT 13
7. PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE 14
8. REDUCTION OF BOND OR SURETY 15
9. RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE 15
10. EVIDENCE OF SATISFACTORY PERFORMANCE 15
11. FAILURE OF PERFORMANCE 17
12. CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL 17
13. AMENDED DEFINITIVE PLAN 17
14. RECORDING OF A DEFINITIVE PLAN 18
15. SUBSTANTIAL CONSTRUCTION
REQUIREMENT 18
SECTION IV – DESIGN STANDARDS
A. STREETS 18
1. ROADWAY DESIGN 18
2. LOCATION AND ALIGNMENT 19
3. WIDTH 20
4. GRADE 20
5. DEAD – END STREET 20
6. INTERSECTIONS 20
7. BRIDGES 21
8. SUBSURFACE DATA 21
B. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 21
1. SUBSURFACE DRAIN OR SUBDRAINS 21
2. STORM DRAINS 22
3. PERIMETER DRAINS 24
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 iii
C. WATER 24
D. FIRE PROTECTION
1. SUBSURFACE WATER STORAGE TANKS
(FIRE TANKS) 26
2. LOCATION 26
3. TANK SPECIFICATION 26
4. INSTALLATION 27
5. EXCAVATION 27
6. BED & BACKFILL 27
7. ANCHORING 28
8. BACKFILL COVER 28
9. BARRICADING 28
10. INSPECTION 28
11. MAINTENANCE 28
E. SEWERAGE 29
F. EASEMENTS 29
G. OPEN SPACE 30
H. PROTECTION OF NATURAL FEATURES 30
I. LOT SIZE 30
SECTION V – REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS FOR A NEW SUBDIVISION
A. DRAINAGE 31
B. WATER & FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS 31
C. SEWERAGE 31
D. UNDERGROUND SERVICES 31
E. STREET GRADING 32
F. ROADWAYS 32
G. CURBING 33
H. STREET SIGNS AND HOUSE NUMBER 33
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 iv
I. SIDEWALKS AND LIGHTING 33
J. PLANTING STRIPS 34
K. SIDE SLOPES 35
L. LOAMING 35
M. MONUMENTS AND MARKERS 35
N. CLEANING UP 35
O. CERTIFICATE 36
P. CONTROL 36
Q. SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION 36
1. PURPOSE 36
2. ACCESS 36
3. NOTIFICATION 37
4. MODIFIED INSPECTION SCHEDULE 37
5. DISAPPROVAL 38
6. INSPECTION REPORTS 38
7. AS BUILTS 38
SECTION VI – ADMINISTRATION
A. VARIATION 39
B. REFERENCE 39
C. ENFORCEMENT BY DENIAL OF BUILDING PERMITS 39
D. SEVARABILITY 40
E. AMENDMENTS 40
APPENDIX
FORM A APPLICATION FOR ENDORSEMENT OF PLAN
BELIEVED
REQUIRE APPROVAL.
FORM B APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF A PRELIMINARY
PLAN
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 v
FORM C APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF A DEFINITIVE
PLAN
FORM D CERTIFIED LIST OF ABUTTERS
APPENDIX E REQUIRED DETAILS
TYPICAL ROADWAY CROSS-SECTION
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 1
SECTION 1
TITLE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
A.
TITLE
These Rules and Regulations of the Sutton Planning Board shall be known and may be cited
as the "Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land, Town of Sutton,
Massachusetts" which herein are called these “Rules and Regulations".
B.
PURPOSE
These Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land, Town of Sutton,
Massachusetts have been enacted for the purpose of protecting the safety, convenience and
welfare of the inhabitants of Sutton by regulating the laying out and construction of ways in
subdivisions providing access to the several lots therein, but which have not become public
ways, and ensuring sanitary conditions in subdivisions and in proper cases parking and open
areas. The powers of the Board and the Board of Appeals under the Subdivision Control
Law shall be exercised with due regard for the provision of adequate access to all of the lots
in a subdivision for travel; for lessening congestion in such ways and in the adjacent public
ways; for reducing danger to safety in the case of fire, flood, panic and other emergencies;
for ensuring compliance with the applicable zoning by-laws; for securing adequate provision
for water, sewerage, drainage, and other requirements where necessary in a subdivision; and
for coordinating the paved and green ways in a subdivision with each other and with the
public ways in the town and with the ways in neighboring subdivisions. It is the intent of
These Rules and Regulations that any subdivision plan filed with the Board shall receive the
approval of such Board if said plan conforms to the recommendations of all Town Boards
and Departments pertaining to subdivisions of land; provided, however, that such Board
may, when appropriate, waive, as provided for in Section VI-A, such portions of These
Rules and Regulations as is deemed advisable.
C.
AUTHORITY
The Board shall be the administrative agency of these regulations and shall have all the
powers assigned them by M.G.L., Ch. 41 § 81A - 81GG. The Board may assign as their
agents appropriate town agencies or officials, and may, from time to time, hire professional
assistance to review and inspect improvements at the cost of the subdivider, or the legal
succeeding owners. The Board, on its own motion or on the petition of an interested
person, shall have the power to modify, amend or rescind its approval of a plan of a
subdivision, or to require a change in a plan as a condition of its retaining the status of an
approved plan.
SECTION 2
GENERAL
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 2
A.
DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of these Rules and Regulations, unless a contrary intention clearly appears,
the terms and words defined in the Subdivision Control Law shall have the meaning given
therein. The following other terms and words shall have the following meanings:
Applicant
- Either the owner of the land stated in the application for subdivision or all the
owners where title is held jointly, in common, or in tenancy by the entirety including
corporations. An agency, representative, or his assigns may act for an owner, provided
written evidence of such fact is submitted. Evidence in the form of a list of its officers and
designated authority to sign legal documents shall be required for a corporation.
Board
- The Planning Board of the Town of Sutton.
Construction Inspector
- A person appointed by the Board to inspect the construction and
installation of the improvements required by Section V.
Subdivision
- See Chapter 41 § 81L
Subdivision Control Laws
- Refers to Sections 81K to 81-GG; inclusive, of Chapter 41, of
the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, entitled "Subdivision Control.
B.
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Subdivision Control Law in Effect
No person shall make a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision Control Law of
any land within the Town, or proceed with the improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision,
or the construction of ways, or the installation of municipal services therein, unless and until
a Definitive Plan of such subdivision has been submitted to and approved by the Board as
hereinafter provided.
2. Limitation of One Dwelling on Any Lot
Not more than one building designed or available for use for dwelling purposes shall be
erected or placed or converted to use as such on any lot in a subdivision, or elsewhere in the
Town of Sutton, without the consent of the Board.
Such consent shall be conditional upon the providing of adequate ways, furnishing access to
each site for such building, in the same manner as otherwise required for lots in a
subdivision.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 3
3. Waivers
The Board may waive strict compliance with any of these Rules and Regulations if it deems
it in the public interest, and if written record is kept of such waivers, and the reasons for
them. The Planning Board shall endorse such waivers of conditions on the plan to which
they relate.
4. Submission of Plans
All Definitive Plans shall be submitted to the Sutton Planning Board in accordance with the
provisions of M.G.L., Ch. 41 § 81-T.
5.
Notice to Clerk and Public Hearing Requirements
Written notice of such submission shall be given to the Town Clerk, and a Public Hearing
shall be held, in accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 41 § 81-T.
C.
FEE SCHEDULE
Approval Not Required Plans
All plans require a completed Form A and a Fee of $100.00 per newly configured lot or
remainder thereof.
Preliminary Plans
A Fee of $100.00 for plans and, $25.00 for each lot within the proposed Subdivision Tract
will be charged to the applicant upon submittal of the Preliminary Plans.
Definitive Plans
A Fee of $3000.00 for the Plans and $200.00 per lot within the proposed Subdivision Tract
will be charged to the applicant upon submittal of the Definitive Plan.
All newly Proposed Subdivisions will be charged an additional $2.50 linear foot of roadway,
and appropriate fees paid to the Sewer Commission. This fee shall be paid upon approval of
the Definitive Plan, and prior to construction. In the event inspection costs exceed the
amount of the initial deposit, the applicant shall reimburse the Town for the additional
amount which shall not exceed the actual cost of the inspection. No bond, security or
condition shall be released by the Board until such expenses have been paid to the Town.
Failure to pay road inspection fee prior to construction may result in rescission of the
Definitive Plan.
Inspection Fee
Additional Fees
For all developments requiring subdivision review, the applicant will be responsible for all
reasonable fees or costs incurred in reviewing such plans. The Planning Board is authorized
to retain a Registered Professional Engineer, Architect, Landscape Architect, Attorney,
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 4
and/or other professional consultant to review and advise the Board on any aspect of the
plan.
One thousand dollars will be deducted from the filing fee to cover costs for staff review of
the plan, all billings received from the Town’s consultants will be deducted from the filing
fee. If the billings exceed the amount of the filing fee, the Town will bill the applicant for
the difference. All bills must be paid prior to issuance of approval. If monies are left after
all fees and billings are paid, any excess funds will be returned to the applicant.
The Board will deposit fees in an account established pursuant to M.G.L., Ch. 44 § 53G, as
amended, and in accordance with a vote by the Planning Board on January 28, 1991.
Payment of Fees
All payments to the Board may be made either by check or money order and shall be made
out to the "Town of Sutton".
No cash
will be accepted.
D.
LIMITATIONS OF SITE PREPARATION
Upon the filing of a Definitive Plan, no tract of land proposed for use in a Subdivision shall
be stripped of its vegetation or have earth removed until approval of the Definitive Plan has
been granted and the appeal period has expired for a Definitive Plan.
A pre-construction meeting shall be held prior to any construction. The meeting will be
between the Planning Board and/or its agent, the applicant and the applicant’s contractor.
The applicant shall be responsible for additional cost to remediate and correct site
deficiencies. The minimum notification and inspection schedule is in Section V.Q.
SECTION 3
PROCEDURE FOR THE SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF PLAN
A.
PLAN BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE APPROVAL
1. Submission
Any person who wishes to cause to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds or to be filed with
the Land Court a plan of land, and who believes that his plan does not require approval
under the Subdivision Control Law, may submit his plan and application Form A (see
Appendix) to the Board accompanied by the necessary evidence to show that the plan does
not require approval. Submission of a plan believed not to require approval shall be
accompanied by a fee required in Section II.C.l. Said person shall file said plan in
accordance with M.G.L., Ch. 41 § 81T.
2. Contents
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 5
The original of the drawn plan and four prints shall be submitted and contain the following
information:
a. Title, boundaries, north point, locus, date and scale.
b. Locus plan sufficient in scale and detail to show relationship of proposed lot(s) to
surrounding ways and parcels.
c. Name and address of owner of record for property. Current abutters names, including
those directly across a way.
d. Name, address and stamp of Registered Professional Land Surveyor who prepared the
plan.
e. Reference to the Assessor Map, Block and Lot number and Deed, Book and Page
reference of the existing lot or parcel that is being divided shall be placed on the plan.
f. Frontage and area of any remaining adjoining land owned in whole or in part by the
applicant shall be shown as well as noted.
g. Suitable space to record the action of the Board and signature of Members of the Board.
h. Sufficient data to determine existing width, condition (to demonstrate safe and adequate
access) and status of every street and way shown on the plan (not including locus plan).
i. The following information shall be provided for each lot or parcel, and/or remainder
thereof, shown on the plan:
1. zoning classification and requirements, including overlay districts
2. lot line dimensions, bearings and distances
3. total area in square feet and acres of lot and of easements
4. width as defined by the Zoning Bylaw
5. flood plains and zones & wetlands and resource areas pursuant to the
Wetlands Protection Act and Riverway Protection Act from the frontage of
the lot and encompassing a contiguous area until the upland requirement is
met.
6. uplands determination as defined by the Zoning Bylaw
7. regularity factor as defined by the Zoning Bylaw
8. location and description of all existing buildings and structures, septic systems
and wells.
9. Location and description of all easements and/or encumberances, including
their square footage.
j. All parcels considered non-buildable shall be appropriately indicated on the plan.
3.
Board Action
a. If the Board determines that the plan does not require approval, it shall without a public
hearing and within twenty one days of submission endorse on the plan the words "Approval
under the Subdivision Control Law not required". Said plan shall be returned to the
applicant.
b. If the Board determines that the plan does require approval under the Subdivision Control
Law, it shall within twenty-one days of submission of said plan so inform the applicant and
the Town Clerk of its determination and return the plan to the applicant. If the Board fails
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 6
to act upon the plan within the prescribed twenty one (21) days, it shall be determined that
approval under the Subdivision Control Law is not required.
c. In determining whether a way has been used and maintained, as a public way, the Town
Clerk shall submit to the Board written evidence of public maintenance under vote of the
Town and of continued substantial use by the general public with permission of the
landowners along the way, continuous for at least 20 years. Sporadic use, use by a few
persons or use by agreement of the abutters shall not suffice.
4.
Administration
One print of the endorsed plan shall be retained in the files of the Board and the other
endorsed prints shall be filed by the Board with the Building Commissioner, Town Clerk,
and Board of Assessors.
B.
PRELIMINARY PLAN
1.
General
A Preliminary Plan of a subdivision may be submitted by the applicant for discussion and
approval by the Board. The submission of such a Preliminary Plan will enable the
subdivider, the Board, other municipal agencies and owners of the property abutting the
subdivision to discuss and clarify the problems of such subdivision before a Definitive Plan
is prepared. Therefore, it is strongly recommended that a Preliminary Plan be filed in every
case.
2. Submission
If such review and approval are desired, a properly executed Application Form B (see
Appendix) shall be filed with the Preliminary Plan submitted to the Board. The Preliminary
Plan shall be submitted in accordance with M.G.L., Ch. 41 §81S. Submission of a
Preliminary Plan shall be accompanied by a fee as required by Section II.C.2.
3. Contents
The Preliminary Plan shall be drawn on tracing paper, polyester, or drafting film, at a
suitable scale not less than 1”=200’. Said Preliminary Plan should show sufficient
information about the subdivision to form a clear basis for discussion of its problems and for
the preparation of the Definitive Plan. The applicant shall submit sixteen (16) copies of the
Plan for further distribution as determined by the Planning Board.
Said plan will contain the following information:
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 7
a. A Title Block, in the lower right hand corner, with Subdivision name, boundaries, north
point, locus, date, scale, legend, and title "Preliminary Plan". Name and address of the
owner of record, subdivider, engineer and surveyor, and dates of revisions.
b. Page numbers will appear in the lower right corner of each page.
c. Names of all abutters as they appear in the most recent tax list, existing lot numbers,
existing street names, easements.
d. Existing and proposed lines of streets including approximate grade, radii of curves,
ways, lots, easements and public and common areas within the subdivision in a general
manner. A typical street cross section should be included.
e. Proposed system of drainage, including the location of all swamp, marsh and lowland,
water bodies, streams, open drains and ditches, natural or man-made, and flowage right,
public and private, adjacent to or within the proposed subdivision, in a general manner.
f. The approximate boundary lines of proposed lots, with approximate areas and
dimensions.
g. The names, approximate locations and widths of adjacent streets.
h. The topography of the land in a general manner (10 ft. contour interval) and proposed
major topographic changes.
i. Any and all easements and rights-of-way appurtenant to the land shall be shown by
exact location on the plan.
j. Zoning classifications of all land shown in the plan, including overlay zoning such as
flood-plain, watershed or aquifer districts.
k. Major site features such as existing stone walls, fences, buildings, large trees, rock ridges
outcroppings and historical features.
4.
Board Action
The Board may give such Preliminary Plan its approval, with or without modification.
Such approval does not constitute approval of a subdivision but does facilitate the procedure
in securing approval of the Definitive Plan.
The Board may also disapprove the plan. A disapproval will be accompanied by a detailed
statement of reasons for the action.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 8
Notice of its action must be given by the Board to the applicant and Town Clerk within 45
days of the date of submission. Failure to act within that time shall be considered as
approval of the Preliminary Plan.
5. Relation of a Preliminary Plan to Definitive Plan
Approval of a Preliminary Plan does not constitute approval of a subdivision, and a
Preliminary Plan cannot be recorded in the Registry of Deeds. If a Definitive Plan is duly
submitted within seven months from the date of submission of the Preliminary Plan, the
subdivision rules and regulations in effect at the time of the submission of the approved
Preliminary Plan shall govern the approval process of the Definitive Plan.
C.
DEFINITIVE PLAN
1. General
Any person who submits a Definitive Plan of a Subdivision to the Board for approval shall
file with the Board the following:
a. Sixteen (16) copies of the Definitive Plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board for its
review and distribution. Plans shall be prepared with dark ink on white background. The
original plan which shall be drawn on polyester drafting film or linen should not be
submitted with the copies. However, the original will be needed for endorsement, if the
Definitive Plan is approved.
b. A properly executed application Form C (see Appendix) in duplicate signed by the
applicant and property owner(s).
c. A list of all abutters to the subdivision, as shown on the Definitive Plan, together with
the address of each as determined from the most recent local tax list, certified by the
Assessors on Form D (see Appendix).
d. Envelopes addressed to each abutter prepared for certified mail, return receipt requested.
e. A fee as required by Section II.C.3.
f. A location plan of the subdivision at a scale of 200 ft. to the inch, (1"=200’) showing the
exterior lines of all proposed streets in the subdivision and their location in relation to one or
more existing streets, or portions thereof, lots, easements, street names and lot numbers,
drawn with ink on mylar. One plan to be submitted with the initial definitive plan and
another showing the subdivision as finally approved by the Board.
g. The plan will show the overall location of streets, lots, storm drains, sanitary sewer,
water systems, fire protection systems and other underground utilities.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 9
h. A sketch plan showing a possible or prospective street layout for any adjacent unsubdivided
land owned or controlled by the owner or applicant of the subdivision, unless
such a plan has already been submitted to the Board.
i. A complete set of Drainage Calculations, certified by the Registered Professional
Engineer who prepared them.
j. The applicant shall file by delivery or registered mail a notice with the Town Clerk
describing the land and stating the name and address of the owner and the date of
submission of the plan to the Board for such approval.
k. The submission of supplemental information and/or an Impact Report as may be
required by the Board. (Section II.C.4).
l. Applicant shall submit proof of ownership, deed restrictions and covenants.
NOTE: The Planning Board shall deem that failure to file/submit all of the above items
shall be reason to disapprove the Definitive Plan application.
2.
Contents
The Definitive Plan shall be prepared by a Registered Professional Civil Engineer and
Registered Professional Land Surveyor and shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black
permanent ink upon polyester drafting film or linen. The plan shall be at a scale of 1” = 40’
or such other scale as the Board may accept to show details clearly and adequately. Sheet
sizes shall be 24” X 36”. If multiple sheets are used, they shall be accompanied by an index
sheet showing the entire subdivision at a scale of 1” = 200’. The Definitive Plan shall
contain the following information:
a. A TITLE BLOCK, in the lower right hand corner, with Subdivision name, boundaries,
north point, date, scale, names and addresses of owner of record and applicant, date, names,
signatures and seals of the Engineer and Surveyor that actually prepared the plan, and space
for revision dates.
b. Page numbers will appear in the lower right corner of all pages.
c. Full names of all abutters as determined from the most recent local tax list, including
owners of land separated from the subdivision only by a street, and zoning district
boundaries, if any.
d. Existing and proposed lines of streets, lots, rights-of-ways, easements, and any public or
common areas within the subdivision. The proposed names of proposed streets shall be
shown in pencil until they have been approved by the Board. The Plan shall show the
overall layout to include lots, streets, water systems, storm drainage and sanitary sewer
systems, fire protection systems, and all other underground utilities. Utility Drawings will
also show the plan view directly above the profile view.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 10
e. Sufficient data including lengths, bearings, radii, curve lengths, and central angles to
determine the exact location, direction, and length of every street and way line, easement
line, lot line and boundary line, and to establish these lines on the ground.
f. Location of all existing permanent monuments and bench marks. A minimum of three
(3) permanent bench marks shall be set. Elevations shall be on a sea level basis.
g. Location, names and present widths of streets bounding, approaching, or within at least
800 feet of the perimeter of the subdivision on the 1” = 200’ scale map.
h. Boundary lines, areas in square feet and acres, and dimensions of all proposed lots,
parcels and roads, with all lots and parcels designated numerically and in sequence.
i. Location of natural waterways, water bodies, as well as areas governed by the Wetlands
and Riverway Protection Act, within and adjacent to the subdivision.
j. Suitable space to record the action of the Board and the signatures of the members of the
Planning Board on each sheet of the Definitive Plan. Where the applicant elects to secure
completion of required improvements by covenant (rather than bonds or surety), there shall
be a notation above such space as follows:
Approved on ______________, subject to covenant conditions set forth in a covenant
executed by _____________, dated ________________, and to be (recorded) (registered)
herewith, and subject to conditions listed within the plan.
Items k, 1, m, n, and o may be submitted on the same sheet as the Definitive Plan or on
separate sheets.
k. Existing and proposed topography of the entire subdivision at 2’ contour interval
extending at least 50’ beyond the subdivision boundary. Actual pavement grades, accurate
to 0.1 feet, within 100’ of proposed street intersections shall be shown. All buildings and
physical features of abutting property that are within 50’ of the boundary must be shown.
Additional topographic data shall be required to identify potential off-site drainage problems
related to the proposed development, if the Board determines it to be necessary.
The need for additional topographic data may be identified during the Preliminary Plan
review process. The above data is to be derived from recent field surveys. Recent aerial
mapping, augmented by field surveys, may be used providing that the accuracy of the data
submitted for the contour interval stated above meets established standards for this method.
All plans submitted showing topographic data shall bear a note indicating how the data was
derived.
l. Profiles on the center lines and side lines of proposed streets at a horizontal scale of one
inch equals forty feet (1”=40’) and vertical scale of one inch equals four feet (1”=4’), or such
other scales acceptable to the Board. Profiles shall show elevations of existing sills and of all
existing structures, the location of existing and proposed storm drains, water mains, sewers
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 11
and their appurtenances, and the location of any intersecting public or private ways.
Present and proposed elevations must be shown at least every 50’, and must refer to mean
sea level.
m. The relative error of closure shall not be greater that 1” to 15,000’. The Registered
Professional Land Surveyor shall state this on the plan.
n. Proposed layout of storm drainage, water supply, sewage disposal systems as well as
electrical, telephone and cable distribution including grades.
o. Major site features, such as existing stone walls, fences, buildings, large trees, rock ridges
and outcroppings and resource areas protected by M.G.L., Ch. 131.
p. Size, material type, slope and location of existing and proposed storm drains, water
mains and sewers including all appurtenances, within and adjacent to the subdivision to the
point of connection to existing utilities.
q. Construction details as required to depict the size, material type and slope, of proposed
drains, water mains and sewers, including all appurtenances, and a typical cross-section of
the proposed street. Additional cross-sections may be required to adequately indicate any
variations in the proposed street.
r. All variances and waivers granted by the Board, shall be listed on the final plans.
3. Review by the Board of Health as to the Suitability of the Land
When a Definitive Plan of a subdivision is submitted to the Planning Board, a copy thereof
shall be filed with the Board of Health or its officer having like power and duties. Such
Health Board or Officer shall, within forty-five (45) days after the plan has been filed, report
to the Planning Board in writing, approval or disapproval of said plan, and in the event of
approval or disapproval, shall make specific findings as to which, if any, areas shown on
such plan cannot be used for building sites, without injury to the public health, and include
such specific findings and reasons therefore in such report, and where possible, shall make
recommendations for the adjustment thereof. Failure of such Board or Officers to report
shall be deemed approval by such Board or Officers. Such Health Board or officers shall
send a copy of such report, if any, to the person who submitted said plan.
4. Supplemental Requirements
a. The Board may request, at the expense of the applicant more detailed information in the
form of specialized studies (i.e., geological, hydrological, soils, engineering, environmental
etc.) and/or professional services, (i.e., professional engineer, landscape architect, lawyer,
geologist, -etc) to assist the Board in its review process; in an effort to aid the Board render a
more accurate and definitive decision regarding a prospective subdivision development.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 12
b. The Board may require the submission of an Impact Report by the Applicant. The
report shall address the probable impact on Town facilities and services directly attributable
to the uses as proposed on the subdivision plan. The following items, at a minimum, must
be included: traffic – average daily traffic generation (trips per day); public school
enrollment – total students at full development; water usage – average daily and peak
demand; waste water (sewage) flow – average daily and peak flow; police and fire
protection, including man hours and equipment; and street maintenance, including drainage
and other improvements. This impact analysis shall consider all current and proposed
subdivisions within the Town or as determined by the Board.
c. Plans of perimeter and other drainage systems to be connected to a drainage structure to
be accepted by the Town will be submitted for approval as soon as they are determined, and
prior to lot releases.
d. Should the Board approve the plan, AutoCadTM
files showing, at a minimum, the
approved street and lot boundaries, lot numbers, lot dimensions and road centerline
stations, shall be provided in a format acceptable to the Board of Assessors.
5.
Public Hearing
Before action on the Definitive Plan, a public hearing shall be held by the Board. Notice of
such hearing shall be given by the Board at the expense of the subdivider, by advertisement
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town once in each of two successive weeks, the
first publication being not less than fourteen days before the day of such hearing. A copy of
said notice shall be mailed postage prepaid, to the subdivider and to all owners of the land
abutting upon the subdivision and property owners on the opposite sides of any streets
abutting the subdivision, as appearing in the most recent tax list.
6. Approval Under Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 131, Sections 40, 40A. Wetlands
Protection Act
Any person submitting a subdivision for endorsement or approval by the Board, said
subdivision to be built within 100’ of any resource area, shall file for an Order of Conditions
from the Conservation Commission to perform such activity under the Wetlands &
Riverway Protection Acts (M.G.L., Ch. 131 § 40, 40A) . The filing must be prior to
approval of the Plan by the Board.
7. Performance Guarantee
Before approval of a Definitive Plan for a subdivision, the applicant shall agree to complete
the required improvements specified in Section V for all the lots in the subdivision, such
construction and installation to be secured by one or in part by one and in part by the other,
of the following methods which may from time to time be varied by the applicant:
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 13
a. By a proper bond, sufficient in the opinion of the Planning Board to secure performance
of the construction of ways and the installation of municipal services required for all lots in
the subdivision shown on the plan. Such Bond shall be approved as to form and the manner
of execution by the Town Counsel and shall be contingent on the completion of such
improvements within such time as the Board shall determine.
b. By a deposit of money or negotiable securities, sufficient in the opinion of the Planning
Board to secure performance of the construction of ways and the installation of municipal
services required for all lots in the subdivision shown on the plan. Such security shall be
approved as to form the manner of execution by the Town Counsel and shall be contingent
on the completion of such improvements within such time as the Board shall determine.
c. By a Board approved covenant, executed and duly recorded by the owner of record,
running with the land, whereby such ways and services shall be provided to serve any lot
before such lot may be built upon or conveyed, other than by mortgage deed; provided, that
a mortgagee who acquires title to the mortgaged premises by foreclosure or otherwise and
any succeeding owner of such premises or part thereof may sell any such lot, subject to that
portion of the any such lot, subject to that portion of the covenant which provides that no
lot shall be built upon until such ways and services have been provided to serve such lot;
and provided further, that nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit a conveyance by a
single deed, subject to such covenant, of either the entire parcel of land shown on the
subdivision plan or of all lots not previously released by the Planning Board. A deed of any
part of the subdivision in violation hereof shall be voided by the grantee prior to the release
of the covenant but not later than three years from the date of such deed.
d. By delivery to the Planning Board of an agreement, in a form acceptable by the Town,
executed after the recording of the first mortgage covering the premises shown on the plan
or a portion thereof given as security for advances to be made to the applicant by the lender,
which agreement shall be executed by the applicant and the lender and shall provide for the
retention by the lender of funds sufficient in the opinion of the Planning Board and
otherwise due the applicant, to secure the construction of ways and the installation of
municipal services. Said agreement shall also provide for a schedule of disbursements
which may be made to the applicant, upon written approval of the Planning Board or its
assigned agent and upon completion of various stages of work, and shall further provide that
in the event work is not completed within the time set forth by the applicant, and funds
remaining un-disbursed shall be available for completion.
8. Reduction of Bond or Surety
The penal sum of any such bond, or the amount of any deposit held under clause "all above,
may from time to time, be reduced by the Board and the obligations of the parties thereto
released by said Board in whole or in part. If release is by reason of covenant, a new plan of
the portion to be subject to the covenant may be required. The Town shall retain 20%
contingency until the ways are released from surety as a completed private way or the deed
is accepted by the Board of Selectmen after vote of Town Meeting to accept the way as
public.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 14
9. Release of Performance Guarantee
Upon the completion of improvements required under Section V, security for the
performance of which was given by bond, deposit or covenant, or upon the performance of
any covenant with respect to any lot, the applicant shall send by registered mail to the Town
Clerk and to the Board a statement in duplicate that the said construction or installation in
connection with which such bond, deposit or covenant has been given, has been completed
in accordance with the requirements continued under Section V, such statement to contain
the address of the applicant. If the Board determines that said construction or installation
has not been completed, it shall specify to the applicant by registered mail and to the Town
Clerk the details wherein said construction and installation fails to comply with the
requirements contained under Section V. Upon failure of the Board to act on such
application within 45 days after the receipt of the application by the Town Clerk, all
obligations under the bond shall be returned and a such covenant shall be returned and any
such covenant shall become void. In the event that said 45 day period expires without such
specification, or without the release and return of the bond or return of the deposit or release
of the covenant as aforesaid, the Town Clerk shall issue a certificate to such effect, duly
acknowledged, which may be recorded.
10. Evidence of Satisfactory Performance
Before the Board will release the interest of the Town in a performance bond or deposit or,
in the case of approval with covenant, issue a release of covenant:
a. The applicant shall file with the Board an As-built Plan for each street in the subdivision,
along with a statement by the engineer and surveyor employed by the applicant at his own
expense, indicating that all streets, sidewalks, sewers, storm drains, and water mains, and
their appurtenances have been constructed in accordance with the lines and grades of said
plan and are accurately located as shown thereon in accordance with Section V.Q "As
Builts".
b. The Board shall obtain in writing from the Board's designated Construction Inspection
Agent a statement that all work required by these Rules and Regulations has been inspected
by him and completed in each street in the subdivision (or the street or streets serving the
lots in question), including storm drains, bridges, and sidewalks and that he has approved
the methods of construction and materials used in the performance of such work.
c. The Board shall obtain in writing from the appropriate Water Commissioners and Sewer
Commissioners, if any, and within whose jurisdiction the subdivision is located, a statement
that they have inspected and the applicant has completed each water main and sanitary
sewer and their appurtenances in accordance with the requirements of these Rules and
Regulations and they have approved the methods of construction and materials used in the
performance of such work.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 15
d. The Board shall obtain in writing from the Board of Health a statement that each already
installed
on-lot sewage system was installed in accordance with Title 5, Environment Code
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 310 CMR 11.00 - 17.00.
e. The applicant shall execute an instrument, in a form approved by the Board, transferring
to the Town or to an approved public utility company without cost, valid unencumbered
title to all sanitary sewers, water mains and appurtenances thereto, constructed and installed
in the subdivision or approved portion thereof , and to the Town or to an approved district
or public utility company without cost and free of liens and encumbrances, perpetual rights
and easements to construct, inspect, repair, renew, replace, operate, and forever maintain
such sanitary sewers and water mains, with any easements and rights-of -way, manholes,
pipes, conduits and other appurtenances, and to do all acts incidental thereto, in, through,
and under the whole of all streets in the subdivisions or approved portion thereof, and if any
such sewers or water mains have been constructed in, through, and under a strip of land
extending 10 ft. in width on each side of the centerline of all such sewers and water mains.
f. Approval by the Sewer Commissioners of "off-site" sewer plans for connection to the
nearest public sewers.
g. Approval by the Highway Superintendent of off site storm drainage for connection to the
nearest public storm drains (if required).
11. Failure of Performance
Any such bond may be endorsed and any such deposit may be applied by the Board for the
benefit of the Town, as provided in M.G.L., Ch. 41 § 81Y upon failure of the performance
for which any such bond or deposit was given to the extent of the reasonable cost to the
Town of completing such construction and installation.
12. Certificate of Action
After said public hearing and after the report of the Board of Health, the Board shall
approve, or, if such plan does not comply with the subdivision control law or the rules and
regulations of the Board or the recommendations of the Board of Health, shall modify and
approve or shall disapprove such plan, shall file a certificate of its action with the Town
Clerk, a copy of which shall be recorded by the Town Clerk in a book kept for that purpose,
and shall send notice of its action by registered mail, postage prepaid, to the subdivider at
his address stated on the application.
Failure of the Board to take final action regarding the plan submitted by the subdivider
within 90 days after such submission, or such further time as may be agreed upon at the
written request of the subdivider, shall be deemed to an approval thereof. Notices of such
extension of time shall be filed forthwith by the Board with the Town Clerk, in accordance
with M.G.L., Ch. 41 § 81U.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 16
The action of the Board with respect to such a plan shall be by vote, copies of which shall be
certified and filed with the Town Clerk and sent by registered mail to the applicant. If the
Board modifies or disapproves such plan, it shall state in its vote the reasons for such action.
Final approval, if granted, shall be endorsed on the original drawing of the Definitive Plan
by the signature of a majority of the Board (or by the signature of a person officially
authorized by the Board) but not until the statutory 20-day appeal period has elapsed
following the filing of the certificate of the action with the Town Clerk and said clerk
notified the Board that no appeal has been filed. After the Definitive Plan has been
approved and endorsed, the applicant shall furnish the Board with ten revisions, if any, for
the Board to endorse prints thereof. Final approval of the Definitive Plan does not
constitute the laying out of or acceptance by the Town of the streets within the subdivision.
13. Amended Definitive Plan
Any amended plan must be submitted within six months of the disapproval. An amended
plan will be accompanied by a fee in the amount required in Section II.C.3., or any lesser
amount as determined by the Planning Board.
14. Recording of a Definitive Plan
Within 10 days after endorsement of the definitive plan, the property line plan, as approved
and endorsed, shall be recorded at the Worcester County Registry of Deeds or, in the case
of Registered Land, with the Recorder of the Land Court. The applicant shall notify the
Planning Board in writing of the date of such recording with the plan book and plan
reference.
Within fourteen (14) days after recording, the applicant shall file six copies of the complete
approved Definitive Plan with the Board. The Board will distribute one to the Town Clerk,
Board of Assessors, Building Inspector, Planning Board, Highway Department and Town
Engineer. In accordance with the statute, where approval with covenant is noted thereon,
the Building Commissioner shall issue no permit for the construction of a building on any
lot within the subdivision except upon release of the lot in question by the Board.
A plan approved and endorsed must be recorded, in any case, within 60 days of said
endorsement or the Definitive Plan shall become null and void.
15. Substantial Construction Requirement
A developer must begin infrastructures within two (2) years of endorsement and approval of
a Definitive Plan of a subdivision or the plan will be rescinded.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 17
If a Planning Board approved "phasing" schedule is used, each phase has a two year period
to complete construction, but cannot exceed eight years in total. Infrastructures shall mean
those requirements of Section V, sub-sections A through K.
SECTION 4
DESIGN STANDARDS
A.
STREETS
1. Roadway Design
Roadways shall be designed and stamped by a Massachusetts Registered Professional
Engineer.
2. Location and Alignment
a. All streets in the subdivision shall be designed so that they will provide safe vehicular
travel. Due consideration shall also be given by the subdivider to ease of future
maintenance of the roadways as well as the attractiveness of the street layout in order to
obtain the maximum livability and amenity of the subdivision.
b. The proposed streets shall conform so far as practicable to the Master or Study Plan as
adopted in whole or in part by the Board.
c. Provision satisfactory to the Board shall be made for the proper projection of streets, or
for access to adjoining property which is not yet subdivided.
d. Reserve strips prohibiting access to streets or adjoining property shall not be permitted.
e. The centerline offset of two streets which intersect the same third street on opposite sides
shall be a minimum of 200 feet. The centerline offset of two streets that intersect the same
third street on the same side of the roadway shall be a minimum of 400 feet. Wherever
possible four way intersections shall be utilized.
f. The minimum centerline radii of curved streets shall be 270 feet. A minimum stopping
sight distance of 200 feet, or other as required by the Board, shall be provided.
g. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. No street
shall intersect any other street at less than 60 degrees.
h. Intersecting streets should be planned with a minimum amount of obstructions blocking
a driver's view of the intersection.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 18
i. Cuts or fills in excess of eight (8) feet or roadway locations resulting in lots being more
than eight (8) feet above or below the grade of the roadway shall be substantiated by the
submission of a cross section showing the proposed grading within 200 feet of the roadway
of both sides.
j. Street patterns designed for the sole purpose of providing maximum lot development
will be cause for disapproval.
k. Roadway Cross Section will be like that shown in Appendix.
3. Width
The minimum width of street right-of –way shall be 50 feet. Greater width shall be required
by the Board when deemed necessary for present and future vehicular travel, safety and
snow removal. The minimum roadway width for a 50 foot right-of-way shall be 26 feet.
The minimum road width for a 60 foot right-of-way shall be 36 feet. This section may also
be applied to access roads to the subdivision. Sidelines and centerline shall be parallel.
4. Grade
a. Grades of streets shall not be less than 0.5 percent nor more than 9.0 percent.
b. All changes in grade exceeding eight tenths of one percent (0. 8%) shall be connected by
vertical curves with a minimum length of one hundred feet (100’).
c. Where a grade is five percent or greater within 150’ of the intersection of a street right-of
-way line, there shall be provided a leveling area on the proposed street of at least 100’, with
a maximum grade of three percent.
5.
Dead-End Street
a. Dead-end streets shall not be longer than 500 feet (measured from the centerline of the
intersecting street to the furthest curb line, along the centerline, on the dead end street)
unless, in the opinion of the Board, a greater length is necessitated by topography or other
local conditions. Future extension must be shown to the nearest proposed or constructed
street. Sidelines and centerline shall be parallel. The minimum sideline radii shall be 30
feet.
b. Dead-end streets shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside
diameter of 176 feet, with a minimum 100’ diameter island, 26’ of pavement and a 12’ grass
strip/sidewalk area.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 19
c. Maximum grade of the roadway in a cul-de-sac shall be 3 percent, and the minimum
shall be 1 percent.
6.
Intersections
a. Curb lines at street intersections shall be rounded to a radius of not less than 30 feet and
property lines shall be rounded to a radius of not less than 30 feet for 50 feet right-of-way
streets.
b. Curb lines at street intersections shall be rounded to a radius of not less than 50 feet and
property lines shall be rounded to a radius of not less than 50 feet for 60 feet of right-of -way
streets.
7.
Bridges
a. Bridges shall be designed in accordance with the design criteria of the Massachusetts
Department of Public Works.
8. Subsurface Data
a. Sufficient subsuface data shall be obtained by the applicant for the proper design of
subdivision roadways.
b. Subsurface soil sampling shall be performed in the presence of the Board or its Agent.
c. Soil logs shall be certified and stamped by a Massachusetts Registered Professional
Engineer.
d. Subsurface soil data shall be reviewed and approved by the Board or its Agent
B.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
All stormwater management calculations and designs shall be in accordance with the
Stormwater Management Guidelines issued by the Department of Environmental
Protection and regulations promulgated in accordance with those Guidelines. This applies
to all facilities, regardless of their proximity to areas regulated by the Wetlands Protection
Act.
1.
Subsurface Drain or Subdrains
a. In areas where the finished grade of the roadway is less than four (4) feet above the
water table or in areas where less than four (4) feet of fill is placed above water in swampy
places or any standing water, or in other areas, where in the opinion of the Board, the
roadway subgrade or slopes in cut sections must be drained, a system of sub-drains. shall be
installed in all ledge cuts, and shall extend at least fifty (50) feet beyond the limits of such
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 20
cuts. The subdrain shall consist of a minimum of one longitudinal drain f or each side of the
paved roadway. In addition, laterals may be required as directed by the Board in areas in
which an undue amount of water could accumulate in the subgrade or within the slopes of
cut sections. The system of subdrains shall be discharged into the storm drain system or
otherwise disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the Board.
b. Subdrains shall be a smooth interior perforated corrugated High Density Polyethylene
(HDPE) Pipe. All pipe, couplings and fittings shall conform to the applicable requirements
of AASHTO Designation M252 & M294 and ASTM D3350. The minimum depth of cover
shall be 2 feet. The minimum inside diameter of the pipe shall be 6 inches. Cleanouts shall
be provided.
2. Storm Drains
A complete storm drain system shall be designed for each street of the subdivision and to the
satisfaction of the Board and shall be so laid out and of sufficient size to permit unimpeded
flow of all natural waterways, to provide adequate drainage of all portions of the street
system so that water does not accumulate thereon, to intercept storm water runoff from the
adjacent lots of the subdivision, and to eliminate undesirable or unnatural accumulation of
water on any portion of the subdivision or surrounding property. The storm drain system
shall include gutters, catch basins, manholes, culverts, drain lines, concrete headwalls and
such other items as may be required to complete the system to the satisfaction of the Board.
Manhole and storm drains pipe will be off -center and be located between the centerline and
the gutter on the side opposite the water line. The Board encourages storm drain systems
that reflect state-of -the-art drainage management.
a. The quantity of storm water carried by drains and other drainage facilities shall be
determined by a method acceptable to the Board, and the design storm shall be 25 year
rational method except for bridges, in which case it shall be 100 years. Systems for
infiltration, detention and attenuation of storms shall be designed for 100 year frequency
storm and shall not cause water to be discharged within 10 feet of the perimeter of the
subdivision.
b. Storm drains shall have a minimum diameter of 12 inches, a minimum slope of 0.5%,
and minimum cover of 4 feet. The maximum flow velocity in the pipes shall be 12
feet/second when flowing full, and the minimum flow velocity shall be 2 feet/second at
depth of design storm, however there may be consideration for minimum velocity for other
depths.
Storm drains shall be constructed of reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) or High Density
Polyethylene (HDPE) Corrugated and Smooth Lined Pipe & Fittings. HDPE pipe shall be
manufactured in accordance with requirements of ASTM F 2306, latest editions, from
virgin PE compounds which conform with the requirements of cell class 335400C as defined
and described in ASTM D 3350, latest editions.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 21
Foundation and bedding for HDPE pipe shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M 145,
A-1, A-2-4, A-2-5, or A-3. A stable and uniform bedding shall be provided for the pipe and
any protruding features of its joint and/or fittings. The middle of the bedding equal to 1/3rd
of the pipe O.D. may be loosely placed, while the remainder shall be compacted to a
minimum 95% of maximum density per AASHTO T99. A minimum of 4” of bedding shall
be provided prior to placement of the pipe, unless an unyielding material (rock cuts) is
present in the trench bottom, then a 6” cushion of bedding is recommended. Bedding
material size shall be 1.5” maximum granular material.
c. Catch basins with curb inlets shall be located in pairs, one on each side of the roadway,
at all low points or sag curves in the roadway, at intervals of not more than three hundred
(300) feet on continuous grades of the roadway, and at or near the corners of the roadway at
intersecting streets. Invert and grate elevations shall be shown. Catch basins shall connect
only to manholes.
d. Manholes shall be located at all changes in direction, either horizontally or vertically, of
a drain line or at the intersection of two (2) or more drain lines, or so located that a drain
line greater than (300) feet in length would exist without either a catch basin or manhole.
This distance may be less if the Board determines it is necessary. Invert and cover
elevations shall be shown.
e. Provision shall be made for the disposal of surface water intercepted collected by the
system in such a manner that no, flow is conducted over Town ways, or over the land or
others unless a drainage easement is obtained or unless such flow is essentially the same
quantity as previously existed in the same location.
Drainage easements provide that the Town shall have the right to enter thereupon if the
Town is charged with the responsibility of maintaining same. Said easement must be in a
form recordable at the Worcester District Registry of Deeds.
f. A headwall shall be provided at the outfall end of all drains. Headwall and wing walls
are required on all exposed drainage inflows.
g. Storm water runoff, except in areas where the minimum lot size is 40,000 square feet or
larger or where it is in existing open stream channels, shall not be permitted to flow upon
the surface for a longer distance than 4,000 feet before it enters the underground system.
h. If existing or potential downstream flooding problems are identified Board shall require
that the storm drains system for the proposed development be designed so that the storm
water volume, peak discharge rate and pollution load leaving the site are no greater after
development than before development. The criteria to be use to establish the peak rate of
discharge from the site as it presently exists is that peak rate of runoff associated with a 25
year storm. There are many ways to accomplish this, with detention ponds being the least
desirable. If site detention areas and/or storm water leaching pits are used, easements will
be required for these areas and the detention area must be completely fenced.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 22
3. Perimeter Drains
a. All perimeter drains that will in any way drain onto existing Town property or
easements, or any property or easements to be accepted by the Town, must be shown on the
Definitive plan. It will not be construed that the town is responsible for such drains or
assumes ownership of said types of drains. These drains are the sole responsibility of the
land owner.
C.
WATER
1 . Public water mains shall be not less than 8 in. unless approved otherwise by the Board.
Fire hydrants shall be located not more than 500 feet hose lay (within roadways) from any
existing or proposed building in residential subdivisions. Hydrants in non-residential
subdivisions shall be located so as not to be more than a 500 separation as measured along
roadways. Hydrant locations should be at street intersections, at other locations to comply
within the above 500 foot distance requirements and at locations determined by the Fire
Department. Water lines will be on the side opposite storm drain line.
2. Each hydrant shall be served directly from the water main through a 6 inch lateral
connection. It shall be gated with a minimum 5 inch bottom valve and shall have two 2 1/2
inch hose outlets and on 4 1/2 inch pump outlet. Sectional control valves shall be located in
such number and locations that lines by individual block may be isolated for maintenance
purposes.
3. A minimum of 750 gallons per minute (gpm) of water flow at a minimum residual water
pressure of 20 pounds per square inch (psi) shall be available at every hydrant intended to
serve a building within a proposed residential subdivision. Minimum flow requirements for
non-residential subdivisions shall be determined on an individual case basis using accepted
industry standards and methodology applied toward the proposed building size,
construction, location and usage, and shall be at least equal to that for residential
subdivisions.
4. Before lot release and subsequent issuance of any building permit for a building within a
subdivision, the Fire Department shall be provided with a certification of compliance of
available flows for hydrants located within 500 feet of that building. This certification shall
be prepared by the applicant's or owner's Professional Engineer and shall show the actual
water flow and residual pressure which shall meet or exceed the above mentioned minimum
requirements. This certification shall be based upon actual hydrant flow tests performed
within one year of the date of certification and the results of each hydrant flow test shall be
included as part of the certification.
5. If the minimum flow and pressure requirements cannot be met with a gravity flow
system and pumping is necessary, and allowed by the authority having jurisdiction, all fire
pumping equipment shall be in accordance with the latest edition of the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) Standard 20, Standard for the Installation of Centrifugal
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 23
Fire Pumps. Every pumping facility shall include an approved emergency pumping by-pass
feature.
6. Where the proposed subdivision public water system is located within 1000 feet of the
subdivision, the subdivider shall connect to the public water system. Where a public water
system is not located within 1000 feet, the subdivider may install private on-lot water
systems and such systems shall be designed in conformity with the standards of the Board of
Health.
7. Water systems shall be of redundant looped design.
8. Community-type systems or the joint use of wells shall be subject to the standards of the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection.
9. Should there exist within a proposed subdivision, a surface body of water (a pond,
stream, brook or wetland area) that has potential as a source of water for fire fighting
purposes, a permanent easement shall be established to provide access to the water sources.
If the Fire Chief requires the installation of a dry hydrant, such installation will be at the
expense of the developer.
D.
FIRE PROTECTION
For all residential developments or common drives which serve greater than (3) three
proposed home sites that are not located near a municipal or private water company water
fire hydrant district or service are required to meet the following.
For all commercial developments that are not located near a municipal or private water
company, water fire hydrant district, or service, are required to meet the following criteria if
said structure or structures within said commercial development exceed in (7,500) seventyfive-
hundred square feet in each commercial building.
1.
Subsurface Water Storage Tanks (Fire Tanks)
Subsurface water storage tanks for fire protection shall be installed within all subdivisions,
or common driveways, which serve (3) three or more residential homes, or for all
commercial developments, or when in the opinion of the Sutton Planning Board and the
concurrence with the Chief of the Sutton Fire Department when such tanks are necessary to
protect the public by providing adequate water availability for fire protection. No tank
installation(s) shall be started until the developer or contractor has obtained a permit from
the Sutton Fire Department. Said tank shall be filled and maintained at the expense of the
developer.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 24
2.
Location
All subsurface water tanks shall be located within easements provided exclusively for this
purpose. Tanks shall be not more than (1,500) feet apart. The fire tank located closest to an
existing intersection shall be located within (50) feet of the proposed new roadway. Each
suction pipe installed upon each tank shall be located at least (7) feet but not more that (9)
feet from the edge of the traveled way.
3.
Tank Specifications
a. Tanks shall be of a water tight fiberglass design capable of holding not less than ten
thousand (10,000) gallons for residential developments. Tanks shall be from a manufacturer
approved and reviewed by the Sutton Planning Board and the Sutton Fire Department.
b. Tank size for commercial buildings shall be determined by using (ISO) Insurance Service
Organization Calculations or the National Fire Protection Association- Standard #1231 or
equivalent.
c. Warranty-Tanks shall carry an implied warranty by said approved manufacturer, which
covers defects and other failures for at least (30) thirty years. Said warranty shall be
transferable to the Town of Sutton, when the Town assumes ownership of said tank. Each
tank installed shall be submitted prior to the installation with a complete copy of all
warranties, checklists, certificates and other written materials, which accompany each tank.
d. Suction Pipe-Each tank will be equipped with a (6) six inch diameter, seamless suction
pipe composed of steel or equivalent with a minimal wall thickness of one-eighth (1/8) inch
and terminating in a (6) six inch 90° degree elbow with a (6) six inch cap. Said suction pipe
shall be screened and shall extend (4) four inches from the bottom of the tank to a point not
greater than (32) thirty-two inches above the finish grade at the edge of the traveled way.
That portion of pipe within said tank shall be composed of PVC pipe. Metal hold down
strapping shall be required and bolted holding and preventing said suction pipe from falling
into or walking away from the finished grade pad.
e. Fill Pipe-Each tank shall be equipped with a (4) four inch diameter fill pipe having (2.5)
two and one-half inch fire department national standard thread. Said pipe shall extend (3)
three feet above finish grade, be screened to prevent stones and debris from being placed
into said tank or openings. Said fill line shall also be equipped with a cap and chain, which
will be screwed into said fitting. Said fill pipe shall terminate in a tee so as to allow
measurement of the water level in the tank.
f. Vent Pipe-Each tank shall be equipped with a vent pipe at least (6) six inches in
diameter. Said vent pipe shall extend (3) three feet above finish grade, terminating in an
elbow at 180° degrees so as to allow the opening of the pipe to face the ground. The
opening shall be screened with a one-forth-inch mesh steel screening.
4. Installation
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 25
All tanks shall be handled, stored, installed, anchored and tested in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions.
5.
Excavation
For all tanks with a 10,000 gallon capacity, the tank hole size in stable soil conditions shall
allow for (24) twenty-four inches between the tank sides and ends and the banks of the hole.
The tank hole shall be deep enough to allow a minimum of (12) twelve inches of required
backfill material over the hole bottom ( or over the concrete slab if required), a concrete slab,
backfill cover over the tank as specified within other sections of this by-law.
6.
Bed and Backfill
All excavated native soil must be replaced with backfill approved by the Town Engineer or
certified to meet the manufacture requirements pertaining to particle size, roundness, quality
and soundness. No sand or native soil shall be mixed with the approved gravel. In areas of
unstable soils, changing groundwater levels, or watery conditions, or where in the opinion
of the Town Engineer may require the installation of a concrete slab below the tank, and
may specify other modifications such as anchoring, filter fabric, or change the size of the
tank in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. All such installations will be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Board, Fire Department and the Town Engineer.
7.
Anchoring
Provisions for anchoring, where required, shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions, and approved by the Town Engineer.
8.
Backfill Cover
The tank shall be covered by a minimum of (69) sixty-nine inches of backfill or other
minimum as required by the manufacturer’s recommendations.
9.
Barricading
The tank area shall be barricaded using temporary fencing to prevent vehicular traffic over
said tank until the installation is complete. Thereafter, the pipes shall be protected by
bollards placed in accordance with the Fire Departments recommendations.
10.
Inspection
a. Tank Permit & Inspection Fees-A fee of $100.00 per tank will be required for all tank(s).
No inspections can be made until an “Application For Permit” has been obtained from the
Fire Department.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 26
b. The developer or contractor shall provide the Town Engineer, Planning Board and Fire
Department with soil test and water table results, and backfill material certification prior to
the tank has been installed for their review. Where the groundwater is a consideration,
buoyancy calculations by a registered engineer must be submitted to verify whether concrete
hold-down structures are necessary for said tank(s).
c. Request for inspection-The developer or contractor shall submit a “request for
inspection” (5) five days prior to the day of inspection to the Fire Department.
d. The tank shall be tested in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions at the
expense of the developer or contractor. The Fire Department shall be present during all
stages of tank installation and testing and shall inspect the tank before it is installed, the
excavation, backfill, concrete pads or anchoring provisions, if required, pipes and fittings,
and all other items and installations such as the final filling of water.
11.
Maintenance
Underground water storage (fire) tank easements shall be maintained free of all vegetation
and during snow conditions to allow access to the site by fire department vehicles and
personnel at all times during the year.
E.
SEWERAGE
1. A sewerage collection system, including pipes, connecting Y's, manholes, lift stations, if
necessary, and other related equipment shall be installed to serve all lots in the subdivision,
except in the following cases:
a. For subdivision not within 2500 feet of an already existing sewer line.
b. For subdivisions not within the 2500 feet of an existing sewer line and which the Board
of Sewer commissioners determine cannot be connected to sewers likely to exist within 10
years from the date the last performance guarantee was given by the subdivider to the Town.
2. The sewerage collection system shall be installed under supervision of and in accordance
with the requirements of the Board of Sewer Commissioners. Said system shall be tested
and approved before paving commences.
a. Sewer manholes and pipes shall be located at the center of the road to maximum extent
possible.
3. Where a sewerage collection system is deemed not to be required, individual on-site
subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed under the supervision of the Board of
Health and in strict compliance with the latest edition of Title 5 of the State Environmental
Code, and CMR #11.00-17.00.
F. EASEMENTS
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 27
1. Easements for utilities across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided
where necessary and shall be at least 30 feet wide.
2. Where a subdivision is traversed by watercourse drainage way, channel or stream, the
Board shall require that there be provided storm water easement or drainage right-of-way of
adequate width to conform substantially to the lines of such water course, drainage way,
channel or stream, and to provide for construction or other necessary purpose.
3. Temporary construction easements shall be shown on all lots adjacent to the proposed
roadways to allow for construction of back slopes from the road onto the lots. The
easements shall extend a minimum of 10 feet into each lot, or a greater distance if required
by the proposed construction. The easements shall terminate upon acceptance of the street
by the Town.
4. Signed copies of easements and agreements affecting land not within the subdivision but
necessary for provision of utilities shall be submitted to the Board before approval of the
Definitive Plan.
G.
OPEN SPACE
Before approval of a plan, the Board may also, in site specific cases, require the plan to
show a park or parks suitably located for playground or recreation purposes or for providing
light and air. The park or parks shall not be unreasonable in area in relation to the land
being subdivided and to the prospective uses of such land. The Board may, by appropriate
endorsement on the plan, require that no building be erected upon this park land for a
period of not more than three (3) years without its approval.
H.
PROTECTION OF NATURAL FEATURES
All natural features, such as stone walls, trees, wooded areas, water courses, scenic points,
historic spots, will be preserved under the discretion of the Board.
Any clearance, back filling, cutting, thinning or other disturbance to trees twelve inches or
over in diameter measured four feet (41) above finished ground level, located within the
minimum front setback distance shall be prohibited unless deemed proper by the Board.
Any such proposed clearance shown on the plan and written reasons therefor may be
requested by the Board. Tree wells or retaining walls shall be installed whenever necessary
for suitable grading around trees. Tree wells or retaining walls shall be of such design to
meet the standards as set forth in the Tree Experts Manual or some similar publication.
Also refer to the Sutton General By-Laws, Section 16, "Scenic Road By-Law".
I.
LOT SIZE
Proposed lots shall be in conformance with the Town's Zoning By-Law for the zoning
district(s) in which the subdivision is located.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 28
SECTION 5
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS FOR A NEW SUBDIVISION
In subdivisions, the ways shall be constructed and municipal services installed in accordance
with the Massachusetts Highway Department (MHD) Standard Specifications for Highways
and Bridges and in the event of conflict, the more stringent specification will govern and the
following specific requirements:
A.
DRAINAGE
The construction of the drainage system, including methods of construction and quality of
materials used, shall be in conformity with the Definitive Plan and the details shall conform
with the details of the MHD Specifications and Standards, unless specifically excepted by
the Board.
B.
WATER & FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
The water and fire protection systems shall be installed in accordance with the Definitive
Plan and shall be in conformity with these Rules and Regulations as well as Water District
Regulations and Fire Department Regulations.
C.
SEWERAGE
The sewerage system shall be installed in accordance with the Definitive Plan and shall be
in conformity with these Rules and Regulations of the Board and Rules and Regulations of
the Sutton Sewer Commissioner. Said system shall be tested and approved before paving.
D.
UNDERGROUND SERVICES
1. All water mains and laterals within the exterior lines of the street shall be installed at
least 5 feet below the finished grade.
2. In rock, clay or peat excavation, trenches shall be excavated to a depth of 6 inches or
more below the bottom of any water pipe, storm drain, or sewer and filled with suitable base
materials (select gravel or 2 1/2 inches trap rock as is found necessary).
3. All water pipes, storm drains and/or sewers, and any gas mains or underground light
and power conduits shall be installed in the street prior to completion of the roadway
foundation. This includes the installation of service pipes and conduits to the front lot line
of each residential lot shown in the subdivision. Underground utilities should be located
under a grass area.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 29
4. All storm drains, sewers, culverts, manholes, water mains and laterals, shutoff valves
and hydrants shall be inspected prior to any back filling of trenches or other covering of
structure
5. All wire shall be placed underground in conduits. Such wires shall include electric,
telephone or cable television and other wire which would normally be placed on a utility
pole.
. Following such inspection, the fill material shall be carefully placed around the
structure and rammed and compacted in I foot layers.
6. The developer shall work with the cable provider during subdivision planning. A plan
for the cable Distribution Plant shall be included in the definitive plan. A copy of the
approved plan that relates to installation of the Distribution Plant will also be provided to
the cable provider by the developer after approval.
E.
STREET GRADING
1. The entire area of each street within the exterior lines shall be cleared of all stumps,
brush, roots, rock or boulders and like material and of all trees not intended for
preservation. All loam and other yielding material shall be removed from the roadway area
of each street or way and replaced with suitable material.
2. Within each street, the full length and width of roadway shall be excavated to a depth of
at least 21 inches below the finished surface or filled, as necessary, to a subgrade parallel to
the finished grade herein specified. If the soil is soft or yielding, or contains rocks or
boulders, clay, sand pockets, peat or other material detrimental to the subgrade, such
materials shall be removed to such additional depth as required by the Board's designated
Construction Inspector and replaced with well-compacted material such as 2 1/2 inch trap
rock approved by him. Where fills are very deep, the material shall be placed in layers of
approximately 1 foot and thoroughly compacted. No gravel shall be placed on the finished
subgrade until approval is given by the Board following an inspection as here-in after
provided.
3. Off-set stakes for construction shall be set and maintained by the developer at 50 foot
intervals on each side of the right-of-way and to indicate the location of each drainage and
sewerage structure and at each hydrant. Stakes shall be set under the direction of a
Registered Land Surveyor and shall indicate the exact amount of cut, fill or grade. Stakes
shall be maintained during construction until first asphalt course is placed.
F.
ROADWAYS
1. Roadways shall be constructed for the full length and width. The centerline of such
roadways shall coincide with the centerline of the street right-of-way.
2. Roadways shall be provided with a gravel base course consisting of at least 18 inches
compacted thickness of binding gravel satisfactory to the designated construction inspector.
The gravel shall be clean, free of organic matter, and containing no stones over three (3)
inches in diameter. The gravel shall be spread in two equivalent layers, each thoroughly
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 30
watered and rolled true to line and graded to conform with the typical street cross-section
and the street profiles. Rolling shall be with an approved three wheel roller or equal,
weighing not less than ten (10) tons. The complete gravel base shall be inspected as
hereinafter provided, prior to any further construction.
3. The wearing surface of roadways and driveways within the right-of-way shall be a two
course type I Bituminous Concrete Pavement, applied with a 1 1/2 inch base course, after
compaction, with a 1 1/2 inch finish course, after compaction, in accordance with the
MHD Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges or a Cement/ Concrete Pavement
constructed in accordance with the MHD Standard Specifications for Highways and
Bridges
. A tack coat will be required between the two courses if they are not completed
within the same construction season.
G.
CURBING
1. Curbing shall be provided along each side of all roadways and shall be granite.
2. The need for curbing may be eliminated along certain roadways, when drainage is
provided in swales, which are designed to reduce the rate of runoff, restore or supply needed
water to vegetation in the street right-of-way.
H.
STREET SIGNS AND HOUSE NUMBERS
1. Street signs which, in the opinion of the Board are the type commonly used on the
public ways in the town and bearing the names of the street as indicated on the Definitive
Plan, shall be erected at all intersections of streets in the subdivision. The lettering on such
signs shall be so arranged that the word "Private" appears below the street name and may be
painted out or removed when the street is accepted by the Town as public way.
2. The use of approved street names and house numbers, as assigned by the Board of
Assessors, shall be utilized in early construction of a project to aid emergency services and
prospective buyers in locating the correct addresses. After construction, permanent house
numbers shall be affixed to each residence and shall be clearly visible from the street.
I.
SIDEWALKS AND LIGHTING
1. Sidewalks of not less than 4 feet in width shall be constructed as shown on the Definitive
Plan on at least one side of each roadway on all streets. Sidewalks on both sides of a
roadway may be required near schools or other generators of pedestrian travel, as
determined by the Board. Sidewalks shall be no closer than one foot (1’) to the edge of
pavement.
2. Sidewalks shall have a finished grade in relation to the finished grade of the roadway as
shown on the applicable cross-section plan. When unusual physical land characteristics or
topographic conditions require, the Board may approve the placement of a lower elevation
in relation thereto, provided such variation is indicated on the Definitive Plan.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 31
3. In constructing all sidewalks, the material shall be removed for the full width of the
sidewalk to a subgrade of at least eleven (11) inches below the approved finished grade, and
also all soft spots and other undesirable material below such subgrade shall be replaced with
a good binding material and rolled with a 2 ton roller or equivalent.
4. Unless the applicant elects to install cement concrete sidewalks (built according to
specifications of MHD) the excavated area shall be filled with at least 8 inches of select
gravel containing some binding material and compressed and rolled to a surface with a pitch
parallel to than shown on the applicant cross-section plan. Sidewalks shall be constructed of
Portland cement concrete to a minimum thickness of 4”, with an 8” gravel base. In all other
respects the sidewalk shall be constructed in accordance with MHD specifications. The
cross slope shall be ¼” per 1’ of width to provide proposed drainage.
J.
PLANTING STRIPS
1. A four foot wide grass plot shall be constructed between the back edge of the curb and
the front edge of the sidewalk on each side of the roadway.
2. The finished grade of such planting strips in relation to the finished grade of the roadway
shall be as shown on the applicable cross-section plan.
3. If the subdivider finds it necessary to remove any of the Town's trees or if the Board
finds it necessary to have the subdivider remove any of the Town's trees, the subdivider
shall replace any and all at his own expense. The species of trees may include Silver Maple,
Red Maple, Sugar Maple, Northern Red Oak, Pin Oak, Scarlet Oak, or any other species
that is acceptable to the Planning Board. These new plantings shall be guaranteed by the
subdivider for a period of one year. The location for the new plantings shall be designated
by the Tree Warden or the appointed representative.
4. Along each street and on both sides, the subdivider shall plant trees so that with existing
trees they shall be an average of 100 feet apart within twenty feet of the roadway. The new
plantings will be one and one half (1 1/2) to two (2) inches caliper with a minimum height
of ten (10) feet. Each tree shall be supported with a 2” x 2” x 8’ wooden stake and shall be
fastened at the top with loop of rubber or suitable fabric hosing. All trees shall be
guaranteed by the subdivider until the street is accepted by the Town as a public way.
5. No utility poles or trees shall be placed or retained within the planting strip so as to be
closer than three (3) feet from the edge of the roadway.
K.
SIDE SLOPES
The area in back of the sidewalk, or where no sidewalk is constructed, in back of the
required planting strip, shall be graded to a point where it coincides with the finished grade
of abutting lots in such a manner that no portion thereof within the exterior lines of the
street will project above a plane sloped three horizontal to one vertical from the edge of the
sidewalk or grass lot, or be below a plane sloped three horizontal to one vertical downward.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 32
L.
LOAMING
The top 4 inches of planting strips and side slopes shall consist of good quality loam,
screened, raked, and rolled with a hand roller to grade.
The loam shall be seeded with lawn grass seed applied in sufficient quantity to assure
adequate coverage, rolled when the loam is moist.
M.
MONUMENTS AND MARKERS
1. Granite monuments shall be installed at all street intersections, at all points of change in
direction or curvature of streets, and at other points as shown on the Definitive Plan and
where, in the opinion of the Board, permanent monuments are necessary.
2. An iron pipe or iron rod marker at least 36 inches long shall be installed at all corners of
each lot shown on the Definitive Plan and granite monuments shall be set to mark all Town
related easements.
3. No permanent monuments shall be installed until all construction which could destroy
or disturb the monuments is completed.
4. Monuments must be set to be flush with finished grade. Reference points to be drilled
holes in the top.
N.
CLEANING UP
The entire area must be cleaned so as to leave a neat and orderly appearance free from
debris and other objectionable materials. All catch basins shall be properly cleaned. Such
work shall be guaranteed by the developer through the performance bond and/or covenant.
O.
CERTIFICATE
Just prior to the completion of the subdivision, the subdivider shall furnish a certificate from
the Massachusetts Registered Land Surveyor or Massachusetts Registered Civil Engineer
that the plan and profile of the subdivision are according to the Board's approved plan and
that all bounds and monuments are set correctly and according to Board approved plan.
Prior to the final release, the subdivider shall file with the Board an "as-built" plan of
completed improvements. The plan shall show all plan and profile views correct and
verified by the subdivider's land surveyor to be actual as-built locations and profiles of all
streets, ways and utilities, including those installed by others, such as the gas company,
cable company, or telephone company and the location of all lines, including service
connections.
P.
CONTROL
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 33
The applicant shall employ, at his own expense, a Registered Professional Land Surveyor to
set all lines and grades in a manner satisfactory to the Board.
Q.
SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION
1.
PURPOSE
All work performed as a consequence of these Rules and Regulations shall be subject to the
review of the Board which shall approve and accept, or disapprove and reject, each phase or
portion of such work, and at completion shall recommend the acceptance of all work or
disapproval of the work with reasons therefor. The Board may employ a registered
professional engineer or other qualified agent to act to inspect the work to insure
compliance with These Rules and Regulations, and to report to the Board his
recommendations as to approval or disapproval of the work. Such agent will make certain
inspections as prescribed herein in order to check the adequacy of the work at various stages
prior to such work being covered by subsequent work. However, the Board, its engineer, or
agent shall have the right to inspect the work at any time.
2. ACCESS
The applicant will provide safe and convenient access to all parts of the subdivision, for the
purposes of inspection, to representatives of the Board or other Town agencies and Boards.
3.
NOTIFICATION
a. After approval of the Definitive plan, the Board will notify the applicant of the name and
address of the engineer designated as its representative to perform the inspection as required
herein, and otherwise act as the Board's agent to insure compliance with these Rules and
Regulations. The applicant shall keep the engineer fully informed as to the status and
progress of the work, and shall notify the engineer directly (by mail or in person or by
telephone) at least forty-eight hours in advance that the work has progressed to a stage that
an inspection is required.
b. A "pre-construction" meeting will be held by the Board's agent before any work can
begin on the subdivision.
c. In the event the engineer makes an inspection of the work at the time designated and
finds that such work is not at the proper stage of completion, or that the work has been
covered or otherwise obscured, the engineer shall notify the applicant and the Board as to
the additional steps the applicant shall take to complete the work to the point required, or to
the extent the work shall be uncovered or exposed to full view. The applicant shall notify
the engineer again when the work is ready as prescribed in a. above.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 34
d. The applicant shall notify all applicable Town agencies and Boards when prepared for
other inspections not within the jurisdiction of the Planning Board. Such inspections shall
include water line and sewer line test and inspections.
4.
MODIFIED INSPECTION SCHEDULE
Inspection shall be continuous except a modified schedule may be authorized by the Board
or certain subdivisions. This modified schedule shall be for the following purposes:
INSPECTION TIMING PURPOSE
1 Prepared site Correct materials
Open trenches Proper site
Grade stakes placed Preparation
2 Installed drains, Correct installwater
mains, sewer, ation of lines
and utilities
3 After preparation Correct preparaof
road sub-grade tion of sub-grade
and prior to placement
of gravel
4 After compaction For correct placeof
roadway before ment of fill and
paving compacting
5 After street con- Correct construct
struction ion of pavement,
curb and sidewalks
6 After Cleanup For installation of
grass plots, street
signs, monument installation
and general
cleanup.
5. DISAPPROVAL
All work which has been disapproved, or is not acceptable to the Board, shall be removed
and replaced or otherwise corrected to the point of complying with the requirements of the
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 35
Board for acceptance. Any work which has been covered by subsequent work prior to
acceptance, or is otherwise not available or obscured to the point of rendering inspection of
the work difficult, shall be considered to be not acceptable to the Board. Such subsequent
guarantee shall depend upon the acceptance of all work prescribed herein and on the
Definitive plan and as directed by the Board.
6.
INSPECTION REPORTS
Timely inspection reports shall be provided to the applicant/developer or his agent with
copies to the Planning Board.
7.
AS BUILTS
The "as-built" drawings are an assembly containing a print of each original drawing, or
revised sheet.
They should be the most current set of drawings showing the latest approved changes; such
as, changes of location of pipe, inlets, manholes, finished pavement grades, etc. They
should be clean, neat and accurately prepared and are maintained for the purpose of
recording approved field changes, which are usually of minor nature. More significant
changes require documented revisions to the plans. The prints shall be maintained at the
work site and be used for the purpose of showing approved field construction changes.
Upon completion of the services, ways and street bounds, the applicant will have the
original approved construction drawings corrected and certified by a Registered Professional
Land Surveyor and or Engineer to show the actual "as-built" location and elevations of
pavement and utilities to include the driveway openings, trees, signs and changes approved
by the Planning Board. A complete set of mylars together with the set maintained in the
field must be submitted prior to acceptance by the Town.
SECTION 6
ADMINISTRATION
A.
VARIATION
The Planning Board may in any particular case, where such action is in the public interest
and not inconsistent with the intent and purpose of the subdivision control law, waive strict
compliance with its rules and regulations, and with the frontage or access requirements
specified in said law, and may, where the ways are not otherwise deemed adequate, approve
a plan ' on conditions limiting the lots upon which buildings may be erected and the number
of buildings that may be erected on a particular lots and the length of time for which
particular buildings may be maintained without further consent by the Planning Board to
the access provided. The Planning Board shall endorse such conditions on the plan to
which they relate, or set them forth in a separate instrument attached thereto to which
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 36
reference is made on such plan and which shall for the purpose of the subdivision control
law be deemed to be a part of the plan.
B.
REFERENCE
For matter not covered by these Rules and Regulations, reference is made to M.G.L., Ch.
41 § 81-K to 81-GG, and MHD Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges, each as
amended or updated from time to time.
C.
ENFORCEMENT BY DENIAL OF BUILDING PERMITS
No building shall be erected within a subdivision without written permission from the Board
in the form of a lot release. The Board reserves the right to rescind prior permission to build
(lot release) for cause.
D.
SEVARABILITY
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or provision of these Rules and Regulations shall
be adjudged not valid, the adjudication shall apply only to the material so adjudged, and
remainder of these Rules and Regulations shall be deemed valid and effective.
E.
AMENDMENTS
These Rules and Regulations or any portion thereof may be amended, supplemented, or
repealed from time to time by the Board after a public hearing on its own motion or by
petition.
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 37
APPENDIX
FORM
BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE APPROVAL
A APPLICATION FOR ENDORSEMENT OF PLAN
FORM
B APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF A PRELIMINARY PLAN
FORM
C APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF A DEFINITIVE
PLAN/LDRD PLAN
FORM D
CERTIFIED LIST OF ABUTTERS
APPENDIX E
TYPICAL ROADWAY CROSS-SECTION
REQUIRED DETAILS
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 38
TOWN OF SUTTON, MASSACHUSETTS
FORM A
Application for Endorsement of Plan Believed Not to Require Approval
An application fee in the amount of $100.00 per lot, including reconfigured residue land, made out
to “Town of Sutton”, must be attached to this form. Please submit at least two(2) copies of this
application and four(4) copies of the plan.
To the Planning Board:
The undersigned, believing that the accompanying plan of his property in the Town of
Sutton does not constitute a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision Control
Law, herewith submits said plan for a determination and endorsement that Planning Board
approval under the Subdivision Control Law is not required.
Date: _____________________
1. Name of Land Owner: ____________________________________________
Address: ________________________________________________________
Phone: ______________________ Fax: ______________________________
2. Name of Applicant: ______________________________________________
Address: ________________________________________________________
Phone: _______________________ Fax: _____________________________
3. Name of Registered Land Surveyor: _________________________________
Address: ________________________________________________________
Phone: ______________________ Fax: ______________________________
4. Location of Property: __________________________ Area: _____________
Deed Recorded at Worcester District Registry of Deeds at Book: ____________
Page: ___________ OR Land Court as Cert #: ___________________
5. Type of plan:
? Boundary Survey ? Conveyance
? New Lot(s) - #_____ ? Other: _________________
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 39
6. Owner’s Signature: _________________________________
Applicant’s Signature: _________________________________
Note: The plan to be filed with this application must be prepared in conformance with the
requirements of the Registry of Deeds or Land Court
TOWN OF SUTTON, MASSACHUSETTS
FORM B
Application for Approval of a Preliminary Plan
The application fee of $100.00 for plans, plus $25.00 per lot, check made out to "The Town
of Sutton", must be attached to this form.
_____________, _____
To the Planning Board,
The undersigned, being the Applicant as defined under M.G.L., Ch. 41 § 81-L, for approval
of a proposed subdivision shown on a plan entitled:
____________________________________________________________________
Dated _______________, _____.
Located (off of . . .) :________________________________________
as shown on Assessor’s Map # _________ Parcel #______________
By Engineer and Surveyor:
_____________________________________________________________
Address: ______________________________________________________
Phone: _______________________ Fax: _____________________________
hereby submits said plan as a PRELIMINARY subdivision plan in accordance with the
Rules and Regulations of the Sutton Planning Board and makes application to the Board for
approval of said plan.
The undersigned's title to said land is derived from:_____________________________
by deed dated ____________and recorded in the Worcester District Registry of Deeds
Book ______, Page ______, OR Land Court Certificate Number _____________
Applicant's Name & Signature:______________________________________
Applicant's Address: ______________________________________________
Phone: ________________________ Fax: _____________________________
Owner's Name & Signature: ________________________________________
Owner’s Address: _________________________________________________
Phone: ________________________ Fax: _____________________________
Received by the Planning Board:________________ ? Meeting ? Certified
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 40
TOWN OF SUTTON, MASSACHUSETTS
FORM C
Application for Approval of a Definitive Subdivision
The application fee of $3000.00 for plans, plus $200.00 per lot, check made out to "The
Town of Sutton", must be attached to this form.
Date of filing by certified mail or in open meeting:_________________
The undersigned, being the applicant as defined under M.G.L., Ch. 41 § 81-L, for approval
of a proposed definitive subdivision plan hereby submits said definitive plan in accordance
with the Ruled and Regulations of the Town of Sutton and M.G.L., Ch. 41.
Subdivision Name:____________________________________________________
Plans Dated:___________ Calculations Dated: ______________ Fee: $__________
Engineer and/or Land Surveyor:__________________________________________
Address:___________________________________________________________
Phone:___________________ Fax: ____________________
Owner’s Name, Address, Phone Number and Fax #:
______________________________________________________________________________
Applicant’s Name, Address, Phone Number and Fax #(if different than owner):
______________________________________________________________________________
Assessor’s map and parcel number of land: Map ________ Parcel _______
Land Recorded in Worcester District Registry of Deeds or Land Court:
Book_______Page_____ or Certificate Number __________.
Dated: _________________
Owned By: __________________________________Phone:__________________
Address:___________________________________ Fax:____________________
Land is free of encumbrances, except for: __________________________________
__________________________________________________________________
Said plan ? has ? has not evolved from a preliminary plan submitted to the Board on
________________.
The undersigned hereby applies for the approval of said definitive plan by the Planning
Board and hereby agrees to abide by the Town’s Rules and Regulations.
Owner’s Signature: _________________________________
Applicant’s Signature: ____________________________________
LIST OF ABUTTERS
Sutton Subdivision Rules & Regulations 2006 41
Owner’s Name: _________________________________________________________
Address of Property Affected: _____________________________________________
Map Number: _____________________ Parcel Number: _____________________
Parties of interest shall mean the petitioner, direct abutters, and owners of land directly
opposite on any public or private street or way, even though said land is in another city or
town.
Abutters:
Map Parcel Map Parcel Map Parcel Map Parcel
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____ ___ ____
See the attached certified list from the Board of Assessors.
Contact name and telephone:_________________________________________
Planning Board Direct Abutters List - Definitive Subdivision