Town of Stow
Stow, Massachusetts
General Bylaws
Including Amendments through July 10, 2017
ii
iii
GENERAL BYLAWS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
ARTICLE 1. TOWN MEETINGS 1
ARTICLE 2. GOVERNMENT OF TOWN MEETINGS 2
ARTICLE 3. TOWN AFFAIRS 3
Section 17. Community Preservation Committee 6
Section 18. Municipal Affordable Housing Trust 7
ARTICLE 4. TOWN FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION 13
Section 8. Capital Planning Committee 14
ARTICLE 5. ACCEPTANCE AND REPAIRS OF PRIVATE ROADS 17
ARTICLE 6. POLICE REGULATIONS 21
Section 6. Public Ways 21
Section 7. Animal Control 23
Section 21. Boating Regulations at Lake Boon 31
Section 23. Unregistered Motor Vehicles 33
Section 24. Non-criminal Disposition of Certain Violations 34
Section 26. Regulation and Licensing of Solicitors and Canvassers 36
Section 27. Alarm Systems Regulation Bylaw 38
Section 28. Schedule of Fees for Weights and Measures (deleted) 39
ARTICLE 7. CEMETERIES 40
ARTICLE 8. REPEAL 42
ARTICLE 9. WETLANDS PROTECTION 43
ARTICLE 10. FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION CODE 49
ARTICLE 11. PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION 51
ARTICLE 12. REGULATIONS FOR UNDERGROUND STORAGE FACILITIES 67
ARTICLE 13. REGULATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIAL 74
ARTICLE 14. REGULATION FOR RECYCLING MATERIALS (deleted) 79
ARTICLE 15. RIGHT TO FARM 80
ARTICLE 16. STRETCH ENERGY CODE 82
ARTICLE 17. EARTH REMOVAL 82
iv
1
TOWN OF STOW
STOW, MASSACHUSETTS 01775
GENERAL BYLAWS OF THE TOWN
Including Amendments through July 10, 2017
NOTE: In addition to these General Bylaws, attention is directed
to the Charter of the Town of Stow which was adopted by the Town
on May 13, 1991, in particular Article I, Section 1-7 thereof.
ARTICLE 1. TOWN MEETINGS
SECTION 1. The annual town meeting primarily for appropriations raised by taxation shall be held
the first Monday in May of each year. The Selectmen may call more than one special town meeting
each year for the primary purpose of zoning and other bylaw changes, land use regulations,
environmental problems and appropriations covered by transfer or borrowing.
(amended 7/8/63, 10/26/64, 10/15/73, 5/8/75, 6/12/96, 2/12/2001)
Nothing in this section shall prevent insertion in any warrant of any article on any subject for town
meeting consideration, the foregoing primary purposes being set forth as a guide for the orderly
conduct of town business. (amended 5/8/75)
The warrant for an annual or special town meeting may specify that the meeting is to be held in a
suitable auditorium or other facility in any of the contiguous towns. Town meeting may also vote to
adjourn to such a facility if it deems appropriate. (added 5/21/97)
SECTION 2. The annual town meeting for the election of officers and such other matters as may be
voted on the official ballot shall be held on the Tuesday of May of each year, which falls on the
eighth day following the date of the start of the annual meeting, provided that in no event shall such
election be held later than the last Tuesday in May. (amended 10/26/64, 10/15/73, 10/8/96, 2/12/01)
SECTION 3. All annual town meetings shall be notified and warned by posting attested copies of
the warrant calling same at the Town Building and at each of at least seven (7) other public places at
least seven (7) days before the time of holding the meeting. All special town meetings shall be
notified and warned at least fourteen (14) days before the time of holding the meeting by posting in
the same manner as provided for annual town meetings.
(amended 10/26/64, 5/9/79, 6/12/96)
2
ARTICLE 2. GOVERNMENT OF TOWN MEETINGS
SECTION 1. The moderator, while occupying the chair, shall not second any motion nor participate
in any discussion before the meeting.
SECTION 2. No vote on a main motion made under any article in the warrant shall be again taken
into consideration after having been disposed of unless ordered by a vote of two-thirds of the voters
present and voting, and no vote on such action shall be taken into reconsideration in any event after
the lapse of two hours from the time of the disposition of the vote, time to be measured only while
the town meeting is in session, unless announcement of intent to reconsider at a fixed place within
the warrant, or at a fixed time, is made within the same two-hour period. Once reconsideration of a
vote on a main motion under an article has been moved and voted upon, the vote may not again be
reconsidered within the same meeting. (amended 5/20/74, 10/5/81, 6/12/96)
SECTION 3. All motions shall be reduced to writing before being submitted to the meeting, if
required by the moderator.
SECTION 4. No vote fixing the time of closing a ballot shall be reconsidered after such ballot shall
have commenced; but the time for closing such ballot may be extended without reconsideration.
SECTION 5. When a question is under debate, motions may be received in accordance with the
procedures and provisions set forth in Town Meeting Time and in Section 7 of these bylaws.
(amended 6/12/96, 5/21/97)
SECTION 6. Articles in the warrant shall be acted upon in their order, unless otherwise directed by
a majority of the voters present.
SECTION 7. The duties of the moderator and the conduct of the meeting, not specially provided for
by law nor by the foregoing rules, shall be determined by the rules of parliamentary law contained in
Town Meeting Time by Johnson, Trustman & Wadsworth. (amended 2/24/58, 3/8/72)
SECTION 8. A vote to receive the report of a committee shall place the report before the meeting,
but shall not discharge the committee. A vote to accept or to adopt a report of a committee with or
without amendment shall discharge the committee.
SECTION 9. There shall be no quorum required at any town meeting, including that portion
devoted exclusively to the election of Town Officers.
(amended 2/24/59, 10/15/73, 5/7/91)
SECTION 10. On matters requiring a two-thirds vote by statute, an actual count need not be taken
unless the vote so declared is immediately questioned by the Moderator or seven (7) or more voters
as provided in Mass. General Laws Chapter 39, Section 15. (added 5/21/97)
3
ARTICLE 3. TOWN AFFAIRS
SECTION 1. The financial year shall begin with the first day of July in each year and end with the
thirtieth day of June following. (amended 5/20/74)
SECTION 2. (deleted 5/20/74)
SECTION 3. All town officers, except the Town Accountant, shall deliver to the Selectmen their
annual report prior to the fifteenth day of February in each year. The Town Accountant shall deliver
to the Selectmen his/her annual report on or before the fifteenth day of August in each year.
(amended 5/20/74, 11/17/98)
The Selectmen shall cause these reports, together with a list of town officers and other matter usually
published, to be printed and placed in the hands of the Town Clerk, ready for distribution ten days, at
least, before the annual meeting. (amended 11/17/98)
SECTION 4. The reports of the several boards of town officers shall contain a schedule of all
property in their charge at the end of the year, with the valuation thereof, and an estimate of the
amount required for the ensuing year.
SECTION 5. No town officer and no salaried employee of the Town, nor any agent of any such
officer or salaried employee, shall sell materials or supplies to the Town without the permission of
the Board of Selectmen expressed in a vote which shall appear on their records with the reasons
therefor.
SECTION 6. No town officer and no salaried employee of the Town, nor any agent of such an
officer or employee, shall receive any compensation or commission for work done by him for the
Town except his official salary and fees allowed by law without the permission of the Selectmen
expressed in a vote which shall appear on their records with the reasons therefor.
SECTION 7. An Inspector of Gas Fitting shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen to serve for
a term of one year from June first, or until his successor is appointed and qualified. He shall be a
licensed and qualified Master or Journeyman gas fitter or plumber. The Board of Selectmen shall
have authority to establish and change fees to be charged for inspections to be made by the Inspector
of Gas Fitting. (adopted 2/26/62; amended 5/20/74, 5/5/92)
SECTION 8. A Wire Inspector shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for the term of one
year from June first, or until his successor is appointed and qualified. He shall be a licensed and
qualified Master or Journeyman Electrician. The Board of Selectmen shall have authority to
establish and change fees to be charged for inspections to be made by the Wire Inspector.
(adopted 2/26/62; amended 3/3/65, 5/20/74)
4
ARTICLE 3. TOWN AFFAIRS
SECTION 9. A Plumbing Inspector shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for a term of one
year from June first, or until his successor is appointed and qualified. He shall be a licensed and
qualified Master or Journeyman Plumber. The Board of Selectmen shall have authority to establish
and change fees to be charged for inspections to be made by the Plumbing Inspector.
(adopted 3/9/66; amended 5/20/74, 5/5/92)
SECTION 10. All owners or keepers of dogs kept in the Town of Stow during the preceding six (6)
months and who on the fifteenth day of April of each year have not licensed said dog or dogs as
prescribed by Chapter 140 of the Massachusetts General Laws, shall be required to pay a fine of
Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) in addition to the licensing fee. (amended 5/6/81, 12/9/85, 5/8/90)
SECTION 11. The Council on Aging shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Board of
Selectmen. The Council shall, at its convenience, appoint by majority vote one of its members to
serve as chair. Appointees shall hold office until successors are designated and qualified. The
council may appoint associate members as it may require. (amended 5/20/74, 11/17/76, 11/17/98)
It shall be the duty of the Council on Aging to coordinate or carry out programs designed to meet the
problems of the aging in coordination with programs of the Massachusetts Department of Elder
Affairs as established under Chapter 19A of the Massachusetts General Laws and in accordance with
the provisions of Section 8B of Chapter 40 of said laws. (adopted 3/8/67; amended 11/17/76)
SECTION 12. There shall be a Board of Appeals of five (5) members appointed by the Selectmen
which shall act under the zoning bylaw, the subdivision control law, and for such other purposes
authorized and permitted by the General Laws. The members shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen for terms of five years each, so arranged that the terms of one or two members shall expire
each year. The Selectmen shall also appoint six (6) associate members for terms of five years each,
and any of these associates may be appointed to serve on the Board of Appeals in case of the
resignation, death or disability of any regular member before his term shall have expired. The Board
of Appeals shall act upon all matters within its jurisdiction under this Bylaw in the manner
prescribed by Chapter 40A of the General Laws of Massachusetts. This Board of Appeals shall, at
all times, give consideration to the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience and welfare,
and this Board shall permit no building or structure or use of any premises which causes injury to any
neighborhood or which is detrimental to any neighborhood, and the Board shall prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards in each case. (amended 5/4/77, 1/28/87, 5/5/92, 6/12/96)
SECTION 13. The Town Clerk shall be required to deliver and pay over to the Treasurer-Collector
at the end of each month all fees and charges collected during the month, except any salary paid
him/her by virtue of his/her office as Clerk of the Board of Registrars of Voters. (added 3/3/70;
amended 5/2/78, 1/28/87, 5/20/98)
5
ARTICLE 3. TOWN AFFAIRS
SECTION 14. Street Numbering
(a) Street numbers shall be provided for each dwelling, each business building and each
industrial building by the owners of such structures within three (3) months after notification
of their number by the Selectmen.
(b) When the street numbers have been assigned by the survey of street numbering, owners shall
be notified in writing.
(c) The numbers shall be at least three (3) inches in height and shall be clearly visible from the
street or roadway upon which the building faces. The numbers may be placed upon the
structure itself or on a suitable support near the entrance to the structure.
(adopted 3/8/72)
SECTION 15. A Treasurer-Collector shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for a term not to
exceed three (3) years. Unless otherwise established by law or the bylaws of the Town, the Board of
Selectmen shall establish the qualifications for this position. The person appointed shall take office
upon the expiration of the term of the Treasurer and Tax Collector then holding office. (added
1/28/87)
SECTION 16. The Registrars of Voters shall annually in January visit or communicate with the
residents of every building in Stow and, after diligent inquiry, make true lists containing, as nearly as
can be ascertained, the name, date of birth, occupation, nationality if not a citizen of the United
States, and residence on January first in the preceding year and in the current year, of every person
three years of age or older residing in the town. The Police Department shall, upon request, have
access to said lists.
A list of all persons three through twenty-one years of age may be transmitted by the Registrars to the
school committee not later than April first in each year. Said list shall contain the name, residence
and age or date of birth of each such person; provided, however, that the names of persons three to
sixteen, inclusive, shall not be disclosed to any person other than the respective school committee or
boards of trustees of county agricultural schools or police department; and provided further that the
name and address of any person who provides the Registrars with a copy of a court order granting
protection, or evidence of residence in a protective shelter, shall not appear on the street list, and
such names shall not be disclosed to any person.
The Registrars shall on or before April fifteenth in each year prepare lists containing the names and
addresses of all persons seventeen years of age or older listed by them as above for the current year.
On or before June fifteenth in each year, the Registrars shall cause a sufficient number of such lists to
be printed so as to furnish, free of charge, such lists, upon request, to all duly organized political
committees and to all political candidates of the various districts in which the town is located. Such
lists shall be made available by the Registrars to business organizations and other nonpolitical
committees and organizations at a fee to be determined by the Registrars. (adopted 5/20/98)
6
ARTICLE 3. TOWN AFFAIRS
SECTION 17. Community Preservation Committee
(a) Authority
In accordance with Mass. General Laws Chapter 44B, Section 5(a) through Section 5(e)
inclusive, a Community Preservation Committee shall be created upon acceptance of the
Community Preservation Act, Mass. General Laws Chapter 44B, Sections 3 through 7
inclusive.
(b) Purpose
The purpose of the Committee is to administer the Community Preservation Fund in
accordance with the provisions and requirements set forth in MGL Chapter 44B. This shall
include making recommendations to Town Meeting for the appropriation of funds to be
collected through the Community Preservation surcharge and matched by the
Commonwealth. Funds raised or received by the Town as a match from the Commonwealth
may only be used for the purpose of acquiring and preserving open space, historical
preservation, affordable housing, and related expenses.
(c) Membership
Said committee shall consist of nine (9) members. Each of the following shall appoint one of
its members or associate members to serve on the Community Preservation Committee:
Conservation Commission, Historical Commission, Planning Board, Housing Authority,
Recreation Commission (performing like duties of a Board of Park Commissioners), Finance
Committee, Council on Aging, Open Space Committee and Board of Assessors. Each
member's term shall be from the first day of July until the last day of the following June,
however, each term shall not extend beyond that member's term of service on his/her
appointing agency. Committee members shall hold office until successors are designated.
The Committee shall elect a chairman annually from among its membership. The Committee
may appoint clerks and other employees as it may require. (amended 5/9/2007)
(adopted 5/8/2001)
7
ARTICLE 3. TOWN AFFAIRS
SECTION 18. Municipal Affordable Housing Trust
There shall be a Municipal Affordable Housing Trust, the purpose of which shall be to provide for
the preservation and creation of affordable housing in the Town of Stow for the benefit of low and
moderate income households. The Trust shall be governed by Trustees in accordance with Mass.
General Laws Chapter 44, Section 55C and the authority granted by Town Meeting, as revised from
time to time.
Pursuant to a vote at the Stow 2005 Annual Town Meeting and pursuant to the provisions of Mass.
General Laws Chapter 44, Section 55C adopted at the Stow 2005 Annual Town Meeting, the Town
of Stow hereby establishes the specific powers of the Municipal Affordable Housing Trust for the
benefit of all of the inhabitants of the Town of Stow in the manner and under the terms and
conditions set forth herein. To the extent that this Article is in conflict with Article 38 of the 2005
Annual Town Meeting, the terms, conditions and enabling authority of this Article shall control.
A. Name of the Trust
The Trust shall be called the "Stow Municipal Affordable Housing Trust", herein referred to
as the Trust.
B. Purpose
The purpose of the Trust shall be to provide for the preservation and creation of affordable
housing in the Town of Stow for the benefit of low and moderate income households.
C. Tenure of Trustees
There shall be a Board of Trustees consisting of seven Trustees who shall be appointed by
the Board of Selectmen. One of the Trustees shall be a member of the Board of Selectmen.
Only persons who are residents of the Town of Stow shall be eligible to hold the office of
Trustee. The chairman of the Town of Stow Local Housing Partnership shall be an exofficio
member with no right to vote. Trustees shall serve for a term of two years, except that
three of the initial trustee appointments shall be for a term of one year. The Board of
Selectmen may reappoint trustees for succeeding terms, and there is no limit on the number
of terms that a Trustee can serve. Any Trustee may resign by written instrument signed and
acknowledged by such Trustee and duly filed with the Town Clerk. If a Trustee shall die,
resign, or for any other reason cease to fulfill the duties of a Trustee hereunder before his/her
term of office expires, a successor shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen to fill the
remainder of the term of such vacancy provided that said appointment and acceptance in
writing by the newly appointed Trustee are filed with the Town Clerk. Upon the
appointment of any Trustee and the filing of such appointment with the Town Clerk, the title
to the Trust estate shall thereupon and without the necessity of any conveyance be vested in
such succeeding Trustee jointly with the remaining Trustees. Reference to the Trustee shall
mean the Trustee or Trustees for the time being hereunder. Trustees may be removed at any
time for cause by a majority vote of the Board of Selectmen following a properly noticed
public hearing. Cause shall include, but not be limited to, violation of any local, state or
federal law; non-participation in business of the Trust; incapacity to perform the duties of a
8
ARTICLE 3. TOWN AFFAIRS
Trustee; acts of the Trustee, that in the opinion of the Board of Selectmen, are negligent or
detrimental to the Town of Stow or the Trust.
D. Meetings of the Trust
The Trust shall meet at least quarterly at such time and at such place as the Trustees shall
determine. Notice of all meetings of the Trust shall be given in accordance with the
provisions of the Open Meeting Law, Mass. General Laws Chapter 39, Sections 23A, 23B
and 23C. A quorum at any meeting shall be a majority of the Trustees qualified and present
in person. Minutes of all meetings shall be kept with the Town Clerk in accordance with the
provisions of the Open Meeting Law, Mass. General Laws Chapter 39, Sections 23A, 23B
and 23C.
E. Powers of Trustees
The Powers of the Trust shall be the following, except that any purchase, sale, lease,
exchange, transfer or conveyance of any interest in real property is subject to a two-thirds
(2/3rds) vote of the Trustees:
(1) to accept and receive property, whether real or personal, by gift, grant, devise, or
transfer from any person, firm, corporation or other public or private entity, including
without limitation grants of funds or other property tendered to the Trust in connection
with provisions of any zoning bylaw or any other bylaw;
(2) to purchase and retain real or personal property, including without restriction
investments that yield a high rate of income or no income;
(3) to sell, lease, exchange, transfer or convey any personal, mixed or real property at
public auction or by private contract for such consideration and on such terms as to
credit or otherwise and to make such contracts and enter into such undertakings relative
to trust property as the Trust deems advisable notwithstanding the length of any such
lease or contract;
(4) to execute, acknowledge and deliver deeds, assignments, transfers, pledges, leases,
covenants, contracts, promissory notes, releases and other instruments sealed or
unsealed, necessary, proper or incident to any transaction in which the Board engages
for the accomplishment of the purposes of the Trust;
(5) to employ advisors and agents, such as accountants, appraisers and lawyers as the Trust
deems necessary;
(6) to pay reasonable compensation and expenses to all advisors and agents and to
apportion such compensation between income and principal as the Trust deems
advisable;
9
ARTICLE 3. TOWN AFFAIRS
(7) to apportion receipts and charges between incomes and principal as the Trust deems
advisable, to amortize premiums and establish sinking funds for such purpose and to
create reserves for depreciation, depletion or otherwise;
(8) to participate in any reorganization, recapitalization, merger or similar transactions; and
to give proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of substitution to vote any
securities or certificates of interest and to consent to any contract, lease, mortgage,
purchase or sale of property, by or between any corporation and any other corporation
or person;
(9) to deposit any security with any protective reorganization committee and to delegate to
such committee such powers and authority with relation thereto as the Trust may deem
proper and to pay out of Trust property, such portion of expenses and compensation of
such committee as the Trust may deem necessary and appropriate;
(10) to borrow money on such terms and conditions and from such sources as the Board
deems advisable, to mortgage and pledge trust assets as collateral;
(11) to carry property for accounting purposes other than acquisition date values;
(12) to make distributions or divisions of principal in kind, as well as to make loans and
grants of money for the purpose of constructing or rehabilitating dwelling units for low or
moderate income individuals or families subject to the terms and conditions imposed by the
Trustees of the Trust; (amended 5/3/2010)
(13) to comprise, attribute, defend, enforce, release, settle or otherwise adjust claims in
favor or against the Trust, including claims for taxes and to accept any property, either
in total or partial satisfaction of any indebtedness or other obligation and subject to the
provisions of state statutes, to continue to hold the same for such period of time as the
Trust may deem appropriate;
(14) to manage or improve real property and to abandon any property which the Trust
determines not to be worth retaining;
(15) to hold all or part of the Trust property un-invested for such purposes and for such time
as the Trust may deem appropriate;
(16) to extend the time for payment of any obligation to the Trust; and
(17) to adopt rules and regulations governing the conduct of the Trust and the Trustees,
consistent with the General Laws.
10
ARTICLE 3. TOWN AFFAIRS
F Funds Paid to the Trust
Notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary, all monies paid to the Trust in
accordance with any Town of Stow zoning bylaw, exaction fee, or private contribution shall
be paid directly into the Trust and need not be appropriated or accepted and approved into the
Trust.
Funds appropriated by the Town of Stow Town Meeting for payment into the Trust become
Trust property and these funds need not be further appropriated to be expended except as set
forth in paragraph E herein. All monies remaining in the Trust at the end of any fiscal year,
whether or not expended by the Trust, remain Trust property. The Trust shall comply with
any conditions stipulated in the article's motion for monies appropriated by the Stow Town
Meeting.
G. Acts of Trustees
A majority of Trustees may exercise any or all of the powers of the Trustees hereunder,
unless otherwise provided, and may execute on behalf of the Trustees any and all instruments
with the same effect as though executed by all the Trustees. No Trustee shall be required to
give bond. No license of court shall be required to confirm the validity of any transaction
entered into by the Trustees with respect to the Trust Estate. Any expenditure by the Trust to
any one party in a cumulative amount exceeding $200,000.00 or any borrowing (capped at
$200,000.00) or donations to any charitable organization by the Trust shall also be approved
by a majority vote of the Board of Selectmen prior to finalizing the transaction. Any single
borrowing shall be capped at $200,000.00.
H. Liability
Neither the Trustees nor any agent or office of the Trust shall have the authority to bind the
Town of Stow, except in the manner specifically authorized herein. The Trust is a public
employer and the Trustees are public employees for the purposes of General Laws Chapter
268A. The Trust shall be deemed a municipal agency and the Trustees special municipal
employees for the purposes of General Laws Chapter 268A. The Trustees shall be provided
the same scope and degree of municipal insurance coverage as is provided to other appointed
board and commission members within the Town of Stow.
I. Taxes
The Trust is exempt from General Laws Chapter 59 and 62, and from any other provisions
concerning payment of taxes based upon or measured by property or income imposed by the
Commonwealth or any subdivision thereto.
J. Custodian of Funds
The Town of Stow Treasurer shall be the custodian of the funds of the Trust. The books and
records of the Trust shall be audited annually by an independent auditor in accordance with
accepted accounting practices for municipalities. Cost associated with the independent audit
shall be born by the Trust.
11
ARTICLE 3. TOWN AFFAIRS
K. Governmental Body
The Trust is a governmental body for purposes of Section 23A, 23B and 23C of General
Laws Chapter 39.
L. Board of the Town
The Trust is a board of the Town for purposes of General Laws Chapter 30B and Section
15A of General Laws Chapter 40; but agreements and conveyances between the Trust and
agencies, boards, commissions, authorities, departments and public instrumentalities of the
Town shall be exempt from said Chapter 30B.
M. Duration of the Trust
This Trust shall be of indefinite duration until terminated by a vote of the Stow Town
Meeting. Upon termination of the Trust, subject to the payment of or making provisions for
the payment of all obligations and liabilities of the Trust and the Trustees, the net assets of
the Trust shall be transferred to the Town of Stow and held by the Board of Selectmen for
affordable housing purposes. In making any such distribution, the Trustees may, subject to
the approval of the Board of Selectmen, sell all or any portion of the Trust property and
distribute the net proceeds thereof to the Town of Stow. The powers of the Trustees shall
continue until the affairs of the Trust are concluded. Once the Stow Town Meeting has voted
to terminate the Trust, the Board of Selectmen shall approve all financial transactions made
on behalf of the Trust.
N. Registry of Deeds
The Board of Selectmen may authorize the Trustees to execute, deliver and record with the
Registry of Deeds any documents required for any conveyance authorized hereunder.
O. Titles
The titles to the various Articles herein are for convenience only and are not to be considered
part of said Articles nor shall they affect the meaning or the language of any such Article.
P. Compensation of Trustees
Trustees shall not receive a salary, stipend, bonus or other means of compensation for their
service as a Trustee, nor shall they be eligible for any benefits from the Town of Stow.
Trustees may be compensated for reasonable out-of-pocket expenses for travel and other
Trust-related expenses. All such out-of-pocket expenses shall be fully documented with
receipts for expenses prior to payment by the Trust.
Q. Amendments
The provisions of this Trust can only be amended by a vote of the Stow Town Meeting.
R. Conflicts of Interest
The Trust shall be considered a public employer and the Trustees shall be subject to the
conflict of interest provisions of General Laws Chapter 268A.
12
ARTICLE 3. TOWN AFFAIRS
S. Annual Report
The Trustees shall prepare an annual report describing the activities of the Trust on a
calendar year basis. The annual report shall be submitted to the Stow Board of Selectmen by
February 12th of each year. The annual report shall list all financial transactions conducted
by the Trust including all revenues and costs, provide a balance sheet of liabilities and assets
of the Trust, list an inventory of all affordable housing units created, sold, and/or managed by
the Trust, and any other pertinent information related to the business of the Trust. Ten paper
copies and an electronic copy of the annual report shall be submitted to the Board of
Selectmen.
(adopted 5/6/2080; amended 5/3/2010)
13
ARTICLE 4. TOWN FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 1. There shall be a Finance Committee consisting of five registered voters, none of
whom shall be Town officers, agents or employees, who will serve through the annual town meeting
of the year in which their term of office expires. Initially the moderator shall appoint two members
for a one-year term, two members for a two-year term and one member for a three-year term; and
each year thereafter the moderator shall appoint a member or two members, as the case may be, for a
three-year term. Said committee shall choose its own chairman and secretary. The moderator shall
also appoint not more than five (5) Associate Members with the same qualifications as regular
members, each for a term of one year, to serve through the annual town meeting of the year in which
their term of office expires, who shall be non-voting members whose duties, rights and obligations
shall be determined by the regular members thereof. Vacancies on said committee may be filled at
any time by the moderator. (amended 2/24/59, 12/17/62, 12/7/70, 11/10/75)
To this committee shall be referred all articles and warrants. No action shall be taken on any town
meeting article until the proposition has been referred to the Finance Committee and a report made
thereon. The Town Administrator and officers of the Town shall, upon request, furnish the
Committee with facts, figures and any other information. The Committee shall report its
recommendations in print to all town meetings. (amended 5/5/92)
SECTION 2. The Selectmen shall have authority in their discretion to institute and prosecute
proceedings under the provision of Chapter 60 of the General Laws for the foreclosure of the right to
redeem lands purchased, taken or held by the Town for the nonpayment of taxes.
SECTION 3. The Treasurer-Collector shall have the custody, management and sale of all lands held
by the Town under a tax collector's deed or a taking of lands for taxes after the title of the Town has
become absolute by the fore- closure of the right of redemption according to law. And he is
authorized and empowered with the approval of the Selectmen, in the name and on behalf of the
Town to sell and convey such lands after publicly advertising such sale and to execute, acknowledge
and deliver proper deeds for that purpose.
(amended 1/28/87)
SECTION 4. The Selectmen shall act as town agents, and have authority as agents and officers of
the Town to appoint and employ a town counsel, who shall act as attorney and counsel for the Town
and the various officers and boards thereof, and to fix his compensation, to institute and prosecute
suits in the name of the Town, to defend suits brought against the Town, and to compromise and
settle suits and claims, unless otherwise ordered by special vote of the Town.
SECTION 5. No elected town officer shall hold a salaried position under the board of which he is a
member. Nor shall any contract for materials or property of any kind to an amount exceeding one
hundred dollars in any one year, be made in behalf of the Town by any such board with any of its
members. Provided, however, that such contract may be made with any person who is the lowest
bidder in an open competition wherein written bids are called for.
14
ARTICLE 4. TOWN FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 6. The registrars of voters shall hold a session from three o'clock until five o'clock in the
afternoon of the last day fixed by law for filing nomination papers.
SECTION 7. The Treasurer-Collector shall have all of the duties and all of the same powers as the
separate offices of Town Treasurer or Collector of Taxes.
SECTION 8. Capital Planning Committee
a. A committee to be known as the Capital Planning Committee shall be established, composed of
one member appointed by the Finance Committee, one member appointed by the Board of
Selectmen and three additional members appointed by the Moderator. The members appointed
by the Finance Committee and the Board of Selectmen shall be appointed for two-year terms,
with the initial member appointed by the Finance Committee to have an initial term of one year.
The other members shall be appointed for three-year terms such that one term will expire each
year. The Moderator shall also appoint not more than three (3) associate members with the
same qualifications as regular members, each for a term of one year, who shall be non-voting
members whose duties, rights and obligations shall be determined by the regular members
thereof. All members and associate members shall serve through the annual town meeting of
the year in which their terms expire. Only registered voters of the Town of Stow who are not
employed by or serve as officers for the Town shall be eligible for appointment by the
Moderator. A vacancy shall be filled for the expired term in the manner of the original appointment.
The committee shall choose its own chairman and secretary. (amended 12/12/88,
6/12/96)
b. The Committee and the Town Administrator shall study proposed capital outlays involving the
acquisition of land and any expenditure of $10,000 or more having a useful life of at least three
years. All officers, boards and committees of the Town, including the Selectmen and the
School Committee, shall by December 1st of each year submit to the Capital Planning
Committee and the Town Administrator, on forms prepared by them, information concerning
all projects anticipated by them as requiring town meeting attention during the ensuing five
fiscal years. The Committee and Town Administrator shall consider the relative need, timing
and cost of these expenditures and the effect each will have on the financial position of the
Town. (amended 5/5/92, 6/12/96)
c. The Committee and the Town Administrator shall prepare an annual report containing a capital
budget of such outlays for the first year for presentation to the Board of Selectmen and the
Finance Committee for inclusion in the Finance Committee's report and also a capital program
for the following four (4) years for adoption by the town at the annual meeting, with
explanations thereof. Investigations may be made and hearings held as may be deemed
necessary. (amended 5/5/92)
15
ARTICLE 4. TOWN FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION
d. After its adoption by town meeting, the capital program shall permit the expenditure on projects
included therein of sums from departmental budgets for surveys, engineering advice, options or
appraisals. No such expenditures shall be incurred on projects which have not been so
approved by town meeting action. Such expenditures may also be made on projects approved
by the Town through the appropriation of funds in the current or prior years and also for
preliminary planning for projects to be undertaken more than five years hence.
e. The report shall be published and distributed along with the Finance Committee's report. The
Committee shall deposit the original with the Town Clerk.
(adopted 5/3/83)
SECTION 9. Granting or Renewing Certain Licenses and Permits
a. The Treasurer-Collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all municipal
taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges, hereinafter referred to as the
Treasurer-Collector, shall annually furnish to each department, board, commission or division,
hereinafter referred to as the Licensing Authority, that issues licenses or permits including
renewals and transfers, a list of any person, corporation or business enterprises, hereinafter
referred to as the Party, that has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments,
betterments or other municipal charges for not less than a twelve-month period, and that such
Party has not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending
petition before the appellate tax board.
b. The Licensing Authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit, including renewals
and transfers of any Party whose name appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority
from the Treasurer-Collector; provided, however, that written notice is given to the Party and
the Treasurer-Collector, as required by applicable provisions of law, and the Party is given a
hearing, to be held not earlier than fourteen days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie
evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any Party. The
Treasurer-Collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to
such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by the Licensing Authority
with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the
purposes of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding
at law, except for any appeal from such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any license or
permit denied, suspended or revoked under this section shall not be reissued or renewed until
the Licensing Authority receives a certificate issued by the Treasurer-Collector that the party is
in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees assessments, betterments or other
municipal charges payable to the municipality as of the date of issuance of said certificate.
16
ARTICLE 4. TOWN FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION
c. Any Party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement, thereby allowing the
Licensing Authority to issue a certificate indicating said limitations to the license or permit and
the validity of said license shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said
agreement. Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or
revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder be given notice and a
hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
d. The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension of revocation if it finds there is no
direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or
members of his immediate family, as defined in section one of chapter two hundred and sixtyeight
A, in the business or activity conducted in or on said property.
e. This section shall not apply to the following licenses and permits granted under the General
Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts: Open burning; section thirteen of chapter fortyeight;
bicycle permits; section eleven A of chapter eighty-five; sales of articles for charitable
purposes; section thirty-three of chapter one hundred and one; children work permits; section
sixty-nine of chapter one hundred and forty-nine; clubs, associations dispensing food or
beverage license; section one hundred and thirty-seven of chapter one hundred and forty;
fishing, hunting, trapping license; section twelve of chapter one hundred and thirty-one;
marriage licenses; section twenty-eight of chapter two hundred and seven; and theatrical
events, public exhibition permits; section one hundred and eighty-one of chapter one hundred
and forty. (adopted 1/28/87; amended 10/15/91)
SECTION 10. No later than one hundred days prior to the date scheduled for the town meeting in
accordance with the bylaws herein, the town administrator shall call a public meeting of the finance
committee, the school committee(s), representatives of any regional school committees, the
assessors, the capital planning committee and the board of selectmen to review the financial
condition of the town, revenue and expenditure forecasts and other information relevant to the
budget in preparation for the annual town meeting. (adopted 10/24/05)
17
ARTICLE 5. ACCEPTANCE AND REPAIRS OF PRIVATE ROADS
SECTION 1. Specifications for new roads and ways through private property.
(a) A plan and profile of every such street or way shall be filed in the office of the Selectmen.
(b) All streets shall be designed so that they will provide safe vehicular travel, and shall conform
to any Master or Study Plan as shall be adopted in whole or in part by the Planning Board.
(c) The minimum centerline radii of curved streets shall be one hundred (100) feet. Greater radii
may be required for principal streets.
(d) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. No street shall
intersect any other street at less than sixty (60) degrees.
(e) Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded or cut back to provide for a curb radius of
not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
(f) The minimum width of a street right-of-way shall be fifty (50) feet, except that lesser widths
not less than forty (40) feet may be accepted upon recommendation of the Planning Board.
(This section shall not apply to streets constructed prior to the adoption of this amendment.)
(3/8/72)
(g) Grades of streets shall not be less than 0.5%. Grades shall not be more than 6.0% for principal
streets nor more than 10.0% for secondary streets.
(h) Dead end streets shall not be longer than five hundred (500) feet. Any combination of roads or
ways which have but one common entrance and exit to any other existing way shall be defined
as a dead end street. (amended 5/20/74)
(i) Dead end streets shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around having an outside
roadway diameter of at least one hundred (100) feet, and a property line diameter of at least one
hundred and twenty (120) feet.
(j) Trees, stumps and brush, including roots, shall be completely removed from all areas where
the finished grade of the street, shoulders or any embankment slope is to be within 3-1/2 feet of
the original ground level. Trees outside of graded areas shall be removed only where
necessary.
(k) Unsuitable material shall be removed to a depth of at least 12 inches wherever the grade of the
new surface is less than 3 feet above the existing ground. Peat, loam or other unsatisfactory
bearing material shall be removed from under roadway or embankment areas to a satisfactory
depth, as determined by the Selectmen, and the space filled with clean gravel.
18
ARTICLE 5. ACCEPTANCE AND REPAIRS OF PRIVATE ROADS
(l) Embankments shall be made of Ordinary Borrow which may be taken from cuts elsewhere on
the project where the material is approved. They shall be built in layers not in excess of 12
inches and compacted satisfactorily by tractor or 12-ton roller. The tops of embankments shall
be at least 32 feet wide and the slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical.
(m) Shoulders 12 inches thick and 4 feet wide shall be constructed of Gravel Borrow and
compacted as above.
(n) Pavement Foundation shall be placed 10 inches thick in two layers separately and satisfactorily
compacted over a 24-foot width using Gravel Borrow. Said borrow shall contain no stone
having any dimension greater than 2-1/2 inches; and three inches, when compacted, of black
base Class I Type I-1 bituminous concrete, compacted and rolled in place, shall be laid over the
borrow in accord with the specifications of the Massachusetts Department of Public Works,
provided that this amendment shall not apply to roads already constructed or presently under
construction if such roads comply with the subdivision regulations adopted September 2, 1971.
The Town may accept roads with less than a 24-foot foundation width, but not less than twenty
(20) feet, upon recommendation of the Planning Board. Where soil conditions permit, a lesser
thickness of black base may be used if recommended by the Planning Board and Town
Engineer. (amended 11/1/71, 5/20/74, 11/10/75)
(o) Bituminous Concrete Pavement Type I-1 shall be laid in accordance with the specifications of
the Massachusetts Department of Public Works 2-1/2 inches thick in two courses to consist of
1-1/4 inches binder material and 1-1/4 inches of top material compacted and rolled in place
over a full 24-foot width or a lesser width, but not less than twenty (20) feet, upon
recommendation of the Planning Board. The paved surface on dead end turn-arounds shall
have an outside roadway diameter of at least 100 feet and a property line diameter of at least
120 feet. (amended 11/1/71, 5/20/74)
(p) Curbing of bituminous concrete, made 4 inches high with a 45-degree slope on the face and a
4-inch width on the top, shall be placed along the outside of the paved surface where grades are
in excess of 2% or in other locations where such protection is deemed necessary. The berm
mixture shall be placed and compacted with a machine acceptable and designed for the type of
berm required, provided that this amendment shall not apply to roads already constructed or
presently under construction if such roads comply with the subdivision regulations adopted
September 2, 1971.
(q) Guard rails or posts and street lights and street signs shall be installed where necessary.
Sidewalks shall have a width for pedestrian traffic of no less than four feet. If the sidewalk is
constructed of bituminous concrete, it shall have one inch of binder rolled and compacted in
place and one inch of bituminous sidewalk mix rolled and compacted in place in accordance
with specifications of the Massachusetts Department of Public Works. (amended 5/20/74)
(r) Catch basins, manholes, culverts, paved waterways, drainage fields, and drainage pipes, both in
street areas and drainage easements, shall be in stalled to an adequate design capacity.
(Section 1 amended 2/24/59)
19
ARTICLE 5. ACCEPTANCE AND REPAIRS OF PRIVATE ROADS
SECTION 2. All streets to be accepted by the Town must be petitioned for not later than January 15
previous to the annual town meeting in May. No streets shall be accepted by the Town unless
constructed in compliance with the foregoing specifications. No streets built or hereinafter to be
built shall be accepted by the Town unless constructed in compliance with the following:
Any petition or proposal for an article of acceptance of any street or way to be voted on at any
town meeting shall be accompanied by complete roadway plans and layouts drawn to the scale
of one inch to forty feet by a registered civil engineer which shall show the dimensions of the
roadway, including the traveled way, the location of all utilities and all easements and the
boundaries and dimensions of any properties to be taken by said acceptance, the ownership of
abutting properties according to the latest assessors list of January 1 of the instant year, and the
plans shall be suitable for recording in Middlesex South District Registry of Deeds. The same
engineer shall also, by a separate certificate to the Board of Selectmen, certify that roadway
proposed for acceptance meets all the construction requirements and complies with the Bylaws
of the Town of Stow, Article 5, Sections 1 and 2. (amended 5/20/74)
The Selectmen may waive the requirements of the engineer's certificate, and compliance with any of
the specifications set forth in Section 1, upon the recommendation of the Planning Board and the
Superintendent of Streets. (this paragraph added 5/4/83)
SECTION 3. Private Ways
(a) The Town may, in addition to whatever other powers it shall have over the control and
repairs of private ways, appropriate money at the annual town meeting for the purpose of
making repairs to private ways, to be used in the discretion of the Selectmen upon
recommendation by the Superintendent of Streets, when such repairs are required by public
use, and the Selectmen specifically vote that such repairs are required by public necessity and
convenience, upon the following conditions:
(1) That such repairs shall include only the filling of holes in the subsurface of ways and
repairs to the surface materials thereof with such materials as are similar to or the same
as existing materials whenever practical, and the repair, installation, construction or
reconstruction of drainage;
(2) That such repairs shall only be made on private ways open to public use for at least ten
(10) years;
(3) That such repairs shall not include the construction, reconstruction or resurfacing of such
ways;
(4) That the Selectmen may require that all abutters on such ways shall, prior to the
commencement of repairs, furnish appropriate releases and agreements to indemnify the
Town in the event of any damages resulting from or caused by said repairs, in recordable
form, which shall run with the land.
20
ARTICLE 5. ACCEPTANCE AND REPAIRS OF PRIVATE ROADS
(b) In addition to such repairs made at the discretion of the Selectmen, a petition may be signed
by at least seventy-five percent (75%) of all the abutters on a private way and presented to the
Selectmen proposing a special article for the annual town meeting warrant, and containing
the text for such an article which shall set forth the extent of repairs requested, upon the
following conditions:
(1) That any proposed special article for this purpose shall be presented to the Selectmen on
or before January 1 for the May annual town meeting, and shall be accompanied by
appropriate releases and agreements to hold the Town harmless from any liability
whatsoever on account of damages resulting from or caused by said repairs signed by all
the abutters on said way in recordable form which shall run with the land;
(2) That the cost of such repairs shall be paid by the abutters and a cash deposit of an amount
equal to the cost of repairs, estimated and appropriated at the annual town meeting, shall
be paid to the Town before any such repair work shall commence, unless waived by town
meeting;
. (3) In the event the annual town meeting expressly votes to waive the conditions set forth in
3(b)(2), the Selectmen may, in their discretion, assess betterments upon the abutters
deriving benefit or advantage from the making of the repairs, in an amount equal to the
total cost of the repairs, and assess to each abutter the aggregate amount of such total cost
in proportion to the linear frontage of each such abutter to the way, in accordance with
the provisions of General Laws Chapter 80.
(c) In no event shall the Town be liable for damages caused by making repairs under this section to
any greater extent than if such repairs were done on a public way, nor subject itself to Section
25 of Chapter 84 of the General Laws.
(Section 3 adopted 5/1/78)
21
ARTICLE 6. POLICE REGULATIONS
SECTION 1. No owner or person having the care of any sheep, swine, horses, oxen, cows or other
grazing animal shall permit or suffer them to go at large or to graze on any street, lane, common,
square or other public place within this town, nor permit any such animal to go or stand upon any
sidewalk therein.
SECTION 2. No person shall coast in any street or public way except such as are publicly
designated for that purpose by the Selectmen.
SECTION 3. No person or persons shall play or perform on a musical instrument, sing, parade,
hold a public meeting, make a public address, march or congregate in any public way or public place,
except in connection with a funeral, without a written permit from the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 4. No person shall at any time swim or bathe in any pond, stream, or waters in the Town
of Stow unless properly clothed. No person shall appear in any way, street, or public place in the
Town of Stow in a bathing suit unless properly covered. (amended 2/24/59)
SECTION 5. No person shall collect, deal in, or keep a shop for the purchase, sale, or barter of
junk, old metals or second hand articles within the limits of the Town, unless licensed by the Board
of Selectmen.
SECTION 6. Public Ways
(a) No person shall surface, resurface, break or dig up the ground in any street for any purpose
whatever or set or place any fence, post, tree or edgestone, or alter or change the position or
direction of any fence, post or edgestone, or swing any door or gate in, upon or over, or
change the grade or width of any public way without a written permit of the Board of
Selectmen, which shall prescribe the limitations or restrictions of such permit. Such permit
may be obtained on payment of a fee as determined from a schedule established by the Board
of Selectmen. It shall be required of the person obtaining the permit as part of the permit that
the Superintendent of Streets be notified in writing at least forty-eight (48) hours before the
work is to be commenced. No permits shall be issued for projects which will not be
completed by November 15, except in an emergency situation. (amended 3/4/69, 5/20/74,
5/6/81)
When any stone walls or other markers or monuments, which are highway boundaries, are
removed in a manner which destroys the boundary of the highway, they shall be replaced
with bounds and to the specifications contained in the manual of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts Department of Public Works Standards for Highways and Bridges, Section
710. (added 3/3/70; amended 3/7/73)
(b) When meeting the edge of the present traveled way of a street with driveways, walks, etc.,
the construction of the same shall be as prescribed by the Superintendent of Streets.
22
ARTICLE 6. POLICE REGULATIONS
(c) No person shall push snow or other material onto any public way without a permit from the
Board of Selectmen.
(d) No person shall push snow into snowbankings along the streets of the Town of Stow and
cause these snowbankings to protrude into the traveled way which has already been cleared
by Town plows.
(e) No person, except agents of the Board of Selectmen, shall fill or alter any drainage pipe or
drainage structure within any highway easement or drainage easement in the Town of Stow.
(f) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged water or materials onto any traveled way
in the Town of Stow so as to cause hazard to the public using that way.
(g) The Board of Selectmen, upon written report of the Highway Superintendent, may, in the
interests of public safety and without further authority, establish a speed limit of 25 miles per
hour on any roadway inside a thickly settled or business district, as defined in MGL c.90  1,
in the city or town on any way that is not a state highway. (added 7/10/2017)
(h) The Board of Selectmen, upon written report of the Highway Superintendent, and after a duly
noticed Public Hearing, may, in the interests of public safety and without further authority,
establish 20 mph Safety Zones in areas where vulnerable road users are likely to be present,
including but not limited to ways in the vicinity of the following land uses:
? Parks and playgrounds
? Senior housing developments and assisted living/nursing care centers
? Hospitals or other medical facilities
? Schools and higher education centers
? Daycare facilities
? Other areas where pedestrian activity in and around the Public Way is common and focused,
beyond typical residential patterns of use.
The establishment of a Safety Zone that includes the installation of regulatory speed limit
signs shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Design in accordance with
M.G.L c.85 2, including an engineering study and analysis of current vehicular speed
distribution. Proposed Safety Zones shall be developed in accordance with the following
minimum criteria.
? The Safety Zone shall contain one or more areas that have potential conflicts between
motor vehicles and vulnerable road users that warrant a reduction in speeds, including but
not limited to crosswalks, bike paths, trail heads, curb-cuts, driveways and/or side streets.
? The minimum length of the Safety Zone shall be at least .25 miles and shall not extend
more than 500 feet beyond a side street unless an applicable land use continues along the
adjacent block.
23
ARTICLE 6. POLICE REGULATIONS
In an area where a legal Special Speed Regulation has been enacted, the Safety Zone
shall be terminated with a Speed Limit sign that corresponds to the regulatory limit shown in
the regulation. If the Safety Zone is in an area that has no Special Speed Regulation, it
should be terminated with an End Speed Zone sign in accordance with the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices. (added 7/10/2017)
SECTION 7. Animal Control
a. Definitions
Adoption: The delivery of a cat, dog, or other animal to any person eighteen (18) years of age
or older for the purpose of harboring the animal as a pet.
Animal Control Officer: Any officer appointed by the Board of Health to enforce this bylaw
and sections 136A to 174E, inclusive.
Animal Shelter: Any facility or kennel operated by a humane society, the town, or its
authorized agents for the purpose of impounding animals under the authority of this bylaw or
state law for care, confinement, return to owner, adoption, or euthanasia.
At Large: Any dog shall be deemed to be at large when it is off the premises of its owner or
keeper, and not under the direct control of a person demonstrating the ability to properly
control the dog.
Attack: Aggressive physical contact initiated by an animal.
Commercial Boarding or Training Kennel: An establishment used for boarding, holding,
day care, overnight stays or training of animals that are not the property of the owner of the
establishment, at which such services are rendered in exchange for consideration and in the
absence of the owner of any such animal; provided, however, that commercial boarding or
training kennel shall not include an animal shelter or animal control facility, a pet shop
licensed under section 39A of chapter 129, a grooming facility operated solely for the purpose
of grooming and not for overnight boarding or an individual who temporarily, and not in the
normal course of business, boards or cares for animals owned by others. G.L. c.140 ss136A
Commercial Breeder Kennel: An establishment, other than a personal kennel, engaged in the
business of breeding animals for sale or exchange to wholesalers, brokers or pet shops in return
for consideration.
24
ARTICLE 6. POLICE REGULATIONS
Dangerous Dog: A dog that either;
without justification, attacks a person or domestic animal causing physical injury or
death
OR
behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses an unjustified
imminent threat of physical injury or death to a person or to a domestic or owned
animal.
Hearing Authority: The person(s) charged with the responsibility of handling dog complaints
in a town or city.
Keeper: Any person, corporation or society, other than the owner, harboring or having in his
possession any dog.
Kennel: One pack or collection of dogs on a single premises, whether maintained overnight for
breeding, boarding, sale, training, hunting or other purposes and including any shop where
dogs are on sale, and also including every pack or collection of more than three dogs three
months old or over owned or kept by a person on a single premises irrespective of the purpose
for which they are maintained overnight, but excluding daytime only services such as dog
grooming, dog training, supervised playtime and dog walking with no more than twelve dogs
on a single premises.
License Period: January first (1st) to December thirty-first (31st) of the same year.
Livestock or Fowl: Animals or fowl kept or propagated by the owner for food or as means of
livelihood; also deer, elk, cottontail rabbits, northern hares, pheasants, quail, partridge and
other birds, and quadrupeds determined by the Department of Fisheries and Wildlife and
Environmental Law Enforcement to be wild, and kept by or under a permit from said
department(s) in proper housing and/or suitably enclosed yards. Such definition shall not
include dogs, cats or other pets.
Nuisance Dog: A dog that:
by excessive barking or other disturbance, is a source of annoyance to a sick person
residing in the vicinity;
OR
by excessive barking, causing damage or other interference, a reasonable person would
find such behavior disruptive to ones quiet and peaceful enjoyment;
OR
has threatened or attacked livestock, a domestic animal or a person, but such threat or
attack was not a grossly disproportionate reaction under all the circumstances.
25
ARTICLE 6. POLICE REGULATIONS
Owner: Any person, partnership or corporation having dominion or title of one or more
animals.
Personal Kennel: a pack or collection of more than 4 dogs, 3 months or older, owned or kept
under single ownership, for private personal use; provided however, that breeding of personally
owned dogs may take place for the purpose of improving, exhibiting or showing the breed or
for use in legal sporting activity or for other personal reasons; provided further, that selling,
trading, bartering or distributing such breeding from a personal kennel shall be to other
breeders or individuals by private sale only and not to wholesalers, brokers or pet shops;
provided further, that a personal kennel shall not sell, trade, barter or distribute a dog not bred
from its personally-owned dog; and provided further, that dogs temporarily housed at a
personal kennel, in conjunction with an animal shelter or rescue registered with the department,
may be sold, traded, bartered or distributed if the transfer is not for profit.
Shelter: a public animal control facility operated by an organization or individual for the
purpose of protecting animals from cruelty, neglect or abuse.
Veterinary Kennel: a veterinary hospital or clinic that boards dogs for reasons in addition to
medical treatment or care; provided, however, that veterinary kennel shall not include a
hospital or clinic used solely to house dogs that have undergone veterinary treatment or
observation or will do so only for the period of time necessary to accomplish that veterinary
care.
b. 1. Individual Licenses and Tags
A. License for dog over 6 months
The owner or keeper of a dog over the age of 6 months shall obtain a license for the dog.
The Stow Town Clerk shall register, number, describe and license the dog.
Penalty: A violation of G.L.sections 137, 137A, 137B or 138 shall be assessed a penalty of
not less than $50.00 which shall be paid to the town wherein the violation occurs. G.L.c.
140 & 137
The licensing authority, Stow Town Clerk, shall not grant a license for a dog unless the
owner of the dog provides a veterinarians certificate proving the dog has been vaccinated
according to section 145B.
Penalty: A violation of G.L. sections 137, 137A, 137B or 138 shall be assessed a penalty of
not less than $50.00. A violation of sections 137, 137A, 137B, or 138 shall be assessed a
penalty of not less than $50.00 which shall be paid to the town wherein the violation
occurs.
26
ARTICLE 6. POLICE REGULATIONS
The owner or keeper of a licensed dog shall keep affixed around the dogs neck or body, a
collar or harness of leather or other suitable material to which a tag shall be securely
attached. The tag shall have inscribed upon it the dogs license number, the name of the
city or town issuing the license and the year of issue. If said tag becomes lost, the owner or
keeper of the dog shall immediately secure a substitute tag from the licensing authority at a
cost to be determined by the city or town and the fee shall be retained by the clerk unless
otherwise provided by law. This section shall not apply to a person to whom a valid
kennel license has been issued.
B. G.L.c.140, s. & 139 License Fees
The license fee for a spayed or neutered dog shall be LESS than the license fee for an intact
dog. The fee shall be determined by a city or town; provided however, that no fee shall be
increased without a majority vote of the voters present at a Town Meeting.
The Town Clerk shall require a certificate from the veterinarian who spayed or neutered the
dog as proof that the dog is spayed or neutered.
No fee shall be charged for a license issued under this section for a service animal as
defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act or regulations promulgated thereunder.
b. 2. Commercial Kennel License
A kennel maintained as a business for the boarding, grooming, breeding or sale of dogs shall be
subject to the provisions of the Zoning Bylaw, Section 3.2.2.5. Upon approval of the Zoning
Board of Appeals, a commercial kennel license may then be obtained upon written application
to the Town Clerk. The fee for such kennel license shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for no
more than four (4) dogs, sixty dollars ($60.00) for five (5) to ten (10) dogs, and one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for more than ten (10) dogs. Each kennel shall be available for inspection by
the Animal Control Officer, a police officer or the Stow Board of Health at any time to ascertain
compliance with all state, county and local laws and bylaws. The late fee for a kennel license is
2.5 times the license fee.
The Town Clerk shall issue a kennel license without charge to any charitable corporation
incorporated exclusively for the purpose of protecting animals from cruelty, neglect or abuse
and for the relief of suffering animals.
A veterinary clinic within the Town of Stow shall not be considered a commercial kennel
unless it contains an area for grooming or selling of dogs or for boarding of dogs for other than
medical purpose.
Any person or corporation maintaining a kennel for thirty (30) days without a proper license
shall be in violation of this provision.
27
ARTICLE 6. POLICE REGULATIONS
b. 3. Kennel License
Every person maintaining a kennel shall have a kennel license. (Chapter 140, Section 137A
Kennel Licenses, Mass. General Laws) The late fee for a kennel license is 2.5 times the license
fee. The fee for such kennel license shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for no more than four
(4) dogs, sixty dollars ($60.00) for five (5) to ten (10) dogs, and one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for more than ten (10) dogs.
c. Vaccination of Dogs, Cats, and Ferrets Against Rabies
Pursuant to Section 145B of Chapter 140 of the Massachusetts General Laws, the owner or
keeper of a dog, cat, or ferret six (6) months of age or older shall cause the dog, cat, or ferret to
be properly vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian. Upon vaccination, the
veterinarian shall issue a vaccination certificate, which shall show the name of the owner, the
animal that received the vaccination, the date the vaccination was given, when the next
vaccination is due, a rabies tag number, and the name of the veterinary clinic or hospital. The
owner/keeper of unvaccinated dogs, cats, or ferrets living in or brought into the Town of Stow
shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the Animal Control Officer of not more than
one-hundred dollars ($100.00), which shall be paid to the Town of Stow.
d. Enforcement/Impoundment
It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer, or any other person appointed by the Board
of Health, to cite and/or impound any dog found running at large. Such animal shall be held at
an authorized animal shelter and returned to owner, adopted, or euthanized as described in
Chapter 140, Section 151A of the Massachusetts General Laws. The Officer that so impounds
any animal shall keep a record of each animal so impounded which shall contain the following
information: breed, color and sex of the animal, distinctive markings or characteristics of the
animal; name and address of the owner (if known) along with the license number; the final
disposition of the animal, the name, address, phone number of any person adopting such dog;
and if destroyed, method and name of technician who administered euthanasia. Such records
shall be kept by the Animal Control Officer for a period of twelve (12) months from date of
impoundment. A copy shall be forwarded to the Board of Health upon disposition of the
animal, and the Board of Health shall retain copies as provided by law.
e. Violations/Penalties
The Animal Control Officer, any police officer of the Town of Stow, or any other person so
appointed by the Board of Health, may impose a fine upon the owner or keeper of a dog so
found to be at large, unlicensed, or unvaccinated against rabies.
28
ARTICLE 6. POLICE REGULATIONS
f. Boarding Fees
An owner or keeper of any dog so impounded for violation of this bylaw shall pay to the Town
of Stow a pick up fee and boarding fees while such dog is impounded.
g. Redemption of Dogs
The owner or keeper of a dog so impounded may claim the dog as provided by law upon the
occurrence of the following:
1. The owner or keeper presents a valid dog license and certificate of rabies vaccination;
2. The owner or keeper pays all boarding and other fees;
3. The owner or keeper gives his/her name and address;
4. If the dog does not have a current rabies vaccination, the owner or keeper must
present a receipt from a licensed veterinarian showing prepayment of a rabies
vaccination;
5. If the dog is unlicensed, the owner must secure or pay for a license before redemption.
h. Nuisance or Dangerous; Other Applicable Sections of General Laws
The provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 140, Sections 157 and 158 shall be
applicable to nuisance or dangerous dogs and all other applicable sections of Chapter 140 or
other sections of the General Laws or rules and regulations adopted thereunder pertaining to
dogs, or to any animals as may be regulated by law, shall apply and be enforceable by the
Town, as if said sections were fully set forth herein.
i. Emergency Fees for Dogs and Cats Injured on Public Ways
Any veterinarian who renders emergency care or treatment to, or disposes of any dog or cat
injured on any public way in the Town of Stow shall receive payment of costs from the owner
of such dog or cat, if known or, if not known, shall receive the sum of two-hundred and fifty
dollars ($250.00) from the Town of Stow for such care, treatment and/or disposal.
Care, treatment and/or disposal shall be for the purpose of maintaining life, stabilizing the
animal or alleviating pain or suffering until the owner of such dog or cat is identified, or for a
period of twenty-four (24) hours. Any veterinarian who renders such emergency care or
treatment to, or euthanizes or disposes of such dog or cat shall notify the Animal Control
Officer of Stow and, upon notification, the Animal Control Officer shall assume control of such
dog or cat.
(Section 7 adopted 6/12/96; amended 5/6/2008; amended 10/28/2013)
29
ARTICLE 6. POLICE REGULATIONS
SECTION 8. No person shall make any indecent figure or write any indecent or obscene words
upon any fence, building, or structure in any public place, or upon any sidewalk or wall.
SECTION 9. No person, unless required by law so to do, shall make any marks, letters, or figures
of any kind, or place any sign, advertisement, or placard upon or against any wall, fence, post, ledge,
stone, tree, building or structure in or upon any street in this Town without the permission of the
owner thereof.
SECTION 10. No person shall distribute papers, circulars or advertisements throughout the Town
in such a manner as to create a litter. (amended 5/20/74)
SECTION 11.
(a) No person shall throw stones, snowballs, sticks or other missiles; nor kick at football, nor
play at any game in which a ball is used; nor fly any kite or balloon; nor shoot with or use a
bow and arrow, gun, air-gun or sling in or across any public way, street, lane, sidewalk,
common, square or other public place in the Town, except that the playing of games, sport
and recreational activities shall be allowed on school grounds in accordance with the rules
and regulations of the Nashoba Regional School District Committee and on other grounds of
the Town as permitted by the Board of Selectmen or other committees having charge of said
areas. (amended 5/20/74, 11/17/98)
SECTION 12. No person shall resort to or frequent any school-house grounds or enclosure in the
Town to interfere with or annoy any person lawfully using or enjoying the same; nor shall any person
resort to or frequent any cemetery or graveyard in the Town and there engage in or be present at any
game of cards or other game of sport, or lounge or loiter therein to the annoyance or interference of
persons properly visiting or resorting to said places.
SECTION 13.
a. No vehicle shall be parked on the left side of any street, road, square or way within the Town
of Stow, nor shall any vehicle be parked so as to interfere with the normal flow of traffic, nor
shall any vehicle be parked anywhere within the Town of Stow in such a manner as to hinder in
the plowing or removal of snow from any street, road, square, or way. (amended 2/24/59)
b. No person, which term shall include any company, corporation or other entity and its agents and
employees, shall block or obstruct the normal flow of vehicular traffic on any public way, or
private way open to the public, for any reason, including repairs by any public utility, without
first obtaining a permit from the Chief of Police, acting for or on behalf of the Selectmen. Such
permits may be granted by the Chief of Police on such terms and conditions as he in his sole
judgment and discretion shall determine to be in the interests of public safety. Any public
utility or other person frequently engaged in activities in or near such a way may be granted a
general permit for all such work; provided, however, that the Police Department shall be
notified by the holder of such permit prior to the undertaking of any work thereunder. The
30
ARTICLE 6. POLICE REGULATIONS
denial of a permit, or any terms and conditions imposed, may be appealed by the applicant to
the Board of Selectmen. Any person, prior to the issuance of such permit, shall agree in writing
to indemnify and hold the Town and its officials harmless from any damages as may be
awarded or legal fees incurred in any action for personal injury or property damage suffered as a
result of the issuance of any permit. (added 5/8/84)
SECTION 14. The Board of Selectmen, or any person authorized by them, may, when necessity or
convenience requires, by the placing of suitable signs, restrict the parking of vehicles upon any
public way within the limits marked by such signs. (amended 2/24/59)
SECTION 15. The Town may erect any and all signs to protect the safety of the public. (adopted
6/21/54)
SECTION 16. No person shall dispose of garbage, refuse, any bottle, can or any form of rubbish on
any public way or on private property, or in any catch basin, waterway, river, brook or pond in the
Town of Stow. Any violator of this section to be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00). (added 2/24/59; amended 5/20/74; amended 5/9/2007)
SECTION 17. No person, except an officer of the law in the performance of his duties, shall enter
upon the premises of another with the intention of peeping into the windows of a house or spying
upon in any manner, any person or persons therein. Anyone found violating this law may be arrested
without a warrant. (added 2/24/59)
SECTION 18. Owners of land on which there is located an abandoned well, or a well in use, shall
be required to either provide a covering for such well capable of sustaining a weight of three hundred
(300) pounds or to fill said well to the level of the ground. Any violator of this section is to be
punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00.
(added 5/20/74)
SECTION 19.
(a) No person shall fire or discharge any firearms on any private property except with the written
consent of the owner or legal occupant thereof.
(b) This bylaw shall not apply to lawful defense of life or property nor any law enforcement
officer acting in the discharge of his duties.
(c) The penalty for violation of this Section 19 shall be a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(adopted 3/4/71; amended 5/9/2007)
SECTION 20. Any person who shall violate any provision of these bylaws shall, in cases not
otherwise provided for, forfeit and pay for each offense a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars
($100.00). (amended 5/20/74; amended 5/9/2007)
31
ARTICLE 6. POLICE REGULATIONS
SECTION 21. Boating Regulations at Lake Boon
Rule 1. No person operating a craft propelled by other than muscular power shall allow said craft to
approach closer than seventy-five (75) feet to another craft unless said second craft is stopped and a
closer approach is for the purpose of communicating with the occupants of the second craft; nor
circle around any craft in a manner as to annoy or endanger the occupants of other crafts; nor pass
between moored rafts or floats and the shore. No craft shall operate at a speed that endangers the
life, limb or property of any person. No towline shall exceed seventy-five (75) feet from the point of
contact on tow boat to object being towed. (amended 5/20/74)
Rule 2.
A. EQUIPMENT
All motor or power boats on the Lake, whether or not required to be registered under State law shall
display the lights and be equipped with a proper muffler or underwater exhaust as is or may be
required by Sections 5 and 6 of Chapter 275, Acts of 1960, or acts in amendment thereof, or
regulations made thereunder.
B. SPEED
(1) No person shall operate any motorboat on the Lake at a speed that is greater than is
reasonable and proper under the circumstances and conditions then existing, or operate same
or manipulate any water skis, surfboard or similar device in a negligent manner so that the
lives or safety of the public might be endangered.
(2) Speed in any of the narrows shall be such that no appreciable wake is produced, but in no
case to exceed the minimum necessary to maintain steerage way. (amended 5/20/74, 5/8/84)
(3) Speed during the period from one-half hour after sunset until one-half hour before sunrise
shall be such that no appreciable wake is produced, but in no case to exceed the minimum
necessary to maintain steerage way. (amended 5/20/74, 5/8/84)
(4) The hours of 2:00 to 6:00 P.M. on Sundays and holidays, including Memorial Day,
Independence Day and Labor Day, are designated for canoeing, sailing, swimming and other
non-motorized uses of the Lake, and the maximum speed of any motorboat shall be the
minimum necessary to maintain steerage way. (amended 5/8/84)
C. WATER SKIING
(1) Water skiing and skipboard riding is prohibited in the narrows between the first and second
and second and third and third and fourth basins at all times, and is prohibited on all the
waters of the Lake between 2:00 and 6:00 P.M. on all Sundays and holidays including
Memorial Day, Independence Day and Labor Day. (amended 5/8/84)
32
ARTICLE 6. POLICE REGULATIONS
(2) No person operating a boat with a water-skier, skipboard rider or similar device in tow shall
bring such device, or rider or the boat within seventy-five (75) feet of any other boat, dock,
pier, raft, wharf, float or a person or persons swimming or any part of the shore except to
embark or disembark, and except as allowed under Rule 2.C.(1), in the performance of
official duties or to render assistance to a boat or person in need of it. (amended 5/20/74)
(3) Two persons, an operator and an observer, shall be in any boat towing a skier, skipboard, or
similar device.
(4) The towing of two or more persons on skis, skip or surfboard or other device is hereby
prohibited.
(5) No craft, skier, or towed object may go beyond the markers set by the Commission at
Hanson's Beach except for the purpose of docking at a permanent dock. Craft proceeding to
dock or leaving said dock shall enter and leave without delay from the marked area and shall
be operated so as not to endanger any swimmer.
Rule 3. When any person having charge of a vessel, canoe, boat or motorboat approaches another
vessel, canoe, boat or motorboat, head and head, that is, end on, or nearly so, it shall be the duty of
each craft to pass on the left side of the other. But, if the course of such vessel, canoe, boat or motorboat
is so far on the left side of each other as not to be considered as meeting head and head, each
shall pass on the left side of each other. When any person having charge of a vessel, canoe, boat or
motorboat overtakes another vessel, canoe, boat or motorboat, it shall be the duty of the person in
charge of the overtaking boat to pass on the left side. (amended 5/20/74)
Rule 4. Any person who violates any provision of the bylaw shall be punished by a fine of not more
than Fifty (50) Dollars.
Rule 5.
A. Houseboats: No vessel may be used as a residence, either permanently or temporarily, on the
waters of Lake Boon. (added 3/8/72)
B. No air boat, so-called, which requires a propeller or propellers which are located above the
surface of the water (and said propeller or propellers are used with a motor of more than twentyfive
[25] horsepower) for the propulsion of a boat shall be used or allowed on the waters of
Lake Boon except vessels as described above which are operated by any governmental
subdivision or department. (added 3/8/72)
(Section 21 adopted 2/26/63)
33
ARTICLE 6. POLICE REGULATIONS
SECTION 22. The Removal of Earth Material
Section 22. Deleted November 16, 2015
SECTION 23. Unregistered Motor Vehicles
a. No person shall leave any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked, junked or unregistered
motor vehicle, or any vehicle without a current inspection sticker from the Commonwealth
(hereinafter all called "unregistered motor vehicles" for the purpose of this bylaw), on any town,
private or publicly maintained way within the town.
b. No person in charge or control of any property within the town, whether as owner, tenant,
occupant, lessee or otherwise shall allow more than one unregistered motor vehicle to remain
on such property except as provided in paragraphs c. and e. of this bylaw.
c. The Board of Selectmen may issue a permit to keep, store or allow more than one such motor
vehicle to remain on such property after said board has held a public hearing thereon and,
subject to such conditions as may be set forth in such permit, the Board finds that the presence
of one or more such motor vehicles on such property (1) will not nullify or substantially
derogate from the intent or purpose of the bylaw; (2) will not constitute a hazard to the safety
and welfare of the inhabitants of the town; and (3) will not adversely affect the neighborhood in
which such property is situated.
d. Each permit shall (1) specify the maximum number of such motor vehicles that may be kept,
stored or allowed to remain on such property; (2) be limited to a reasonable period of time not
exceeding two years; and (3) be a personal privilege of the applicant and not a grant attached to
and running with the land.
e. This bylaw shall not apply with regard to a motor vehicle in an enclosed building, a motor
vehicle on the property of a holder of a class license under Section 58 of Chapter 140 of the
Massachusetts General Laws, a motor vehicle on the property of a farming or business
enterprise operated in a lawful manner when necessary to the operation of such enterprises, any
motor vehicle with intrinsic value as an "antique motor car", as defined in Massachusetts
General Laws Chapter 90, Section 1, or a motor vehicle in an appropriate storage place or
depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the Town.
f. Any person who continues to violate the provisions of this bylaw after thirty (30) days
following receipt by him of written notice of such violation from the Selectmen shall be liable
for a penalty not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each day that any violation
is allowed to continue after said thirty-day period shall constitute a separate offense for each
unregistered motor vehicle thereon.
(adopted 11/20/95)
34
ARTICLE 6. POLICE REGULATIONS
SECTION 24. Non-criminal Disposition of Certain Violations
(a) Any person, whether a municipal officer or a member or employee of a board or department of
the Town, taking cognizance of a violation of a specific bylaw, rule or regulation which he is
empowered to enforce, hereinafter referred to as the enforcing person, as an alternative to
initiating criminal proceedings may give to the offender a written notice to appear before the
clerk of the district court having jurisdiction thereof at any time during office hours, not later
than twenty-one (21) days after the date of such notice. Such notice shall be in triplicate and
shall contain the name and address, if known, of the offender, the specific offense charged and
the time and place for his required appearance. Such notice shall be signed by the enforcing
person and shall be signed by the offender whenever practicable in acknowledgement that such
notice has been received.
(b) The enforcing person shall, if possible, deliver to the offender a copy of said notice at the time
and place of the violation. If it is not possible to deliver a copy of said notice to the offender at
the time and place of the violation, said copy shall be mailed or delivered by the enforcing
person, or by his commanding officer or the head of his department or by any person
authorized by such commanding officer, department or head to the offender's last known
address, within fifteen (15) days after said violation. Such notice as so mailed shall be deemed
a sufficient notice, and a certificate of the person so mailing such notice that it has been mailed
in accordance with this section shall be prima facie evidence thereof.
(c) At or before the completion of each tour of duty, or at the beginning of the first subsequent tour
of duty, the enforcing person shall give to his commanding officer or department head those
copies of each notice of such a violation he has taken cognizance of during such tour which
have not already been delivered or mailed by him as aforesaid. Said commanding officer or
department head shall retain and safely preserve one copy and shall, at a time not later than the
next court day after such delivery or mailing, deliver the other copy to the clerk of the court
before which the offender has been notified to appear.
(d) Any person notified to appear before the clerk of the district court as hereinbefore provided
may so appear and confess the offense charged, either personally or through a duly authorized
agent or by mailing to such clerk with the notice such specific sum of money not exceeding
two hundred dollars ($200.00) as the Town shall fix as penalty for violation of the bylaw, rule
or regulation. Such payment shall if mailed be made only by postal note, money order or
check. The payment to the clerk of such sum shall operate as a final disposition of the case.
An appearance under this paragraph shall not be deemed to be a criminal proceeding. No
person so notified to appear before the clerk of the district court shall be required to report to
any probation officer, and no record of the case shall be entered in any probation records.
(e) If any person so notified to appear desires to contest the violation alleged in the notice to
appear and also to avail himself of the procedure established pursuant to this section, he may,
within twenty-one (21) days after the date of the notice, request a hearing in writing. Such
hearing shall be held before a district court judge, clerk or assistant clerk, as the court shall
direct, and if the judge, clerk or assistant clerk shall, after hearing, find that the violation
occurred and that it was committed by the person so notified to appear, the person so notified
35
ARTICLE 6. POLICE REGULATIONS
shall be permitted to dispose of the case by paying the specific sum of money fixed as a penalty
as aforesaid, or such lesser amount as the judge, clerk or assistant clerk shall order, which
payment shall operate as a final disposition of the case. If the judge, clerk or assistant clerk
shall, after hearing, find that violation alleged did not occur or was not committed by the
person notified to appear, that finding shall be entered in the docket, which shall operate as a
final disposition of the case. Proceedings held pursuant to this paragraph shall not be deemed
to be criminal proceedings. No person disposing of a case by payment of such a penalty shall
be required to report to any probation officer as result of such violation, nor shall any record of
the case be entered in the probation records.
(f) If any person so notified to appear before the clerk of the district court fails to pay the fine
provided hereunder within the time specified or, having appeared, does not confess the offense
before the clerk or pay the sum of money fixed as a penalty after a hearing and finding as
provided in the preceding paragraph, the clerk shall notify the enforcing person who issued the
original notice, who shall determine whether to apply for the issuance of a criminal complaint
for the violation of the appropriate bylaw, rule or regulation.
(g) Such notice shall be given on a form, if any, and printed for such purpose by the district court,
and may be used and given by the enforcing person for the above violation and for violations of
such other offenses as are set forth in Chapter 40, Section 21D of the General Laws, as it may
from time to time be amended.
(Section 24 adopted 5/9/79)
SECTION 25. No person shall keep, use, consume or have in his or her possession any alcoholic
beverages as defined in Chapter 138, Section 1 of the General Laws, in any building, or part thereof,
owned or occupied by the Town of Stow, except the Police Department for evidentiary purposes,
without the permission of the person or board in control of such premises, and being duly licensed by
the licensing authority when required by law; nor shall any person consume any alcoholic beverages
while on, in or upon any public way or upon any way to which the public has right of access, or any
town common, public park or playground, or any land or place to which members of the public have
access as invitees or licensees, or any private land or place, without the consent of the owner or
person in control of such public or private land or place, and being duly licensed by the licensing
authority when required by law. The penalty for any violation of this bylaw shall be a fine not
exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. (adopted 5/9/79)
36
ARTICLE 6. POLICE REGULATIONS
SECTION 26. Regulation and Licensing of Solicitors and Canvassers
a. It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser as defined in this bylaw to engage in such
business within the town of Stow without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with
the provisions of this bylaw. A reasonable fee shall be charged for the issuance of such license.
The provisions of this bylaw shall not apply to any person engaged in the soliciting for
charitable, benevolent, fraternal, religious or political activities, nor any person exempt under
Chapter 101 of the Mass. General Laws, nor to any person duly licensed under Chapter 101 of
the Mass. General Laws, nor to any person exempt by any other General Law, nor shall this
bylaw be construed to prevent route salesmen or other persons having established customers, to
whom they make periodic deliveries, from calling upon such customers or from making calls
upon prospective customers to solicit an order for future deliveries. Persons engaged in
unlawful solicitation and canvassing may be subject to arrest without a warrant. A fine not to
exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) may be assessed for violations. (amended 5/9/2007)
b. Definition
A solicitor or canvasser is defined as any person who, for himself or for another person, firm or
house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to lease or take orders for retail sale
of goods, wares, merchandise or services, including without limitation the selling, distributing,
exposing for sale or soliciting orders for magazines, books, periodicals or other articles of a
commercial nature, the contracting of all home improvements, or for services to be performed
in the future whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for retail sale a sample of the
subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payment on such retail sales.
c. Application
Applicants for a license shall file with the Chief of Police, on a form issued by the Police
Department, a written application signed under penalties of perjury, containing the following
information:
(1) Name of applicant.
(2) Address of applicant (local and permanent address).
(3) Applicant's height, weight, eye and hair color.
(4) Applicant's Social Security number.
(5) Length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
(6) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold.
(7) The name and home office address of the applicant's employer. If self-employed, it
shall be so stated.
37
ARTICLE 6. POLICE REGULATIONS
(8) A photograph of the applicant which shall be submitted by the applicant and be 2" by
2", showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing
manner.
(9) If operating a motor vehicle, the year, make, model, motor number, registration
number, state of registration, vehicle's owner name and address.
d. Investigation and Issuance
(1) Upon receipt of the application, the Chief of Police shall investigate the applicant's
reputation to determine from prior business practices if he/she is a suitable person to be
licensed.
(2) After such investigation, the Chief of Police shall endorse the application with his
approval or disapproval. If disapproval, the applicant shall have the right of appeal to
the Board of Selectmen.
(3) Said license when issued shall contain the signature of the Chief of Police or the
Board of Selectmen and shall show the name, address and photograph of the licensee,
the date of issue and the length of validity as well as the license number. The Police
Department shall maintain a record of all licenses issued for a period of five (5)
years. Solicitors and canvassers are required to display the identifying badge issued by
the Police Department on an outer garment whenever soliciting. Each licensee is required
to possess an individual license.
e. Expiration of License
Each license issued under the provisions of this bylaw shall be valid for a period not to exceed
sixty (60) days unless sooner revoked.
f. Renewal of License
A license issued under the provisions of this bylaw may be renewed by the Chief of Police. The
licensee requesting such a renewal shall apply in person to the Chief of Police.
g. Transfer or Revocation of License
No license shall be transferred. The Chief of Police may revoke a license for any violation of
this bylaw.
38
ARTICLE 6. POLICE REGULATIONS
h. Hours of Solicitation
The hours for solicitation or canvassing shall be as follows:
Monday through Friday: 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Saturday and Sunday: 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Violation of this section shall constitute sufficient reason for revocation of license to solicit.
i. Misrepresentation
(1) No solicitor or canvasser, licensed or exempt from license, shall misrepresent in any
manner the buyer's right to cancel as stipulated by Chapters 93, 93A and 255D of the
Massachusetts General Laws.
(2) No solicitor or canvasser, licensed or exempt from license, shall use any plan, scheme or
ruse which misrepresents the true status or mission of the person making the call in order
to gain admission to a prospective buyer's home, office or other establishment with the
purpose of making a sale of consumer goods or services.
j. Duty of Police to Enforce.
The police officers of the Town of Stow shall enforce this bylaw.
k. Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this bylaw shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished
by a fine not to exceed Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for each and every offense. Each day that a
person solicits without a license provided herein shall constitute a separate offense.
(Section 26 adopted 5/8/84)
SECTION 27. Alarm Systems Regulation Bylaw
a. No alarm user shall install or maintain a burglar alarm or similar system arranged to signal the
presence of a hazard involving an unauthorized intrusion or attempted robbery of a premises,
and to which the Stow Police Department is expected to respond, without first complying with
and there- after continuing to comply with this bylaw and the Rules and Regulations to be
enacted by the Selectmen for the purposes of implementing, enforcing and administering this
bylaw.
b. Fire alarm systems and alarm systems which monitor temperature, smoke, humidity or any
other condition not directly related to the detection of a burglary, unauthorized intrusion or
attempted robbery are specifically excluded from this bylaw and the Rules and Regulations to
be enacted hereunder.
39
ARTICLE 6. POLICE REGULATIONS
c. The Board of Selectmen, with the assistance of the Police Chief, shall promulgate and enact
Rules and Regulations for the implementation, enforcement and administration of this bylaw,
including permit fees, user fees and fines or other penalties for any violations.
d. The maximum fine for any violation shall be $50.00. Each day during which a violation exists
and continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Section 27 adopted 5/8/84)
SECTION 28. Schedule of Fees for Weights and Measures
Section 28 deleted 5/9/2007
40
ARTICLE 7. CEMETERIES
SECTION 1. The Town of Stow will receive of any person any sum of money, the interest whereof
shall be applied to the annual care of such lot in the public or private burial grounds of the Town of
Stow as the person paying the money shall designate. Such deposit may be made perpetual, if so
desired by the depositor.
SECTION 2. All sums of money now or hereafter deposited with the Treasurer-Collector in
accordance with the provisions of Section 19, Chapter 114, of the General Laws, shall be credited to
the account of the cemetery perpetual care fund, and the Treasurer-Collector shall keep a book which
shall contain a record of all moneys deposited, the date of each deposit, the name of the depositor,
the name of the cemetery containing the lot for care of which the deposit is made, and the number of
said lot. (amended 1/28/87)
SECTION 3. There shall be a board of cemetery trustees consisting of three members appointed by
the Board of Selectmen for terms of three years each, so arranged that the term of one member shall
expire each year. Said board, with the Treasurer-Collector, shall have the management of the
cemetery perpetual-care fund. (amended 1/28/87, 5/5/92)
SECTION 4. Every person who may hereafter deposit any money under the provision of Section
19, Chapter 114, of the General Laws shall receive a certificate therefor from the Treasurer-Collector
in the following form:
Town of Stow
Treasurer-Collector's office____________ 20____
This is to certify that __________________________________________ has deposited with
me the sum of _________________________ dollars, the interest of which is to be forever applied
in accordance with the provisions of Section 19, Chapter 114, of the General Laws, and the bylaws
of the town in respect thereto for the lot numbered ______ on the plan of __________________.
______________________________
Treasurer-Collector
(amended 1/28/87)
SECTION 5. The income on all deposits made under the provision of Section 1 shall be computed
annually on the thirtieth day of June and the amount due thereon shall be entered to its credit in the
book provided for in Section 2 of this article, and annually on the first day of April the treasurer shall
return to the secretary of the cemetery trustees a statement of the amount of income to the credit of
each deposit, with the name of the depositor, the name of the cemetery, and the number of the lot
therein. The provisions of this section shall not apply to deposits made prior to the adoption of this
bylaw. (amended 5/20/74)
41
ARTICLE 7. CEMETERIES
SECTION 6. The Treasurer-Collector shall be the custodian of said funds, and shall deposit and
invest the same as directed by the board of trustees. He shall make all transfers of securities, execute
all papers necessary therefor when duly authorized by vote of the trustees, and collect, receive and
enforce the payment of all debts and obligations due to it and upon payment therefor shall acquit and
discharge the same, and surrender, discharge, or assign all security held therefor. (amended 1/28/87)
SECTION 7. The cemetery trustees shall attend to the care and preservation of the lots for which
deposits have thus been made and said trustees shall include in their annual report to the Town a
statement of the amount expended on each of said lots. The Treasurer-Collector shall pay such bills
as may be thus incurred and approved by the cemetery trustees to an amount not exceeding the
interest to the credit of said deposits, and charge to the same. (amended 1/28/87)
SECTION 8. The Treasurer-Collector shall also pay to the authorities having control of private
cemeteries, for the care of which moneys have been received by the Town of Stow, the income on all
sums so deposited for the care of the lots for which deposit was made, and the cemetery trustees shall
include in their annual report to the Town a statement of such payments.
(amended 1/28/87)
42
ARTICLE 8. REPEAL
SECTION 1. All bylaws or part of bylaws heretofore adopted which are inconsistent with the
provisions of the foregoing bylaws are hereby repealed and annulled; but the provisions of the
foregoing bylaws so far as they are the same as the provisions of bylaws heretofore adopted shall be
construed as a continuation thereof, and not as new enactments.
SECTION 2. The repeal of a bylaw heretofore adopted shall not affect any act done, ratified, or
confirmed, or any right accrued or established, or any action, suit or proceeding commenced or had
in a civil case, nor effect any punishment, penalty, or forfeiture incurred under such bylaw.
SECTION 3. These bylaws may be repealed or amended at any annual town meeting or at any other
town meeting specially called for the purpose, an article or articles for such purpose having been
inserted in the warrant for such meeting.
43
ARTICLE 9. WETLANDS PROTECTION
SECTION 1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this Bylaw is to protect the wetlands, flood plains, water resources, and adjoining
land areas of the Town of Stow by controlling activities deemed to have a significant effect upon the
values of these resources, including but not limited to the following: public and private water supply,
ground water, flood control, erosion and sedimentation control, storm damage prevention, water
quality, soil and water pollution control, fisheries, shellfish, wildlife and wildlife habitat (wild plants
and wild animals), rare species habitat including rare plant species, agriculture, aquaculture, and
recreation (collectively, the interests of this Bylaw). This Bylaw is intended to utilize the Home
Rule authority of this municipality to protect additional resource areas, for additional values, with
additional standards and procedures to augment those of the Wetlands Protection Act, G.L. Ch. 131,
40 and Regulations thereunder, 310 CMR 10.00.
(amended 5/21/2003)
SECTION 2. APPLICATION
No person shall remove, fill, dredge, alter, degrade, pollute, discharge into, or build upon or within
one hundred feet of any bank, fresh water wetland, beach, dune, flat, marsh, meadow, bog or swamp;
or lands bordering on or within one hundred feet of any Great Pond, estuary, creek, intermittent
stream, or any land under said waters; or lands bordering on or within two hundred feet of any
perennial stream, river, pond (with the exception of Great Ponds as defined at 310 CMR 10.58 and
historic mill complexes as defined at 310 CMR 10.04), lake, reservoir, vernal pool, or any land under
said waters; or lands bordering on or within one hundred feet of any land subject to flooding or
inundation by ground water or surface water; or lands bordering on or within one hundred feet of the
one-hundred year flood elevation, without filing written application for a permit so to remove, fill,
dredge, build upon, degrade, pollute, discharge into, or alter, including such plans as may be
necessary to describe such proposed activity and its effect on the environment, and receiving and
complying with a permit issued pursuant to this Bylaw.
The written application, accompanied by a filing fee as described by regulation, payable to the Town
of Stow, shall be sent in a manner that provides proof of delivery to the Stow Conservation
Commission. This same application shall fulfill the requirements of the Massachusetts General
Laws, Chapter 131, 40. Copies of this application shall be sent at the same time, in a manner that
provides proof of delivery, to the Board of Selectmen, Planning Board and Board of Health. Such
application shall be filed concurrently with applications for all other variances and approvals
required by the Zoning Bylaw, the Subdivision Control Law or any other Bylaw or regulation, or
after such variances and approvals have been obtained.
Upon written request of any person to the Commission, the Commission shall within twenty-one (21)
days make a written determination as to whether this Bylaw is applicable to any land or work
thereon. When the person requesting a determination is other than the owner, notice of the
determination shall be sent to the owner as well as to the requesting person. Where appropriate, the
44
ARTICLE 9. WETLANDS PROTECTION
Conservation Commission may conduct a public hearing on such a determination but is not required
to do so. Notice of such a request for determination shall be sent to the abutters of record (as shown
by the Assessors) where deemed necessary by the Commission.
(Section amended 5/21/2003)
SECTION 3. HEARING
The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application within twenty-one (21) days of its
receipt. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given by the Commission, at the expense
of the applicant, not less than five (5) days prior to the hearing, by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in Stow and by mailing copies of the notice to the applicant, Board of Health,
Board of Selectmen, Planning Board, abutters as shown by the Assessors and to such other persons
as the Commission may determine. (amended 5/21/2003)
SECTION 3.1 PERMIT AND CONDITIONS
If after the public hearing the Commission determines that the area, which is the subject of the
application, is significant to the interests protected by this Bylaw, the Commission shall within
twenty-one (21) days of such hearing issue or deny a permit for the work requested. If it issues a
permit after making such determination, the Commission shall impose such conditions as it
determines are necessary or desirable for protection of those interests, and all work shall be done in
accordance with those conditions. The conditions may include a condition that certain land or
portions thereof not be built upon or altered, filled or dredged, that streams may not be diverted,
dammed or otherwise disturbed. If the Commission determines that the area which is the subject of
the application is not significant to the interests protected by this Bylaw, or that the proposed activity
does not require the imposition of conditions, within twenty-one (21) days of the public hearing it
shall issue a permit without conditions. Permits shall expire three (3) years from the date of
issuance, unless renewal is sought by written application prior to the date of expiration. (amended
5/21/2003)
SECTION 3.2 RELATIONSHIP TO MASS. GENERAL LAWS CH. 131, S. 40
The Conservation Commission may authorize a Notice of Intent under this bylaw to suffice for an
application under Mass. General Laws, Chapter 131, Section 40, and where appropriate may conduct
a single public hearing under this bylaw and that act, and may issue one Order of Conditions
thereunder.
SECTION 4. PRE-ACQUISITION VIOLATION
Any person who purchases, inherits or otherwise acquires real estate upon which work has been done
in violation of the provisions of this bylaw or in violation of any permit issued pursuant to this bylaw
45
ARTICLE 9. WETLANDS PROTECTION
shall forthwith comply with any such order or restore such land to its condition prior to any such
violation.
SECTION 5. REGULATIONS
The Conservation Commission may promulgate, after due notice and public hearing, rules and
regulations to effectuate the purpose of this bylaw. However, failure by the Commission to
promulgate such rules and regulations or a legal declaration of their invalidity by a court of law shall
not act to suspend or invalidate the effect of this bylaw.
The Commission may in its rules and regulations provide such definitions of terms used in this
bylaw as it deems useful in order to carry out its obligations under this bylaw.
SECTION 6. BURDEN OF PROOF
The applicant shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the credible evidence that the
work proposed in the application will contribute to the interests protected by this Bylaw. Failure to
provide adequate evidence to the Commission supporting a determination that the proposed work
will contribute to the interests protected by this Bylaw shall be sufficient cause for the Commission
to deny a permit or grant a permit with conditions, or, in the Commissions discretion, to continue
the hearing to another date to enable the applicant or others to present additional evidence. Due
consideration shall be given to any demonstrated hardship of the petitioner by reason of a denial, as
brought forth at the public hearing. (amended 5/21/2003)
SECTION 7. DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and implementation of this bylaw.
SECTION 7.1. PERSON
The term "person" shall include any individual, group of individuals, association, partnership,
corporation, company, business organization, trust, estate, the Commonwealth of political
subdivision thereof to the extent subject to town bylaws, administrative agencies, public or quasipublic
corporations or bodies, the Town of Stow, and any other legal entity, its legal representatives,
agents or assigns.
SECTION 7.2. ALTER
The term alter shall include, without limitation, the following actions when undertaken in areas
subject to this Bylaw:
46
ARTICLE 9. WETLANDS PROTECTION
a. Removal, excavation or dredging of soil, sand, gravel, peat or aggregate materials of any
kind;
b. Changing drainage characteristics, flushing characteristics, salinity distribution,
sedimentation patterns, flow patterns, and flood retention characteristics;
c. Drainage or other disturbance of water level or water table;
d. Dumping, discharging or filling with any material that may degrade water quality;
e. Placement or removal of material, which would alter elevation;
f. Driving of piles, erection of buildings or structures of any kind;
g. Placing of obstructions whether or not they interfere with the flow of water;
h. Destruction of plant life, including cutting of trees;
i. Changing of water temperature, biochemical oxygen demand or other physical or chemical
characteristics of the water;
j. Any activities, changes or work that pollutes a stream or body of water.
k. Incremental activities, which have, or may have, a cumulative adverse impact on the resource
areas protected by this Bylaw.
(Section 7.2 amended 5/21/2003; j. amended 10/24/2005)
SECTION 7.3. BANKS
The term bank shall include the land area which normally abuts and confines a water boundary; the
lower boundary being the mean annual low flow level, and the upper boundary being the first
observable break in the slope or the mean annual flood level, whichever is higher.
(amended 5/21/2003)
SECTION 7.4. AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES
a. The term "land in agricultural use" shall mean any qualifying wetland within a farm which is
qualified or eligible to be qualified under the Farmland Assessment Act, Mass. General Laws,
47
ARTICLE 9. WETLANDS PROTECTION
Chapter 61A, Sections 1 through 5, including but not limited to land primarily used in the
raising of animals, the raising of plants for human or animal feed, the production of flowers,
trees, nursery and greenhouse products, or ornamental plants and shrubs, or any combination
thereof.
b. The term "qualifying wetland" shall mean only inland fresh water wetland areas which are
seasonally flooded or basins or flats or inland fresh water meadows.
(Subsections c., c.(1), c.(2) and c.(3) deleted 10/24/2005)
SECTION 8. SECURITY
The Conservation Commission may, as part of its conditions, require in addition to any security
required by any other town or state board, commission, agency or officer that the performance and
observance of the conditions imposed hereunder be secured by one, or in part by one and in part by
the other, of the methods described in the following:
a. By a bond or deposit of money or negotiable securities in an amount determined by the
Commission to be sufficient and payable to the Town of Stow.
b. By a conservation restriction, easement or other covenant, executed and duly recorded by the
owner of record, running with the land (or registered, in the case of registered land).
The amount of security required by this Commission shall not, however, exceed either the estimated
cost of the work required to secure the faithful and satisfactory compliance with the final Order of
Conditions or the estimated cost of the work required to restore the resources and other properties
that may be affected if the work is not performed as required, whichever is greater.
SECTION 9. ENFORCEMENT
The Conservation Commission shall have authority to issue administrative orders for the purpose of
enforcing this bylaw and regulations and permits thereunder.
Whoever violates any provision of this Bylaw shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300.00
or such other amount as may be provided by State statute. Each day or portion thereof during which
a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense, and each permit condition violated shall
constitute a separate offense. (fine amount added 5/19/2004)
This bylaw shall be enforced pursuant to Mass. General Laws Chapter 40, Section 21D by a town
police officer or other officer having police powers. Upon request of the Commission, the Board of
Selectmen and Town Counsel shall initiate appropriate legal action or injunctive relief in Superior
Court as may be necessary to enforce this bylaw and permits issued pursuant to it.
48
ARTICLE 9. WETLANDS PROTECTION
The Commission, its agents, officers and employees may enter upon publicly or privately owned land
for the purpose of performing their duties under this bylaw.
SECTION 10. EMERGENCY PROJECTS
The Conservation Commission may exempt emergency projects as described by rules and
regulations.
SECTION 11. SEVERABILITY
The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate any other section or
provision thereof, nor shall it invalidate any Order of Conditions which has previously become final.
(Article 9 adopted 5/3/83)
49
ARTICLE 10. FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION CODE
SECTION 1. This bylaw shall constitute and shall be known as the "FIRE PREVENTION AND
PROTECTION CODE OF THE TOWN OF STOW, COUNTY OF MIDDLESEX,
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS" and shall be construed to insure public safety,
health and fire prevention for all buildings, structures or other premises.
This code shall not be construed to authorize any action in violation of any bylaw, regulation, ruling
or statute. This code shall become effective upon its acceptance by vote of the Town Meeting of the
Town of Stow. Invalidity of any section or provision of this code shall not affect the validity of any
other section or provision thereof.
SECTION 2. The Board of Selectmen shall have the authority to establish and change inspection
fees as required under this code.
SECTION 3. The Stow Fire Department shall have the authority to establish rules and orders from
time to time pertaining to fire prevention and protection. (amended 5/9/2007)
SECTION 4. New buildings, except residential dwelling buildings of three dwelling units or less,
shall have an automatic fire and/or smoke detection and alarm system. Such system shall alert all
persons within the building and shall automatically alert the Stow Fire Department by transmittal of
a signal to the fire station alarm system. All such detection and alarm systems must be approved by
the Board of Fire Engineers.
All municipal buildings not in compliance with this section at the time of adoption of this code shall
comply with said requirements by July 1, 1976.
SECTION 5. Standpipes, sprinkler systems, internal or external fire hydrant systems which shall
include the water supply mains and pumps for said systems to be installed, altered or changed within
the Town of Stow must be approved by the Stow Fire Department. A permit must be obtained for
the installation, alteration or change of these systems from the Stow Fire Department, and the
application for the permit must be accompanied by the specifications of the building in which it is to
be installed, altered or changed, and specifications of the system itself, whether an internal or
external system, according to the rules, orders and regulations of the Stow Fire Department.
(amended 5/9/2007)
SECTION 6. No person or persons shall block, obstruct or otherwise make unusable any access to a
natural water supply that may be used for fire fighting without approval of the Stow Fire Department.
(amended 5/9/2007)
50
ARTICLE 10. FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION CODE
SECTION 7. All public buildings and others herein described, which shall include schools,
churches, municipal buildings, commercial and industrial buildings, shall maintain a fire access lane
of fifteen (15) feet minimum width, where designated by the Board of Fire Engineers, which shall
not be obstructed for an unreasonable length of time by commercial vehicles which have need of
access to said buildings and provided that the operators of other vehicles, or those responsible for
any other obstruction, are immediately available to remove said vehicle or obstruction upon orders of
the Fire Department of the Town of Stow.
SECTION 8. The head of the Fire Department of the Town of Stow shall have the authority to
inspect, at a reasonable hour, all buildings, including residential buildings of four or more dwelling
units per building, for the purpose of fire prevention and safety.
SECTION 9. The owner or tenant of any building or dwelling may request an inspection of the
property or building owned or occupied by him by the Stow Fire Department for the purpose of fire
prevention and safety.
(Article 10 adopted 5/20/74)
51
ARTICLE 11. PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 1. TITLE
These bylaws may be referred to as the Personnel Administration Bylaws.
SECTION 2. APPLICABILITY
All town departments and positions in the town service for which compensation is paid, including
full time, part time, seasonal or intermittent, shall be considered as being within the scope of
coverage of the Personnel Administration Bylaws, except that in conformance with Chapter 41,
Section 108 of the Mass. General Laws, as amended, salaries paid to elected town officials shall be
established annually by a vote of the Town.
SECTION 3. COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
The Personnel Administration Bylaws shall not apply to any employees covered by collective
bargaining agreements entered into pursuant to Chapter 150E of the Mass. General Laws, except to
the extent that such agreements specifically incorporate the provisions of the Personnel
Administration Bylaws.
SECTION 4. DEFINITIONS
Employee: An employee of the Town occupying a position in the classification plan.
Continuous Employment: Employment (either full or part time) requiring a predetermined
minimum work week and uninterrupted except for required military service and for authorized
vacation or leave of absence.
Full Time Employment: Employment for not less than thirty-five (35) hours per week.
(amended 5/1/95)
Part Time Employment: Regularly scheduled employment for less than full time weekly
employment.
Permanent Position: A full or part time position in the town service which has required or
which is likely to require the service of an incumbent in continuous employment for a period of
fifty-two (52) calendar weeks or more.
Intermittent Employment: Employment on an "as needed" basis.
Temporary Position: A position in the town service which requires or is likely to require the
services of one incumbent for a period less than fifty-two (52) calendar weeks in continuous
employment.
52
ARTICLE 11. PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
Seasonal Employment: Full time or part time employment for less than fifty-two (52) weeks a
year.
Probationary Employee: An employee during the first ninety (90) days of employment.
Increment: Dollar difference between step rates.
Min Rate: Lowest rate applicable for a given classification.
Max Rate: Highest rate which employee usually is entitled to attain within classification.
Range: Dollar difference between min and max rates.
Department: Any department, board, committee, commission or other agency of the Town
subject to this bylaw.
Town: The Town of Stow.
SECTION 5. CIVIL SERVICE LAW
Nothing contained in this bylaw or any section thereof shall be construed as being in conflict with
Chapter 31 of the Mass. General Laws.
SECTION 6. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Every full-time person employed by the Town in the following designated departments shall
successfully complete a physical examination: Police Department, Fire Department, Highway
Department, Tree Department and others as required by department heads. The examination shall be
paid for by the Town. The examining physician shall advise the Board of Selectmen as to whether, in
his or her opinion, the applicant is physically qualified to perform the duties of the position for which
application has been made.
SECTION 7. WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION
Each employee covered under the Workmen's Compensation Law shall be entitled to the benefits and
be subject to the provisions of Mass. General Laws Chapter 152, as amended.
a. Any sickness or injury arising out of and in connection with the service to the Town and for
which Workmen's Compensation is payable. The employee shall be granted the difference
between Workmen's Compensation payments and the regular straight time rate of pay.
Difference in pay is charged to accrued sick leave benefits to bring total compensation to the
full rate of pay provided by the position.
53
ARTICLE 11. PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
b. To insure the employee that he/she will receive his/her regular rate of pay, the Town will
continue to pay the employee until the Workmen's Compensation insurance has started to pay
the employee. In order to do this, the employee will be required to sign a written waiver
provided by the department head (drawn up by Town Counsel) stating that he/she will turn
over to the Town Workmen's Compensation checks as soon as they are received. (Note: The
employee must turn back checks retroactive to the first day of injury.)
c. If the employee does not sign the waiver, he/she will have to wait for Workmen's Compensation
to process his/her claim.
d. The provisions of this Section 7 shall not apply to police officers or firefighters who are
excluded from the Workmen's Compensation Law.
SECTION 8. OVERTIME
a. Eligibility: All hourly rate employees subject to this bylaw are eligible for overtime as stated
below. Salaried employees are ineligible to receive overtime pay.
b. Any time worked in excess of forty (40) hours a week or eight (8) hours a day is considered
overtime.
c. Hourly employees shall be paid for overtime at a rate of 1.5 times the regular hourly rate.
d. Permanent hourly employees are guaranteed a minimum of four (4) hours overtime for any call
back unless said call back is within two (2) hours prior to or within two (2) hours subsequent to
regular scheduled hours.
(amended 5/1/95)
SECTION 9. HOLIDAYS
a. The following days shall be recognized as legal holidays, within the meaning of this bylaw, on
which employees shall be excused from all duty not required to maintain essential town
services:
New Year's Day Labor Day
Martin Luther King Day Columbus Day
Washington's Birthday Veterans' Day
Patriots' Day Thanksgiving
Memorial Day Christmas
Independence Day
b. Every permanent employee shall be entitled to these holidays as follows:
54
ARTICLE 11. PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
(1) Without loss of pay for employees paid on a weekly or annual basis.
(2) With pay at the regular hourly rate for the number of hours normally scheduled on the
designated day for employees paid on an hourly basis.
c. Holiday benefits are effective immediately upon employment for new permanent employees.
d. Whenever one of the recognized holidays falls on a Sunday, the following day shall be
observed; and whenever one of the recognized holidays falls on a Saturday, the previous day
shall be observed.
e. Any eligible employee who performs work on one of the holidays shall be paid in addition to
the holiday pay, at his/her regular rate for such day or fraction thereof; or for salaried employees,
be granted compensatory time off at the convenience of the department in lieu of payment. For
Christmas Day only, each hour worked shall be compensated at the overtime rate or counted as
one and one-half hours for compensatory time calculation.
SECTION 10. VACATION LEAVE
a. All full-time permanent employees shall be entitled to vacation leave based on the length of
continuous town service as follows:
Duration of Continuous Service Accrual Rate
One month through five years 1 day per month
After five years 1-1/2 days per month
After twelve years 2 days per month
(amended 5/1/95)
Accrual at these rates will allow employees to take two, three or four weeks of vacation per
year, depending on seniority, and allow for two, three or four days of personal time off per year,
depending on seniority. No other personal time off with pay will be granted.
b. Eligibility is determined by anniversary date of employment.
c. The maximum number of days carried as accrued vacation leave into a new fiscal year is limited
to the number of days accrued during the prior fiscal year. (amended 10/5/81)
d. If a holiday occurs while an employee is on vacation, that day will not be deducted from
vacation leave.
e. If an employee becomes ill while on vacation, vacation leave continues to apply.
f. Vacation leave must be taken in increments of at least one-quarter day. (amended 5/1/95)
55
ARTICLE 11. PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
g. Each department head shall schedule the vacations of employees within the department so as to
cause the least interference with the work, while giving preference to those employees with
maximum seniority.
h. A terminated employee shall be paid for all vacation leave accrued but not taken as of the date of
his/her termination.
i. The vacation leave applies to all permanent part-time employees subject to the following:
(1) Average hours worked per week in the prior year must be twenty (20) or more.
(2) Leave accrual, carry-over and minimum time increment is reduced by the average hours
worked per week divided by 35, 37.5 or 40, as the case may be for such employee.
(amended 5/1/95)
SECTION 11. SICK LEAVE
a. All full-time permanent employees shall be credited with fifteen (15) days of sick leave at the
beginning of each fiscal year. Each employee shall be granted sick leaves aggregating not more
than their accrued leave without loss of pay.
b. Sick leave not used in any fiscal year may be accumulated to a total of 120 days entering each
new fiscal year. (amended 5/1/95)
c. Rate of accrual is one (1) day per month for the following purposes:
(1) New employees, after one month of employment, shall be credited with one (1) day of sick
leave for each full month remaining in the current fiscal year following the date of
employment. Fractional days shall be raised to the next whole number.
(2) For repayment of advanced sick leave liability, a terminated employee shall have sick leave
credit reduced by one (1) day for each full month remaining in the current fiscal year
following termination date. Fractional days of reduction shall be dropped.
d. Proof of illness which results in sick leave in excess of three (3) days shall be established by
either a doctor's certificate, a town nurse verification or other such means suitable to the
department head.
e. In the event that an employee is entitled to disability compensation, pursuant to the provisions of
the Workmen's Compensation Act, he/she may take accrued sick leave benefits to bring total
compensation to the full rate of pay provided by the position.
56
ARTICLE 11. PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
f. Upon request of the department head, the Board of Selectmen may advance sick leave to an
employee by an amount not to exceed thirty (30) days. Advanced sick leave shall be repaid to
the Town out of leave not used during the following years.
g. Any employee who is on sick leave will not be allowed to return to duty until he/she is capable of
performing the full duties of employment, except to perform specific assignments mutually
agreed upon by the department head and employee.
h. Sick leave will not apply on either a holiday or vacation day where compensation is already being
paid.
i. If an employee leaves Town employment with a sick leave advance liability against his/her
record, such liability shall be deducted from accrued earnings.
j. No credit shall be made for unused sick leave balance upon termination of employment.
k. Accrued sick leave may be used for maternity purposes.
l. Sick leave applies to all permanent part-time employees, subject to the following:
(1) Average hours worked per week in the prior year must be twenty (20) or more, based on a
fifty-two (52) week year. (amended 10/5/81)
(2) Leave accrual, carry-over and minimum time increment otherwise provided in these bylaws
shall be reduced for part-time employees by multiplying said benefits by a fraction, the
numerator of which shall be the average number of hours worked per week by such employee,
Based on a fifty-two (52) week year, and the denominator of which shall be 35, 37.5 or 40
hours, as the case may be for such employee. (amended 10/5/81, 5/1/95)
SECTION 12. BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
a. A permanent employee is eligible for up to three (3) days of bereavement leave to handle
personal matters related to the death of a close member of the employee's family including his or
her spouse, child or parent, brother or sister, or grandparent of either spouse.
b. An employee on bereavement leave shall not suffer loss in pay. Specifically, employees shall be
paid at their regular rate for the hours normally scheduled on those days.
c. Bereavement leave benefits are effective immediately upon employment for new permanent
employees.
57
ARTICLE 11. PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 13. JURY LEAVE
a. A permanent employee called for jury duty on days falling within his or her regular work period
is eligible for jury leave.
b. An employee on jury leave shall be paid the difference (if any) between the compensation he/she
would have received from the Town and his/her fees, exclusive of travel allowance, for such jury
duty.
c. For employees paid on an hourly rate, pay is based on the number of hours normally scheduled
on those days.
d. Jury leave benefits are effective immediately upon employment for new permanent employees.
SECTION 14. MILITARY LEAVE
a. A permanent employee who is in the military reserve is eligible for military leave.
b. An employee on military leave shall be paid the difference (if any) between the compensation he
or she would have received and his or her military pay.
c. For employees paid on an hourly rate, pay is based on the number of hours normally scheduled
on those days.
d. Paid military leave is limited to a period not to exceed two weeks in any twelve-month period.
e. Paid military leave does not apply to an employee who may be mobilized during an emergency.
f. Military leave benefits are effective immediately upon employment for new permanent
employees.
SECTION 15. PERFORMANCE APPRAISAL
a. Definition: Performance appraisal is the continuous process by which an employee of the Town
is informed of the supervisor's performance requirements and of how the employee performance
is viewed by the supervisor in relation to those requirements.
b. Performance Requirements: The level of performance required of an employee by the
supervisor expressed in terms of quantity and quality of finished work, the cooperativeness and
dependability which is required for a satisfactory rating in the position to which the employee is
officially assigned. For supervisors the performance requirements also include the level of
effectiveness in developing subordinate employees.
58
ARTICLE 11. PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
c. Performance Rating: Each town employee covered by this bylaw shall receive annually a
written evaluation of his/her performance for the preceding calendar year. All employees will
be rated on four factors: quantity, quality, cooperativeness and dependability. In addition,
supervisors, other than boards or elected officials, will be rated on their ability to develop
subordinate employees. Department heads may add other appropriate evaluation factors.
d. Performance Rating Process: Using the evaluation forms provided, each supervisor of town
employees will annually complete three (3) copies of the evaluation form by January 30. The
supervisors must then sit down with the employee, give him/her a personal copy of the
evaluation form and discuss the reasons for the ratings. Ratings may be changed during this
discussion if the employee relates information about his/her performance that was not
considered by the supervisor. At the conclusion of this discussion, the supervisor will give the
employee an opportunity to comment orally and/or in writing and have the employee sign the
bottom of the form to acknowledge participation in the review and receipt of the rating. The
supervisor will forward a copy of the rating form to the Board of Selectmen for its review and
for filing in the employee's official personnel folder. A copy of the rating form will be kept in
the personnel folder for a period of one (1) year or until a new performance rating is completed
for the employee. Employee performance ratings are to be kept confidential and are to be used
only by officials authorized by the Board of Selectmen.
e. Purpose and Uses of the Evaluation: The performance evaluation process is a valuable tool for
improving employee productivity by informing employees of noted strengths and weaknesses
and for giving clues on how to improve future performance. The employee performance rating
may be used when promotions are being considered and for consideration for step increases.
f. Unsatisfactory Performance: If an employee is given an unsatisfactory evaluation at any time
following prior warning of deficiency, then consideration should be given toward removal,
reassignment or demotion of the employee.
g. Outstanding Performance: To receive an outstanding performance evaluation an employee
must be rated exceptional in each of the rating elements. An outstanding rating should be
considered unusual and is reserved for those employees who perform above and beyond normal
expectations of performance. An outstanding rating gives eligibility for a quality step increase
in pay not limited by time in grade and for official recognition of the employee by the Board of
Selectmen.
SECTION 16. MAINTAINING DISCIPLINE
a. It is expected that town employees will obey the town bylaws and the lawful orders of their
supervisors, give a full day's work for a full day's pay and that they adhere to high standards of
conduct. Disciplinary action may be taken against town employees for violations as set forth
below.
59
ARTICLE 11. PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
b. Principles: The maintenance of good discipline among town employees and the handling of
disciplinary actions, when required, are to be carried on in accordance with the following
principles:
(1) Primary emphasis is to be placed on positive action by supervisors to prevent situations
requiring disciplinary actions.
(2) Employees are expected to adhere to high standards of conduct. When they violate rules,
regulations or standards of conduct, they will be dealt with promptly and on a fair and
equitable basis.
(3) Disciplinary actions should be consistent with the principle of like penalty for like
offense with due consideration for the employee's past record and any other
circumstances that, in the exercise of reasonable judgment, detract from or add to the
seriousness of the offense.
c. Disciplinary Actions (from least severe to most severe)
(1) Oral reprimand, or telling an employee specifically of undesirable behavior, and
suggesting how it may be corrected. Many of the more severe actions could be prevented
when the verbal reprimand is used in a positive manner. By avoiding a situation and
saying nothing, a supervisor may be supporting behavior which results in a more serious
and unpleasant problem later.
(2) Letter of admonishment, or notifying the employee that behavior must improve. This
letter does not go into the employee's personnel file and is signed by the supervisor or
other official in the unit.
(3) Letter of reprimand, in writing to the employee through official channels. The letter of
reprimand is kept in the employee's personnel file for a period of three years and is
signed by the supervisor.
(4) Suspension, or removing the employee from pay status for a designated period of time.
One day is usually the minimum period of suspension, and for repeated offenses the
period is increased to a maximum of thirty (30) days.
(5) A.W.O.L. (Absence Without Official Leave. A supervisor may take action to place an
employee in a non-pay status for unauthorized absence.
(6) Reduction in rank or compensation, or demoting an employee to a lower paying job for
the good of the Town.
(7) Discharge, or firing an employee from employment for the good of the Town. In a few
cases it may be the first action taken because the offense may be of such seriousness that
no other action is feasible. Where it is taken as a result of behavior that the employee has
60
ARTICLE 11. PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
not corrected over a period of time, it should be the last measure after one or more
penalties have not produced the corrective results. Discharge or firing of an employee
must be approved by the Board of Selectmen. Such action may be taken only after the
employee is given a statement of the reasons for the discharge or firing and only after the
employee is afforded a hearing before the Board of Selectmen with respect to such
statement of reasons, at which hearing the employee may have counsel or a representative
of his own choosing present for the purpose of advising him but not for the purpose of
active participation.
SECTION 17. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
a. Any dispute arising in connection with wages, hours of work and other conditions of
employment, or out of the interpretation of application of the provisions set forth in the town
Personnel Administration Bylaws is grievable.
b. Any grievance that may arise will be discussed promptly and the parties will diligently
cooperate in an effort to adjust said grievance at the earliest possible time.
c. Any grievance must be filed within fourteen (14) calendar days of the event upon which the
grievance is based or from the date when the employee should have had knowledge of the event
or shall be deemed null and void.
d. General Process
An employee grievance shall be filed in writing with the department head or the appropriate
grievance hearing officer.
A hearing will take place within ten (10) working days from the hearing officer's receipt of the
grievance, unless circumstances or conditions reasonably warrant an extension of the grievance
hearing date, as determined by the hearing officer. This heading process encourages the
department head to conduct an informal review and investigation of a grievance when
appropriate and practicable.
The hearing officer will issue a written decision to the grievance within ten (10) working days
from the date that the grievance hearing has been completed.
e. Hearing Officers
1. General Case: The head of the employee's department shall be the hearing officer.
2. Department Head: A grievance claim against a department head reporting to another board
or commission shall be filed with the board or commission. The chairperson of that board
or commission will adjudicate the grievance as the hearing officer. A grievance against a
department head appointed by the Board of Selectmen, not reporting to another board or
61
ARTICLE 11. PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
commission, shall be filed with and heard by the Town Administrator.
3. Board of Commission Members: A grievance claim filed against a member of a board or
commission member shall be filed with that board or commission. The chairperson of the
board or commission shall be the hearing officer. If circumstances reasonably warrant, the
board or commission chairperson may request that the Town Administrator adjudicate the
grievance. A grievance filed against the chairperson of a board or commission shall be
adjudicated by the Town Administrator.
4. Board of Selectmen: A grievance claim filed against a member of the Board of Selectmen
shall be adjudicated by the Chairperson of the Selectmen. A grievance filed against the
Chairperson of the Selectmen will be adjudicated by another Selectman voted by the Board
of Selectmen. If circumstances reasonably warrant, the Board of Selectmen may appoint
an outside independent third party to adjudicate a grievance against a member of the Board
of Selectmen. No paid employee of the Town, or any person appointed by the Selectmen,
shall be appointed to adjudicate a grievance filed against an individual Selectman.
f. Appeals: An employee may appeal a grievance decision. The appeal must be made in writing
within ten (10) working days of receipt of the written grievance decision and filed with the
appeal hearing officer. The appeal shall be heard within ten (10) working days of receipt and a
written decision of the appeal shall be issued within ten (10) working days from the date that
the appeal has been completed. A grievance shall be deemed waived and settled unless such
grievance decision is appealed within the time limits prescribed.
1. A grievance hearing decision issued by a department head or by a board or commission
chairman, excluding the Board of Selectmen, may be appealed to the Town Administrator.
2. A grievance hearing decision issued by the Town Administrator may be appealed to the
chairperson of the Board of Selectmen.
3. Employee grievance hearing decisions issued by the Selectmen are final.
(Section 17, paragraph d amended, paragraphs e and f added 5/9/2007)
SECTION 18. PERSONNEL RECORDS
Personnel records shall be maintained in a secure place for each employee of the Town. These
records shall be considered confidential. The following information shall be contained within them:
a. A copy of the letter offering employment and which contains
(1) Starting date
(2) Starting rate of pay
(3) Job title and job description
(4) Employee category
62
ARTICLE 11. PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
(5) Scheduled work hours
(6) Benefits
b. Application form
c. References
d. Date of birth
e. Social Security number
f. Changes in pay
g. Vacation time (accumulated and used)
h. Sick time (accumulated and used)
i. Performance appraisal (one at least every twelve months). Only the latest performance
appraisal shall be kept in the record.
j. Other information that may deem proper and necessary to the effective administration of the
personnel plan.
k. Written records of grievance and disciplinary action and medical information shall be kept in a
secure place separate from the affected employee's personnel folder. Access to grievance and
disciplinary action files shall be limited to parties with an official need to know the contents of
those files. Access to medical records shall be in accordance with state and federal law.
Access to personnel files shall be limited to the department head, Board of Selectmen, Town
Accountant, Town Treasurer and the employee.
SECTION 19. MISCELLANEOUS
a. All powers and duties given the Board of Selectmen pursuant to the Personnel Administration
Bylaws shall, with respect to employees of the library, be exercised and performed to the extent
permitted by law, by the Library Trustees.
b. These Personnel Administration Bylaws shall become effective July 1, 1981 except that all
vacation, holiday, bereavement leave, jury leave, military leave, and sick leave benefits for
permanent part-time employees provided for in the Personnel Administration Bylaws shall not
be available until the 1983 fiscal year, except to the extent any particular such employee has
been receiving such benefits in years prior to the 1982 fiscal year.
c. The members of what was employee Clerical Union Local 1156, having now been decertified
by the State Department of Labor Relations, shall retain all of the individual wage and other
compensatory benefits that the Town had provided to them by and through expressed provisions
of the labor contract in force and effect at the time of decertification effective February 2013.
(Amended 5/7/2013, paragraph c. added)
(Sections 1 thru 19 adopted 5/6/1981)
63
ARTICLE 11. PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 20. CLASSIFICATION AND SALARY PLAN
a. The positions of all employees of the Town, except those filled by popular election, those under
the control of the School Committee and those covered by collective bargaining agreements,
shall be classified by titles. Those employees who hold Hourly Rate Positions shall also be
classified by groups. Each group shall include those positions which involve substantially
similar work or which have substantially equal responsibilities. These titles and groups are set
forth in the schedules referred to in clause h. of this section. The title of any position shall be
used to designate that position in all payrolls, budget estimates, official reports, records or other
matters involving the personnel or fiscal processes of the Town.
b. The minimum, maximum and range of salaries, or the single rate salaries, for the groups and
positions in this plan are to be established by the vote of the Town in town meeting and are set
forth in the schedules referred to in clause h. of this section. The minimum salary set for a
position shall be the starting salary for that position, unless the Board of Selectmen authorizes a
higher starting salary within the applicable range. To authorize a higher starting salary, the
Board of Selectmen shall consider the recommendations of the department head or other
administrative authority, supported by evidence of exceptional circumstances satisfactory to the
Board. Except as provided below, in order to advance to the next step in a salary range, an
employee will have to have been continuously employed in the position as described below for
the following periods of time:
Minimum to Step 1 One Year at Minimum
Step 1 to Step 2 Two Years at Step 1
Step 2 to Step 3 Two Years at Step 2
Step 3 to Maximum Three Years at Step 3
(amended 5/1/95)
An employee may be advanced to the next step in a range without regard to the time provisions
upon receipt of an outstanding performance appraisal, with the written approval of the Board of
Selectmen. Temporary employees shall be paid the minimum salary set for the position,
regardless of amount of time in the position, unless the Board of Selectmen authorize a higher
step based on the experience and qualifications of the employee.
c. No person may be appointed, employed or paid as an employee of the Town in any position
subject to the Classification and Salary Plan
(1) under any position title, or titles, other than those in the Classification and Salary Plan;
(2) under a position title other than that of the position, or positions, the duties of which the
person actually performs;
(3) at a salary, or rate, other than that set in the salary schedule for the position, or positions,
the duties of which the person actually performs; nor
64
ARTICLE 11. PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
(4) unless the Board of Selectmen has determined that the employment of such person is
consistent with all provisions of this bylaw.
d. Every three years, or more often if it appears advisable, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint a
Personnel Advisory Committee to review
(1) all positions subject to the Classification and Salary Plan to determine whether each
group continues to include those positions which involve substantially similar work or
which have substantially equal responsibilities, and
(2) the Classification and Salary Plan to determine whether it sets forth fair and equitable
pay levels.
After each review, the committee shall report to the Board of Selectmen, and the Selectmen
shall report to the Town the actions considered advisable. The Board of Selectmen may
temporarily add a new position to the Classification Plan or reclassify an existing position to a
different group. Any such action shall cease to be effective after the close of the next following
town meeting, unless adopted by an amendment to the Classification and Salary Plan at that
meeting. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as limiting the authority of the Board of Selectmen
to recommend to the town meeting changes in the Classification and Salary Plan whether or not
a Personnel Advisory Committee is appointed pursuant to this section.
e. This Classification and Salary Plan may be amended by majority vote at a town meeting.
Amendments to the Classification and Salary Plan voted at a town meeting shall be effective on
the next succeeding July first unless the vote of the town provides otherwise, provided,
however, that those amendments which confirm a temporary classification change as ordered by
the Board of Selectmen shall be effective immediately.
f. It shall be the responsibility of each department head, or other appropriate supervisory
authority, to write a position description for each of his/her subordinates and to keep it current.
As a minimum, each position description shall contain the following:
(1) Title of the position.
(2) Knowledge required by the position.
(3) Supervisory controls.
(4) Complexity of the work.
(5) Physical demands of the work.
(6) Description of the work environment.
Copies of a pamphlet on how to write position descriptions shall be kept by the administrative
65
ARTICLE 11. PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
assistant to the Board of Selectmen. A copy of the position description shall be given to each
employee and the administrative assistant to the Selectmen. The supervisor shall retain a copy,
and a copy shall be included in each employee's personnel folder.
g. When an employee is promoted into a new position, his/her new pay rate will be determined as
follows:
(1) Identify the person's present pay rate.
(2) Increase that rate by one step. If the person is at his/her top step in his/her former
position, then add the step increment value (the step increment value is the amount of the
difference between each step in the former position).
(3) By definition, a promotion must increase a person's pay to at least the figure identified in
(2) above.
(4) To find the proper pay rate in the new position, select the lowest rate in the new pay scale
that is not less than the figure derived in step 2.
h. The salaries of town employees covered by this bylaw shall be listed on the seven (7) schedules
described below. Each schedule shall list the classification title of each position (and the
classification group as to Hourly Rate Positions) and the salary or salary range of each position.
Schedule A - Annual Rate Positions
This schedule shall list all positions that are paid at an annual rate and for which a salary range
from minimum to maximum is listed.
Schedule B - Hourly Rate Positions
This schedule shall list all positions paid at an hourly rate and for which a salary range from
minimum to maximum is listed.
Schedule C - Single Rate Positions Paid Annually
This schedule shall consist of all positions paid on an annual basis and does not contain a range
of pay for each position.
Schedule D - Single Rate Positions Paid Hourly
This schedule shall consist of all positions that are paid at an hourly rate and does not contain a
range of pay for each position.
Schedule E - Annual Rate Plus Hourly Single Rate Positions
This schedule shall consist of all positions paid a single annual rate plus an hourly rate for hours
actually worked.
Schedule F - Fee Rate Positions
This schedule shall contain all positions paid on a fee basis.
66
ARTICLE 11. PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
Schedule G - Shift Incentive Premium for Emergency Medical Technicians
(Section 20 adopted 5/4/82)
SECTION 21. LONGEVITY
An employee of the Town in a permanent position occupying a position as defined in and covered by
the Personnel Administration Bylaw shall be paid, in addition to compensation received under the
wage and salary schedules, annual increments for each year of permanent service determined as
follows:
Years of Service
9 years...$200.00 13 years.....$400.00
10 years..... 250.00 14 years..... 450.00
11 years..... 300.00 15 years..... 500.00
12 years..... 350.00
Permanent service may consist of continuous service or total service. If service is interrupted by
layoff or other reasons not resulting from the employee's own action, total service will be considered
as continuous service.
The annual longevity increment shall be paid from one payroll in the month of December, before
Christmas, and will be based upon the years of service completed by the end of the calendar year.
(Section 21 adopted 5/1/95)
67
ARTICLE 12. REGULATIONS FOR UNDERGROUND STORAGE FACILITIES
SECTION 1. AUTHORITY
This bylaw is adopted by the Town of Stow under its home rule powers, its police powers to protect
the public health, safety and welfare and under powers authorized by Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 40, Section 21.
SECTION 2. FINDINGS
The Town of Stow finds that:
a. The ground water underlying this town is a major source of its existing and future water supply,
including drinking water. The ground water is integrally connected with, and flow into, the
surface water systems which constitute recreational and economic resources of the Town. The
foregoing conclusions are supported by findings set forth in the Interdisciplinary Environmental
Planning, Inc. (IEP) Water Resources Study for the Town of Stow, October 28, 1977 and the
maps provided therewith.
b. Accidental spills and discharges of liquid products, materials or substances could threaten the
quality of such ground water supplies and related water resources in Stow and in other
Massachusetts towns, posing potential public health and safety hazards and threatening
economic losses to the affected communities.
c. Unless preventive measures are adopted to prohibit discharge of such liquids and to control
their storage within the town, further spills and discharges of such materials will predictably
occur, and with greater frequency and degree of hazard by reason of increasing construction,
commercial and industrial development, population and vehicular traffic in the town of Stow.
SECTION 3. PURPOSES
The purposes of this bylaw are, through regulation of the design, construction, installation, testing
and maintenance of underground storage facilities, to protect public health from the contamination of
public and private water supplies due to leakage from such facilities, to protect the public safety from
the dangers of fire and explosion associated with such leakage, and to protect the general welfare by
preserving limited water supplies for present and future use in coordination with other regulatory
provisions.
SECTION 4. DEFINITIONS
4.1 "Components" means piping, pumps and other related storage, conveyancing and dispensing
elements that, together with one or more tanks and any cathodic protection or monitoring
system, constitute a storage facility.
68
ARTICLE 12. REGULATIONS FOR UNDERGROUND STORAGE FACILITIES
4.2 "Effective date" means the date on which the bylaw becomes effective pursuant to the
provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40, Section 32, as amended.
4.3 "Hazardous material" means a substance which because of quantity, concentration or physical
or chemical characteristics, poses a hazard to human health, safety, welfare or the
environment, when improperly treated, stored, transported, used or disposed, or otherwise
managed; this includes but is not limited to any substance set forth or deemed a hazardous
material in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 21C and 21E or 310 CMR 30.00 of the Code
of Massachusetts Regulations or pursuant to any bylaws or regulations of the Town of Stow.
(amended 1/19/88)
4.4 "Storage facility" means one or more tanks, at a particular site, together with its or their
components, used, or designed to be used, for the underground storage of any liquid product,
material or substance, except water, and shall include any cathodic protection or monitoring
system used, or designed to be used, for inhibiting or detecting leaks from any element of the
facility.
4.5 "Tank" means a structure, any part of which is used, or designed to be used, for the
underground storage of any liquid product except water.
4.6 "Underground storage" means storage within a tank or components any part of which are
below the surrounding ground level, but shall not include storage in a free-standing container
within a building.
4.7 "Board" means Board of Health.
4.8 "Owner" means the person or persons or government entity having legal ownership of a
storage facility.
4.9 "Operator" means the lessee, tenant or licensee of a storage facility or any other person or
persons responsible for the daily operation of a storage facility.
SECTION 5. PERMITS
New Storage Facilities
5.1 Subsequent to the effective date of this bylaw, no storage facility shall be installed unless the
owner shall have first obtained a permit from the Board of Health. This permit shall be in
addition to any license or permit required by Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 148, as
amended, or by any regulations issued thereunder. The fee for this permit shall be established
by the Board of Health. The fee shall be filed with the application and made payable to the
Town of Stow.
69
ARTICLE 12. REGULATIONS FOR UNDERGROUND STORAGE FACILITIES
5.2 The application for a permit shall be on a form obtained from the Board of Health and shall
include the following information and any other information that the Board may require:
a. Name, address and telephone numbers (day and night) of the owner.
b. Name, address and telephone numbers (day and night) of the operator.
c. The number of tanks in the proposed storage facility and the capacity of and the specific
liquid product, material or substance to be stored in each proposed tank.
d. The proposed type of construction and material for each tank and its components,
together with the tank's UL serial number, if any, and a description of any provisions
made for cathodic protection, electrical isolation and early detection of leaks through a
monitoring system.
e. The depth below ground level of the lowest and highest points of each proposed tank.
f. A statement supported by the manufacturer's documentation that the materials of each
tank and its components are guaranteed by their manufacturers to be compatible with the
specific liquid product, material or substance that the applicant proposes to store in such
tank.
5.3 In a proposed storage facility, the applicant shall furnish a certificate, signed by a registered
professional engineer, that the proposed facility meets all the design and construction
requirements of this bylaw.
5.4 The applicant shall also furnish a plot plan of the site and the area surrounding it, prepared by
a registered land surveyor or professional engineer, showing the location of each proposed
tank and its components and any existing storage facilities and of any building on the site, and
showing the approximate location of any public or private well and of any body of surface
water and the aquifer and recharge areas as reflected on the Water Resource Protection District
map, Town of Stow, Massachusetts, dated May 1, 1987 at a scale of 1 inch = 800 feet, on file
in the office of the Town Clerk, within 1,000 feet of the proposed storage facility.
(amended 1/19/88)
5.5 If the Board of Health determines that the proposed storage facility constitutes a danger to a
public or private water supply, whether by reason of its proximity to a public or private well,
aquifer, recharge area or body of surface water, or for any other reason, the Board may deny
the permit or may grant it subject to conditions which the Board determines are necessary to
protect such water supply. The conditions may include, but are not limited to, such
requirements as, for example, a double-walled tank or other secondary containment system, a
monitoring system, testing at more frequent intervals than would otherwise be required under
the testing for tightness of underground tanks section of 527 CMR 9.00, or continuing
statistical analysis of daily inventory records. The Board of Health shall set forth the reasons
for its decision in writing.
70
ARTICLE 12. REGULATIONS FOR UNDERGROUND STORAGE FACILITIES
Existing Storage Facilities
5.6 The owner of every storage facility that has been installed prior to the effective date of this
bylaw shall apply to the Board of Health, within six (6) months of the effective date of this
bylaw, for a permit to maintain the storage facility. Application shall be made on a form
obtained from the Board of Health and shall include, to the extent available to the owner, the
following information:
a. Name, address and telephone numbers (day and night) of the owner.
b. Name, address and telephone numbers (day and night) of the operator.
c. The number of tanks in the facility and the capacity of and the specific liquid product,
material or substance stored in each tank.
d. The type of construction and material for each tank and its components, together with a
description of any provisions made for cathodic protection, electrical isolation and early
detection of leaks through a monitoring system.
e. The depth below ground level of the lowest and highest points of the tank.
f. The date of installation of the tank(s).
g. A description of any previous leaks, including approximate dates, causes, estimated
amounts, any cleanup measures taken and any measures taken to prevent future leaks.
5.7 The owner shall also furnish evidence of the date of installation. Such evidence may include,
but is not limited to, a copy of any license issued by the local licensing authority or of any
permit issued by the Chief Fire Engineer or his designee. If no substantial evidence of date of
installation is supplied, the tank shall be presumed to have been installed twenty years prior to
the effective date of this bylaw.
5.8 The applicant shall also furnish a plot plan of the site and of the area surrounding it, showing
the approximate location of each tank and its components and of any building on the site, and
showing the location of any public or private well and of any body of surface water and the
aquifer and recharge areas as reflected on the Water Resource Protection District map, Town
of Stow, Massachusetts, dated May 1, 1987 at a scale of 1 inch = 800 feet, in file in the office
of the Town Clerk, within 1,000 feet of the storage facility. (amended 1/19/88)
5.9 If the Board of Health determines that the existing storage facility constitutes a danger to a
public or private water supply, whether by reason of its proximity to a public or private well,
aquifer, recharge area or body of surface water, or for any other reason, the Board may deny
the permit or may grant it subject to the provisions of 527 CMR 9.00 et seq or conditions
which the Board determines are necessary to protect such water supply. The conditions may
71
ARTICLE 12. REGULATIONS FOR UNDERGROUND STORAGE FACILITIES
include, but are not limited to, such requirements as, for example, a double-walled tank or
other secondary containment system, a monitoring system, testing at more frequent intervals
than would otherwise be required under the testing for tightness of underground tanks section
of 527 CMR 9.00, or continuing statistical analysis of daily inventory records. The Board of
Health shall set forth the reasons for its decision in writing.
Monitoring, Replacement and Subsequent Modification
5.10 Except as otherwise provided in 527 CMR 9.00, each storage facility shall be inspected
twenty (20) years following the installation at a frequency established by the Board of Health.
No storage facility shall be excluded.
5.11 The term "substantial modification" shall mean any change in the specific liquid product,
material or substance, except water, to be stored in any tank at a storage facility or the
installation of any addition to, or change in, a storage facility that alters its on-site storage
capacity, significantly alters its physical configuration or alters its capacity to inhibit or detect
leaks through the use of cathodic protection or a monitoring system or any similar device.
5.12 There shall be no replacement of a tank or of its components or substantial modification of
any storage facility unless the owner has first applied for and obtained approval in writing
from the Board of Health. The Board shall keep a copy of its approval with the records for
that storage facility.
5.13 Any application for approval under subsection 5.12 shall be in writing on an application
provided by the Board of Health and shall clearly describe the type of construction and
material of any replacement tank or component or the modification that is proposed.
5.14 Any application to add cathodic protection to an existing storage facility using one or more
steel tanks shall be accompanied by a design plan prepared by an engineer licensed by the
National Association of Corrosion Engineers, the plan to include provisions for a test box to
allow measurement of electrical potential and current flow.
5.15 If the Board of Health determines that the proposed replacement or modification constitutes a
danger to a public or private water supply, whether by reason of its proximity to any public or
private well, aquifer, recharge area or body of surface water, or for any other reason, the
Board of Health may deny the application or approve it subject to conditions that the Board
determines are necessary to protect such public or private water supply. The Board of Health
shall set forth the reasons for its decision in writing.
5.16 No replacement or substantial modification shall be made except by a contractor who has
either been licensed by state authorities for work on underground storage facilities or has
been certified by the manufacturer or a storage equipment association as qualified for that
purpose.
72
ARTICLE 12. REGULATIONS FOR UNDERGROUND STORAGE FACILITIES
Renewal of Permits and Changes of Ownership
5.17 The owner of any new or existing storage facility for which a permit has been issued must
apply to the Board of Health for a renewal of the permit at five (5) year intervals from the
date on which the original permit was granted. The fee for renewal of such permit shall be
established by the Board of Health. The fee shall be filed with the application and made
payable to the Town of Stow. The applicant must also furnish evidence of the most recent
testing as specified within this bylaw. The application for renewal must include any changes
in the information required under subsections 5.2, 5.4 or 5.6. No application for renewal
shall be denied, provided that the storage facility is in accordance with the provisions of this
bylaw.
5.18 The owner of any storage facility shall within twenty-one (21) working days notify the Board
of Health of any change in the name, address or telephone numbers of the owner or of the
operator. In the case of any transfer of ownership, the new owner shall be responsible for
notification.
SECTION 6. GENERAL PROVISIONS
6.1 The provisions of the Board of Fire Prevention Regulations, as set forth in 527 CMR 9.00 of
the Code of Massachusetts Regulations, shall apply to all storage facilities in connection with
compliance and enforcement of this bylaw.
6.2 The Chief Fire Engineer shall notify the Board of Health of any installation, modification or
testing of storage facilities requiring his approval. The Board of Health shall notify the Chief
Fire Engineer of any installation, modification or testing of storage facilities requiring the
Board's approval.
6.3 Notification of installation, modification or testing for tightness shall be given to the Chief
Fire Engineer and Board of Health at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the intended action.
6.4 Septage treatment systems are exempt from this bylaw.
SECTION 7. FEES
The Board of Health shall establish reasonable fees and publish a fee schedule for the purposes of
administering and enforcing this bylaw.
73
ARTICLE 12. REGULATIONS FOR UNDERGROUND STORAGE FACILITIES
SECTION 8. ENFORCEMENT
8.1 Any owner or operator who violates any provision of this bylaw shall be subject to a fine of
three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each offense. Each day during which such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. This bylaw may be enforced pursuant to
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40, Section 21D, as amended, by a local police officer or
any other officer having police powers. Upon request of the Board of Health, the Chief Fire
Engineer or the Board of Selectmen, the Town Counsel shall take such legal action as may be
necessary to enforce this bylaw.
8.2 In the event of any violation of this bylaw by the owner or operator of a storage facility, the
Board of Health, instead of or in addition to requesting enforcement under subsection 8.1, may
revoke or suspend the owner's permit or may require more frequent testing than would
otherwise by required.
8.3 If a permit is denied, granted with conditions, suspended or revoked, then the applicant or
holder of the permit may appeal this decision to the Board of Selectmen within ten (10) days
from the date of the decision or order from which the appeal is taken. The Board of
Selectmen shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within thirty (30) days from the date of
filing of the appeal and render its decision in writing within thirty (30) days of the hearing.
SECTION 9. SEVERABILITY
9.1 The invalidity of any provision of this bylaw shall not affect the validity of the remainder.
SECTION 10. COMPLIANCE
10.1 Compliance with this regulation does not relieve the owner and/or operator from the liability
of an underground storage facility or from complying with all other applicable federal, state
or local statutes, bylaws or regulations.
(Article 12 adopted 5/7/86)
74
ARTICLE 13. REGULATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIAL
SECTION 1. AUTHORITY
This bylaw is adopted by the Town of Stow under its home rule powers, its police powers to protect
the public health, safety and welfare, and under powers authorized by Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 40, Section 21.
SECTION 2. PURPOSE
The purpose of this bylaw is to protect, preserve and maintain the existing and potential ground
water supply and ground water recharge areas within the town.
SECTION 3. DEFINITIONS
The following terms shall have the following meaning in the bylaw:
3.1 "Discharge" means the accidental or intentional disposal, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking, incineration or placing of any hazardous material, regardless of volume, into or on any
land or water within the Town of Stow.
3.2 "Hazardous material" means a substance which because of quantity, concentration or physical
or chemical characteristics, poses a hazard to human health, safety, welfare or the environment
when improperly treated, stored, transported, used or disposed or otherwise managed. This
includes but is not limited to any substance set forth or deemed a hazardous material in
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 21C and 21E or 310 CMR 30.00 of the Code of
Massachusetts Regulations or pursuant to any bylaws or regulations of the Town of Stow.
(amended 1/19/88)
3.3 "Owner" means the person or persons or entity having legal ownership of a container.
3.4 "Operator" means the lessee, tenant or licensee of a container or any other person or persons
responsible for the oversight of a container.
3.5 "Container" means a facility at a particular site, together with its or their components, used or
designed to be used for the storage of hazardous materials.
SECTION 4. PROHIBITIONS
4.1 a. All discharges of hazardous material within the town are prohibited, except as provided
in Section 4.2 hereof.
75
ARTICLE 13. REGULATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIAL
b. All handling and storage of hazardous material is prohibited except in accordance with
the provisions of this bylaw, the Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Management Act,
Mass. General Laws Chapter 21C, as amended, and the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act, P.L. 94-580, as amended, and regulations issued incident thereto.
4.2 Section 4.1 shall not apply to the following:
a. Proper disposal of any hazardous material in an approved hazardous material disposal
facility that has received and maintains all necessary federal, state and town permits for
such purpose; provided that all current permits have been filed with the Stow Board of
Health.
b. Application of fertilizer and pesticides in accordance with label recommendations and
with applicable regulations of the Massachusetts Pesticide Board and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency.
c. Application of road salts or other deicing chemicals in conformance with the snow and
ice control program of the Massachusetts Department of Public Works and the Stow
Highway Department.
d. Disposal of "sanitary sewage" to subsurface sewage disposal systems as defined and
permitted by Title 5 of the Massachusetts Environmental Code and the supplemental
rules and regulations issued by the Stow Board of Health; provided, however, that the use
of septic system cleaners containing hazardous material is prohibited hereunder.
e. Industrial discharges which are point source discharges subject to existing valid permits
under S401 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1967 as amended.
f. Discharges pursuant to permits issued by the Stow Board of Health pursuant to Section 6
hereof.
g. Underground storage facilities in compliance with Article 12 of the Town of Stow
general bylaws.
h. Heating oil stored for use on the premises.
i. The storage of hazardous materials for normal household use in a single-family or multifamily
dwelling.
SECTION 5. REGISTRATION, INVENTORY AND STORAGE CONTROLS
5.1 Every owner or operator of a container storing hazardous materials in quantities totaling more
than 50 gallons liquid volume or 25 pounds dry weight, or in a lesser quantity or weight if so
76
ARTICLE 13. REGULATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIAL
determined by Board of Health regulation, shall register with the Board of Health the types of
materials stored, quantities, location and method storage. Registration required by this
subsection shall be submitted within 60 days of the effective date of this bylaw, and annually
thereafter, on such form or forms as the Board of Health may from time to time prescribe. If
an owner or operator fails to register within the time specified by this section, the Board of
Health may, in addition to imposing a penalty under Section 11, require that the storage
container or containers be inspected immediately at the owner's expense.
5.2 Hazardous materials shall be held on the premises in product-tight containers, and the Board
of Health may require by the enactment of an appropriate regulation that containers of
hazardous materials be stored on an impervious, chemical resistant surface compatible with
the material being stored, and that the storage area be enclosed with a permanent dike of
impermeable construction. The volume of the area enclosed by the dike shall be equal to a
minimum of 1.2 times greater than capacity of the containers within the dike so as to be
capable of holding the enclosed material at all times.
5.3 The registration provision shall not apply to those exclusions listed in Section 4.2.
SECTION 6. DISCHARGE PERMITS
6.1 Any owner or operator of a container or any person who desires to discharge hazardous
materials within the town, other than those discharges permitted pursuant to Section 4.2.a.
through 4.2.i. hereof, may petition the Board of Health in writing for permission to do so. The
Board of Health may adopt regulations to administer this bylaw, but nothing in this bylaw
shall be construed by implication or otherwise to impose upon the Board of Health any
obligation to permit any discharges other than those specifically permitted by Sections 4.2.a.
through 4.2.i. hereof.
SECTION 7. FEES
The Board of Health shall establish reasonable fees and publish a fee schedule for the purposes of
administering and enforcing this bylaw.
SECTION 8. REPORT OF SPILLS AND LEAKS
Every owner or operator having knowledge of a spill, leak or other loss of hazardous materials shall
immediately report the spill or loss of same to the Board of Health and Fire Department.
77
ARTICLE 13. REGULATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIAL
SECTION 9. COSTS
9.1 In every case the owner shall assume responsibility for costs incurred necessary to comply
with this bylaw. The Board of Health may charge the owner for expenses incurred in the
enforcement of this bylaw.
9.2 Failure to pay costs incurred or fees shall constitute a violation and shall subject the violator to
the penalties outlined in Section 11 of this bylaw.
SECTION 10. ENFORCEMENT
10.1 The provisions of this bylaw and regulations adopted hereunder shall be enforced by the
Board of Health. The agent or designated representative of the Board of Health may,
according to law, enter upon any premises at any reasonable time to inspect for compliance.
10.2 In accordance with the rules and regulations adopted hereunder, or upon request of the agent
or designated representative of the Board of Health, the owner or operator of any premises at
which hazardous materials are used or stored shall furnish all information required to
monitor compliance with this bylaw and regulations adopted hereunder.
10.3 All records pertaining to storage, removal and disposal of hazardous material shall be
retained for no less than five years by the owner or operator and shall be made available for
review by the agent or designated representative of the Board of Health upon request.
10.4 In the event of any violation of this bylaw, the Board of Health instead of, or in addition to,
requesting enforcement under Section 11 may revoke or suspend the owner's or operator's
permit issued by this bylaw, if any.
SECTION 11. VIOLATION
11.1 Written notice of any violation of this bylaw and regulations adopted hereunder shall be
given by the agent or designated representative of the Board of Health specifying the nature
of the violation; any corrective measures that must be undertaken, including containment and
cleanup of discharged materials; any preventive measures required for avoiding future
violations; and a time for compliance. Requirements specified in such notice shall be
reasonable in relation to the public health hazard involved and the difficulty of compliance.
11.2 Any violation of this bylaw shall be punishable by a fine of up to $300.00 for each day of
violation, and the Town of Stow may enforce this bylaw by any criminal or civil remedies as
are available, including equitable remedies or prohibit violations hereunder.
78
ARTICLE 13. REGULATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIAL
SECTION 12. SEVERABILITY
The invalidity of any provision of this bylaw shall not affect the validity of the remainder.
(Article 13 adopted 1/28/87)
79
ARTICLE 14. REGULATION FOR RECYCLING MATERIALS
THIS ARTICLE WAS DELETED BY TOWN MEETING VOTE ON MAY 19, 1999.
80
ARTICLE 15. RIGHT TO FARM
SECTION 1. Legislative Purpose and Intent
The purpose and intent of this Bylaw is to state with emphasis the Right to Farm accorded to all
citizens of the Commonwealth under Article 97 of the Constitution, and all state statutes and
regulations thereunder including, but not limited to, Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A,
Section 3, paragraph 1; Chapter 90, Section 9; Chapter 111, Section 125A; and Chapter 128, Section
1A. We, the citizens of Stow, restate and republish these rights pursuant to the Town's authority
conferred by Article 89 of the Articles of Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution ("Home
Rule Amendment").
This General Bylaw encourages the pursuit of agriculture, promotes agriculture-based economic
opportunities, and protects farmlands within the Town of Stow by allowing agricultural uses and
related activities to function with minimal conflict with abutters and town agencies. This Bylaw
shall apply to all jurisdictional areas within the town.
The word "farm" shall include any parcel or contiguous parcels of land, or water bodies, used for the
primary purpose of commercial agriculture, or accessory thereto.
The word "farming" or "agriculture" or their derivatives shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
? farming in all its branches and the cultivation and tillage of the soil;
? dairying;
? production, cultivation, growing and harvesting of any agricultural, aquacultural,
floricultural, viticultural, or horticultural commodities;
? growing and harvesting of forest products upon forest land, and any other forestry or
lumbering operations;
? raising of livestock, including horses;
? keeping of horses as a commercial enterprise; and
? keeping and raising of poultry, livestock and other domesticated animals for food and other
agricultural purposes, including bees.
"Farming" shall encompass activities including but not limited to the following:
? operation and transportation of slow-moving farm equipment over roads within the town;
? control of pests including, but not limited to, insects, weeds, predators and disease organism
of plants and animals;
? application of manure, fertilizers and pesticides;
? conducting agriculture-related educational and farm-based recreational activities, including
agri-tourism, provided that the activities are related to marketing the agricultural output or
services of the farm;
? processing and packaging of the agricultural output of the farm and the operation of a
farmer's market or farm stand including signage thereto;
? maintenance, repair or storage of seasonal equipment or apparatus owned or leased by the
farm owner or manager used expressly for the purpose of propagation, processing,
management or sale of the agricultural products; and
81
ARTICLE 15. RIGHT TO FARM
? on-farm relocation of earth and the clearing of ground for farming operations.
SECTION 2. Right to Farm Declaration
The Right to Farm is hereby recognized to exist within the Town of Stow. The above-described
agricultural activities may occur on holidays, weekdays and weekends by night or day and shall
include the attendant incidental noise, odors, dust and fumes associated with normally accepted
agricultural practices. It is hereby determined that whatever impact may be caused to others through
the normal practice of agriculture is more than offset by the benefits of farming to the neighborhood,
community and society in general. The benefits and protections of this Bylaw are intended to apply
exclusively to those commercial agricultural and farming operations and activities conducted in
accordance with generally accepted agricultural practices. Moreover, nothing in this Bylaw shall be
deemed as acquiring any interest in land, or as imposing any land use regulation, which is properly
the subject of state statute, regulation or local zoning law.
SECTION 3. Disclosure Notification
Not later than 21 days after the purchase and sale contract is entered into, or prior to the sale or
exchange of real property if no purchase and sale agreement exists, for the purchase or exchange of
real property, or prior to the acquisition of a leasehold interest or other possessory interest in real
property located in the Town of Stow, the landowner shall present the buyer or occupant with a
disclosure notification which states the following:
"It is the policy of this community to conserve, protect and encourage the maintenance and
improvement of agricultural land for the production of food and other agricultural products, and also
for its natural and ecological value. This disclosure notification is to inform buyers or occupants that
the property they are about to acquire or occupy lies within a town where farming activities occur.
Such farming activities may include, but are not limited to, activities that cause noise, dust and
odors. Buyers or occupants are also informed that the location of property within the town may be
impacted by commercial agricultural operations including the ability to access water services for
such property under certain circumstances."
A copy of the disclosure notification shall be given on a form prepared by the Town and shall be
signed by the prospective landowner prior to the sale, purchase, exchange or occupancy of such real
property. A copy of the disclosure notification must be filed with the Board of Selectmen or its
designee prior to the sale, purchase, exchange or occupancy of such real property. In addition to the
above, a copy of this disclosure notification shall be provided by the Town to landowners each fiscal
year by mail.
SECTION 4. Resolution of Disputes
Any person who seeks to complain about the operation of a farm may, notwithstanding pursuing any
other available remedy, file a grievance with the Board of Selectmen, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer or the Board of Health in accordance with statute and appropriate bylaws and regulations of
82
ARTICLE 15. RIGHT TO FARM
the Town. The filing of the grievance does not suspend the time within which to pursue any other
available remedies that the aggrieved may have. The Zoning Enforcement Officer or Board of
Selectmen shall forward a copy of the grievance to the Agricultural Commission or its agent which
shall review and facilitate the resolution of the grievance and report its recommendations to the
referring town authority within an agreed upon time frame.
The Board of Health, except in cases of imminent danger or public health risk, shall forward a copy
of the grievance to the Agricultural Commission or its agent which shall review and facilitate the
resolution of the grievance and report its recommendations to the Board of Health within an agreed
upon time frame.
SECTION 5. Severability Clause
If any part of this Bylaw is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the remainder of this Bylaw. The Town of Stow hereby declares the provisions of this
Bylaw to be severable.
This Bylaw restates the various protections afforded to commercial farms throughout Massachusetts
state law and is intended to educate citizens that farming activities are valued in Stow. Our few
remaining commercial farms provide essential components to maintain the character of the Town.
The notification provisions of the Bylaw will enhance awareness relative to the value of agriculture
in Stow. There are no new benefits or protections provided in this Bylaw beyond those contained in
state laws.
(adopted 12/13/2005)
ARTICLE 16. STRETCH ENERGY CODE
Enacted May 4, 2015 for the purpose of regulating the design and construction of
buildings for effective use of energy, pursuant to Appendix 115.AA of the Massachusetts
Building Code, 780 CMR, the Stretch Energy Code, including future editions, amendments or
modifications thereto.
(adopted 5/4/2015)
ARTICLE 17. THE REMOVAL OF EARTH MATERIAL
SECTION 1. PURPOSE
The provisions of this Bylaw are intended:
? to regulate the extraction and transportation of earth from a SITE in order to manage soil
EROSION, SEDIMENTATION, drainage runoff, dust control and encroachment onto abutting
properties;
? to maintain traffic safety and circulation;
83
ARTICLE 17. THE REMOVAL OF EARTH MATERIAL
? to protect human health, public safety, welfare and the Towns natural resources that could be
adversely affected by such activities; and
? to prohibit the extraction, stripping or removal of EARTH for reasons that are not consistent with
this Bylaw.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS
ABUTTER - The owner of a property within 300 feet of the perimeter of the PARCEL(s) identified
in the application.
APPLICANT - The individual, corporation or other legal entity who makes the application for an
Earth Removal Permit. Such individual, corporation, or other legal entity may be the OWNER of the
SITE, or, with the written approval of the OWNER, the operator of the EARTH REMOVAL
OPERATION.
EARTH - All forms of natural earthen material, including but not limited to, decomposed organic
matter, LOAM, sand, gravel, clay, silt, peat, hard-pan, ledge, or rock or other geologic deposit
whether surficial or found in the subsurface.
EARTH REMOVAL OPERATION  The removal of EARTH from a SITE, by hand or machinery.
An EARTH REMOVAL OPERATION includes all activities associated with the removal, including,
but not limited to, the stripping of LOAM, topsoil, sod, and the digging, stockpiling, PROCESSING,
moving, depositing, or transportation of EARTH products in any form; and all aspects of the
operation inclusive of the moving of equipment required for the operation to, from, or within the
SITE, and all land affected by the operation (e.g. fill, or storage piles, access ways, or structures),
grading of slopes, removal of trees and vegetation anticipatory to the removal of EARTH, replanting
and all other activities required to mitigate the impacts of the EARTH REMOVAL OPERATION.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS
? Areas subject to the jurisdiction of either the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L.
Ch. 131 40), the Town of Stow Wetlands Protection Bylaw, or both;
? Floodplain as defined in Section 5.1 (Floodplain Overlay District) of the Town of Stow Zoning
Bylaw;
? Areas of Zone I or Zone II Public Water Supplies and Interim Wellhead Protection Areas as
designated by the Department of Environmental Protection;
? Areas located in the Town of Stow Water Resource Protection District; and
? Areas delineated as Priority or Estimated Habitats for Rare Species as defined by the
Massachusetts Natural Heritage and Endangered Species Program (NHESP).
EROSION  The process by which the ground surface is worn by forces such as wind, running water,
ice, abrasion, gravity, transportation or by artificial means.
LOAM - A soil consisting of a friable mixture of varying proportions of clay, sand, silt, and organic
matter.
84
ARTICLE 17. THE REMOVAL OF EARTH MATERIAL
PARCEL  A plot of land under single, joint, or several ownership defined by metes and bounds, or
boundary lines, and shown on a deed and/or plan recorded in the Middlesex District Registry of
Deeds or registered in the Land Court.
PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY - The Board of Selectmen is herein designated as the Permit
Granting Authority. In the event an EARTH REMOVAL OPERATION is also subject to an
application for a subdivision, special permit or site plan approval and is necessary and incidental for
the construction of ways and/or associated infrastructure, the PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY
shall be the Planning Board.
PRINCIPAL USE - The predominant and permitted use of a PARCEL.
PROCESSING - The sorting or separating of EARTH materials into distinct categories based on
particle size or type usually through the use of a screening process but not exclusively so.
PROCESSING includes mechanical stone crushing operations which create smaller sized stones or
stone products from larger sized stones, boulders, or particles typically using a rock crusher, or
similar machinery.
QUARRYING  The process of removing or extracting EARTH, by digging, cutting, blasting,
ripping or hammering, except for the collection of distinct particles (e.g. glacial erratics, boulders
and other discrete stone objects).
SEDIMENTATION - EARTH materials transported or deposited into any body of water, creek,
ravine, or other ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA, or onto the property of an adjacent
landowner or way, by the movement of wind, water, ice, gravity, or by artificial means.
SITE - A distinct portion of one PARCEL or contiguous PARCELs under the same ownership on
which an EARTH REMOVAL OPERATION is conducted, or is proposed to be conducted, under an
Earth Removal Permit. A SITE may not encompass land in another town or a street or way in which
the public has access.
SECTION 3. APPLICABILITY
3.1 Unless specifically exempted, a Permit is required for the removal of EARTH in conjunction
with a lawfully allowable use, provided that the PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY
determines that such earth removal is necessitated by the use and consistent with the
provisions of federal and state law, the Zoning Bylaw and this Bylaw.
3.2 Existing Operations
? Existing operations pursuant to a valid EARTH removal permit as of the adoption of this
Bylaw shall have the right to continue under the terms of that permit until its expiration
or request for modification. Permit renewal of existing permits and modification of
permits lawfully in existence as of November 16, 2015, shall comply with the
procedures and substantive requirements of this Bylaw and be subject to all terms and
conditions contained herein.
85
ARTICLE 17. THE REMOVAL OF EARTH MATERIAL
? The owner of an operation in existence at the time of the adoption of this Bylaw without
a permit shall, within ninety (90) days of adoption of this Bylaw, meet with the PERMIT
GRANTING AUTHORITY to discuss a process for development of a transition plan to
bring the SITE into compliance. The APPLICANT shall, in consultation with the
PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY, and the Towns Consultant (if the PERMIT
GRANTING AUTHORITY deems necessary), property OWNER (if not the
APPLICANT) and operator, develop such transition plan to bring the operation into
compliance with the Bylaw to the greatest extent possible. The EARTH REMOVAL
OPERATION shall have the right to continue if a transition plan shall be developed and
approved within twelve (12) months of the effective date of this Bylaw.
The APPLICANT shall be responsible for any fee deposit for consultant review of a
transition plan pursuant to M.G.L. Ch. 44 S. 53G.
3.3 Prohibited Operations
The following activities are prohibited:
? QUARRYING as a PRINCIPAL use;
? Removal of EARTH as a PRINCIPAL use; and
? Removal of earth for purposes unrelated to an allowed use as defined in the Stow Zoning
Bylaw.
3.4 Exemptions
The following EARTH REMOVAL OPERATIONs do not require an Earth Removal Permit,
provided that the EARTH REMOVAL OPERATION is not conducted, maintained and/or
left in a condition so as to alter the natural drainage flow beyond the property; or to cause
dust, silt soil or other materials to be deposited on adjacent properties; or to otherwise cause
nuisances, hazards, or other objectionable conditions detrimental to health, safety, or
property values in adjacent areas.
? Removal of EARTH from a PARCEL that involves fewer than 100 cubic yards in any 12
month period.
? Emergency projects, provided that the relevant local public safety department or Building
Commissioner provides written notice that such project is necessary for the protection of
the health or safety of the citizens of the Commonwealth and there is no time to get a
permit. In general the time limitation for performance of emergency work shall not
exceed 30 days. An Earth Removal Permit is required for any work performed beyond
30 days.
? Removal of EARTH associated with the installation or repair of septic systems, which
shall be governed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Environmental Code (Title 5,
310 CMR 15.00) and Stow Board of Health Regulations, provided the quantity of the
materials removed shall not exceed that displaced by installation of the septic system;
86
ARTICLE 17. THE REMOVAL OF EARTH MATERIAL
? Removal of EARTH associated with the installation of foundations for approved
structures and/or building additions, or swimming pools, which shall be governed by
Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 143 and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Building Code (780 CMR) and for which a building permit has been issued, provided the
quantity of materials removed shall not exceed that displaced by the portion of the
building or structure below grade;
? Removal of EARTH in the course of customary operations on existing agricultural land,
provided that written notification of the operation is provided to the PERMIT
GRANTING AUTHORITY or its designee prior to commencement of work and it can be
demonstrated that the agricultural establishment currently operates a farm business and
that the earth removal is necessary and incidental to the agricultural use of the property,
as defined M.G.L C. 128 et seq.
? Removal of EARTH brought onto a PARCEL from another location solely for
PROCESSING, as may be permitted under the Zoning Bylaw.
SECTION 4. RULES AND REGULATIONS
The PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY shall promulgate, adopt, and from time to time, amend
rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Bylaw or other applicable
provisions of the General Laws or local laws and regulations. Prior to any changes in the Rules and
Regulations, the PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY shall hold a public hearing thereon,
advertised in a public newspaper of general circulation in the Town no less than 7 days prior to the
day of the Public Hearing.
Such rules and regulations shall include as a minimum:
? the size, form, contents, style and number of copies of plans and specifications, which shall be
stamped by a registered engineer;
? performance standards for proposed EARTH REMOVAL OPERATIONs;
? requirements for the restoration of the SITE once excavation and EARTH removal activities
have ceased;
? the town boards or agencies from which the PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY may require
reports;
? application forms and fees;
? fee deposit for reviews by consultants pursuant to M.G.L. Ch. 44 S. 53G;
? provision for performance guarantee in order to secure performance of the APPLICANTS
obligations pursuant to the EARTH Removal Permit and this Bylaw; and
? transition plan for existing operations as described in Section 3.2 of this Bylaw.
87
ARTICLE 17. THE REMOVAL OF EARTH MATERIAL
SECTION 5. APPLICATION AND PUBLIC HEARING PROCESS
5.1 Pre-Submission Review - It is recommended that the APPLICANT contact the office of the
PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY to establish a time for pre-submission review with
staff of Town departments, committees and agencies to discuss submission requirements,
applicability and review processes, including but not limited to:
? Sequencing of other applicable permits, including Abbreviated Notice of Resource Area
Delineation and/or a Notice of Intent from the Conservation Commission; Special Permit
and/or Site Plan Approval from the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals; or other
permits as may be required by federal, state, or local agencies.
? Changes to the proposed SITE work that may avoid the need for the filing of an
application for EARTH REMOVAL OPERATION, or whether changes or alterations to
the proposed plans may minimize or mitigate the community and environmental impact
of the proposed work.
5.2 Application Filing - Any person seeking to obtain an Earth Removal Permit (hereinafter
referred to as the APPLICANT) shall file a petition with the PERMIT GRANTING
AUTHORITY. Each petition shall be completed on the proper forms and accompanied by
the information required by the PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY as set forth in its rules
and regulations.
No application for an EARTH Removal Permit shall be considered complete and shall not be
acted upon unless the Tax Collector of the Town of Stow has certified, pursuant to MGL Ch.
40 Section 57, that no debt is owed to the Town by the APPLICANT or owner.
In addition to the application fee, the APPLICANT shall be responsible for any fee deposit
for consultant reviews pursuant to M.G.L. Ch. 44 S. 53G.
All costs relating to legal notice publication and mailings shall be borne by the APPLICANT.
5.3 Reports from Town Boards or Agencies - The PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY shall
transmit one copy each to the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, Building Inspector,
Board of Health, Conservation Commission, Board of Selectmen, Highway Department, Fire
Department, Police Department, Historical Commission and other such board or agency
deemed necessary by the PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY for their written reports.
Comments from any such board or agency may be received up to the close of the public
hearing.
5.4 Applications for Related Permits and Joint Meetings - If the proposed EARTH Removal
Permit requires any other permit from the Town of Stow, the PERMIT GRANTING
AUTHORITY and other permit granting authority shall conduct reviews simultaneously, to
the extent feasible. Nothing in this section obviates the application process or public hearing
requirements as described in this Bylaw. The PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY may
reduce the application fee in the instance of simultaneous filings.
88
ARTICLE 17. THE REMOVAL OF EARTH MATERIAL
5.5 Restoration - All EARTH removal applications shall include a plan, including a financial
plan, for the restoration of the SITE once excavation and EARTH removal activities have
ceased. Depending on the scale of the operation, the PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY
shall require that restoration be implemented in its entirety at the termination of the removal
operation or in phases as operations cease on portions of a SITE. The PERMIT GRANTING
AUTHORITY shall review the restoration plan in consultation with its Consulting Engineer
and with the Conservation Commission. APPLICANTs are also encouraged to consult with
the Middlesex Conservation District and/or Natural Resources Conservation Service as they
develop proposed restoration plans. Restoration shall include the following:
? All surfaces shall be graded and/or stabilized by planting or other means to prevent short
and long term EROSION, control runoff, and reduce hazards at the SITE.
? Measures shall be taken to ensure that there is no standing water on the SITE and that
there is no off-SITE EROSION or SEDIMENTATION. The volume and rate of runoff
shall not increase from the pre-removal SITE conditions. An exception may be made
where a water feature is part of an approved restoration plan.
? All debris, stumps, slash, boulders and similar material shall be removed from the SITE
or disposed of in an approved location on SITE. Any on-SITE disposal areas shall be
covered with no less than two feet of soil (unless otherwise specified by the PERMIT
GRANTING AUTHORITY) prior to restoration and the locations of these areas shall be
shown on the as-built plan.
? Plantings shall be selected from native grassland, shrubland and tree species as needed to
both stabilize the SITE and screen it from view from public ways and waterways and by
abutting properties. The use of wildlife-friendly species is encouraged.
? The PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY may require the submittal of an as-built plan,
prepared by a registered engineer or land surveyor and demonstrating compliance with
the permit conditions and restoration plan.
5.6 Public Hearing - The PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY shall hold a public hearing, after
proper notification in accordance with the provisions of this Section, no later than sixty-five
(65) days after the filing of an application. The Public Hearing shall be advertised by the
PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY in a public newspaper of general circulation in the
Town, no less than 14 days prior to the day of the Public Hearing. In addition, copies of the
notice shall be sent by certified mail by the APPLICANT to all Parties in Interest at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the public hearing. Proof of notification to parties in
interest (certificate of mailing or certified mail receipts) shall be submitted to the PERMIT
GRANTING AUTHORITY no later than the commencement of the public hearing.
89
ARTICLE 17. THE REMOVAL OF EARTH MATERIAL
SECTION 6. DECISION
6.1 The permit shall be issued to the APPLICANT. If the APPLICANT is not the OWNER of
the land, the APPLICANT, shall demonstrate that they have the legal permission of the
OWNER to make an application and alter the SITE for EARTH REMOVAL OPERATION.
The decision of the PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY shall be made within ninety (90)
days following the date of the close of the public hearing and shall be deemed approved by a
majority vote of its members. The PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY shall have the
power to continue a public hearing if it finds that such continuance is necessary to obtain
additional information in order to make an informed decision.
? The required times for a public hearing and decision may be extended by written
agreement between the APPLICANT and the PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY.
? The PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY may act to issue an EARTH Removal Permit
with conditions, or may deny the application. If an application is denied, the findings for
denial shall be included in the decision.
? A copy of the issued EARTH Removal Permit or denial thereof shall be mailed or handdelivered
to the APPLICANT within ten (10) business days of the Boards final action.
? A copy of the EARTH Removal Permit shall be recorded by the Applicant in the Registry
of Deeds prior to commencement of work.
6.2 Mandatory Findings by PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY - The PERMIT
GRANTING AUTHORITY shall not issue an Earth Removal Permit unless it finds that such
earth removal is necessitated by the proposed use and development:
? is in conformance with the procedures, standards and conditions contained herein;
? is able to be conditioned in a manner consistent with the purpose and intent of this
Bylaw;
? will not be detrimental or injurious to abutting properties, neighborhoods, Town
amenities or ways utilized in the transport of EARTH from the SITE;
? provides sufficient mitigating measures to address any adverse impacts to
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS;
? will result in no redirection or increase in rate and volume of existing surface water
runoff onto abutting or downstream properties and ways;
? provides for safe vehicular and pedestrian passage and circulation on public and private
ways;
? will result in no SEDIMENTATION beyond the boundary line of the SITE;
? will comply with all requirements of EARTH Removal Rules and Regulations, unless
specifically waived by the PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY for good cause, and all
other applicable requirements of this Bylaw; and
? all other applicable permits for the proposed use have been applied for.
90
ARTICLE 17. THE REMOVAL OF EARTH MATERIAL
6.3 Conditions - Notwithstanding the Performance Standards outlined in the Rules and
Regulations for EARTH REMOVAL OPERATIONs, the PERMIT GRANTING
AUTHORITY shall impose such conditions, safeguards and limitations as it deems
appropriate to protect abutting properties or ways, the neighborhood, community amenities,
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS and the Town of Stow, including, but not
limited to:
? limitations on the hours of operation and duration of EARTH REMOVAL OPERATION
activities;
? limitations on the location of the EARTH REMOVAL OPERATION ACTIVITIES on
the SITE;
? requirement of mitigating equipment on trucks, including but not limited to suitable
coverage of payload, to prevent dust and contents from affecting abutting properties and
ways;
? limitations on truck routes and/or transportation of EARTH over public or private ways
which may cause undue injury to road surfaces;
? plans for roadway impact mitigation, including but not limited to improved aprons
and/or spill mitigation plans;
? setbacks from abutting dwellings, properties and/or ENVIRONMENTALLY
SENSITIVE AREAS;
? screening of parking areas or other parts of the premises from adjoining premises or from
the STREET by specified walls, FENCEs, plantings or other devices, including a
program of maintenance for said screening which will continue for the life of the
permitted use;
? continuing provision for adequate and legal disposal of all solid waste, sewage, REFUSE
and any other potential pollutant generated by EARTH REMOVAL OPERATION;
? inclusion of measures to ensure GROUND WATER protection, and to ensure the
proposed development will not result in no redirection or increase in rate and volume of
existing surface water runoff onto abutting or downstream properties and ways;
? provision of any necessary easements, restrictions or other rights necessary accommodate
existing uses and to carry out the project and/or the required conditions;
? the location of construction staging or stockpiling;
? regulation of number, design and location of access drives;
? provision for security and construction fencing;
? provision for phasing the EARTH REMOVAL OPERATION;
? provision for restoration of the SITE, including financial guarantees;
? provision for EROSION control measures to be in place and maintained;
? provision for the safety and convenience of vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
? provision for performance guarantee in order to secure performance of the
APPLICANTS obligations pursuant to the EARTH Removal Permit and this Bylaw;
? installation and certification of mechanical or other devices to limit present or potential
hazard to human health, safety, welfare or the environment resulting from smoke, odor,
particulate matter, toxic matter, fire or explosive hazard, glare, noise, vibration or any
other objectionable impact generated by any given use of land; and
? proof that all other applicable permits have been obtained.
91
ARTICLE 17. THE REMOVAL OF EARTH MATERIAL
6.4 Time Limitation on EARTH Removal Permit  EARTH Removal Permits shall lapse
within a period of time to be specified by the PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY,
depending on the scope of the project, not to exceed two years from the date of grant thereof.
The EARTH Removal Permit shall lapse if the EARTH REMOVAL OPERATION has not
commenced, except for good cause within one (1) year from the date of grant thereof.
No EARTH REMOVAL OPERATION activity shall occur after the lapse of an EARTH
Removal Permit.
SECTION 7. EXTENSION OR MODIFICATION OF EARTH REMOVAL PERMIT
7.1 Extension - A reasonable extension of said time, depending on the scope and phasing of the
EARTH REMOVAL OPERATION, but not more than two additional years, may be granted
by the PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY after a public hearing has been held where good
cause is shown. Any request to the PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY for such extension
of time shall be submitted to the PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY at least sixty (60)
days prior to the date when the EARTH Removal Permit is due to lapse. Failure to submit
such a request as prescribed herein shall be sufficient cause for the PERMIT GRANTING
AUTHORITY to deny the requested time extension.
Notification of any deficiencies found through said review shall be forwarded to the property
owner and EARTH Removal permit holder. Failure to rectify said deficiencies may result in
rescission of the EARTH Removal permit or other enforcement proceedings.
7.2 Modification - Upon request by the APPLICANT, the PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY
may, where good cause is shown, modify the EARTH Removal Permit and impose additional
conditions, as appropriate.
Criteria for approval of extension or modification applications may include, but not be limited to,
impacts to abutting properties, ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS, adherence to permit
conditions, number of permit violations, and actions taken to remedy said violations, and proposed
changes to operation of activity and any substantive changes in operations proposed for the coming
year of activity; and any additional information deemed necessary by the PERMIT GRANTING
AUTHORITY to make an informed decision.
Extension and Modification Applications are subject to notifications in accordance with Sections 5.6
(Reports from Town Boards and Agencies) and 5.3 (Public Hearings) of this Bylaw.
92
ARTICLE 17. THE REMOVAL OF EARTH MATERIAL
SECTION 8. PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
The PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY shall require a performance bond or other security in a
form satisfactory to the PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY which is sufficient to ensure
satisfactory performance of the requirements of the permit, including all phases of the EARTH
REMOVAL OPERATION and restoration of the SITE, restoration of any damage to public ways,
and any conditions imposed in the permit. Exceptions to this may be made only upon a written
finding by the PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY that a performance guarantee is not warranted.
After completion of the operation, and upon receipt of a written request, the PERMIT GRANTING
AUTHORITY) may grant a partial release of any security posted by the APPLICANT, owner or
operator. The remainder of the security shall be released one year after the operation has been
completed or expired, upon a final inspection and a finding that:
? removal and restoration has been completed in compliance with the permit and the standards and
requirements of this Bylaw;
? if required, the APPLICANT has submitted an as-built plan, prepared by a registered
professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth and approved by PERMIT GRANTING
AUTHORITY; and
? no deterioration of the SITE has occurred for a period of one year. During the year following the
partial release of the security, the APPLICANT shall be responsible for repairing any damage to
the SITE.
SECTION 9. INSPECTIONS
The PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY and/or its agent shall have the right to inspect any
permitted EARTH REMOVAL OPERATION for compliance with these conditions. The PERMIT
GRANTING AUTHORITY may require a deposit for periodic inspections of permitted EARTH
REMOVAL OPERATONs. Failure of an APPLICANT to pay an inspection fee pursuant to M.G.L.
Ch. 44 S. 53G shall be grounds for revocation of the permit.
The PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY, its agent or designee shall under the provisions of this
Bylaw, act to issue notices of violations(s), cease and desist orders or revoke or suspend any permit
for cause.
SECTION 10. ENFORCEMENT
The provisions of this Bylaw shall be enforced by the Building Commissioner and/or Police
Department in consultation with the PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY.
If the Building Commissioner and/or Police Department or PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY has
reason to believe that there has been a violation of this Bylaw or the terms of a permit issued by the
PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY, the Town shall give notice of the violation to the property
owner/operator by hand delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the record address
of the owner/operator as applicable. The notice shall require that operations immediately cease and
desist, and specify a time for compliance which may include the application for a permit, measures to
correct an imminent safety or health hazard and/or other measures. The notice may also assess a fine
to the owner pursuant to this bylaw.
93
ARTICLE 17. THE REMOVAL OF EARTH MATERIAL
Fines - The penalty for violation of this bylaw or an Earth Removal Permit shall be assessed to the
property owner at $200.00 for each offense.
Each truckload of EARTH removed from the SITE shall constitute a separate offense under this
Bylaw.
In addition to the penalties provided for above, the violation of any provision of this Bylaw or any
condition of a permit issued hereunder, may, at the discretion of the PERMIT GRANTING
AUTHORITY, be punishable by the immediate modification or revocation of the permit. No permit
shall be modified or revoked until the holder thereof has been given notice and an opportunity to be
heard by the PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY. A decision to modify or revoke a permit shall be
made in writing and within 30 days of the close of the hearing. Modification or revocation of a
permit shall not relieve the permit holder of the requirement to restore the SITE.
(Article 17 adopted November 16, 2015)
A true copy. Attest: Linda E. Hathaway
Town Clerk of Stow
TOWN OF STOW
STOW, MASSACHUSETTS
ZONING BYLAW
Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1. AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, DEFINITIONS
1.1 Authority ................................................................................................................... 4
1.2 Purpose.................................................................................................................... 4
1.3 Definitions ................................................................................................................ 4
SECTION 2. ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
2.1 Classification of Districts ........................................................................................ 15
2.2 Zoning Map ............................................................................................................ 15
2.3 Location of Boundaries of Districts ......................................................................... 15
SECTION 3. USE REGULATIONS
3.1 Recreation-Conservation District Uses ................................................................... 18
3.2 Residential District Uses ........................................................................................ 19
3.3 Business District Uses............................................................................................ 21
3.4 Compact Business District Uses ............................................................................ 22
3.5 Commercial District Uses ....................................................................................... 23
3.6 Industrial District Uses ........................................................................................... 25
3.7 Refuse Disposal District Uses ................................................................................ 26
3.8 General Use Regulations Pertaining to All Districts ................................................ 27
3.9 Non-Conforming Uses and Structures .................................................................... 33
3.10 Table of Principal Uses .......................................................................................... 37
3.11 Intentionally Left Blank .......................................................................................... 43
3.12 Intentionally Left Blank .......................................................................................... .43
SECTION 4. DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
4.1 Standard Dimensional Provisions ........................................................................... 43
4.2 Height Regulations ................................................................................................. 44
4.3 Area, Frontage, YARD, and FLOOR AREA Requirements ....................................... 45
4.4 Table of Dimensional Requirements ...................................................................... 47
4.5 Special Provisions and Exceptions to Dimensional Regulations ............................. 48
SECTION 5. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
5.1 Flood Plain District ................................................................................................ .49
5.2 Water Resource Protection District ........................................................................ 50
5.3 Wireless Service Facility District54
5.4 Active Adult Neighborhood District66
5.5 Registered Marijuana Dispensary ....71
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 6. GENERAL REGULATIONS
6.1 Hammerhead LOTs ................................................................................................ 75
6.2 Common Drive ....................................................................................................... 75
6.3 Signs ...................................................................................................................... 76
6.4 Trailers and Mobile Homes .................................................................................... 80
6.5 Earth Removal ....................................................................................................... 80
6.6 Fences ................................................................................................................... 80
SECTION 7. PARKING REGULATIONS
7.1 Purpose.................................................................................................................. 81
7.2 General Provisions ................................................................................................. 81
7.3 Schedule of Minimum Parking  General Requirements ........................................ 82
7.4 Off-Street Loading Areas ....................................................................................... 85
7.5 Standard Parking Dimensional Regulations ........................................................... 85
7.6 Small Car Stalls ...................................................................................................... 85
7.7 Off-Street Parking and Loading Area Design Requirements .................................. 86
7.8 Structured Parking .................................................................................................................................................................................................. 88
SECTION 8. SPECIAL REGULATIONS
8.1 ACCESSORY APARTMENTs ................................................................................ 89
8.2 Duplex Residential Uses ........................................................................................ 90
8.3 Cross Country Ski Uses ......................................................................................... 91
8.4 Golf Course Uses ................................................................................................... 91
8.5 Planned Conservation Development (PCD) ........................................................... 92
8.6 Phasing of Growth................................................................................................ 101
8.7 INDEPENDENT ADULT LIVING RESIDENCEs ................................................... 106
8.8 Intentionally Left Blank ........................................................................................ 111
8.9 Inclusion of Affordable Housing ............................................................................ 111
8.10 COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY
INSTALLATIONs.................................................................................................. 113
SECTION 9. ADMINISTRATION
9.1 Board of Appeals.................................................................................................. 118
9.2 Special Permits .................................................................................................... 118
9.3 Site Plan Approval ................................................................................................ 121
9.4 Procedures ........................................................................................................... 126
9.5 Planning Board Associate Member ...................................................................... 126
9.6 Enforcement ......................................................................................................... 126
9.7 Amendment .......................................................................................................... 127
9.8 Validity ................................................................................................................. 127
9.9 Exemptions  Religious, Educational, Agricultural or Municipal Uses ................... 127
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 3
SECTION 10. TEMPORARY MORATORIUM ON RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
10.1 Purpose.....127
10.2 Definition....128
10.3 Temporary Moratorium....128
10.4 Planning Process..128
Appendix
History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments .............................................................................129
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 4
SECTION 1
AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, DEFINITIONS
1.1 Authority
The Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw is adopted under Chapter 40A of the General Laws (the
Zoning Act) and Article 89 of the Amendments to the Constitution (the Home Rule
Amendment).
1.2 Purpose
The purposes of this Zoning Bylaw are to regulate the use of land, BUILDINGs, and
structures to the full extent of the constitutional and statutory powers of the Town to protect
the health, safety and general welfare of present and future inhabitants, including but not
limited to the following purposes: to preserve the environmental resources of the Town; to
maintain open spaces by recognizing the concern for irretrievable loss of farm, wetlands
and woodlands while respecting the rights of landowners; to encourage the most
appropriate use of land through a proper balance of residential, commercial and industrial
designations; to preserve the historical and cultural characteristics of the Town; to achieve
housing choices and a range of housing costs; and to induce its citizens to remain in the
community, thus providing a sense of history and continuity.
1.3 Definitions
The words defined in this section shall be capitalized throughout the Bylaw. Where a
defined word has not been capitalized, it is intended that the meaning of the word be the
same as the meaning ascribed to it in this section unless another meaning is clearly
intended by its context.
Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include
the plural and words in the plural number include the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory
and not directory; the word "LOT" includes the word "plot", the word "land" includes the
words "marsh" and "water".
ACCESS DRIVEWAY - The travel lane that allows motor vehicles ingress from the street
and egress from the site and includes the area
between the edge of street pavement to the area
within the LOT where the ACCESS DRIVEWAY is
no longer within the minimum parking area setback
required under the Parking Section of the Zoning
Bylaw.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 5
ACCESSORY APARTMENT:
? A second DWELLING UNIT located within a structure constructed as a detached
one-family DWELLING, subordinate in size to the principal DWELLING UNIT and
separated from it in a manner that maintains the appearance of the structure as a
one-family unit; or
? A second DWELLING UNIT located within a separate structure, such as a barn,
garage or shed, that is clearly subordinate to the principal DWELLING UNIT.
ACCESSORY BUILDING - A detached BUILDING, which is located on the same LOT with
the main BUILDING or USE and which is subordinate and customarily incidental to the
USE of the main BUILDING or the land.
ACTIVE ADULT NEIGHBORHOOD (AAN) - A group of DWELLING UNITS for only adult
residents of which at least one resident per DWELLING UNIT is 55 years of age or older.
Such developments shall have this age restriction as part of the deed or other documents
of record and running with the land for the dwellings and/or property and are permitted as
exception to the Fair Housing Act pursuant to 42 USC Section 3607 B.2.c.
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT - A DWELLING UNIT the value of which is determined by
the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) to be affordable by a low
income or moderate income family and thus to be included in DHCD's Subsidized Housing
Inventory of low income or moderate income housing DWELLING UNITS for the purposes
of compliance with the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40B,  20-23.
AQUIFER - A geologic formation, group of geologic formations, or part of a geologic
formation that contains sufficient saturated permeable material to yield significant quantities
of water to wells and springs.
AREA OF SIGN:
? The area of a sign shall include all lettering and accompanying designs and
symbols, together with the background on which they are displayed.
? The area of a sign consisting of individual letters or symbols shall be the area of the
smallest rectangle or triangle which encompasses all the letters and symbols.
? The area of a three-dimensional form sign shall be the area of the four vertical
faces of a cube which encompasses the form.
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT - A private DWELLING with an on-site
manager where no more than eight rooms are let and a breakfast is included in the daily
rate.
BED AND BREAKFAST HOME - A private owner-occupied DWELLING where three or
fewer rooms are let and a breakfast is included in the rent.
BUILDING - A structure having a roof or cover for the shelter, support, or enclosure of
persons, animals, or property.
BUILDING INSPECTOR - The existing Inspector of Buildings under the State Building
Code or other designated authority, or his duly authorized representative, appointed by the
Selectmen, and charged with the enforcement of this Bylaw.
BUILDING LOT - A BUILDING LOT is that area of land described in an application for a
building permit or an application to the Board of Appeals for a permit or a variance, or
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 6
otherwise defined as the area on which a structure is to be constructed or a use is to be
carried on. A BUILDING LOT shall not include any part of a street. A corner LOT shall be
any LOT abutting on two (2) or more streets at their intersection.
CHILD CARE FACILITY - A day care of school-age child care center or program as defined
in Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40A.
COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION - A
solar photovoltaic system that is structurally mounted on the ground and is not roofmounted,
and has a minimum NAMEPLATE CAPACITY of 250 kW DC. A COMMERCIAL
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION shall be considered a
Principal Use as the Zoning Bylaw defines that phrase.
DEVELOPABLE SITE AREA - The DEVELOPABLE SITE AREA of existing or proposed
LOT(s) shall be calculated by subtracting from the LOT area all land, which is located in:
? a wetland, which shall mean a "freshwater wetland" as defined in Chapter
131,Section 40 of the Massachusetts General Laws and the Stow Wetlands
Protection Bylaw, Article 9 of the Stow General Bylaws;
? a Flood Plain District as defined in the Stow Zoning Bylaw;
? another zoning district in which the principal use of the LOT is not also permitted;
and
? an access or right of way easement.
DIRECT LIGHT -Light that reaches a location from a light source or some part of the fixture
containing the source, rather than reflecting off an illuminated surface. Light from filaments
or other sources, surrounding glass, reflectors, diffusers, or similar components is DIRECT
LIGHT. Light arriving from illuminated ground is not direct light.
DWELLING - Any BUILDING, or part thereof, used for habitation for one (1) or more
persons, but not including commercial accommodations for transient occupancy or trailers
or mobile homes, however mounted.
DWELLING UNIT - One (1) or more rooms for cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities
arranged for the use of one (1) or more persons living together as a single
housekeeping unit, but not for more than five (5) persons unrelated by blood or marriage.
ERECTED - Attached, constructed, reconstructed, altered, enlarged or moved. ERECTED
shall not mean repainted, cleaned, repaired or maintained. Altered includes changes in the
structure or lettering or symbols of the sign, or replacement.
EXISTING CONDITIONS - As referred to in this Bylaw means conditions in existence on
the date the first publication of notice of this Bylaw appears in accordance with Chapter
40A, Sections 5 and 6 of the Massachusetts General Laws.
EXTERIOR LIGHT - Any luminaire (light fixture) that is either not within a structure having a
substantially opaque roof or is installed so that more than half the light output shines
outside. A permanently-installed fixture in a screen- or glass-enclosed porch that is not
normally climate-controlled or in a greenhouse or similar structure shall be considered an
exterior light.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME - A FAMILY DAY CARE HOME as defined in the
Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40A.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 7
FENCE - A structure made of wood, wire, metal or other durable material ERECTED so as
to serve as an enclosure or a barrier against unobstructed passage from one side to
another.
FLOOR AREA - The interior FLOOR AREA exclusive of basements, stair wells, halls,
bathrooms, corridors, attics, walls, partitions, porches and attached ACCESSORY
BUILDINGs.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS - The sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of a
BUILDING measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a
common wall, but not including any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six
feet.
FLOOR AREA, NET - The sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of a BUILDING,
measured from the interior face of the exterior walls or common wall, but not including
stairwells, elevator wells, bathrooms, hallways and corridors, designated and approved
building service areas and areas used for a CHILD CARE FACILITY as defined in this
Bylaw, provided that such CHILD CARE FACILITY is accessory to a principal use located
in the same BUILDING or on the same LOT.
FLOOR AREA RATIO - The ratio of the sum of the GROSS FLOOR AREA of all
BUILDINGS on a LOT to the DEVELOPABLE SITE AREA of the LOT.
FULL-CUTOFF FIXTURE - A luminaire having a light distribution where zero candela
intensity occurs at an angle of 90 degrees above nadir, and at all greater angles from nadir.
Additionally, the candela per 1,000 lamp lumens does not numerically exceed 100 (10
percent) at or above a vertical angle of 80 degrees above nadir. This applies to all lateral
angles around the luminaire. This kind of luminaire emits no light above the horizontal.
GARAGE, PRIVATE - Covered space for the housing of motor vehicles, but not for the
rental of more than two (2) stalls for commercial repair or commercial storage.
GROUND WATER - All water beneath the surface of the ground.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL - A substance which because of quantity, concentration or
physical or chemical characteristics poses a hazard to human health, safety, welfare or the
environment, when improperly treated, stored, transported, used or disposed, or otherwise
managed; this includes but is not limited to any substance set forth or deemed a
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 21C and 21E, 310
CMR 30.00 of the Code of Massachusetts Regulations or pursuant to any Bylaws or
regulations of the Town of Stow.
HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION - The corporation, trust, or association owned by the unit
owners within a Development and used by them to manage and regulate their affairs,
including any commonly owned land or facilities.
HOTEL, INN, MOTEL, TOURIST HOME or LODGING HOUSE - A BUILDING, or portion
thereof, or a group of BUILDINGs on a single LOT, intended to be used for the temporary
occupancy of three (3) or more persons who are lodged, with or without meals, and in
which major provision for cooking may be made in a central kitchen but may not be in the
individual room or suites.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 8
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE - A surface impenetrable by water.
INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCE - Any entity, however organized, which meets all of
the following criteria: Provides room and/or board in a residential living environment;
provides services to residents who do not require 24-hour skilled nursing care, but need
assistance with activities of daily living; and in any event collects payments for the provision
of these services.
INDEPENDENT ADULT UNIT - One (1) or more rooms for cooking, living, sanitary and
sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one (1) or more persons living together as a
single housekeeping unit contained within an INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCE.
INITIAL DESIGN LIGHT OUTPUT - The luminous output of a fixture as determined by
specifications of the fixture and lamps (bulbs) that are installed in it, rather than by
measuring the actual light output.
INTERIOR DRIVEWAY - A travel lane located within the LOT which is not used to directly
enter or leave parking spaces. An INTERIOR DRIVEWAY shall not include any part of the
ACCESS DRIVEWAY.
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET - An off-street space or berth, on the same LOT with a
BUILDING, for the temporary parking of vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise
or material, and which has access to a street, alley or other appropriate means of ingress
or egress.
LOT - An area of land, undivided by any STREET, in one ownership with definitive
boundaries ascertainable from the most recently recorded deed or plan which is 1) a deed
recorded in Middlesex South District Registry of Deeds, or 2) a Certificate of Title issued by
the Land Court and registered in the Land Court section of such Registry, or 3) title or
record disclosed by any and all pertinent public documents or otherwise established by
determination of a court. A corner LOT shall be any LOT abutting on two (2) or more
streets at their intersection.
MANEUVERING AISLE - A travel lane located within the perimeter of a parking area by
which motor vehicles directly enter and leave parking spaces.
MARINA - A public or commercial area with docking facilities for one (1) or more of the
following: the launching, docking, storage, or servicing of pleasure boats; docks or related
structures for the sale of fuel, boats, or marine accessories.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 9
MARIJUANA - All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds
thereof; and resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include
the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the
seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom, fiber, oil, or cake or
the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. MARIJUANA also
includes MARIJUANA-INFUSED PRODUCTS (MIPs) except where the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
MARIJUANA-INFUSED PRODUCT (MIP) - A product infused with MARIJUANA that is
intended for use or consumption, including but not limited to edible products, ointments,
aerosols, oils, and tinctures. These products, when created or sold by an RMD, shall not be
considered a food or a drug as defined in M.G.L. c. 94,  1.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTER  A not-for-profit entity registered under
105 CMR 725.100, to be known as a REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY (RMD),
that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes (including development of related products
such as edible MIPs, tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments), transfers, transports, sells,
distributes, dispenses, or administers MARIJUANA, products containing MARIJUANA,
related supplies, or educational materials to registered qualifying patients or their personal
caregivers, as those terms are defined under 105 CMR 725.004. Unless otherwise
specified, RMD refers to the site(s) of dispensing, cultivation, and preparation of
MARIJUANA
MEDICAL USE OF MARIJUANA: The acquisition, cultivation, possession, processing
(including development of related products such as tinctures, aerosols, or ointments),
transfer, transportation, sale, distribution, dispensing, or administration of MARIJUANA, for
the benefit of qualifying patients in the treatment of debilitating medical conditions, or the
symptoms thereof, as those terms are defined under 105 CMR 725.004.
MEMBERSHIP CLUB - A private, non-profit organization, BUILDING or grounds, to include
specifically country clubs and fraternities and other organizations to which membership is
limited or controlled.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING - A BUILDING for residential USE, other than a DWELLING
conversion or ACCESSORY APARTMENT, containing more than one DWELLING UNIT
but not more than 4 DWELLING UNITs.
NAMEPLATE CAPACITY  The maximum rated output of electric power production of the
photovoltaic system in Direct Current (DC).
NON-CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES and LOTS - A NON-CONFORMING USE,
STRUCTURE or LOT shall be defined in Chapter 40A, Section 6 of the General Laws.
ON-SITE SIGN - A SIGN pertaining to products or activities located or offered at the same
location as the SIGN.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 10
OPEN LAND  An area of land within a PLANNED CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT
preserved in perpetuity exclusively for the purposes set forth in Section 8.5.14 (Open Land
Requirements) of the Zoning Bylaw.
OPEN SPACE  An area of natural or landscaped vegetated growth. This may include
within said area recreation areas, playing fields, benches, trails, footpaths, bodies of water
and certain other surfaces such as gravel, cobblestone, brick, pavers or other similar
materials when used to construct permeable walkways as may be approved by the Special
Permit Authority or Site Plan Approval Authority.
PARKING STALL LENGTH - The longitudinal dimension of the stall measured parallel to
the angle of parking.
PARKING STALL WIDTH - The linear dimension measured across the stall and parallel to
the MANEUVERING AISLE.
PERMANENT SIGN - Any sign other than a temporary sign.
PLANNED CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT (PCD)  A development of land that
adheres to the following process: (a) determines the amount of development allowed upfront
by by a PROOF PLAN; (b) requires a PLANNED CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT
DESIGN PROCESS to identify the significant natural, cultural, agricultural, and historic
features of the land; (c) concentrates development, through design flexibility and reduced
dimensional requirements, in order to preserve those features; and (d) permanently
preserves at least sixty percent of the gross area of the proposed PCD locus, which shall
include all parcels of land that are to be developed, preserved or otherwise altered in
accordance with Section 8.5 (Planned Conservation Development) of the Zoning Bylaw.
PLANNED CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT DESIGN PROCESS  A process for
designing the PCD site plan undertaken by appropriate professionals in fields including, but
not limited to, landscape architecture, urban design, engineering and environmental
science, which documents the chronological process for designing a PCD as described in
Section 8.5.5 (Design Process) of the Zoning Bylaw, through the identification of
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 11
conservation areas, locating the dwelling sites, determining the layout of streets and trails
and drawing in the lot lines, in the order so described..
PRIMARY CONSERVATION RESOURCES  Areas of a potentially developable parcel that
are protected or where development is limited by federal, state or local law or private
restriction as stated in the deed of said parcel(s), including, without limitation:
? Easements, not limited to conservation, preservation or agricultural use easements or
restrictions; aquifer or public water supply easements or restrictions, including Zone 1
and A around public water supplies; and similar covenants and restrictions.
? Areas of lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, brooks, vernal pools and wetlands, including the
35 foot no disturb buffer as may be amended, and as determined by the Conservation
Commission in response to a formal Abbreviated Notice of Resource Delineation
Application, and all wetland resource areas as defined in G.L. c. 131, s.40 and the
Town of Stow Wetland Bylaw.
? Floodplains as defined in Section 5.1 (Floodplain Overlay District) of the Zoning Bylaw.
PROCESS WASTES - Nondomestic, nontoxic, nonhazardous, liquid or solid waste byproducts
associated with the manufacture or preparation of a product, including but not
limited to hardware, dry goods, foodstuffs and printed material.
PROOF PLAN  A plan showing the approximate layout of LOTs under a conventional
subdvision plan pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Rules and Regulations and
Zoning Bylaw, including PRIMARY CONSERVATION RESOURCES, that would otherwise
apply under the given site limitations without the benefit of Planned Conservation
Development standards pursuant to Section 8.5 (Planned Conservation Development) of
the Zoning Bylaw..
PUBLIC STREETLIGHT - An exterior light shining primarily onto a STREET, which is both
authorized by the Board of Selectmen and paid for from the Town budget or which is
required by the Planning Board.
QUALIFIED AFFORDABLE HOUSING PURCHASER - An individual or family with
household incomes that do not exceed 80% of the median income (this shall be referred to
as "moderate income") or 50% of the median income (this shall be referred to as "low
income"), with adjustments for household size, as reported by the most recent information
from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and/or the
Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD).
RECHARGE AREA - An area in which water is absorbed that eventually reaches the zone
of saturation in one or more AQUIFERs.
REFUSE - All solid or liquid waste materials, including garbage and rubbish, but not
including sewage.
REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY (RMD) - has the same meaning as MEDICAL
MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTER.
ROOMING or BOARDING HOUSE - A BUILDING or premises, other than a HOTEL, INN,
MOTEL, tourist court, or LODGING HOUSE, where rooms are let and where meals may be
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 12
regularly served by prearrangement for compensation; not open to transient guests; in
contrast to HOTELs, restaurants, and TOURIST HOMEs, open to transients.
SANITARY WASTES - Waste waters arising from ordinary domestic water use from toilets,
sinks and bathing facilities and containing normal wastes. For purposes of this Bylaw, all
references to disposable volume(s) of sanitary wastes refer to design standards as outlined
in Title V of the State Environmental Code (310 CMR 15.00).
SECONDARY CONSERVATION RESOURCES  Areas of a potentially developable parcel
that contain valuable natural, historical or cultural resources, including but not limited to:
- Specimen trees
- Stone walls
- Prime farmland soils or soils of statewide importance as defined by the Natural
Resource Conservation Service.
- Significant geological features, including but not limited to, eskers, exposed ledge and
significant boulders.
- Mature and/or unfragmented woodlands
- Meadows
- Historical and archeological sites
- Core Habitat, Critical Natural Landscapes, and Priority Natural Communities as
defined by the Massachusetts Natural Heritage and Endangered Species Program
- Agricultural fields
- Slopes of 20% or greater
- One hundred foot wetland buffer
- Open scenic vistas as defined in the Open Space and Recreation Plan in effect at the
Time of the Application
- Missing segments of the Stow Emerald Necklas Trail as defined in the Open Space
and Recreation Plan
- Land adjacent to existing conserved parcels
- Areas with a high Index of Ecological Integrity as defined by the Conservation
Assessment and Prioritization System developed by the UMASS Landscape Ecology
Lab.
SIGN - Any words, lettering, parts of letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences,
emblems, devices, designs, trade names, or trademarks, whether stationary or portable, by
which anything is made known, such as are used to designate or locate an individual, a
firm, an association, a corporation, a profession, a business, or a commodity or product,
which are visible from a public or private street or right-of-way and used to attract attention.
SLOPE - For the purposes of the erosion control provision, slope shall be measured using
the two-foot contours on the topographic map supplied with the site plans. The slope
percentage will be the change in elevation divided by the shortest distance between two
contour lines. Upon written permission of the permit granting authority, slope percentages
may be averaged across specified horizontal distances.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 13
SOLID WASTES - Any discarded solid material, putrescible or non-putrescible, consisting
of all combustible and noncombustible solid material including, but not limited to, garbage
and rubbish.
STREET - A street shall be (1) an approved public way laid out by the Town of Stow, or
Middlesex County Commissioners, or the Commonwealth of Massachusetts; or (2) A way
which the Stow Town Clerk certifies is maintained by public authority and used as a public
way; or (3) a public or private way shown on a plan theretofore approved and endorsed in
accordance with the Subdivision control Law; or (4) a way in existence as of June 15, 1956
having in the opinion of the Planning Board sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate
construction to accommodate the vehicle traffic anticipated by reason of the proposed use
of the land abutting thereon or served thereby and for the installation of municipal services
to serve such land and the building erected or to be erected thereon. A public or private
way shall not be deemed to be a STREET as to any lot of land that does not have rights of
access and passage over said way.
STREET LINE - The dividing line between a street and a LOT and, in the case of a public
way, the street line established by the public authority laying out the way upon which the
LOT abuts.
STRUCTURE - Any construction, erection, assemblage or other combination of materials
upon the land, necessitating pilings, footings or a foundation for attachment to the land,
swimming pools which require a permit under the Building Code and parking lots,
driveways, road and septic systems.
TEMPORARY SIGN - Any SIGN which is displayed for a continuous period of not more
than twenty-one (21) days and not replaced by a SIGN of a similar intent within sixty (60)
days.
TRACT OF LAND - An area consisting of a single LOT or parcel of land, or several
contiguous lots or parcels of land.
TRAILER or MOBILE HOME - TRAILER or MOBILE HOME shall mean any vehicle or
object which is drawn by or used in connection with a motor vehicle and which is so
designed and constructed or added to by means of such accessories as to permit the use
and occupancy thereof for human habitation, whether resting on wheels, jacks, or other
foundations. It shall include the type of vehicle commonly known as MOBILE HOME,
containing complete electrical, plumbing, and sanitary facilities and designed to be installed
on a temporary or permanent foundation for permanent living quarters.
USE, ACCESSORY - Any USE which is incidental and subordinate to a PRINCIPAL USE.
USE, PRINCIPAL - The main or primary USE of any land or LOT.
WALL - A STRUCTURE of stone, masonry, wood or other durable material constructed so
as to retain soils or to serve as an enclosure or barrier against unobstructed passage from
one side to another.
YARD - An OPEN SPACE, other than an enclosed court, on the same LOT with a
BUILDING or group of BUILDINGs, which OPEN SPACE lies between the BUILDING or
group of BUILDINGs and a LOT line, and is not occupied or obstructed from the ground
upward by a BUILDING or a STRUCTURE.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 14
YARD, FRONT - A YARD extending across the full width of the LOT and lying between the
STREET LINE of the LOT and the nearest line of the BUILDING. The depth of a front yard
shall be the minimum distance between the BUILDING and front LOT line.
YARD, REAR - A YARD extending across the full width of the LOT and lying between the
BUILDING and the REAR LOT line.
YARD, SIDE - A YARD between the side LOT line of the LOT and the nearest line of the
BUILDING, and extending from the FRONT YARD to the REAR YARD, or, in the absence
of either such YARDS, to the front or rear LOT lines, as may be. The width of a SIDE
YARD shall be the minimum distance between the BUILDING and the side LOT line.
YIELD  The allowable number of residential LOTs in a PLANNED CONSERVATION
DEVELOPMENT determined by an approved PROOF PLAN.
ZONE OF SATURATION - The subsurface zone occurring below the water table where the
soil pores are filled with water and the moisture content equals the porosity.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 15
SECTION 2
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
2.1 Classification of Districts
For the purposes of this Bylaw, the Town of Stow is divided into the following zoning
districts and overlay districts:
2.1.1 Zoning Districts
Recreation-Conservation District
Residential District
Business District
Compact Business District
Commercial District
Industrial District
Refuse Disposal District
2.1.2 Overlay Districts
Flood Plain District
Water Resource Protection District
Wireless Service Facility District
Active Adult Neighborhood District
REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY District
2.2 Zoning Map
Said districts are hereby established as shown, located, defined and bounded on a map
entitled "Town of Stow Zoning District Map", prepared by Metropolitan Area Planning
Council dated May 1, 1995 and amended May 12, 2015 and filed with the office of the
Town Clerk; which map shall also constitute an index map of all zoning districts, and
together with all the maps referred to in Section 2.3 and all explanatory matter thereon shall
constitute the Zoning Map of the Town, herein incorporated by reference and made a part
of this Bylaw.
2.3 Location of Boundaries of Districts:
2.3.1 Where the boundary lines are shown upon said map within the STREET LINES or utility
transportation lines, the center lines of such rights-of-way or lines shall be the boundary
lines unless otherwise indicated.
2.3.2 Boundary lines located outside of such STREET LINES or transmission lines, and shown
approximately parallel thereto, shall be regarded as parallel to such lines, and dimensions
shown in figures placed upon said map between such boundary lines and such
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 16
transmission lines are the distance in feet of such boundary lines from the center line of
such lines, such distances being measured at right angles to such lines unless otherwise
indicated.
2.3.3 Where the boundary lines are shown approximately on the location of property or LOT
lines, and the exact location of property, LOT or boundary lines is not indicated by means
of dimensions shown in figures, then the property or LOT lines shall be the boundary
lines in existence and as recorded at the time of the adoption of or amendment to the
Zoning Map.
2.3.4 Contour lines used as boundary lines are the elevation above the datum mean sea level
as indicated by the U. S. Geological Survey map dated 1952.
2.3.5 Soil association lines used as boundary lines are the soil association boundary lines as
shown on the Soil Association Map, prepared by the U. S. Soil Conservation Service,
dated 1964, on file with the Planning Board.
2.3.6 In all cases which are not covered by other provisions of this Section, the location of
boundary lines shall be determined by the distance in feet, if given, from other lines upon
said map, by the use of identifications as shown on the map, or by the scale of said map.
2.3.7 Intentionally left blank.
2.3.8 Boundary lines outlining the Flood Plain shall include all lands designated in the following
maps and reports. In the event there is a discrepancy in the flood plain boundary
designation, the boundary that includes a larger area of flood plain shall apply.
Boundary lines outlining the flood plain of the Assabet River shall be the limits of the
Standard Project Flood Modified delineated on the plan entitled "Flood Plains &
Profiles", sheets 2, 3, and 4 of the Assabet River Technical Report, Department of the
Army, Corps of Engineers, dated June, 1966 and on file with the Town Clerk.
Boundary lines outlining the flood plain of Heath Hen Meadow Brook shall be the limits of
the 100-year design storm flood plain delineated on the plan entitled "Flood Plain - Plan
and Profile Heath Hen Meadow Brook, Stow, Massachusetts", by BSC Engineering, Inc.,
dated February 21,1975, revised May 2, 1975, and on file with the Town Clerk.
All special flood hazard areas within the Town of Stow designated as Zone A and AE on
the Middlesex County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood
Insurance Program. The map panels of the Middlesex County FIRM that are wholly or
partially within the Town of Stow are panel numbers 25017C0333F, 25017C0334F,
25017C0341F, 25017C0342F, 25017C0343F, 25017C0344F, 25017C0353F,
25017C0354F, 25017C0361F and 25017C0363F dated July 7, 2014. The exact
boundaries of the District shall be defined by the 100-year base flood elevations shown
on the FIRM and further defined by the Middlesex County Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
report dated July 7, 2014. The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by reference
and are on file with the Town Clerk and Planning Board.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 17
2.3.9 Where the limit of the Standard Project Flood Modified, referenced above, is used as a
district boundary, the district boundary shall be determined by the elevations delineated
on said plan.
2.3.10 The boundaries of the Water Resource Protection District are as delineated on a map
entitled "Water Resource Protection District Map - Town of Stow, Massachusetts" dated
May 1, 1987, at a scale of 1 inch = 800 feet, on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
2.3.11 The boundaries of the Wireless Service Facility District are as delineated on a map
entitled "Wireless Service Facility District - Town of Stow, Massachusetts" dated January
23, 2001, at a scale of 1 inch = 1,000 feet, on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
2.3.12 The boundaries of the Active Adult Neighborhood District are as delineated on a map
entitled "Active Adult Neighborhood District - Town of Stow, Massachusetts" dated May
13, 2002, at a scale of 1 inch = 800 feet, on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
2.3.13 The boundaries of the REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY District are as
delineated on a map entitled Registered Marijuana Dispensary Overlay District  Town
of Stow, Massachusetts dated May 5, 2014, on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 18
SECTION 3
USE REGULATIONS
3.1 Recreation-Conservation District Uses
This district is intended to protect the public health and safety, to protect persons and
property against hazards of flood water inundation and unsuitable and unhealthy
development of unsuitable soils, wetlands, marsh land and water courses; to protect the
balance of nature, including the habitat for birds, wildlife, and plants essential to the
survival of man; to conserve and increase the amenities of the Town, natural conditions
and OPEN SPACES for education, recreation, agriculture, and the general welfare.
3.1.1 Uses allowed, provided that no BUILDINGs are located within one hundred (100) feet of
a district boundary line:
3.1.1.1 Conservation areas for water, water supply, plants, and wildlife, dams necessary for
achieving this purpose;
3.1.1.2 Farming and horticulture, including raising, harvesting and storing crops, truck
gardening, grazing, dairying, and poultry and livestock raising, but not including
piggeries or the raising of animals for fur;
3.1.1.3 Orchards, nurseries, forests and tree farms, provided that any logging equipment or
other equipment necessary for these uses is normally stored in an enclosure, or is not
visible from district or property boundaries;
3.1.1.4 Non-commercial recreation, including municipal cross c ountry ski areas, county or
state parks and boat landings, but not an amusement park; and
3.1.1.5 Display and sale or offering for sale, of farm produce from uses permitted in
paragraphs 3.1.1.2 and 3.1.1.3 above, and products normally sold therewith, provided
that:
1. At least 51% of gross annual sales is from produce raised by the owner, operator
or lessee of the stand, and at least 90% of gross annual sales is from farm
produce;
2. No stand for such sale is located within twenty-five (25) feet of the street sideline;
and
3. Provision is made for off-street parking in accordance with the Parking Section of
this Bylaw.
3.1.1.6 ACCESSORY BUILDINGs and USES
3.1.1.7 Uses or structures for religious purposes or for educational purposes on land owned
or leased by the commonwealth or any of its agencies, subdivisions or bodies politic
or by a religious sect or denomination, or by a nonprofit educational corporation;
provided that such use or structure complies with the dimensional requirements of the
Bylaw and is not primarily used as a residential dwelling.
3.1.1.8 Uses or structures by a PUBLIC SERVICE CORPORATION pursuant to the
requirements of G.L. c.40A, s.3.
3.1.2 Uses permitted subject to special permit, granted by the Planning Board, provided that
provisions for disposal of waste products is approved by the Board of Health and parking
is provided as required in the parking section of this Bylaw:
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 19
3.1.2.1 Restaurants, provided that their use is in connection with a permitted use, and
provided that no such BUILDING be located within one hundred (100) feet of a district
boundary line;
3.1.2.2 Country Clubs or other MEMBERSHIP CLUBs;
3.1.2.3 Commercial picnic areas and swimming areas;
3.1.2.4 Day camps, overnight camps, and camp sites, where occupancy is limited to the
period between May 15th and September 15th, provided that there is only one camp
BUILDING or site for each 3500 square feet of grass area;
3.1.2.5 Recreation, including golf courses, ski areas and tows, MARINAs and commercial
boat landings, but not an amusement park.
3.1.2.6 Golf carts, but no other motorized recreational vehicles are permitted.
3.1.2.7 COMMERCIIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIIC RENEWABLE ENERGY IINSTALLATIIONs..
3.2 Residential District Uses
The Residential District is intended as a district for typical rural, single-family residential
and non-commercial uses.
3.2.1 Uses permitted:
3.2.1.1 Conservation areas, farming and horticulture, orchards, nurseries, forests, and tree
farms, display and sale, or offering for sale, of farm produce, all as permitted in the
Recreation-Conservation District;
3.2.1.2 Single-family detached BUILDINGs;
3.2.1.3 BOARDING HOUSES or ROOMING HOUSES for not more than two (2) persons,
provided that the house is also occupied as a private residence by the owner;
3.2.1.4 Playgrounds where approved as part of a subdivision plan;
3.2.1.5 Keeping of pets and animals for use of the residents of the premises;
3.2.1.6 Storage of farm vehicles, and, subject to the provisions of Section 7.7.5.1, school
buses;
3.2.1.7 Professional office or home occupation, provided that:
1. The profession or home occupation is conducted by a resident of the premises;
2. The use is clearly incidental to and secondary to the use as a residence;
3. There is no exterior evidence of a non-residential use of the premises except as
otherwise permitted in this section;
4. No additional noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare, unsightliness or
other nuisance is produced which is discernible from other properties;
5. There is no public display of goods or wares, and there is no additional exterior
storage of material or equipment;
6. One SIGN, not exceeding three (3) square feet, is permitted subject to the
provisions of this Bylaw regulating SIGNS;
7. There is no on-street parking permitted for any employee or visitor in connection
with such use; and
8. The use does not present a safety or health hazard to the public;
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 20
3.2.1.8 ACCESSORY USES and BUILDINGs, including such normal ACCESSORY USES as
PRIVATE GARAGEs, storage sheds, tennis courts, swimming pools, cabanas for
swimming pools, gazebos, and STRUCTURES approved by Civil Defense Authorities
and designed for use by the inhabitants, employees or customers of the property to
which it is accessory, and used for shelter from natural disaster or war, and detached
fireplaces, but not including the outdoor parking of trucks or buses;
3.2.1.9 BED AND BREAKFAST HOME, provided that off-street parking, one parking space
per guest room, is available;
3.2.1.10 CHILD CARE FACILITY, provided that the facility complies with the standards set
forth in the Table of Dimensional Requirements and the following standards:
1. Minimum OPEN SPACE, including outdoor play areas of 35%;
2. Maximum NET FLOOR AREA of 4,000 square feet.
3.2.1.11 FAMILY DAY CARE HOMEs if such FAMILY DAY CARE HOME is accessory to the
residential use.
3.2.1.12 For parcels of five (5) acres or greater, the provisions of Massachusetts General Law
Chapter 40A, Section 3 shall apply.
3.2.2 Uses permitted subject to special permit, granted by the Board of Appeals:
3.2.2.1 Private schools and colleges, with or without dormitory facilities, including nursery and
kindergarten schools, dance and music studios, provided adequate parking areas are
provided;
3.2.2.2 Playgrounds, unless approved as part of a subdivision plan;
3.2.2.3 Conversion of a one-family DWELLING, existing at the time of the original adoption of
this section of the Bylaw, into a two-family DWELLING, provided that the exterior
appearance is not altered and that there is sufficient floor and ground area above the
minimum requirements as provided in Section 4.3 and 4.4;
3.2.2.4 Non-commercial recreation, including municipal, county or state parks (but not an
amusement park), boating, fishing, hunting (where legally permitted), MARINAs,
landings, and other non-commercial recreation use;
3.2.2.5 Veterinary hospitals, and kennels, provided that no such BUILDINGs are located
within one hundred (100) feet of a LOT line;
3.2.2.6 BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT, provided that off-street parking, one
parking space per guest room, is available; and
3.2.2.7 Nursing homes.
3.2.2.8 For parcels of less than five (5) acres, stables, raising or breeding animals for sale,
and boarding animals, provided that no such BUILDINGs are located within one
hundred (100) feet of a LOT line. The Special Permit Granting Authority may allow
BUILDINGs to shelter or maintain animals as defined in Massachusetts General Law,
Chapter 128, Section 1A, within the one hundred foot (100) setback, provided that
the BUILDING was in existence on or before November 13, 1968, was historically
used for such purpose, and the use meets the requirements of the Board of Health;
and provided that the Special Permit Granting Authority finds that such use, with any
necessary mitigation measures, are in harmony with the character of the
neighborhood.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 21
3.2.3 Uses permitted by special permit, granted by the Planning Board:
3.2.3.1 ACCESSORY APARTMENTs in a Residential District as permitted in Section 8.1;
3.2.3.2 Duplex Residential Uses in a Residential District as permitted in Section 8.2;
3.2.3.3 Cross-Country Ski Uses in the Residential District as permitted in Section 8.3;
3.2.3.4 Golf Course Uses in the Residential District as permitted in Section 8.4; and
3.2.3.5 Uses not otherwise permitted in the Residential District, if such uses preserve historic
and/or culturally significant BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES, provided that the historic
and/or cultural character of the site, and BUILDING or STRUCTURE, in the opinion of
the Special Permit Granting Authority, is not significantly altered, and the Special
Permit Granting Authority finds that such uses, with any necessary mitigation
measures, are in harmony with the character and uses permitted in the Residential
District. This Section shall not eliminate the requirements of Section 3.2.2.5, which
shall remain intact as written.
3.2.3.6 COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATIONs.
3.3 Business District Uses
The Business District is intended to meet local needs for retail goods and services primarily
within a BUILDING.
3.3.1 Uses Permitted, provided that the BUILDING is less than 1,000 square feet GROSS
FLOOR AREA, there is only one BUILDING per LOT, all parking spaces are located only
in the REAR YARD, and 50% of the LOT area is OPEN SPACE:
3.3.1.1 TOURIST HOMEs, BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT or HOME, or
LODGING HOUSEs;
3.3.1.2 Business or professional offices;
3.3.1.3 Retail stores, the principal activity of which shall be the offering of goods but not food
at retail within the BUILDING;
3.3.1.4 CHILD CARE FACILITY.
3.3.2 Uses Permitted, subject to special permit granted by the Planning Board:
3.3.2.1 Retail stores or service establishments, the principal activity of which shall be the
offering of goods or services at retail within the BUILDING;
3.3.2.2 Business or professional offices, banks, U. S. Post Office;
3.3.2.3 Salesrooms for automobiles, bicycles, boats, farm implements, and similar
equipment, provided there is no outside display or storage;
3.3.2.4 Restaurants or other places for serving food within the BUILDING. Specifically
excluded is any establishment whose principal method of operation includes sale of
food and beverages in paper, plastic or other disposable containers; and where
consumption of foods and beverages on the premises outside the restaurant
BUILDING or within parked motor vehicles on the premises is allowed and
encouraged; or where food and beverages are served directly to the customer in a
motor vehicle;
3.3.2.5 Parking areas for use of employees, customers or visitors, subject to the
requirements of the Parking Section of this Bylaw;
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 22
3.3.2.6 ACCESSORY BUILDINGs and USES which are customary and incidental to the uses
permitted;
3.3.2.7 SIGNS as provided in the Sign Section of this Bylaw; and
3.3.2.8 INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCE.
3.3.2.9 Uses not otherwise permitted in the Business District, if such uses preserve historic
and/or culturally significant BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES, provided that the historic
and/or cultural character of the site, and BUILDING or STRUCTURE, in the opinion of
the Special Permit Granting Authority, is not significantly altered, and the Special
Permit Granting Authority finds that such uses, with any necessary mitigation
measures, are in harmony with the character and uses permitted in the Business
District.
3.3.2.10 COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATIONs.
3.3.2.11 Retail component of a REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY
3.3.3 Uses permitted, subject to a special permit, granted by the Board of Appeals, which shall
be based on satisfaction that said use will not create a nuisance by virtue of noise, odor,
smoke, vibration, traffic generated or unsightliness:
3.3.3.1 HOTELs, MOTELS, TOURIST HOMEs, BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT
or HOME, or LODGING HOUSEs;
3.3.3.2 Theatres, bowling alleys, skating rinks, clubs or other places of amusement or
assembly which occur within the BUILDING; and
3.3.3.3 Gasoline service stations, garages or repair shops, provided that:
1. Repairs shall be limited to minor repairs and adjustments, with all repairs
occurring within a BUILDING;
2. There shall be no storage of motor vehicles, appliances and equipment on the
premises other than those in process of repair or awaiting delivery or required in
the operation of the service station, garage or repair shop; and
3. The area used to service, repair or store vehicles shall be paved and provided
with traps to catch and retain (until removal in accordance with an approved
maintenance plan) any grease, oil or other fluids.
4. There shall be an area at least twenty (20) feet deep between the STREET LINE
and the paved area which shall be separated from the STREET by a curb, and
which shall be seeded and landscaped, and maintained as such, except at an
entrance/exit which shall be at least twenty (20) feet but no more than thirty (30)
feet wide, and at least fifty (50) feet apart, and further provided that there shall be
only two curb cuts for each one hundred and fifty (150) feet of street frontage.
3.3.4 Access to Industrial Zoned Land - Access over Business Zoned Land is allowed.
3.4 Compact Business District Uses
The Compact Business District is intended as a district to provide certain limited business
uses within a STRUCTURE.
3.4.1 Uses permitted:
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 23
3.4.1.1 Conservation areas, farming and horticulture, orchards, nurseries, forests, and tree
farms, display and sale, or offering for sale, of farm produce, all as permitted in the
Recreation-Conservation District;
3.4.1.2 Single-family detached BUILDINGs;
3.4.1.3 BOARDING HOUSES or ROOMING HOUSES for not more than two (2) persons,
provided that the house is also occupied as a private residence by the owner;
3.4.1.4 Playgrounds where approved as part of a subdivision plan;
3.4.1.5 Keeping of pets and animals for use of the residents of the premises;
3.4.1.6 ACCESSORY USES and BUILDINGs, including such normal ACCESSORY USES as
PRIVATE GARAGEs, storage sheds, tennis courts, swimming pools, cabanas for
swimming pools, gazebos, and STRUCTURES approved by Civil Defense Authorities
and designed for use by the inhabitants, employees or customers of the property to
which it is accessory, and used for shelter from natural disaster or war, and detached
fireplaces, but not including the outdoor parking of trucks or buses; and
3.4.1.7 CHILD CARE FACILITY.
3.4.2 Uses permitted, subject to special permit granted by the Planning Board:
3.4.2.1 Retail store or service establishment, the principal activity of which shall be the
offering of goods or services at retail within the BUILDING;
3.4.2.2 Business or professional offices, banks, U. S. Post Office;
3.4.2.3 Parking areas or garages for use of employees, customers or visitors, subject to
design standards in the parking section of this Bylaw;
3.4.2.4 ACCESSORY BUILDINGs and USES and
3.4.2.5 SIGNS as provided in the Sign Section of this Bylaw.
3.4.2.6 Uses not otherwise permitted in the Compact Business District, if such uses preserve
historic and/or culturally significant BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES, provided that the
historic and/or cultural character of the site, and BUILDING or STRUCTURE, in the
opinion of the Special Permit Granting Authority, is not significantly altered, and the
Special Permit Granting Authority finds that such uses, with any necessary mitigation
measures, are in harmony with the character and uses permitted in the Compact
Business District.
3.5 Commercial District Uses
The Commercial District is intended to meet local needs for goods and services.
3.5.1 Uses Permitted:
3.5.1.1 Conservation areas, farming and horticulture, orchards, nurseries, forests and tree
farms, display and sale, or offering for sale, of farm produce, all as permitted in the
Recreation-Conservation District;
3.5.1.2 CHILD CARE FACILITY; and
3.5.1.3 Wireless Communication Facilities.
3.5.1.4 COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATIONs.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 24
3.5.2 Uses permitted, provided that the BUILDING is less that 1,000 square feet GROSS
FLOOR AREA, there is only one BUILDING per LOT, all parking spaces are located only
in the REAR YARD, and 50% of the LOT area is OPEN SPACE:
3.5.2.1 TOURIST HOMEs, BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT or HOME, or
LODGING HOUSEs;
3.5.2.2 Business or professional offices;
3.5.2.3 Retail store, the principal activity of which shall be the offering of goods but not food
at retail within the BUILDING; and
3.5.2.4 Salesrooms for bicycles, boats and farm implements, provided that no more than
30% of the LOT area is used for BUILDING, parking and display areas.
3.5.3 Uses permitted, subject to special permit granted by the Planning Board:
3.5.3.1 Funeral homes, mortuaries or crematories;
3.5.3.2 Salesrooms for automobiles, bicycles, boats, farm implements, and similar
equipment;
3.5.3.3 Building materials salesrooms and yards, utility structures, contractor's yards, storage
warehouses, BUILDINGs and yards and wholesale distribution plants, provided that
all loading and unloading is done at the rear of the BUILDING in covered berths with
WALLS on three (3) sides, and provided all materials and equipment stored outside
are screened from view from public ways or abutting properties by an opaque FENCE
or screening at least six (6) feet high but not more than twenty (20) feet high except
that items on display for retail sales need be screened only from properties in a
Recreation-Conservation or Residential District on the same side of the STREET;
3.5.3.4 Utility structures, passenger depots and terminals;
3.5.3.5 Printing, publishing or commercial reproduction or photo-processing establishments,
offices, medical or dental laboratories, and research laboratories with incidental
assembly or manufacture;
3.5.3.6 Restaurants or other places for serving food within the BUILDING. Specifically
excluded is any establishment whose principal method of operation includes sale of
food and beverages in paper, plastic or other disposable containers; and where
consumption of foods and beverages on the premises outside the restaurant
BUILDING or within parked motor vehicles on the premises is allowed and
encouraged; or where food and beverages are served directly to the customer in a
motor vehicle;
3.5.3.7 Screened storage, ACCESSORY BUILDINGs and USES;
3.5.3.8 Parking areas or garages for use of employees, customers or visitors, subject to
design standards in the Parking Section of this Bylaw;
3.5.3.9 TOURIST HOMEs, BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT or HOME, or
LODGING HOUSEs;
3.5.3.10 Business or professional offices; banks, U. S. Post Office; and
3.5.3.11 Retail store, the principal activity of which shall be the offering of goods but not food
at retail within the BUILDING.
3.5.3.12 Uses not otherwise permitted in the Commercial District, if such uses preserve
historic and/or culturally significant BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES, provided that the
historic and/or cultural character of the site, and BUILDING or STRUCTURE, in the
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 25
opinion of the Special Permit Granting Authority, is not significantly altered, and the
Special Permit Granting Authority finds that such uses, with any necessary mitigation
measures, are in harmony with the character and uses permitted in the Commercial
District.
3.6 Industrial District Uses
The Industrial District is intended for use by research laboratories, office BUILDINGs and
selected light industries which are compatible with a low-density, rural residential
community.
3.6.1 Uses permitted:
3.6.1.1 Conservation areas, farming and horticulture, orchards, nurseries, forests and tree
farms, display and sale, or offering for sale, of farm produce, all as permitted in the
Recreation-Conservation District;
3.6.1.2 CHILD CARE FACILITY; and
3.6.1.3 Wireless Communication Facilities.
3.6.1.4 COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATIONs.
3.6.2 Uses permitted, provided that the BUILDING is less than 1,500 square feet GROSS
FLOOR AREA, all parking spaces are located only in the REAR YARD, and 50% of the
LOT area is OPEN SPACE:
3.6.2.1 Research laboratories with incidental assembly or manufacture; and
3.6.2.2 Office BUILDINGs.
3.6.3 Uses permitted, subject to special permit granted by the Planning Board:
3.6.3.1 Research laboratories with incidental assembly or manufacture;
3.6.3.2 Office BUILDINGs;
3.6.3.3 Manufacturing enterprises, provided that such activities will not be offensive,
injurious,dangerous to the public health or noxious because of sewage or REFUSE,
vibration, smoke or gas, fumes, dust or dirt, odors, dangers of combustion or
unsightliness;
3.6.3.4 Parking areas or garages for use of employees, customers or visitors, subject to the
design standards in the Parking Section of this Bylaw;
3.6.3.5 Screened storage, ACCESSORY BUILDINGs and USES;
3.6.3.6 Cafeterias for employees, when contained in the same STRUCTURE as a permitted
use;
3.6.3.7 All uses as permitted in the Recreation-Conservation District; and
3.6.3.8 Conversion of existing residence to BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT or
HOME.
3.6.3.9 Uses not otherwise permitted in the Industrial District, if such uses preserve historic
and/or culturally significant BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES, provided that the historic
and/or cultural character of the site, and BUILDING or STRUCTURE, in the opinion of
the Special Permit Granting Authority, is not significantly altered, and the Special
Permit Granting Authority finds that such uses, with any necessary mitigation
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 26
measures, are in harmony with the character and uses permitted in the Industrial
District.
3.6.3.10 ACCESSORY Retail USES
The following Accessory Retail USES shall be permitted, provided such
ACCESSORY USES are clearly subordinate and incidental to the primary USE of the
underlying district:
a.) Makers markets, and/or the sales of crafts and artisan goods, including but
not limited to periodic, seasonal or temporary sales of products produced
onsite, including food products for on-site consumption, provided that:
I. All sales are associated with a lawfully conforming principle permitted
USE;
II. Sales areas occupy no more than 45% of the FLOOR AREA devoted to
the principle permitted use;
III. The ACCESSORY retail USE is primarily engaged in the sale of
products produced on-site and/or directly associated with the products
being produced;
IV. All primary products are sold by the producer of the product or their
designee.
V. Parking areas are designed in accordance with Section 7 of the
BYLAW.
VI. Areas of pedestrian circulation are separated from defined off  street
parking and loading locations through temporary or permanent fencing,
landscaping, or other delineation measures satisfactory to the Permit
Granting Authority.
VII. Any on-site permanent signage proposed in association with an
ACCESSORY retail USE permitted under this bylaw shall conform to
Section 6.3.3.2 for regulating signs in the Business district. For all other
types of signs, the proposed ACCESSORY retail USE shall conform to
Section 6.3 of Bylaw.
3.6.3.10.1 The Planning Board may allow outdoor sales of products described in Section 3.6.3.4
provided that:
a) Outdoor ACCESSORY retail sales are conducted within a defined outdoor space,
clearly adjacent to a STRUCTURE or BUILDING in which the products are produced;
b) Areas of pedestrian circulation are separated from defined off  street parking and
loading locations through temporary or permanent fencing, landscaping, or other
delineation measures satisfactory to the Permit Granting Authority.
3.7 Refuse Disposal District Uses
The REFUSE Disposal District is intended to provide for the safe and sanitary disposal of
REFUSE which is generated within the Town of Stow.
3.7.1 Uses permitted, subject to special permit granted by the Planning Board:
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 27
3.7.1.1 All uses permitted in the Industrial District, subject to all requirements and limitations
contained in this Bylaw for construction or use in the Industrial District, or otherwise
applicable to all districts or any overlying district.
3.7.2 Uses permitted, subject to special permit granted by the Board of Selectmen, collectively or
individually called a "refuse disposal facility" for REFUSE:
Such special permit may be granted by the Selectmen only upon making such findings as
are necessary therefor under Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws, as
amended, and on such further terms, conditions, safeguards and limitations on time or use
as are necessary and appropriate therefor. Provided, however, that only one such permit
shall exist at any time, except that two or more may be issued for "refuse disposal facilities"
located adjacent to an existing "refuse disposal facility for which a special permit under this
section has been granted, or, if at the sole discretion of the Selectmen, a need exists for
the issuance of more than one such permit for non-adjacent site during a transition period
from use of one site to another.
Such special permit shall lapse within two (2) years from the issuance thereof if a
substantial use or construction has not commenced, except that for good cause shown, the
Selectmen may in their sole discretion grant an extension thereof. Such special permit
shall limit the intended use to a "refuse disposal facility" for municipal purposes, to be used
solely by the Town of Stow.
3.7.2.1 Sanitary landfill;
3.7.2.2 REFUSE transfer station;
3.7.2.3 REFUSE incinerator; and
3.7.2.4 Any other facility for treating or disposing of REFUSE.
3.7.3 Uses permitted subject to Site Plan Approval by the Planning Board:
3.7.3.1 COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATIONs.
3.8 General Use Regulations Pertaining to All Districts
3.8.1 Pertaining to all Districts:
3.8.1.1 BUILDING construction - All BUILDINGS shall be constructed as prescribed by the
State Building Code.
3.8.1.2 Odor, dust and smoke - No such offensive emissions shall be discernible beyond the
property line or, in the case of an industrial park development or of multiple use of the
property, beyond one hundred (100) feet of the BUILDING generating the emission,
except that in no case shall the discharge from any source exceed the following limits:
1. Smoke measured at the point of discharge into the air shall not exceed a density
of No. 1 on the Ringlemen Smoke Chart as published by the U. S. Bureau of
Mines, except that a smoke of a density not darker than No. 2 on the Ringlemen
Chart may be emitted for not more than three (3) minutes in any one (1) hour.
2. Lime dust, as Ca0, measured at the property line of any LOT on which the activity
creates such dust, shall not exceed ten (10) micrograms per cubic meter of air.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 28
3. Total particulate matter measured at all stacks or other points of emission to the
air shall not exceed thirty (30) grams per hour per acre of land included in the
LOT.
4. Odors shall not exceed the smallest values given in Table III (Odor Thresholds) in
Chapter 5 of the "Air Pollution Manual" Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc.,
Washington, D.C., 1951.
5. All measurements of air pollution shall be by the procedures, and with equipment,
approved by the BUILDING INSPECTOR, which procedures and equipment shall
be of the latest generally recognized development and design readily available.
3.8.1.3 Noise - The noise generated on any LOT, measured at any point beyond the property
lines of the LOT on which the noise source is located, shall not cause the total sound
level to be more than three (3) decibels above the natural ambient sound level except
as provided below:
1. For not more than five (5) minutes in any one (1) hour the noise generated shall
not cause the total sound level to be more than ten (10) decibels above the
natural ambient sound level.
2. For not more than sixty (60) minutes in any seven (7) day period the noise
generated shall not cause the total sound level to be more than thirty (30)
decibels above the natural ambient sound level.
3. Noise making devices which are maintained and are utilized strictly to serve as
safety warning devices are excluded from these regulations.
Measurements shall be conducted by personnel approved by the BUILDING
INSPECTOR using the "A" weighting on a standard commercial total sound level
instrument approved by the BUILDING INSPECTOR. For the purpose of this Bylaw
the natural sound level shall be assumed to be forty (40) decibels above 0.0002
microbar during hours of daylight, and thirty (30) decibels above 0.0002 microbar at
all other times.
3.8.1.4 Heat, glare, vibration, and radiation - No heat, glare, or vibration shall be discernible
without instruments from the outside of any STRUCTURE, and no radiation shall be
discernible from the outside of the STRUCTURE with or without instruments.
3.8.1.5 Exterior lighting - No exterior lighting, or other street lighting approved by the
Selectmen, shall shine on adjacent properties or towards any STREET in such a
manner as to create a nuisance or hazard.
3.8.1.5.1 The INITIAL DESIGN LIGHT OUTPUT of all exterior lighting on a LOT shall be
subject to a cap of 25,000 lumens/acre or 10,000 lumens, whichever is greater.
Fixtures under an opaque covering such as a canopy or in a parking garage shall
count as 0.25 of their output if 5-10 feet from the nearest edge, 0.1 at 10-30 feet and
0 for more than 30 feet.
3.8.1.5.2 A Special Permit from the Planning Board is required when installing new fixtures or
replacing existing fixtures and the total resulting INITIAL DESIGN LIGHT OUTPUT
would be more than 100,000 lumens on any LOT. However, a Special Permit shall
not be required when replacing existing fixtures with FULL-CUTOFF fixtures and the
total INITIAL DESIGN LIGHT OUTPUT of the replacement fixtures is less than half
the total INITIAL DESIGN LIGHT OUTPUT of the removed fixtures.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 29
The Special Permit application shall show the location, type and output of all fixtures.
The Planning Board shall impose mitigating conditions to protect abutters not only
from DIRECT LIGHT but also reflected light, and shall limit the total light output and
hours of use to that which is reasonably necessary. The Planning Board shall require
remediation of existing lighting.
3.8.1.5.3 Lighting of athletic fields shall be only by Special Permit from the Planning Board, and
shall be exempt from the 25,000 lumens/acre cap. The Planning Board shall require
full engineering plans with a design average illuminance of no more than 200 lux. No
DIRECT LIGHT shall shine off the LOT containing the field. Athletic field lighting shall
be illuminated only while in use and shall not be illuminated between 10 p.m and
sunrise under any circumstances. All lighting fixtures shall be set back 500 feet from
any RESIDENTIAL or RECREATION/CONSERVATION LOT, and 200 feet from any
other LOT.
3.8.1.5.4 The Planning Board may issue a Special Permit for lighting that does not conform to
the conditions of the table in Section 3.8.1.5.6 up to 4,000 additional lumens of
nonconforming lighting if the lighting is found to provide a public benefit. The
Planning Board shall impose mitigating conditions such as limiting lighting levels,
hours of operation, and requiring shielding to protect abutters from unwanted light.
3.8.1.5.5 Shining lasers in excess of 5 mW at wavelengths within the range of human vision or
searchlighs into the sky, for advertising or any other purpose, is prohibited. Airfield
beacons required by the FAA are exempt from this prohibition.
3.8.1.5.6 Each EXTERIOR LIGHT fixture shall comply with the following specific
conditions:
Fixture-Specific Conditions
Fixture Type: Conditions:
All EXTERIOR LIGHT Fixtures with a rated
output of 2,000 lumens or more (other than
PUBLIC STREETLIGHTs)
Must be FULL-CUTOFF FIXTUREs.
Must be installed in the proper orientation so as to emit
no light above the horizontal.
Must be no more than 35 feet above ground.
Must not be used to illuminate a LOT, which is across
any STREET.
EXTERIOR LIGHT Fixtures (other than
PUBLIC STREETLIGHTS) with an INITIAL
DESIGN LIGHT OUTPUT of more than 4,000
lumens
Must comply with all above conditions and:
Must not shine DIRECT LIGHT onto any other LOT or
STREET located within a RESIDENTIAL or
RECREATION-CONSERVATION district.
Must not shine DIRECT LIGHT onto any body of water
not on the same LOT as the fixture.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 30
Fixture-Specific Conditions
Fixture Type: Conditions:
EXTERIOR LIGHT Fixtures (other than
PUBLIC STREETLIGHTS) with an INITIAL
DESIGN LIGHT OUTPUT of more than 10,000
lumens
Must comply with all above conditions and:
Must not shine DIRECT LIGHT onto any other LOT
located within any district.
Must not shine DIRECT LIGHT onto any STREET.
Must not shine DIRECT LIGHT onto any body of water.
PUBLIC STREETLIGHTS Must be FULL-CUTOFF FIXTURES.
Must be installed in the proper orientation so as to emit
no light above the horizontal.
Must be no more than 35 feet above ground.
Must not shine DIRECT LIGHT onto any
DWELLING.
All floodlights, spotlights, or similar EXTERIOR
LIGHT FIXTURE that are not full cutoff
Must be aimed at least 45 degrees below
horizontal.
3.8.1.5.7 The following table provides exemptions to both fixture-specific conditions and
the cap in 3.8.1.5.1
Exemptions
Situation: Exemption:
Emergency Lighting Fixtures Emergency lighting fixtures operated by a public safety
agency are exempt. Lighting fixtures with an INITIAL
LIGHT OUTPUT of less than 200 lumens, which are
intended to signal the location of emergency services,
rather than provide illumination and which are
authorized by a public safety agency, are exempt.
Greenhouse Lighting Fixtures for the purpose
of supporting plant growth.
Exempt from the 25,000 lumens per acre
requirement.
Exempt from the 100,000 lumen Special Permit
requirement (Section 3.8.1.5.2).
Lighting fixtures required by the FAA Lighting fixtures required to comply with FAA
requirements may be installed, but shall not emit
more light above horizontal or shine more DIRECT
LIGHT onto any other LOT than is required to
comply with the FAA regulations.
Seasonal Holiday Lighting Seasonal holiday lighting may be installed and
illuminated, provided that it is illuminated for no
more than 90 days in any 270 day period. (This
allows nonconforming holiday lighting even if the
property is not eligible for the nonconforming fixture
exemption. Conforming holiday lighting is not
restricted in any way.)
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 31
3.8.1.6 Screening, surfacing, parking, and SIGNS - As provided in the sign section and
Parking Section of this Bylaw.
3.8.1.7 Waste disposal and water supply - Regulations of the State Board of Health and the
Stow Board of Health shall be met and shall be indicated on a site plan, when a site
plan is required.
3.8.1.8 Scientific Uses - Uses, whether or not on the same parcel as activities permitted as a
matter of right, accessory to activities permitted as a matter of right, which activities
are necessary in connection with scientific research or scientific development or
related production, may be permitted upon the issuance of a special permit granted
by the Planning Board provided the granting authority finds that the proposed
ACCESSORY USE does not substantially derogate from the public good.
3.8.1.9 Drainage - When a subdivision approval or a Site Plan Approval or a Special Permit is
required drainage shall be designed so that the following conditions shall be met
during and after construction and development:
1. Pre-development surface water runoff rates and volumes shall not be increased;
2. Pre-development erosion and sedimentation rates shall not be increased; and
3. No building permit, special permit or subdivision approval shall be granted if these
conditions cannot be met.
3.8.1.10 Erosion control - Site design, materials and construction processes shall be designed to
avoid erosion damage, sedimentation or uncontrolled surface water run-off. An
Erosion Control Special Permit from the Planning Board shall be required where
proposed development will result in any of the following conditions:
1. Grading or construction which will result in SLOPES of twenty-five percent (25%)
or greater on twenty five percent (25%) or more of the LOT area;
2. Grades will result in slopes of 25% or greater on thirty-two thousand (32,000)
square feet or more on a single parcel, even if less than 25% of the LOT area;
3. Grading and construction on over thirty-two (32,000) square feet of a PARCEL, or
SITE, including SITEs in which multiple PARCELs are part of the same
development proposal.
An Erosion Control Special Permit Shall only be granted under demonstration that
adequate provisions have been made to protect against erosion, soil instability, and
uncontrolled degradation. Applications and plans for such special permits shall be
referred to Conservation Commission.
4. Where 3.8.1.10.1, 3.8.1.10.2, 3.8.1.10.3 and 3.8.1.10.5 apply, all slopes
exceeding fifteen percent (15%) resulting from site grading shall be covered with
topsoil to a depth of at least six inches and planted with vegetative cover sufficient
to prevent erosion.
5. No area totaling one acre or more on any parcel or contiguous parcels in the
same ownership shall have existing vegetation clear-stripped or be filled six
inches or more so as to destroy existing vegetation unless in conjunction with
agricultural activity or unless within STREETS which are either public or
designated on an approved subdivision plan or unless a special permit is
approved by the Planning Board on the condition that run-off will be controlled,
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 32
erosion prevented and either a constructed surface or cover vegetation will be
provided not later than the first full spring season immediately following
completion of the stripping operation. No stripped area or areas which are
allowed by special permit shall remain through the winter without temporary cover
of winter rye or similar plant material being provided for soil control, except in the
case of agricultural activity when such temporary cover would be infeasible.
6. The BUILDING INSPECTOR shall require information of the applicant as
necessary for him to ensure compliance with these requirements, including if
necessary, elevation at key locations, description of vegetative cover and the
nature of impoundment basins proposed, if any.
7. Where resultant site grades will exceed fifteen percent (15%) the Town shall
require a performance bond to ensure compliance with these requirements.
8. Where 3.8.1.10.1, 3.8.1.10.2, 3.8.1.10.3 and 3.8.1.10.5 apply, hillside areas shall
be retained with vegetative cover as follows:
Average Slope
Minimum % of Land to
Remain in Vegetation
10.0 - 14.9 25
15.0 - 19.9 40
20.0 - 24.9 55
25.0 - 29.9 70
30.0 + 85
9. Before a project disturbs one acre or more of land, either by itself or as part of a
larger development, and storm water could run off the site in a directed manner
(via a culvert, ditch, storm sewer system, roadway, storm dug channel, etc) and
reach a surface water (pond, stream, wetland, etc.), a copy of the Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPP) and the Notice of Intent filed with the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) shall be submitted to the Planning Board.
3.8.1.11 Special Provisions to Enhance Access for Handicapped Persons - Attempts to
provide and improve handicapped access on LOTS with established residential or
non-residential uses often create conflicts with various dimensional requirements of
this Bylaw. Therefore, the following partial exemptions shall apply in order to facilitate
the installation of handicapped parking spaces, handicapped access ramps and other
amenities designed to improve access for the handicapped to existing BUILDINGs
and STRUCTURES. The requirements listed in (1) through (3) below may be
reduced only to the degree necessary to be consistent with the requirements of the
Massachusetts Architectural Access Board.
1. Any minimum number of required parking spaces.
2. Any minimum required OPEN SPACE.
3. Any minimum required FRONT, SIDE and REAR YARD.
4. No special permit shall be required for the installation of handicapped access
amenities and for the implementation of any exemption provided herein.
5. All proposed handicapped access amenities and any of the exemptions provided
herein shall be approved by the BUILDING INSPECTOR prior to any work or
construction.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 33
3.8.1.12 Wireless Communication Facility - A transmission facility for the purpose of personal
wireless communication services such as satellite dishes or antennae, with or without
a BUILDING that shelters associated electronic or mechanical equipment.
3.8.2 Use Regulations Pertaining to the Business, Commercial, and Industrial Districts
3.8.2.1 Storage - All materials, supplies and equipment shall be stored in accord with Fire
Prevention Standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and shall be
screened from view from public ways or abutting properties by an opaque FENCE or
screening at least six (6) feet but not more than twenty (20) feet high.
3.8.2.2 No open burning is permitted, unless in an incinerator of a type approved by the
Board of Selectmen.
3.8.3 Use Regulations Pertaining to the Residential District
3.8.3.1 Exterior lighting shall conform with the requirements of Section 3.8.1.5, except that the
use of exterior lighting by a commercial or business activity or operation during the
period from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise shall not be
permitted. This provision shall not preclude the use of emergency lighting required by a
public agency in the performance of its duties, lighting of SIGNS in conformance with
the general regulations included in Section 6.3.1, customary holiday lighting or low level
illumination of entranceways, exits and driveways.
Signs shall not be illuminated unless the business is open to the general public and
employees are present and ready to receive customers, and shall not be illuminated
between 9 p.m. and 7 a.m. Any fixture with an INITIAL DESIGN LIGHT OUTPUT of
more than 2,000 lumens shall not be considered low level illumination. Any peak
illuminance on the ground, a building or a sign, of more than 10 lux shall not be
considered low level illumination.
3.9 NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
3.9.1 A pre-existing NON-CONFORMING USE or STRUCTURE may continue. However, other
than Wireless Service Facilities, which may not be altered or extended unless specifically
allowed in Section 3.11 of the Bylaw, no lawful pre-existing NON-CONFORMING USES or
STRUCTURES may be extended or altered except in conformance with Sections 3.9.6 and
3.9.7 below. All applications for extensions and/or alterations shall include a scaled floor
plan of the STRUCTURE(S) in question showing FLOOR AREA and ground coverage prior
to and following the proposed changes in order to determine the degree to which the use
has expanded from its original size. All applications for such special permits shall include
such information and plans as required for a special permit as required in Section 9.2.
Applicants shall also comply with the following site planning standards for NONCONFORMING
USES or STRUCTURES:
3.9.1.1 It shall comply with the parking requirements of the Parking Section of this Bylaw,
except as superseded by 3.9.1.4., 3.9.1.5. and 3.9.1.6. below;
3.9.1.2 It shall comply with the SIGN section of this Bylaw;
3.9.1.3 It shall comply with the General Use Regulations section of this Bylaw;
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 34
3.9.1.4 No parking, BUILDING or outdoor storage facility of materials or products shall be
closer than 35 feet from the side or rear LOT line, nor closer than 50 feet from the
STREET LINE;
3.9.1.5 Parking and outdoor storage of materials or products shall be screened from the view
of abutting properties and the view from public ways by vegetative screens, opaque
fencing or topography; and
3.9.1.6 There shall be sufficient space and provision on site for the maneuvering of vehicles
so as to allow loading and unloading of materials and products without impeding the
flow of traffic along public ways or blocking pedestrian sidewalks, paths and rights of
way.
3.9.2 If said NON-CONFORMING USE has been changed to a more restricted use, it shall not
again be changed to a less restricted use.
3.9.3 If the NON-CONFORMING USE is discontinued or abandoned for a period of two (2)
years or more, it shall not be re-established except upon a special permit granted by the
Board of Appeals.
3.9.4 A non-conforming single or two-family DWELLING or agricultural STRUCTURE which
has been damaged or removed may be rebuilt or restored at the same location and again
used as previously, provided that the owner shall start operations for restoring and
rebuilding on said premises within twelve (12) months after such damage or removal and
reconstruction is completed and occupancy begun within two (2) years of start of
restoration except upon a special permit for a longer period of time granted by the Board
of Appeals.
3.9.5 An amendment to the Zoning Bylaw shall not apply to structures or uses lawfully in
existance or lawfully begun, or to a building or special permit issued before the first
publication of notice of the public hearing on such bylaw required by Section 5, but shall
apply to any change or substantial extension of such use, to a building or special permit
issued after the first notice of said public hearing, to any reconstruction, extension or
structural change of such structure and to any alteration of a structure begun after the
first notice of said public hearing to provide for its use for a substantially different purpose
or for the same purpose in a substantially different manner or to a substantially greater
extent except where alteration, reconstruction, extension or structural change to a single
or two-family residential structure does not increase the non-conforming nature of said
structure. In cases involving construction, such construction shall be carried through to
completion continuously and expeditiously. If such construction has ceased for a period
of two or more years, it shall be considered abandoned, and exemptions from zoning
bylaw amendments shall cease to apply.
3.9.6 Changes of Use and Limitation on Intensity and Size of Use - Other Than Single or Two-
Family Residential Dwellings:
3.9.6.1 As provided in G. L. c. 40A, sec. 6, a lawfully preexisting nonconforming use and/or
structure, other than a single or two-family residential dwelling, may be reconstructed,
altered or extended only if:
1. said reconstruction, alteration or extension itself conforms with all the provisions of
the Zoning Bylaw;
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 35
2. there is a finding by the Board of Appeals that such reconstruction, alteration or
extension will not be substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood than the
existing nonconforming structure or use;
3. that said extension, alteration or change is in accordance with the guidelines noted
below; and
4. that the Board of Appeals grants a special permit as provided in Section 9.2.
3.9.6.2 Guidelines for Review of Extensions, Alterations or Changes to Preexisting,
Nonconforming Uses and Structures: Recognizing the need to provide guidelines for
determining relative impacts upon the Town and the immediate neighborhood from an
expansion, alteration or change of preexisting nonconforming uses and structures, and
recognizing the basis and consistent principles of zoning with respect to minimizing
nonconforming uses and structures, the following shall apply to the review of special
permit applications under this Section:
1. the Board of Appeals shall encourage extensions, alterations or changes to
nonconforming structures and uses toward greater, if not complete, conformance
with the provisions of the Zoning Bylaw and to reduce the degree of nonconformity;
2. the Board of Appeals shall not encourage the expansion of a nonconforming
structure or use as measured by either the:
a) amount of floor space or land area used, or
b) volume of activity, including but not limited to an increase in the intensity of use
and/or a change in the nature or purpose of the use;
3. the Board of Appeals shall prohibit the expansion of nonconforming structures and
uses unless there will be no demonstrable adverse impacts on abutting properties
and those properties that generally characterize the neighborhood or locus within
which the expansion is sought, and;
4. the Board of Appeals shall not encourage the expansion of nonconforming
structures and uses if the expansion will negatively impact the Town of Stows
ground or surface waterbodies.
3.9.6.3 Table of Presumptively Not More Detrimental Extensions, Alterations, or Changes to
Preexisting, Nonconforming Uses and Structures:
An extension, alteration or change to a lawfully preexisting nonconforming use or
structure shall be presumed not to be substantially more detrimental to the
neighborhood if the guidelines of Section 3.9.6.2 are considered and if the extension,
alteration or change also is in compliance with the following:
TABLE OF PRESUMPTIVELY NOT MORE DETRIMENTAL EXTENSIONS,
ALTERATIONS, OR CHANGES TO OTHER THAN SINGLE OR TWO-FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS
Issue
Presumptively Allowable Changes,
Alterations, or Extensions
If maximum floor area ratio requirements
are exceeded and/or minimum open
space requirements are not met.
The extension, alteration, or change
does not:
1) increase the floor area ratio
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 36
Issue
Presumptively Allowable Changes,
Alterations, or Extensions
requirements;
2) decrease the existing floor area ratio
and/or;
3) results in an increase of the open space
requirements of Section 4.4.
If the structure or use exceeds current
parking or loading area requirements.
The requirements of Section 7 of the
Zoning Bylaw are met or if the Board
of Appeals determines that the existing
use and proposed expansion or site
conditions do not warrant the number
of parking spaces required by Section
7.3.3.
If the structure or use exceeds, or is in
violation of, or violates any other
provision of the Zoning Bylaw.
The extension, alteration, or change
meets the guidelines specified in
Section 3.9.6.2 above.
3.9.7 Alteration, Reconstruction, Extension or Structural Changes to Preexisting Nonconforming
Single and Two-Family Residential Structures.
3.9.7.1 As provided for in G. L. c. 40A sec. 6, a nonconforming single or two-family dwelling or
structure accessory thereto may be altered, reconstructed, extended or otherwise
structurally changed provided that:
1. the proposed alteration, extension or structural change itself conforms to the
requirements of the present Bylaw, and does not intensify any existing nonconformities
or result in any additional non-conformities, in which event the Building
Inspector may issue a building permit and an application to the Board of Appeals
need not be made; or
2. the proposed alteration, extension or structural change itself does not conform to
the requirements of the present Bylaw, and does intensify existing non-conformities
or results in additional non-conformities, in which event a Petition for Special Permit
must be made to the Board of Appeals, and the Board of Appeals must find that:
a) there is no substantial increase in the nonconforming nature of said structure;
and
b) such reconstruction, alteration or extension will not be substantially more
detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing nonconforming structure or
use.
3.9.7.2 In determining the meaning of the phrases increase the nonconforming nature of said
structure and substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood, the following shall
apply to the review of Special Permit Petitions subject to this provision to alter,
reconstruct, extend or structurally change a preexisting nonconforming single- or twofamily
residential structure:
1. The Board of Appeals must make a determination as to the particular respect or
respects in which the existing structure or lot does not conform to the requirements
of the present Bylaw;
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 37
2. Should the Board of Appeals conclude that the proposed change would
substantially increase the nonconforming nature of the structure or lot, the applicant
will not be entitled to the issuance of a special permit;
3. If the Board of Appeals determines, that the proposal will not substantially increase
the nonconforming nature of the structure or the lot, the applicant will also be
required to show that the change will not be substantially more detrimental than the
existing nonconforming structure or use to the neighborhood;
4. If the Board of Appeals determines that the proposal will be more substantially
detrimental to the neighborhood, the special permit sought will be denied unless the
Board of Appeals determines that a special permit can be approved with conditions
that would make the change substantially not more detrimental, in which case the
Board of Appeals may approve a special permit with such conditions.
5. For the purposes of this Section, determination of substantially more detrimental to
the neighborhood shall include consideration of and impacts to, the general and
immediate neighborhood from the resulting height, building coverage, impervious
coverage, and width of the altered, reconstructed, extended or structurally changed
structure. Additionally, a determination whether an altered, reconstructed, extended
or structurally changed structure will be substantially more detrimental to the
neighborhood shall include the resulting impacts to views and vistas from abutting
properties and public and private ways, increase in traffic, noise, surface water
runoff and related site planning issues.
3.10 Table of Principal Uses
3.10.1 Provisions Applicable to Table of Principal Uses - No land, STRUCTURE or BUILDING
shall be used except for the purposes permitted in the district as set forth in this Bylaw
and further indicated on the Table of Principal Uses. Each use set forth in the principal
use column shall be subject to any conditions or limitations that are set forth in this Bylaw
and in the Table of Principal Uses. If there is a discrepancy between the Table of
Principal Uses and the text of this Bylaw, the provisions set forth in the text of this Bylaw
shall take precedent.
3.10.1.1 A use listed in the Table of Principal Uses is permitted in any district denoted by the
letter "Y" and is not permitted in any district denoted by the letter "N". If denoted by
the letters "SPA", "SPP" or "SPS", the use is permitted only if the designated Special
Permit Granting Authority grants a special permit as provided herein and makes such
specific findings as may be required by the Bylaw in respect of such use. For the
purposes of the Table of Principal Uses, "SPA" shall mean a special permit
authorized by the Board of Appeals; "SPP" shall mean a special permit authorized by
the Planning Board; and "SPS" shall mean a special permit authorized by the Board
of Selectmen.
3.10.1.2 Site plan approval in accordance with Section 9.3 is required for a use where the
letter "R" appears and is not required where the letters"NR" appear.
3.10.1.3 A special permit is required for any increase in intensity of a site or use for which a
special permit is required, except as to lawful pre-existing NON-CONFORMING
USES.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 38
Table of Principal Uses
All Principal Uses listed in this Table are subject to provisions in corresponding Section 3.1, Section 5.1 and Section 5.2.
Principal Uses Residential
Business
Compact
Business
Industrial Commercial Recreation
Conservation
FloodPlain
Wetlands
Refuse
Disposal
Site Plan
Approval
General Uses
Agriculture Y (4) N Y Y Y Y Y Y NR
Conservation Y Y (5) Y Y Y Y Y Y NR
Recreation SPA (4) N N SPP N SPP SPA SPP (3)
Residential Uses
Single Family DWELLING Y (4) (11) N Y
SPP(11)
N N N N N (3)
Single Family DWELLING with ACCESSORY
APARTMENT
SPP (4) (7)
(11)
N SPP (7)
(11)
N N N N N (3)
Duplex DWELLINGs SPP (4) (11) N N N N N N N (3)
Multi-Family DWELLING SPP(4) (11) N N N N N N N (3)
Conversion to 2-Family DWELLING SPA (4) N N N N N N N (3)
Combined Residence/ Home Occupation Y (4) N Y N N N N N NR
Bed & Breakfast Home Y (4) SPA (1) N N SPP (3) N N N R
Bed & Breakfast Home or Establishment SPA (1) (4) SPA (1) N N SPP (1) N N N (3)
Boarding House or Rooming House Y (4) N Y N N N N N R
Playgrounds SPA (4) N N N N N N N (3)
Conservation Areas, Farming and Horticulture,
Orchards, Nurseries, Forests, Tree
Farms, Sale of Farm Produce
Y (4) N Y Y Y Y Y Y R
Storage of Farm Vehicles Y (4) N N N N N N N NR
ACCESSORY BUILDINGs & Uses Y (4) Y Y SPP SPP Y SPA SPP (3)
Hammerhead LOTs SPP (4) N N N N N N N (3)
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 39
Table of Principal Uses (Continued)
Principal Uses Residential
Business
Compact
Business
Industrial Commercial Recreation
Conservation
FloodPlain
Wetlands
Refuse
Disposal
Site Plan
Approval
INDEPENDENT ADULT LIVING
RESIDENCE
N SPP (9)
(11)
N N N N N N (3)
ACTIVE ADULT NEIGHBORHOOD N N N SPP (10) SPP (10) N N N (3)
Common Drives Y N N N N N N N R
Institutional Uses
CHILD CARE FACILITY Y (5) (4) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) R
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME Y (6) (4) N Y N N N N N R
Private Schools & Colleges, Dance & Music
Studios
SPA (4)
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
(3)
Nursing Homes SPA (4) N N N N N N N (3)
Day Camps, Overnight Camps, and Camp
Sites
N
N
N
SPP
N
SPP
N
SPP
(3)
Municipal Y (5) (4) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) R
Public Service Corporation Y (5) (4) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) R
Religious Y (5) (4) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) R
Educational (Non-Profit) Y (5) (4) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) Y (5) R
Wireless Communication Facilities SPP (8) N N SSP(8) SSP(8) SPP (8) N SSP(8) (3)
Business & Commercial Uses
TOURIST HOMES, or LODGING HOUSEs N SPA (1) N N SPP (1) N N N (3)
Business or Professional Offices N SPP (1) SPP SPP (2) SPP (1) N N SPP (2) (3)
Retail Stores or Service Establishments N SPP (1) SPP N SPP (1) N N N (3)
Banks N SPP SPP N SPP N N N (3)
U.S. Post Offices N SPP SPP N N N N N (3)
Salesrooms for Automobiles, Bicycles, Farm
Implements, Boats, and Similar Equipment
N
SPP
N
N
SPP (1)
N
N
N
(3)
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 40
Table of Principal Uses (Continued)
Principal Uses Residential
Business
Compact
Business
Industrial Commercial Recreation
Conservation
FloodPlain
Wetlands
Refuse
Disposal
Site Plan
Approval
Restaurants N SPP N SPP SPP SPP N SPP (3)
Country Clubs or Other MEMBERSHIP CLUBs N SPA N SPP N SPP N SPP (3)
Golf Courses SPP (4) N N SPP N SPP N SPP (3)
Ski Areas, MARINAs & Boat Landings SPA(4) N N SPP N SPP N SPP (3)
Cross Country Ski Areas SPP (4) N N N N N N N (3)
Parking Areas for Employees, Customers
or Visitors
N
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
N
N
SPP
(3)
HOTELS MOTELS N SPA N N N N N N (3)
Theaters, Bowling Alleys, Skating Rinks,
Clubs or Assembly within the BUILDING
N
SPA
N
N
N
N
N
N
(3)
Funeral Home, Mortuaries or Crematories N N N N SPP N N N (3)
Veterinary Hospitals, Stables & Kennels,
Raising or Breeding of Animals for Sale, and
Boarding Animals
SPA (4)
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
(3)
Printing, Publishing or Commercial
Reproduction or Photo Processing
Establishments,Offices, Medical or Dental
Labs, and Research Laboratories
N
N
N
N
SPP (2)
N
N
N
(3)
Building Materials Salesrooms & Yards,
Contractor's Yards, Wholesale Distribution
Plants, Storage Warehouses
N
N
N
N
SPP
N
N
N
(3)
Gasoline Service Stations, Garages or
Repair Shops
N
SPA
N
N
N
N
N
N
(3)
Utility Structures, Passenger Depots and
Terminals
N N N N SPP N N N (3)
Screened Storage N N N SPP SPP N N SPP (3)
Cafeterias for Employees N N N SPP N N N SPP (3)
Access to Industrial Zoned Land N Y N N N N N N (3)
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 41
Table of Principal Uses (Continued)
Principal Uses Residential
Business
Compact
Business
Industrial Commercial Recreation
Conservation
FloodPlain
Wetlands
Refuse
Disposal
Site Plan
Approval
Retail Store as part of a REGISTERED
MARIJUANA DISPENSARY
N
SPP
(1) (12)
N N N N N N (3)
Industrial Uses
Manufacturing Enterprises N N N SPP N N N SPP (3)
Research Laboratories with Incidental
Assembly or Manufacture
N N N SPP (2) N N N SPP (2) (3)
Sanitary Landfill N N N N N N N SPS (3)
Refuse Transfer Station N N N N N N N SPS (3)
Refuse Incinerator N N N N N N N SPS (3)
COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC
RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION
SPP SPP N Y Y SPP N Y (3)
(1) Uses permitted by right provided that the BUILDING is less than 1,000 square feet GROSS FLOOR AREA, there is only one
BUILDING per LOT, all parking spaces are located only in the rear yard, Site Plan Approval is granted, and 50% of the LOT area
is open space.
(2) Uses permitted by right provided that the BUILDING is less than 1,500 square feet GROSS FLOOR AREA, there is only one
BUILDING per LOT, all parking spaces are located only in the rear yard, Site Plan Approval is granted, and 50% of the LOT area
is open space.
(3) All uses requiring a Special Permit are subject to Site Plan Approval requirements as part of the special permit process.
(4) Refer to Section 7.3.3.3 of this Bylaw to determine parking requirements for uses permitted in the Residential District.
(5) Allowed in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L., Ch. 40A, Section 3.
(6) Allowed as accessory use only.
(7) Allowed without special permit in accordance with Section 8.1.2 of this Bylaw.
(8) Wireless Service Facilities shall be allowed by special permit only on land located in the Wireless Service Facility District.
(9) The total number of INDEPENDENT ADULT UNITs shall not exceed 6% of the total single family DWELLING UNITs in Stow.
(10) An Active Adult Neighborhood shall be allowed by Special Permit only on land located in the Active Adult Neighborhood District.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 42
(11) Provisions of Section 8.9, Inclusion of Affordable Housing, may apply.
(12) Retail component of a REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY is allowed by Special Permit within the REGISTERED
MARIJUANA DISPENSARY Overlay District, in accordance with section 5.5 of the BYLAW and pursuant to Department of
Public Health Regulations 105 CMR 725.000.
Prohibited Uses - All uses not specifically named in the text of the bylaw are prohibited.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 43
3.11 Intentionally left blank
3.12 Intentionally left blank
SECTION 4
DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
4.1 Standard Dimensional Provisions:
4.1.1 No BUILDING, STRUCTURE or land, or part thereof, may be constructed, altered,
enlarged, repaired or moved, occupied and used for any purpose which violates any
section of this Bylaw or any of the provisions of the bylaws of the Town of Stow.
4.1.2 Only one main BUILDING may be built or placed on any LOT within the Town except
within a business, commercial, or industrial district. Any main BUILDING hereafter
ERECTED shall be on a LOT which has frontage upon a STREET as defined in this
Bylaw.
4.1.3 A LOT on which there existed at the time of the adoption of this Bylaw two (2) or more
DWELLING houses may be divided into as many LOTS as there were DWELLING
houses thereon, providing the LOT is divided in such manner that the resulting LOTS
shall conform to the area and frontage requirements of this Bylaw, except upon special
permit granted by the Board of Appeals. No other LOT may be changed so as to result in
a LOT or LOTS having less than the minimum area and frontage requirements.
4.1.4 No BUILDING except piers, wharfs and other STRUCTURES to service boats shall be
ERECTED below the flood contour lines as shown on the maps and plans set forth in
Section 2.3.8 of this Bylaw, as indicated on and incorporated in by reference on the
zoning map accompanying this Bylaw, except upon a special permit granted by the Board
of Appeals as hereinafter provided for in Section 5.1.1.7.
4.1.5 Any construction or use for which a permit was legally issued prior to the adoption of this
bylaw or any amendment thereto shall be permitted, notwithstanding non-compliance with
the requirements of this bylaw or amendment thereto, provided such construction or use
was commenced within six (6) months after the issuance of the permit and carried on to
completion within two (2) years, unless a special permit for a longer period of time is
granted by the Board of Appeals.
4.1.6 This section is intended to provide additional rights to build single family DWELLINGS on
certain LOTS in the Residential District that do not conform to zoning area and frontage
requirements in effect, and is in no way intended to limit any rights set forth as to such
LOTS in Chapter 40A, as from time to time amended. The Board of Appeals shall grant
a special permit for the construction of a single-family DWELLING to the owner of any
LOT of at least 40,000 square feet area and at least 150 feet of contiguous LOT frontage
in the Residential District, which was separately shown, laid out or described in a plan,
deed or certificate of title duly recorded or registered at the Middlesex South District
Registry of Deeds, and met all requirements of the Bylaw then in effect, prior to the first
publication of notice of the public hearing required before any amendment of the Zoning
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 44
Bylaw pursuant to said Chapter 40A, increasing such area or frontage requirements, or
both, for a residential LOT, and situated on a STREET as defined in the Zoning Bylaws
open for use by the public at such date of publication, upon a finding that the conditions
in Section 4.1.6.1 are met.
4.1.6.1 Any adjoining LOT to the LOT described in the application for a special permit, held in
common ownership with the LOT described in the application for the special permit, had
an existing lawful BUILDING thereon, or a building permit had issued for such a
BUILDING (on which construction was commenced within six [6] months from the date
of the permit and continued through to completion as continuously and expeditiously as
reasonable) before the date of the publication of the first notice of the public hearing on
the amendment to the Zoning Bylaw, increasing such area or frontage requirements, so
that such adjoining LOT is not available for use in combination with the LOT which is
the subject of the application at the time of filing the application.
4.1.6.2 Provided, however, that the Board of Appeals shall grant such special permit for only
one LOT to any owner owning such LOT in common with a LOT unavailable for use in
combination therewith as defined in this section which permit shall run with the land;
and shall impose as conditions to such special permit that any proposed DWELLING is
to be located on such LOT so as to conform with all other minimum requirements of
FRONT, SIDE and REAR YARD setbacks of the Zoning Bylaws in effect; and the
further condition that, unless the LOT is sold and thereafter is in separate ownership, a
special permit granted under this section shall lapse within a specified period of time,
not more than two (2) years thereafter if a building permit has not been issued and
construction has not begun by such expiration date except for good cause shown and
an extension of such special permit by the Board of Appeals granted upon a showing of
good cause.
4.1.6.3 Provided further, that the Board of Appeals may impose additional conditions and
safeguards, where appropriate, to assure harmony with the general purpose and intent
of the Zoning Bylaws.
4.1.7 No BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES, except for driveways, roads and septic systems,
shall be located outside the DEVELOPABLE SITE AREA.
4.2 Height Regulations:
4.2.1 The height of any BUILDING or STRUCTURE shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet unless
a special permit has been granted by the Planning Board when there is no obstruction to
scenic views from public ways or properties, except that in no case shall the height
exceed the limits permitted by Section 35A of Chapter 90 of the General Laws as
inserted by Chapter 756 of the Acts of 1960 and any more restrictive amendments
thereto. Radio towers, chimneys, broadcasting and television antennae, bulkheads,
cooling towers, water towers, ventilators and other appurtenances shall in no event
exceed one hundred (100) feet in height, and amateur radio towers and antennae shall
not exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet in height, and further provided that if the use
requires a permit or license for the intended use from any governmental authority, one
has been granted.
4.2.2 Height shall be measured as the vertical distance from the average ground elevation
around the exterior WALLS of the STRUCTURE, or, in the case of built-up land, the
highest elevation at the site prior to such change in contour, to the highest point of the
roof surface in the case of a flat roof, and to the mean height between eaves and ridge in
the case of a pitched roof.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 45
4.2.3 Limitations of height shall not apply to spires, domes and steeples.
4.3 Area, Frontage, YARD, and FLOOR AREA Requirements
4.3.1 No BUILDING shall be ERECTED unless in conformity with the requirements on the
Table, following, except:
4.3.1.1 eaves, sills, cornices, belt cornices and window awnings may project up to two feet
into the required YARD;
4.3.1.2 on a corner LOT in order to provide unobstructed visibility at intersection, no SIGN,
FENCE, WALL, tree, hedge, or other vegetation, and no BUILDING or other
STRUCTURE more than three (3) feet above the established STREET grades
measured from a plane through the curb grades or the height of the crown of the
STREET, shall be ERECTED, placed or maintained within the area formed by
intersecting STREET LINES and a straight line joining said STREET LINES at points
which are twenty-five (25) feet distant from the point of intersection, measured along
said STREET LINES; and
4.3.1.3 further, no YARD, LOT area or OPEN SPACE required for a BUILDING by this Bylaw,
shall, during the existence of such BUILDING, be occupied by or counted as OPEN
SPACE for another BUILDING. No LOT area shall be so reduced or diminished that
the YARDS or other OPEN SPACES shall be smaller than prescribed by this Bylaw.
4.3.1.4 A detached ACCESSORY BUILDING or a swimming pool may be ERECTED in the
REAR or SIDE YARD area in conformance with the YARD requirements of the district
in which it is located. An ACCESSORY BUILDING attached to its principal BUILDING
shall be considered an integral part thereof, and as such shall be subject to the
FRONT, SIDE and REAR YARD requirements applicable to the principal BUILDING;
4.3.2 Methods for Calculating Dimensional Requirements - The following shall apply:
4.3.2.1 LOT area - LOT area shall be determined by calculating the area within a LOT
including any area within the LOT over which easements have been granted,
provided that:
? no area within a STREET shall be included in determining minimum LOT area.
? water area beyond ten (10) feet from the shore lines shall not be included in
determining the minimum LOT area;
? at least 50% of the minimum required LOT area shall be land which is not in a
wetlands resource area (excluding the buffer zone) as defined by Article
9,Wetlands Protection, of the Town of Stow General Bylaw or Flood Plain
District
4.3.2.2 Frontage shall be contiguous and measured along the STREET LINE.
a) For a corner LOT, frontage shall be measured along one STREET only, including
one half of the corner arc, or that portion of the corner arc not exceeding twentyfive
(25) feet, whichever is less.
b) If a LOT has frontage on more than one STREET, the frontage on one STREET
only may be used to satisfy the minimum LOT frontage.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 46
4.3.2.3 Area Suitable for BUILDINGs - Except in the case of hammerhead LOTS as
permitted in a Residential District, each LOT in a Residential District shall have
sufficient area suitable for BUILDINGs. The area suitable for BUILDINGs shall be
considered sufficient if: (a) a circle of 150 feet in diameter, or, (b) a rectangle with an
area of 20,000 square feet and a minimum side of 80 feet can be drawn on the LOT
plan without overlapping any LOT line or any wetlands or Flood Plain District.
4.3.2.4 LOT Width - In the Residence District, each LOT shall have a minimum width of at
least 100 feet between the STREET LINE and the area suitable for BUILDINGs. A
LOT meets the minimum width requirement if a 100-foot diameter circle can move on
the LOT plan from the STREET LINE to the area suitable for BUILDINGs without
overlapping any side or rear LOT line or any Flood Plain District line.
4.3.2.5 LOT Shape - No LOT shall be laid out which is substantially irregular in shape. For
purposes of this provision, substantially irregular is defined as a LOT having an index
of regularity lower than four-tenths (0.4) as determined by the following formula.
When the LOT is a hammerhead LOT, the index of regularity shall not be lower than
0.25.
r = 16a
p
Where: r
a
=
=
The index of regularity
The area of the LOT in square feet.
p = The perimeter of the LOT in linear feet.
Provisions of this section shall not apply to LOTs shown on a plan and part of an
application for a special permit or subdivision, the application for which has been duly
filed as required by this Zoning Bylaw or the Massachusetts General Laws before the
first publication of notice of the public hearing on such amendment required by
Massachusetts General Laws Ch. 40A, s. 5.
4.3.2.6 Front YARDS - Front YARDS shall be the distance measured in a straight line
between the LOT frontage and the nearest point of any BUILDING or STRUCTURE,
excluding roof overhangs. Roof overhangs shall not extend further than two feet into
the minimum required front YARD.
1) A LOT having frontage on two or more STREETS shall have two or more front
YARDS, each of which shall comply with the requirements of the front YARD
provisions.
2) In no case shall any BUILDING or STRUCTURE be located closer to the sideline
of a STREET than the minimum required front YARD.
3) Driveways are allowed within FRONT YARDS.
4) Septic system STRUCTUREs are allowed within the FRONT YARD and shall
comply with requirements established by the Board of Health.
4.3.2.7 Side and Rear YARDS - Side and rear YARDS shall be the distance measured in a
straight line from the nearest point of any BUILDING or STRUCTURE to each side or
rear LOT line, excluding roof overhangs. Roof overhangs shall not extend further
than two feet into the minimum required SIDE or rear YARD.
1) Septic system STRUCTUREs are allowed within the SIDE and REAR YARD and
shall comply with requirements established by the Board of Health.
2) Intentionally left blank.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 47
3) Driveways are allowed within the SIDE and REAR YARD setbacks.
4.3.2.8 FLOOR AREA RATIO - The ratio of the sum of the GROSS FLOOR AREA of all
BUILDINGs on a LOT to the DEVELOPABLE SITE AREA of the LOT.
4.4 Table of Dimensional Requirements
These requirements shall be satisfied entirely within each district.
Zoning
District
Minimum
LOT Area
in sq. ft.
Minimum
LOT
Frontage
in ft.
Minimum
FRONT
YARD
in ft.
Minimum
SIDE
YARD
in ft.
Minimum
REAR
YARD
in ft.
Minimum
OPEN
SPACE
in percent
Maximum
FLOOR
AREA
RATIO
R/C 40,000 150 (2) 100 50 100 80% .10
Res 65,340 200 (2) 30 25 40 10% NR
Bus 40,000 150 (2) 50 None (1) 50 (1) 20% .30
Comm 40,000 150 (2) 50 25 (1) 50 (1) 30% .30
Ind 40,000 150 (2) 100 25 (1) 50 (1) 40% .30
C/B 65,340 200 50 None (1) 40 (1) 30% .30
R/D 300,000 150 300 (3) 150 (3) 150 (3) 80% .10
NR = Not Regulated
Footnote to Table of Dimensional Requirements
(1) If the LOT abuts a residential or recreation-conservation district, whether directly or
separated by a public or railroad right-of-way, the side and rear YARDS abutting the
residential or recreation-conservation district shall be increased as follows and shall include
a 50 landscaped buffer that consists of an opaque screen as defined in Section 7.7.4.1 of
the Zoning Bylaw.
Minimum Side or Rear YARD
Compact Business District 50 feet
Business District 50 feet
Commercial District 50 feet
Industrial District 100 feet
(2) The minimum frontage on Route 117 (Great Road) shall be 200 feet.
(3) In the Refuse Disposal District, one hundred feet (100) of the FRONT, REAR and SIDE
YARDS must be densely planted with natural screening, or otherwise screened. YARD
requirements may be waived as a condition of the special permit for that portion of a
parcel of land abutting an operational REFUSE disposal facility. Such YARD
requirements are to be measured from the LOT boundaries and the outer-most limits of
the excavation or any BUILDING for the REFUSE disposal facility.
(4) Wireless Service Facilities shall be exempt from the provisions of Section 4 but shall be
subject to minimum front, side and rear YARD setbacks stated in Section 4.4 and
setbacks and other limitations estabished in Section 3.11 of the Zoning Bylaw.
(5) An Active Adult Neighborhood shall be exempt from the provisions of Section 4 and shall
be subject to minimum front, side and rear YARD setbacks and other limitations
established in Section 8.8 of the Zoning Bylaw.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 48
4.5 Special Provisions and Exceptions to Dimensional Regulations
4.5.1 Dimensional Regulations for INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCE
In the Business District, an INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCE shall be built according
to the following dimensional standards.
minimum LOT area - 217,800 sq. ft.
minimum LOT frontage - 200 ft.
minimum LOT width - As otherwise set forth
in this Bylaw
minimum FRONT, SIDE and REAR YARDS - 50 ft.
minimum setback of pavement areas other than ACCESS
DRIVEWAYS and walkways from the front LOT line
- 50 ft.
minimum separation of BUILDINGs within the LOT - 20 ft.
maximum height of STRUCTURES - 35 ft.
minimum OPEN SPACE - 30 %
maximum FLOOR AREA RATIO (business district only) - 0.30
4.5.1.1 Dimensional Regulation of INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs in the Business
District shall be subject to FLOOR AREA RATIO.
4.5.1.2 All privileges and exemptions provided to single-family residential uses or BUILDINGs
under this Bylaw as set forth in Section 3.8.1.11 or otherwise, shall also apply to
INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs.
4.5.1.3 Where the requirements of INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs differ from or
conflict with other requirements of the Bylaw, the requirements established herein
shall prevail. The above requirements shall be met and where appropriate, the
Planning Board may impose additional requirements as a condition of the Special
Permit.
4.5.2 The provisions of Sections 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 of the Zoning Bylaw shall not apply to
Wireless Service Facilities. The height provisions of Section 4.2 shall not apply to
Wireless Service Facilities which shall be governed by the provisions of Section
3.11.7.1.
4.5.3 The provisions of Sections 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3 of the Zoning Bylaw shall not apply to an
Active Adult Neighborhood.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 49
SECTION 5
OVERLAY DISTRICTS
5.1 Flood Plain District
The Flood Plain District is intended to protect the public health and safety and persons and
property against the hazards of flood water inundation; to preserve and maintain the
GROUND WATER table and to protect the community from the costs which may be
incurred when unsuitable development occurs in areas subject to floods. The provisions
applicable to the Flood Plain District shall be considered as overlying other zoning districts.
In those cases where the Flood Plain District overlies another zoning district, the provisions
of the Flood Plain District shall be controlling.
5.1.1 Uses Permitted:
5.1.1.1 Conservation areas for water, water supply, plants and wildlife, and dams necessary
for achieving this purpose;
5.1.1.2 Farming and horticulture, including raising and harvesting crops, truck gardening,
grazing and livestock raising, but not including piggeries or the raising of animals for
fur;
5.1.1.3 Nurseries, forests and tree farms, provided that any equipment necessary for these
uses is normally stored so it is not visible from district or property boundaries;
5.1.1.4 Recreation, including golf courses, municipal, county or state parks (but not an
amusement park), boating, fishing, hunting (where legally permitted), MARINAs,
landings and any non-commercial recreation use;
5.1.1.5 In a business, commercial or industrial district, any of the foregoing uses which are
conducted for profit, or for which a fee or similar charge is made, and allowed within
the Flood Plain District, provided that such uses are otherwise permitted in the district
overlain by the Flood Plain District;
5.1.1.6 Subject to General Laws, Chapter 131, Section 40 and 40A access across land within
the district overlapped; and
5.1.1.7 The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit to allow any use or STRUCTURE
otherwise permitted in the district overlain by the Flood Plain District if it is clearly
shown that the land intended for said use or structure is included within the Flood
Plain District through mapping error, or that no portion of said proposed new use or
structure will be below the flood plain elevation as defined in this Bylaw. Where a
mapping error is claimed, the petitioner claiming the same shall bear the burden of
demonstrating that the Flood Plain District is incorrect as it relates to the land subject
to the special permit application.
5.1.2 Floodway Data - In Zones A and AE, along watercourses that have not had a regulatory
floodway designated, the best available Federal, State, local, or other floodway data shall
be used to prohibit encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase in flood
levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
5.1.2.1 Base Flood Elevation Data - Base flood elevation data is required for land divisions or
proposed developments greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, within
unnumbered A zones.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 50
5.1.3 Notification Of Watercourse Alteration
In a riverine situation, the Town of Stow shall notify the following of any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse:
 Adjacent Communities
 NFIP State Coordinator
Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation
251 Causeway Street, Suite 600-700
Boston, MA 02114-2104
 NFIP Program Specialist
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region I
99 High Street, 6th Floor
Boston, MA 02110
5.1.4 Other Regulations
In Zones AE, along watercourses that have a regulatory floodway within the Town of Stow
designated on the Middlesex County FIRMs, encroachments are prohibited in the
regulatory floodway, which would result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge. All land division or development proposals must
be designed to assure that: a) such proposals minimize flood damage; b) all public utilities
and facilities are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and c)
adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
5.1.5 Reference To Existing Regulations
 The Floodplain District is established as an overlay district to all other districts. All
development in the district, including structural and non-structural activities, whether
permitted by right or by special permit must be in compliance with Chapter 131,
Section 40 of the Massachusetts General Laws and with the following:
 Section of the Massachusetts State Building Code which addresses floodplain and
coastal high hazard areas (currently 780 CMR 120.G, "Flood Resistant Construction
and Construction in Coastal Dunes");
 Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
(currently 310 CMR 10.00);
 Inland Wetlands Restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 13.00);
 Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage, DEP
(currently 310 CMR 15, Title 5);
5.2 Water Resource Protection District
The Water Resource Protection District is intended to protect, preserve and maintain the
existing and potential GROUND WATER supply and GROUND WATER RECHARGE
AREAS within the town; to preserve and protect present and potential sources of GROUND
WATER supply for the public health and safety; and to conserve the natural resources of
the town. The Water Resource Protection District shall be considered as overlying other
zoning districts and the provisions of the Water Resource Protection District shall be
controlling, and any uses permitted in the portions of the underlying districts shall be
permitted subject to all the provisions of this Section. Prohibitions of land use in the
underlying districts shall not be modified by the conditions of the Water Resource
Protection District.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 51
5.2.1 Uses permitted provided that all necessary permits, orders or approvals required by local,
state or federal law shall have been obtained:
5.2.1.1 All uses of the underlying district provided that no such use on any LOT or parcel
shall as to that portion of said LOT or parcel within the Water Resource Protection
District:
1. Result in the disposal of any waste material, solid or liquid, other than
SANITARY WASTES, brush or stumps.
2. Generate on-site sewage disposal exceeding 110 gallons per day per 10,000
square feet of LOT area, except as provided in Section 5.2.2.3. For the
purposes of this Bylaw, such volumes are to be estimated as provided in Title 5,
Sanitary Sewage, of the State Environmental Code.
3. Conduct any activity which involves as a principal or ACCESSORY USE the
manufacture, process, storage, application, transportation and/or disposal of
toxic or HAZARDOUS MATERIALs where such activity would involve outside
storage, on-site waste disposal except as provided in Section 5.2.2, or
uncontrolled drainage facilities which would allow discharge to surface or
GROUND WATER.
4. Dispose of snow brought in from outside the District.
5. Involve the storage for sale of fuel, oil or gasoline or, except as allowed by
special permit, involve outdoor storage of road salt, or other deicing chemicals,
fertilizers, herbicides or pesticides.
6. Store underground and/or transmit oil, gasoline or other liquid petroleum
products, excluding liquified petroleum gases.
7. Involve excavation of earth, sand, gravel and other soils, except as allowed in
Section 5.2.5.3.
8. Render impervious, by any means, more than ten percent (10%) of the LOT
area proposed for development within the Water Resource Protection District or
5,000 square feet of said district, whichever is greater.
9. Use septic system cleaners containing HAZARDOUS MATERIAL.
10. Damage to underlying GROUND WATER. For the purpose hereof the following
uses shall be considered to damage the underlying GROUND WATER:
automotive service and repair shops; junk and salvage yards; truck and bus
terminals; car wash establishments; painting, wood preserving or furniture
stripping establishments; dry cleaning establishments; metal plating, finishing,
polishing or etching establishments; or any other similar use determined by the
Board of Health or its sanitary agent to damage the underlying GROUND
WATER.
5.2.1.2 Conservation of soil, water, plants and wildlife;
5.2.1.3 Outdoor recreation, foot, bicycle and/or horse paths, nature study, boating, landings,
bridges, fishing or hunting where otherwise legally permitted;
5.2.1.4 Proper operation and maintenance of existing dams, splash boards and other water
control, supply and conservation devices;
5.2.1.5 Farming and horticulture, including raising, harvesting and storing crops, truck
gardening, grazing, dairying, orchards, nurseries, forests and tree farms, and poultry
and livestock raising but not including piggeries or the raising of animals for fur,
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 52
provided that fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides and other leachable materials are not
stored in any manner which would permit leakage thereof; the appropriateness of the
management practices shall be governed by USDA or Soil Conservation Service, or
Cooperative Extension Service or Massachusetts Department of Food and
Agriculture's guidelines and use regulations;
5.2.1.6 Necessary public utilities and facilities, provided they are designed to prevent
contamination of GROUND WATER;
5.2.1.7 Construction of BUILDINGs, STRUCTURES and other facilities for parking and other
uses are as appurtenant thereto, provided that except to the extent of naturally
occurring PH and temperature components of surface water quality and GROUND
WATER quality standards, runoff waters leaving the developed site via surface flow
shall remain unimpaired as to quality;
5.2.1.8 Maintenance, replacement and repair of existing BUILDINGs or STRUCTURES;
5.2.1.9 Home heating storage tanks, provided that the contents thereof are for heating the
premises and that the tanks are contained within the BUILDING; and
5.2.1.10 Liquified petroleum gas storage tanks.
5.2.2 Uses permitted where allowed in the underlying zoning district, subject to a special permit
granted by the appropriate Special Permit Granting Authority:
5.2.2.1 Expansion of existing NON-CONFORMING USES to the extent allowed in the
underlying district. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall not grant such
approval unless it shall find that such expansion shall not be more detrimental to the
GROUND WATER supply than the existing use;
5.2.2.2 Any use involving on-site disposal of PROCESS WASTES;
5.2.2.3 Generation of on-site sewage disposal exceeding 110 gallons per day per 10,000
square feet of LOT area; and
5.2.2.4 Above ground or indoor storage of toxic or HAZARDOUS MATERIALs totaling more
than fifty gallons of liquid volume or twenty-five pounds per dry weight, except as
allowed in Section 5.2.1.9.
5.2.3 In addition to the usual requirements in applying for a special permit, each applicant for a
special permit hereunder shall provide the following additional information at the time the
application is filed:
5.2.3.1 A complete list of all chemicals, pesticides, fuel or other potentially toxic or
HAZARDOUS MATERIALs to be used or stored on the premises in quantities greater
than those associated with normal household use, accompanied by a description of
measures proposed to protect all storage containers/facilities from vandalism,
corrosion and leakage and to provide for control of spills;
5.2.3.2 A description of potentially toxic or hazardous wastes to be generated, indicating
storage and disposal methods;
5.2.3.3 Evidence of approval by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP) of any industrial waste treatment or disposal system or any waste water
treatment system subject to 310 CMR 15.02; and
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 53
5.2.3.4 Analysis by a technically qualified expert certifying that during the normal operation of
the proposed use the quality and supply of the underlying GROUND WATER
resources will not be degraded from EXISTING CONDITIONS.
5.2.4 The Special Permit Granting Authority may grant such a special permit provided that it
finds in addition to such other findings as are otherwise required by the Bylaw that such
use permitted thereby:
5.2.4.1 Meets the purpose and intent of this Bylaw and will not derogate from the purpose of
the Water Resource Protection District;
5.2.4.2 Satisfies the requirements for design set forth in Section 5.2.5 below;
5.2.4.3 Will not, during construction or thereafter, impair existing GROUND WATER quality
or reduce existing recharge capacity beyond that allowed in Section 5.2.1.1.8 of this
Bylaw; and
5.2.4.4 Will not adversely affect the quality or the yield of an existing or potential GROUND
WATER supply.
5.2.5 The above uses shall be permitted only upon satisfaction of the following design
requirements:
5.2.5.1 Where a portion of the LOT is located partially outside the Water Resource Protection
District, site design shall to the extent feasible, locate potential pollution sources, such
as on-site disposal systems, outside the district boundaries.
5.2.5.2 Roof, parking and drive runoff shall be recharged on the site, diverted toward areas
covered with vegetation for surface infiltration to the maximum extent practicable.
Runoff from parking areas of 5,000 square feet or more shall be discharged to oil-gas
trap catch basins with appropriate sumps prior to recharge.
5.2.5.3 Excavation of earth, sand, gravel and other soils shall not extend closer than five feet
above the maximum GROUND WATER elevation, except to provide for structural
foundations, holding ponds for drainage purposes and utility conduits. Exposed land
shall be returned to its natural vegetative state when excavation is complete.
5.2.5.4 Any additional net runoff volume shall not be diverted beyond the boundaries of this
District.
5.2.5.5 Risk of pollution through accidental spillage of HAZARDOUS MATERIALs shall be
reduced through the use of secure storage areas, impermeable diked catchments,
separated drainage systems from an area where toxic or HAZARDOUS MATERIALs
are stored or handled, or similar measures, which shall at the minimum meet any
requirements of any governmental agency and shall in general conform to any
standards established for such purpose by any industry or other private organization.
5.2.5.6 PROCESS WASTES from other operations other than personal hygiene and food for
residents, patrons and employees shall be treated so that contaminant levels in
GROUND WATER resulting from such disposal will not exceed those levels specified
in 310 CMR 22.00, or existing levels where such existing levels are higher.
5.2.5.7 All runoff from IMPERVIOUS SURFACEs shall be recharged on the site by being
diverted toward areas covered with vegetation for surface infiltration to the extent
possible. Dry wells shall be used only where other methods are not feasible and shall be
preceded by oil, grease and sediment traps to facilitate removal of contaminated solids.
No discharge directly into surface waters without intervening mitigative measures will be
allowed.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 54
5.3 Wireless Service Facility
5.3.1 Objectives
This Section permits the construction and use of Wireless Service Facilities within Stow,
regulates their impacts and accommodates their location and use in a manner intended
to:
A. Protect the scenic, historic, natural and man-made resources of the town;
B. Preserve the general safety, welfare and quality of life in the community;
C. Protect property values;
D. Protect the environment;
E. Guide sound development and encourage the most appropriate use of the land;
F. Encourage the use of certain existing Towers and structures;
G. Limit the total number and height of such facilities to what is essential to meet the
need;
H. Promote shared use of facilities where appropriate to reduce the need for new
facilities, and
I. Comply with the Communication Act of 1936 as amended by the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996.
5.3.2 Applicability
A. No Wireless Service Facility shall be ERECTED or installed except in compliance
with the provisions of this Section.
B. The requirements of this section shall apply to all Wireless Service Facilities, except
where Federal or State Law or Regulations exempt certain users or uses from all or
portions of the provisions of this section.
C. No Wireless Service Facility shall be considered exempt from this section by
sharing a MOUNT or FACILITY SITE with such exempt uses.
5.3.3 Definitions
In addition to the terms defined in Section 1.3, Definitions, of this Bylaw, the following
words, which are technical terms applying to Wireless Service Facilities, shall have the
meaning indicated below. Although set forth here for convenience, the terms shall have
the same effect as if set forth in Section 1.3, Definitions.
A. ACT: The Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996.
B. ABOVE GROUND LEVEL (AGL): A measurement of height from the natural grade
of a site, prior to disturbance, to the highest point of a structure with appurtenances.
C. ANTENNA: A device by which electromagnetic waves are sent or received (whether
a dish, rod, mast, pole, set of wires, plate, panel, line, cable or other arrangement
serving such purpose).
D. APPLICANT: The applicant or co-applicant for any special permit or site plan
approval for a Wireless Service Facility shall be a provider of WIRELESS
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 55
SERVICES, as defined herein, or other entity that has authority from the FCC to
provide WIRELESS SERVICES for the facility being proposed. The applicant shall
submit documentation of the legal right to install and use the proposed facility at the
time of the filing of the application for the permit or approval.
E. AVAILABLE SPACE: The space on a Tower or other structure to which ANTENNAS
of a Carrier are able to fit structurally and to be technologically feasible.
F. CAMOUFLAGED: A Wireless Service Facility or components that are disguised,
painted, colored or hidden by a purpose-built decoy that is made part of an existing
or proposed structure or made to resemble an architectural feature of the building
or structure on which it is placed.
G. CARRIER: An entity that provides Wireless Services, as defined herein, to
individuals, businesses or institutions. Synonymous with Wireless Service Provider.
H. CHANNEL: One of the assigned sub bands of radio frequencies as defined in the
ACT, licensed to the CARRIER for wireless service use.
I. CO-LOCATION: The use of a single MOUNT by more than one CARRIER and/or
several MOUNTS on a building or structure by more than one CARRIER. Each
service co-located at a site is a separate Wireless Service Facility. CARRIERS
operating more than one service at a site will be considered to have more than one
facility co-located at the site.
J. CONCEALED: A Wireless Service Facility or components are CONCEALED when
they are within parts of a building or other structure that was built for another
purpose and that is not visible from outside the structure.
K. ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT: An EA is the document required by the
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) when a Wireless Service Facility is
placed in certain designated areas.
L. EQUIPMENT SHELTER: An enclosed structure, cabinet, shed or box at the base
of the Mount within which are housed batteries, generators and electrical
equipment.
M. FACILITY SITE: A lot or parcel, or any part thereof, that is owned or leased by one
or more CARRIERS and upon which one or more Wireless Service Facility(s) and
required landscaping are located.
N. MODIFICATION OF AN EXISTING FACILITY: Any material change or proposed
change to a facility including but not limited to power input or output, number of
ANTENNAS, change in ANTENNA type or model, repositioning of ANTENNA(s), or
change in number of channels per ANTENNA above the maximum number
approved under an existing permit or special permit.
O. MONITORING: The measurement, by the use of instruments away from the
ANTENNA, including measurements at the lot/leasehold boundary, of the
electromagnetic radiation from a site as a whole, or from individual Wireless Service
Facilities, Towers, ANTENNAS, or associated power supplies and generators.
P. MONOPOLE: A single, self-supporting vertical pole with no guy wires, and hollow
such that the ANTENNA cables are CONCEALED within the structure.
Q. MOUNT: The structure or surface upon which ANTENNAS are Mounted, including
the following four types of Mounts:
1. Roof-mount. A mount attached to a building roof to which ANTENNAS are
mounted.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 56
2. Side-mount. A mount attached to the side or other non-roof portion of a building
to which ANTENNAS are mounted.
3. Ground-mount. A mount anchored into the ground to which ANTENNAS are
mounted. Ground mounts include purpose built structures such as poles, bases,
posts, MONOPOLES, and towers.
4. Structure-mount. A mount, attached to a structure other than a building, to which
ANTENNAS are mounted.
In the absence of a separate structural component to hold an ANTENNA, the
ANTENNA shall be considered to be its own ground, roof, side or structure mount.
R. RADIO FREQUENCY ENERGY (RFE): The electromagnetic emissions from 9 kHz
to 3,000 GHz.
S. SECURITY BARRIER: A locked fence, a wall or berm that completely seals an area
from unauthorized entry or trespass.
T. TOWER: A ground or building MOUNT that is significantly taller than it is wide, built
for the purpose of supporting wireless service transmitting, and/or receiving,
ANTENNAS and/or related equipment. Components of the Wireless Service Facility
used only to attach, contain, or support other elements of that facility are excluded
from this definition provided such components are not integrated with, or attached
directly to, the tower structure.
U. WIRELESS SERVICES: Commercial mobile radio services, unlicensed Wireless
Services, and common Carrier wireless exchange access services, as defined in the
ACT. These services include, but are not limited to, cellular services, personal
communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio services, and paging
services.
V. WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY: A complete system operated by one entity on one
communications service that is installed at one site, which system contains
ANTENNAS, transmission and/or reception equipment, and related equipment for
the purpose of supporting wireless communications. A site may contain one or more
Wireless Service Facilities.
5.3.4 Location of Facilities, Priorities
5.3.4.1 Wireless Service Facilities shall only be permitted by Special Permit from the Planning
Board, acting as the Special Permit Granting Authority, in accordance with MGL Ch.
40A, s.9 on land located in the Wireless Service Facility District.
5.3.4.2 APPLICANTS shall demonstrate that they have investigated locations higher in priority
ranking than the one for which they are applying and make a showing that
demonstrates that the alternatives are singly or in aggregate insufficient to provide the
necessary coverage and/or singly or in aggregate more visible or otherwise have more
of a detrimental impact on the community than use of the proposed location. A
WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY, ANTENNAS and MOUNTS shall be permitted
according to the following priorities: (a. being the highest priority)
a. on property occupied by the State Dept. of Fire Services, the State Entomology Lab
and the portion of the former Ft. Devens Annex occupied by the Air Force;
b. within an existing structure, CONCEALED;
c. CAMOUFLAGED on an existing structure, such as but not limited to an existing
electric transmission Tower or an existing radio Antenna, a water Tower or building
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 57
provided that the installation of the new facility does not increase the height of the
existing structure, and of a compatible design;
d. on an existing structure and not to increase the height of the structure by more than
10 feet. In no case shall the height exceed 100 feet AGL except on land occupied
by the State Dept. of Fire Services, the State Entomology Lab and the portion of the
former Ft. Devens Annex occupied by the Air Force;
e. co-located with existing Wireless Service Facilities located within the WIRELESS
SERVICE FACILITY District where deemed appropriate by the Special Permit
Granting Authority;
f. co-located on a new MOUNT within the Wireless Service Facility District as deemed
appropriate by the Special Permit Granting Authority, and
g. if adequately demonstrated to the Planning Board in the special permit process that
each of the above types of locations is not feasible, erection of a new facility that
complies with the requirements of this section and where visual impact can be
eliminated or minimized and mitigated to the maximum extent feasible, including
height reductions, camouflaging and other means.
5.3.5 Wireless Service Facility District
This district shall be an overlay district and shall include all parcels of land located in the
Industrial and Refuse Disposal Districts and on certain parcels of land in the Commercial
and Residential Districts, and on land occupied by the State Dept. of Fire Services, the
State Entomology Lab and the portion of the former Ft. Devens Annex occupied by the Air
Force as depicted on a map dated January 23, 2001 and entitled Wireless Service Facility
District.
5.3.6 Special Permit
Any new WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY and any proposed modification of a WIRELESS
SERVICE FACILITY shall be allowed only by special permit from the Planning Board as
the Special Permit Granting Authority in accordance with MGL Ch. 40A, s.9, subject to the
following requirements, conditions and limitations.
5.3.7 Dimensional, Screening and Other Site Development Requirements
5.3.7.1 Height - Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 4.2.1 of the Bylaw with respect to
height
a. Except on land occupied by the State Fire-fighting Academy, the State Entomology
lab and the portion of the former Ft. Devens Annex occupied by the Air Force, the
maximum height of a new WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY shall not exceed 100
feet AGL or such lesser height as is established as the maximum height necessary,
and shall not exceed a height that requires it to be illuminated at night under
Federal Aviation Administration or Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission
regulations, whichever is less.
b. On land occupied by the State Fire-Fighting Academy, the state entomology lab and
the portion of the former Ft. Devens Annex occupied by the Air Force, the maximum
height of a new WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY shall not exceed 150 feet AGL.
c. The height of all wireless mounts and facilities shall be proportional to, compatible
with and appropriate to the site and surroundings. Factors to be considered include
but are not limited to whether there is existing vegetation sufficient to screen the
visual impact of the proposed WIRELESS SERVICES FACILITY, the height and
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 58
density of existing structures and vegetation on and off-site, the presence of scenic
views and vistas on and off-site, visual and economic impacts to residential
properties off-site, and proposals to screen the visual impact of the structure(s) with
landscaping on site or on other land controlled by the applicant.
d. On land located outside the Wireless Service Facility District and within a
residential district the maximum height shall not exceed 35 feet AGL and shall not
result in adverse visual or economic impact.
e. Deleted at October, 2009 Special Town Meeting
5.3.7.2 Setbacks  No TOWER, MONOPOLE, or WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY shall be
located within:
a. 1000 feet, measured on a horizontal plane, to all existing residential Buildings and
schools or the footprint of a future residential building for which a Building Permit
has been issued, except those residential buildings located on the LOT upon which
the WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY is to be constructed, provided, however, that
the Special Permit Granting Authority may allow a setback of 900 feet measured on
a horizontal plane when it finds that a substantially better design will result from
such reduction. In making such a finding, the Special Permit Granting Authority
shall consider the visual and safety impacts of the proposed use;
b. 1000 feet, measured on a horizontal plane, to all existing municipal buildings,
except those located on the LOT upon which the WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY
is to be constructed, provided, however, that the Special Permit Granting Authority
may allow a setback of 900 feet measured on a horizontal plane when it finds that a
substantially better design will result from such reduction. In making such a finding,
the Special Permit Granting Authority shall consider the visual and safety impacts of
the proposed use; and
c. 200 feet from existing non-residential buildings except those located on the LOT
upon which the WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY is to be constructed;
d. Any WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY shall comply with front, side, and rear YARD
dimensional requirements of Section 4.4, Table of Dimensional Requirements,
except that such dimensional requirements may be altered by the Planning Board if
it finds that a substantially better design will result. In making such a finding, the
Planning Board shall consider both the visual and safety impacts of the proposed
WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY.
5.3.7.3 Shelters and Accessory Buildings - EQUIPMENT SHELTERS for Wireless Service
Facilities shall be designed to be consistent with one of the following design standards:
a. EQUIPMENT SHELTERS shall be located in underground vaults; or
b. EQUIPMENT SHELTERS shall be designed to be consistent with traditional New
England architectural styles and materials. Alternative materials may be used
provided that the Special Permit Granting Authority finds the materials to be
consistent with character of the neighborhood; or
c. EQUIPMENT SHELTERS shall be screened behind an effective year-round
landscape buffer, equal to the height of the proposed building, and/or wooden
fence. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall determine the style of fencing
and/or landscape buffer that is compatible with the neighborhood.
5.3.7.4 Security, Signs
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 59
a. All Ground Mounted Wireless Service Facilities shall be surrounded by a
SECURITY BARRIER to ensure they are completely secure from trespass or
vandalism.
b. A one square foot sign shall be posted adjacent to the entry gate indicating the
name of the facility owner(s) and a 24-hour emergency telephone number(s).
c. Advertising on any ANTENNA, TOWER, fencing, accessory building or
communication EQUIPMENT SHELTER is prohibited.
5.3.7.5 Lighting - No exterior night lighting of TOWERS or the WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY
is permitted except for manually operated low intensity security lights installed at or
near ground level for use when operating personnel are on site.
5.3.7.6 Historic Buildings and Structures
1) Any WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY located on or within a historic structure shall
not alter the character-defining features, distinctive construction methods, or
original historic materials of the building, or
2) Any alteration made to a historic BUILDING or STRUCTURE to accommodate a
WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY shall be fully reversible.
5.3.7.7 Environmental Standards
a. Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable.
b. Electric utilities and all network interconnections from the WIRELESS SERVICE
FACILITY via land lines shall be via underground lines.
c. No hazardous waste shall be discharged on the site of any WIRELESS SERVICE
FACILITY. If any hazardous materials are to be stored or used on site, there shall
be provisions for full containment of such materials. An enclosed containment area
shall be provided with a sealed floor, designed to contain at least 110% of the
volume of the hazardous materials stored or used on the site.
d. Storage of any materials other than those customarily used at the site shall be
prohibited.
5.3.7.8 Noise - Ground-Mounted, Roof-Mounted or Side-Mounted equipment for WIRELESS
SERVICE FACILITY shall not generate acoustic noise in excess of those levels allowed
by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection noise regulation, 310
CMR 7.10 or its successor.
5.3.7.9 RADIO FREQUENCY ENERGY (RFE) Standards - All equipment proposed for a
WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY shall be evaluated for safety compliance per the FCC
Guidelines for Evaluating the Environmental Effects of Radio Frequency Radiation or
their successor.
5.3.8 New WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY - Any new freestanding MOUNT in the Wireless
Service Facility District shall be of a MONOPOLE construction with internal ANTENNAS
designed to be visually unobtrusive or with surface MOUNT ANTENNAS as determined to
be appropriate for the circumstances by the Planning Board or other less obtrusive design
as it becomes available.
5.3.9 Justification of Need
5.3.9.1 Coverage Area - The APPLICANT shall provide a map of the geographic area in which
the proposed facility will provide Wireless Service. Said map shall be provided as a
colored hard copy and in a digital format that is compatible with the Town of Stow
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 60
Geographic Information System program(s). The APPLICANT shall provide
documentation of the criteria and methodology employed to establish coverage area.
5.3.9.2 Adequacy of Other FACILITY SITES and Controlled by the APPLICANT - The
APPLICANT shall provide written documentation of any FACILITY SITES in the town
and in abutting towns or cities in which it has a legal or equitable interest, whether by
ownership, leasehold or otherwise. Said documentation shall demonstrate that these
FACILITY SITES do not already provide, or do not have the potential to provide
WIRELESS SERVICES by site adjustment.
5.3.9.3 Capacity of Existing FACILITY SITES and Potential FACILITY SITES - The
APPLICANT shall provide written documentation that it has examined all FACILITY
SITES located in the town and in abutting towns or cities in which the APPLICANT has
no legal or equitable interest to determine whether those existing facilities can be used
to provide Wireless Service. In addition, the APPLICANT shall provide written
documentation that it has examined existing commercial Buildings and Structures for
opportunities to construct roof and side MOUNTS, or otherwise demonstrate that such
a facility is not technologically feasible as a potential FACILITY SITE. The APPLICANT
shall demonstrate that potential FACILITY SITES will not provide similar coverage to
the APPLICANTS confirmed Co-locators.
5.3.9.4 Wireless Service Through the Least Disruptive Means The APPLICANT shall provide
written documentation that the proposed facility uses the least disruptive technology
(through the creative use technology and materials) in which it can provide WIRELESS
SERVICES in conjunction with all FACILITY SITES listed above.
5.3.10 Application
5.3.10.1 APPLICANT - The APPLICANT or co-APPLICANT for any special permit or site plan
approval for a WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY shall be a CARRIER that has authority
from the FCC to provide WIRELESS SERVICES for the facility being proposed. The
APPLICANT shall submit documentation of the legal right to install and use the
proposed facility at the time of the filing of the application for the permit or approval.
5.3.10.2 Pre-Application Conference - Prior to the submission of an application for a Special
Permit under this bylaw provision, the APPLICANT is strongly encouraged to meet with
the Special Permit Granting Authority at a public meeting to discuss the proposed
WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY in general terms and to clarify the filing requirements.
5.3.10.3 Pre-Application Filing Requirements - The purpose of the conference is to inform the
Special Permit Granting Authority as to the preliminary nature of the proposed
WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY. As such, no formal filings are required for the preapplication
conference. However, the APPLICANT is encouraged to prepare sufficient
preliminary architectural and/or engineering drawings to inform the Special Permit
Granting Authority of the location of the proposed facility, as well as its scale and
overall design.
5.3.10.4 Demonstrated Co-Locators  If proposing CO-LOCATION, the APPLICANT shall
submit written proof of commitment.
5.3.11 WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY Regulations
The Special Permit Granting Authority shall adopt and maintain a set of regulations that
contains the necessary policies, procedures, and requirements to implement the provisions
of this Section. At a minimum, such regulations shall require the APPLICANT to provide the
following materials with the application:
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 61
a. A town-wide map showing all existing Wireless Service Facilities in Stow and those
within two miles of its corporate limits, including those recently approved but not
constructed.
b. The proposed locations of all future Wireless Service Facilities known to be under
consideration in the Town on a Town-wide map for this CARRIER.
c. An appraisal, prepared by a state-certified real estate appraiser, of the economic impact
on property values within view of the proposed facility, based upon the impact of
substantially similar wireless facilities in substantially similar communities. For the
purposes of this paragraph, substantially similar communities shall include communities
from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, with similar market demand, population
density and rural character.
d. The results of a drive test conducted by the APPLICANT and based on the preapplication
conference.
e. Sight lines, photographs and other visual materials as described below:
1) Sight line representation. A sight line representation shall be drawn from any public
road within 1500 feet and the closest facade of each residential building (viewpoint)
within 1500 feet to the highest point (visible point) of the WIRELESS SERVICE
FACILITY. Each sight line shall be depicted in profile, drawn at one-inch equals 40
feet. The profiles shall show all intervening trees and Buildings. In the event there is
only one (or more) residential building within 1500 feet there shall be at least two
sight lines from the closest habitable structures or public roads, if any.
2) Existing (before condition) photographs. Each sight line shall be illustrated by one
four-inch by six-inch color photograph of what can currently be seen from key
locations on any roadways determined by the Special Permit Granting Authority to
be relevant to the requested special permit.
3) Proposed (after condition). Each of the existing condition photographs shall be
based on crane or balloon tests and shall have the proposed WIRELESS SERVICE
FACILITY superimposed on it to show what will be seen from key locations on any
roadways determined by the Special Permit Granting Authority to be relevant to the
requested special permit if the proposed WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY is built.
Original photos of crane or balloon test shall be supplied to verify authenticity of the
digital simulations.
4) The APPLICANT shall submit a map of the town that has been annotated with the
data collected during the crane or balloon test. The roadways, determined by the
Planning Board to be relevant to the requested special permit, shall be highlighted in
one color, the points where the crane or balloon was visible at all shall be highlighted
in another color, and the points where there is an unscreened view of the crane or
balloon shall be highlighted in a third color. The APPLICANT shall designate on the
map the location from which the photographs were taken.
5) The APPLICANT shall submit a map showing the broadcast footprints coverage
areas created by varying antenna heights at 50, 75 and 100 feet AGL and at 150
feet AGL where the latter height is permitted. The map shall indicate the different
signal strengths and the parameters used to arrive at the data. An explanation of
the reasons for selecting the signal strength(s) used to characterize coverage shall
be provided. As a minimum the following shall be provided with each map: frequency
in MHz, transmitter power output per channel, transmit and receive antenna gains,
line loss and amplifier gains (if any), effective radiated power per channel in watts, all
quality-of-service assumptions used (including factors for attenuation through foliage
and/or structures), signal strength required to meet the stated quality-of-service
assumptions, and identification of the computer software used to generate the
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 62
footprints. The applicant shall also include, on a separate map of the same scale,
signal-strength footprints indicating any existing coverage within the Town of Stow
from any applicant-owned or -operated sites in Stow and any existing coverage from
adjacent towns that meet the stated quality-of-service assumptions.
f. Within 21 days of filing an application for a Special Permit, the APPLICANT shall
arrange for a crane or balloon test, satisfactory to the Planning Board, at the proposed
site to illustrate the height of the proposed facility. The date, time and location of such
test shall be advertised in two newspapers of general circulation in the Town at least 14
days, but not more than 28 days prior to the test. Notification of the test shall be mailed
to all postal patrons in Stow. Notification shall also be sent via certified mail with return
receipt requested to all parties in interest. The test shall illustrate the proposed height
and each subsequent ten-foot interval downward to the vegetation line, or ground,
whichever is earlier.
g. Noise Filing Requirements: The APPLICANT shall provide a statement demonstrating
the impact of the proposed facility on the acoustic noise environment in the vicinity of the
facility. The following conditions shall apply:
1) Existing ambient conditions: characterize existing acoustic noise conditions in
the area.
2) Existing plus proposed conditions: characterize acoustic noise produced by the
proposed WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY in relation to the existing ambient
conditions as it would affect nearby parcels.
3) If the acoustic noise levels produced by the proposed WIRELESS SERVICE
FACILITY are expected to approach or exceed the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection requirements, the Planning Board may require a more
detailed analysis and/or field measurements prior to rendering its decision on an
application, or as a condition of the Special Permit, or in other such manner as
deemed by the Planning Board to be appropriate.
Such statement shall be certified and signed by an acoustical engineer, stating that
noise measurements are accurate.
h. RADIO FREQUENCY ENERGY (RFE) Filing Requirements: The APPLICANT shall
provide a statement listing the existing and maximum future projected levels of RFE
from the proposed WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY, for the following situations:
1) Existing, or ambient: characterize existing RFE sources in the area;
2) Existing plus proposed wireless service facilities: characterize RFE from the
proposed WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY plus the existing RFE environment and
estimated cumulative RFE impacts, and
3) Certification, signed by a Radio Frequency (RF) engineer, experienced in the field of
evaluating RF standards, stating that RFE characterizations are accurate and meet
FCC Guidelines as specified in the RFE Standards sub-section of this Bylaw.
5.3.12 Approval Criteria
5.3.12.1 A special permit shall be granted under this section only if the Special Permit Granting
Authority finds that the project is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the
Bylaw and the Special Permit Granting Authoritys Rules & Regulations. In addition, the
Special Permit Granting Authority shall make all of the applicable findings before
granting the special permit, as follows:
a. that the APPLICANT is not already providing coverage or is unable to maintain
coverage, to the extent that the town is required to accommodate such coverage
under federal law, without the special permit;
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 63
b. that the APPLICANT is not able to use existing FACILITY SITES within the overlay
district to provide coverage to the extent that the town is required to accommodate
such coverage under federal law; and that the proposed WIRELESS SERVICE
FACILITY minimizes or prohibits, as appropriate, any adverse impact on historic
resources, scenic views, residential property values, natural or man-made
resources, and the public welfare;
c. that the APPLICANT has agreed to implement all reasonable measures to mitigate
the potential adverse impacts of the facilities;
d. that the facility shall comply with the appropriate FCC regulations regarding
emissions of electromagnetic energy and that MONITORING shall be paid for by
the APPLICANT;
e. that the proposed MOUNT is designed to accommodate the maximum number of
users technologically practical but not less than three (3) unless a lesser number is
deemed appropriate by the Special Permit Granting Authority;
f. that the APPLICANT has agreed to rent or lease AVAILABLE SPACE on any
TOWER it controls within Stow or its contiguous towns, under the terms of a fairmarket
lease, without discrimination to other Wireless Service CARRIERS;
g. that the facility is in compliance with applicable Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA), Federal Communications Commission (FCC), Massachusetts Aeronautics
Commission, and the Massachusetts Department of Public Health regulations, and
h. that the proposed WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY complies with all applicable
requirements of this Bylaw.
5.3.12.2 If a special permit is granted, the Special Permit Granting Authority may impose such
additional conditions and safeguards as public safety, welfare and convenience may
require.
5.3.12.3 Any decision by the Special Permit Granting Authority to deny a special permit under
this section shall be in conformance with the ACT, in that it shall be in writing and
supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record.
5.3.13 (Intentionally left blank)
5.3.14 Term of Permit
Any Special Permit issued for any WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY shall be valid for not
more than three (3) years, unless such time is extended by the Planning Board, by a
period not to exceed one year, to accommodate the coordinated review of special permits
for WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES. At the end of that time period, the WIRELESS
SERVICE FACILITY shall be removed by the CARRIER or a new Special Permit shall be
required.
5.3.15 Removal Requirements
5.3.15.1 At such time that a licensed CARRIER plans to abandon or discontinue operation of a
WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY, such CARRIER shall notify the Town by certified mail
of the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations. Such notice
shall be given no less than 30 days prior to abandonment or discontinuation of
operations. In the event that a licensed CARRIER fails to give such notice, the
WIRELESS SERVICE FACILTIY shall be considered abandoned upon such
discontinuation of operations.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 64
5.3.15.2 Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the CARRIER shall physically remove the
WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY within 90 days from the date of abandonment or
discontinuation of use. "Physically remove" shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Removal of ANTENNAS, MOUNT, EQUIPMENT SHELTERS and SECURITY
BARRIERS from the subject property.
b. Proper disposal of the waste materials from the site in accordance with local and
state solid waste disposal regulations.
c. Restoring the location of the WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY to its natural
condition, except that any landscaping and grading shall remain in the aftercondition.
5.3.15.3 If a CARRIER fails to remove a WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY in accordance with
this section of this Bylaw, the town shall have the authority to enter the subject property
and physically remove the facility.
5.3.15.4 The Special Permit Granting Authority may require the APPLICANT to post a bond at
the time of construction to cover costs for the removal of the WIRELESS SERVICE
FACILITY in the event the Town must remove the facility.
5.3.16 Modifications - Modification of a WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY may be considered
equivalent to an application for a new WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY and will require a
Special Permit when the following events apply:
5.3.16.1 The APPLICANT and/or co-APPLICANT wants to alter the terms of the Special Permit
by changing the WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY in one or more of the following ways:
a. Change in the number of facilities permitted on the site;
b. Change in the facilities that materially changes the facilities approved by the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health, and
c. Change in the operating parameters of a facility, including, but not limited to,
ANTENNAS and cables that increases their quantity or size, that changes in a
material way their orientation or other visible characteristics, or that exceeds
specifications on the special permit.
5.3.16.2 The APPLICANT and/or co-APPLICANT propose to add any equipment or additional
height not specified in the original approval.
5.3.17 Monitoring and Maintenance
5.3.17.1 Upon review of the RFE data submitted by the applicant pursuant to Sections 5.3.7.9
and 5.3.11.h, the Planning Board shall determine if the applicant must provide
additional analysis or field monitoring of RFE safety compliance. The Planning Board
may require additional information to be submitted prior to rendering its decision on an
application, or as a condition of the Special Permit, or in other such manner as deemed
by the Planning Board to be appropriate. The Planning Board shall also determine
whether the application as proposed would be compliant with the Federal
Communications Commission's regulations concerning environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions. The Planning Board may engage the services of independent
consultants at the expense of the applicant to evaluate the submissions of the applicant
and make recommendations to the Planning Board.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 65
5.3.17.2 Upon review of the acoustic noise data submitted by the applicant pursuant to Sections
5.3.7.8 and 5.3.11.g, the Planning Board shall determine if the applicant must provide
additional analysis or field monitoring of acoustic noise compliance. The Planning
Board may require additional information to be submitted prior to rendering its decision
on an application, or as a condition of the Special Permit, or in other such manner as
deemed by the Planning Board to be appropriate. The Planning Board may engage the
services of independent consultants at the expense of the applicant to evaluate the
submissions of the applicant and make recommendations to the Planning Board.
5.3.17.3 The APPLICANT and co-APPLICANT shall maintain the WIRELESS SERVICE
FACILITY is safe and in good condition. Such maintenance shall include, but shall not
be limited to, painting, structural integrity of the MOUNT and SECURITY BARRIER,
and maintenance of the buffer areas and landscaping.
5.3.18 WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY Operating Permit
Any WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY installed in compliance with this Bylaw shall require
an annual Operating Permit from the BUILDING INSPECTOR. No WIRELESS SERVICE
FACILITY shall be constructed, operated, altered, repaired or maintained except in exact
conformance with such Permit.
5.3.18.1 Application - All applications shall be made to the BUILDING INSPECTOR in such form
as he may require, and such applications shall include at least: 1) the location, by
STREET number, of the proposed WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY; 2) the name and
address of the WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY operator in charge and the owner of
the LOT where the facility is to be located; 3) a scale drawing showing the proposed
construction, method of installation or support, colors, display, dimensions, location of
the WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY on the site, and illumination, if any; 4) such other
pertinent information as the BUILDING INSPECTOR may require to ensure compliance
with the Bylaw and any other applicable law; 5) a copy of the Special Permit, as
amended, granted by the Special Permit Granting Authority under this Bylaw; and 6)
the application must be signed by the property owner. The BUILDING INSPECTOR
shall have the authority to reject any Permit application that is not complete when
submitted.
5.3.18.2 Time Limitations - The BUILDING INSPECTOR shall approve or disapprove any
application for a Permit within 30 days of receipt of the application. If the BUILDING
INSPECTOR should fail to approve or disapprove an application for a Permit within
such 30-day period, the application shall be deemed to be approved.
5.3.18.3 Fees - The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Stow shall establish and from time to
time review the Permit fee for Wireless Service Facilities which shall be published as
part of the Permit application form.
5.3.18.4 Certifications - The owner or operator in charge of the WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY
shall certify annually to the BUILDING INSPECTOR that he is in compliance with the
standards of the Federal Communications Commission, Federal Aviation
Administration, the Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission, the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health regulations, and the American National Standards Institute
and evidence of required maintenance shall be filed with the BUILDING INSPECTOR
by the special permit holder.
5.3.19 Non-Wireless Facility Structures
Municipal wireless uses, amateur radio uses, and home viewer and listener uses shall not
exceed a maximum height sufficient to reasonably accommodate those uses, as required
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 66
by Title 47 CFR Part 1 Subpart S Section 1.40000, Title 47 CFR 97.15 (as further defined
by FCC PRB-1 101 FCC 2nd 952 (1985) and M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 3.
5.4 ACTIVE ADULT NEIGHBORHOOD (AAN)
5.4.1 Purpose - Stow cherishes the wisdom and experience of our citizens, and encourages
continuity and participation in the town by its residents. This bylaw is intended to provide
housing designed for adult residents age 55 and older who no longer want to maintain a
single-family home. Preference shall be given to Stow residents and shall be achieved by
local preference requirements as established, in accordance with all applicable law, by the
Town of Stow Planning Board under its Rules and Regulations. An AAN shall be designed
to:
 promote a sense of community among its residents;
 fit into the surrounding neighborhood while minimizing visual impacts;
 be in harmony with the natural terrain and consistent with Stow's rural New England
architectural and village traditions;
 promote community through clustering of BUILDINGS, provision of community gathering
spaces such as gardens and commons;
 emphasize protection of existing resources on the site, including natural resources,
agriculture, recreation and trail linkages.
5.4.2 Applicability - An AAN shall only be permitted by Special Permit, and any amendments
thereto from the Planning Board, acting as the Special Permit Granting Authority, in
accordance with MGL Ch. 40A, s.9 on land located in the AAN District.
5.4.3 AAN District
This district shall be an overlay district and shall include parcels of land depicted on a map
dated May 13, 2002 and entitled Active Adult Neighborhood District, or any amendments
thereto. This map is hereby adopted coincident with the adoption of this Bylaw.
Development in an AAN District is subject to all provisions of the remainder of the Zoning
Bylaw, except to the extent provided in Section 5.4, ACTIVE ADULT NEIGHBORHOOD
(AAN). Section 8.9, Inclusion of Affordable Housing, applies to the AAN District, except for
the restriction in Section 8.9.5.1.C.iii, which states that the total number of MULTI-FAMILY
DWELLINGS shall not exceed 10% of the lots in the development.
5.4.4 Permitted Uses - There shall be permitted in any AAN:
5.4.4.1 Single-family DWELLINGS, single-family DWELLINGS with ACCESSORY
APARTMENTS. For the purposes of this Bylaw, an ACCESSORY APARTMENT shall
be considered a DWELLING UNIT; and
5.4.4.2 MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS that are designed to be consistent in character with the
single-family DWELLINGS in the same development. Such MULTI-FAMILY
DWELLINGS may be allowed, provided there shall be no more than four (4) DWELLING
UNITS in any residential BUILDING; and
5.4.4.3 Accessory uses and structures incidental to principal uses indicated above.
5.4.5 Procedural Requirements
5.4.5.1 Any new AAN and any proposed modification of an AAN shall be allowed only by Special
Permit from the Planning Board in accordance with MGL Ch. 40A, s.9, subject to the
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 67
requirements, conditions and limitations contained herein and in the regulations adopted
by the Planning Board.
5.4.5.2 AAN Regulations
The Planning Board shall adopt and maintain a set of regulations that contains the
necessary policies, procedures, and requirements to implement the provisions of this
Section.
5.4.5.3 Application for an AAN Special Permit
An application for an AAN Special Permit shall be submitted in writing that meets the
requirements set forth herein and all other information that may be required by the
Planning Board under its Rules and Regulations.
5.4.6 Dimensional Requirements - There shall be no minimum LOT area, FRONTAGE, FLOOR
AREA RATIO, LOT width or YARD requirements within an AAN or for any LOT or
BUILDING within an AAN except as provided in this section. However, an AAN shall
comply with the applicable requirements of the Water Resource Protection and Flood Plain
Districts. The Planning Board may impose appropriate additional conditions on the location,
layout and size of BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES and OPEN SPACE.
An AAN shall be built according to the following dimensional standards:
Minimum TRACT OF LAND area 25 acres
Minimum frontage of TRACT OF LAND No Minimum Required
Minimum TRACT OF LAND width No Minimum Required
Minimum SIDE and REAR YARDs of TRACT OF LAND No Minimum Required
Minimum setback of BUILDINGS, pavement areas other
than ACCESS DRIVEWAYs and walkways from all
boundaries of the TRACT OF LAND
50 feet
Minimum separation between BUILDINGS and/or
STRUCTURES
20 feet
Maximum height of Principal and Accessory
STRUCTURES
35 feet
Minimum OPEN SPACE 40% (OPEN SPACE shall
not contain more than 50%
wetlands, as defined in MGL
Ch. 131, S.40 and the Stow
Wetlands Protection Bylaw.)
Maximum density 3 DWELLING UNITS per acre
of DEVELOPABLE SITE AREA
Maximum DWELLING UNITS per BUILDING 4
5.4.7 Special Standards
5.4.7.1 No more than 66 on-site DWELLING UNITS may be permitted under an AAN Special
Permit. In no case shall the total number of DWELLING UNITS in the AAN Overlay
District exceed six percent (6%) of the total number of single-family DWELLING UNITS
in the Town of Stow.
5.4.7.2 Access Roads and Driveways - In the event that the land that comprises an AAN is
located in different zoning districts, it shall be a permitted use in each such zoning
district not in the Active Adult Neighborhood Zoning District for roadways and driveways
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 68
to provide access to land and BUILDINGS in the Active Adult Neighborhood Zoning
District.
5.4.7.3 Each DWELLING UNIT in an AAN shall have at least one separate ground floor
entrance/exit, unless the Planning Board permits otherwise as part of its Special Permit.
In addition, the Planning Board may establish design guidelines for AANs.
5.4.7.4 The Planning Board, in granting a Special Permit for an AAN, may impose reasonable
conditions to protect the environment, and the health, safety and welfare of the
neighborhood, of residents in the proposed development, and of the general public.
Such conditions may include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, requirements for the
tertiary treatment of wastewater effluent, the location of wastewater effluent disposal,
and necessary limitations on the total number of DWELLING UNITS to prevent negative
impacts on the groundwater and other existing or potential water resources.
5.4.7.5 DWELLING UNITS for Handicapped Persons - The Planning Board may require that
some of the DWELLING UNITS be constructed so as to be suited for access and
occupancy by a handicapped person or persons.
5.4.7.6 Performance Guarantee - Before the issuance of any building permits for the AAN, the
petitioner shall agree to complete the required improvements specified in the decision,
such construction and installation to be secured in accordance with performance
guarantee requirements of the Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the
Subdivision of Land to the extent applicable and/or the regulations adopted pursuant to
the Active Adult Neighborhood Bylaw for this purpose. Exceptions to the Regulations
that may be adopted pursuant to this bylaw may be authorized by the Planning Board in
granting a Special Permit hereunder, provided the Board determines such exceptions
are in the public interest and are consistent with the purposes of Section 5.4 of the
Bylaw.
5.4.7.7 Revisions and Amendments of an AAN Special Permit - Any change which, in the sole
opinion of the Planning Board, would alter the character of an AAN, including, but not
limited to, an increase in number of total DWELLING UNITS within the AAN, an increase
in the number of parking spaces, a decrease or cessation of any recreation amenities or
similar use, structural change or alteration, shall require an amendment of the Special
Permit or the filing of an application for a new Special Permit, as the Planning Board
may determine.
5.4.7.8 Streets and Utilities - All streets and ways, whether public or private, wastewater
disposal systems, drainage facilities, drinking water supplies, and utilities shall be
designed and constructed in compliance with the Town of Stow Rules and Regulations
Governing the Subdivision of Land, as amended, whether or not the Active Adult
Neighborhood is a subdivision.
5.4.8 Occupancy - Each DWELLING UNIT in an AAN shall be occupied by at least one person
age fifty-five (55) or older. Notwithstanding the death of a qualifying owner/occupant or
other unforeseen circumstance in which a DWELLING UNIT becomes non-compliant with
this Section, at no time shall the development be in violation of U.S. Code Title 42  3607,
which as of May 1, 2017 , requires that at least 80 percent of the occupied units are
occupied by at least one person who is 55 years of age or older.
5.4.8.1 Children under the age of eighteen (18) may not reside in a DWELLING UNIT located in
an AAN for more than six (6) months in any nine (9) month period.
5.4.9 Occupancy Income Range - The AAN shall be designed to provide housing for occupants
earning a broad range of incomes, as defined by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) for the Town of Stow. The
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 69
AAN shall comply with the provisions of Section 8.9 Inclusion of Affordable Housing. In
addition, at least 5% of the DWELLING UNITS shall be built to sell at a price affordable to
middle income households, as defined by Executive Order 418 for the Town of Stow. All
low income and moderate income and middle income DWELLING UNITS shall contain
deed restrictions and comply with the provisions of MGL Ch. 184, s.31 as to resale price
and shall provide for notice of any proposed resale and a right of first refusal to the Town of
Stow, prior to any such sale.
A. Low income or moderate income DWELLING UNITS created under this section shall be
restricted as such in perpetuity and comply with the provisions of MGL Ch. 184, s.31.
Middle income DWELLING UNITS created under this section shall be restricted as
such in perpetuity and comply with the provisions of the Regulations promulgated in
accordance with this Section 5.4.
B. This subsection deleted at the May 4, 2009 Annual Town Meeting.
C. This subsection deleted at the May 4, 2009 Annual Town Meeting.
D. This subsection deleted at the May 4, 2009 Annual Town Meeting.
E. This subsection deleted at the May 4, 2009 Annual Town Meeting.
F. This subsection deleted at the May 4, 2009 Annual Town Meeting.
G. Rights and privileges - QUALIFIED AFFORDABLE HOUSING PURCHASERS and
middle income purchasers shall have all rights, privileges and responsibilities given to
owners or renters of market rate DWELLING UNITS, including access to all amenities
within the development.
H. A Special Permit issued under this Bylaw shall include the provision that no building
permit shall be issued in reliance on said Special Permit, unless and until the Town of
Stow has received written correspondence from the Department of Housing and
Community Development (DHCD) that the low or moderate income DWELLING UNITS,
authorized as a result of the Special Permit, will be included in DHCDs Subsidized
Housing Inventory of low income or moderate income housing DWELLING UNITS for
the purposes of compliance with the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 40B,  20-23. The correspondence from DHCD must provide documentation
that the low or moderate income DWELLING UNITS will be treated as if they were
created pursuant to an application for a Comprehensive Permit and qualifying programs
thereunder.
I. Purchaser/tenant selection - Procedures for the selection of purchasers and/or tenants
shall be subject to approval by the Town of Stow or its designee.
J. Timing of commitments - All contractual agreements with the Town of Stow and other
documents necessary to ensure compliance with this Section shall be executed prior to
and as a condition of the issuance of any Special Permit required to commence
construction.
K. Timing of construction - As a condition of the issuance of a Special Permit under this
Section, the Planning Board may set a time schedule for the construction of both low
income or moderate income and market-rate DWELLING UNITS. No Certificate of
Occupancy shall be issued for any market-rate DWELLING UNIT in a development,
subject to the requirements of this Section, until there have been issued Certificates of
Occupancy for low income or moderate income DWELLING UNITS in an amount equal
to the percentage of low income or moderate income UNITS, which are to be
constructed in the development or provided off-site.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 70
L. The above provisions apply to all on-site, off-site, buildings and existing housing stock
made affordable with AAN provided funds.
5.4.10 Planning Board Action
5.4.10.1 In evaluating the proposed AAN, the Planning Board shall consider the general
objectives of this Bylaw and of AAN in particular: the existing and probable future
development of surrounding areas, the appropriateness of the proposed layout, the
configuration, and use of the OPEN SPACE in relation to the characteristics of the tract
of land in question. The Planning Board may grant a Special Permit for an AAN if it
finds that the AAN meets the purposes of this Bylaw as set forth herein:
A. meets the intended purposes of this Bylaw as set forth herein;
B. provides a useful addition to the housing inventory of Stow;
C. protects and enhances the rural character and environment of Stow;
D. provides OPEN SPACE which is of a size, shape and location and has adequate
access so as to benefit the town and the residents of the AAN;
E. is appropriate to the natural terrain of the tract of land to be developed;
F. provides for the convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement in
the development in a manner that is compatible with the narrow, tree-lined country
roads of Stow;
G. the application set forth a specific plan for maintenance of all common facilities
including but not limited to waste disposal and drainage facilities, roadways and
other improvements to be constructed in an AAN;
H. will result in the creation of DWELLING UNITS that count toward the Towns quota
requirements as established by MGL Ch. 40B s. 20-23;
I. complies with all other legal requirements for a Special Permit and the Zoning
Bylaw, including those for an AAN; and
J. is consistent with the Stow Master Plan or succeeding plan, as amended.
5.4.10.2 The Planning Board shall consider the recommendations of the Board of Health, the
Conservation Commission and the Towns consulting engineer, and other Boards,
Departments and experts, in making said findings.
5.4.10.3 The Planning Board may require changes to the AAN Site Plan and impose additional
conditions, safeguards and limitations, as it deems necessary, to secure the objectives
of this Bylaw.
5.4.11 The provisions of this Bylaw are severable from each other, and the invalidity of any
provisions or section shall not invalidate any other provision or section thereof.
5.4.12 ACTIVE ADULT NEIGHBORHOOD UNITs constructed under a Special Permit issued in
accordance with this section are exempt from Section 8.6, Phasing of Growth.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 71
5.5 REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY DISTRICT (RMD)
5.5.1 Purpose - This bylaw is intended to provide for the limited establishment of
REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES (RMD) in accordance with the
Humanitarian Use of Medical Marijuana Act, M.G.L c.94C, App. 1-1 et seq., and as they
are authorized pursuant to Massachusetts Department of Public Health (DPH)
regulations set forth in 105 CMR 725.000, Implementation of an Act for the Humanitarian
Medical Use of Marijuana. The Medical Marijuana Overlay District Bylaw and the Rules
and Regulations for RMDs are designed to provide safe and efficient access to regionally
and locally appropriate locations for RMDs, and to minimize the adverse impacts of such
facilities on abutting properties in the Town of Stow through controls on site design,
location, hours of operation and setbacks from USES incompatible with RMDs as
established in accordance with all applicable law.
5.5.2 Applicability - Notwithstanding the limitations of the base zoning or any other overlay
district, a REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY shall only be allowed within the
RMD district upon the granting of a Special Permit by the Planning Board in accordance
with the M.G.L. c.40A 9, on land located in the RMD District and subject to the
requirements set forth in this section, the Zoning Bylaw and the Rules and Regulations
for REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES adopted by the Planning Board.
5.5.2.1 Notwithstanding the limitations stated in section 5.5.2, the establishment and operation of
a RMD, limited to the retail component, may be permitted in the Business District under
section 3.3 of this BYLAW and in accordance with all applicable DPH regulations as
stated in 105 CMR 725.000.
5.5.3 REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY OVERLAY DISTRICT
5.5.4 Permitted Uses  There shall be permitted in any RMD District:
5.5.4.1 REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES subject to Special Permit granted by the
Planning Board pursuant to 105 CMR 725.000.
5.5.4.2 Accessory structures incidental to the principal uses indicated above.
5.5.5 General Requirements
5.5.5.1 RMD Regulations
The Planning Board shall adopt and maintain a set of regulations that contain the
necessary policies, procedures and requirements to implement the provisions of this
Bylaw.
5.5.5.2 Application for a RMD Special Permit
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 72
An application for a RMD Special Permit shall be submitted in writing pursuant to the
requirements set forth Section 5.5, et seq., the RMD Rules and Regulations and Town of
Stow Site Plan Approval Rules and Regulations.
5.5.5.3 Limitation of Approval
A Special Permit authorizing the establishment of a REGISTERED MARIJUANA
DISPENSARY shall be valid only for the registered entity to which the Special Permit was
issued, and only for the site on which the RMD has been authorized to locate. If the
registration for an RMD has been revoked, transferred to another controlling entity, or
relocated to a different site within the RMD, the Special Permit shall become null and void
and a new Special Permit shall be required to reestablish the use of the RMD.
5.5.5.4 Hours of operation for the RMD shall be set by the Special Permit Granting Authority.
5.5.6 Location Requirements
5.5.6.1 All RMDs shall be contained within a building or structure.
5.5.6.2 No RMD, including the retail component of a RMD in the Business District, shall be
located within a building which houses residential units.
5.5.6.3 No RMD shall be located within a moveable structure or trailer, not limited to a mobile
home or truck. All sales shall be conducted within the building or through home
deliveries to qualified patients consistent with the regulations pursuant to 105 CMR
725.000.
5.5.6.4 No RMD shall be permitted within (300) three hundred feet of the lot line of the following
uses:
? Daycare facilities
? Schools
? Public Parks
? Playgrounds
? Drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility
? Correctional facility, half-way house, or similar facility
? Any other REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY not involved in the
processing, selling or retailing of MARIJUANA products for which the Special
Permit is being issued.
The distance under this section is measured in a straight line from the nearest point of
the property line of a use fitting the criteria of Section 5.5.5.8 to the nearest building
footprint of the proposed RMD.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 73
5.5.7 Site and Dimensional Requirements
5.5.7.1 Dimensions  RMDs shall conform to the dimensional requirements of the underlying
district set forth in the Section 4.4 of the Stow Zoning Bylaw, Table of Dimensional
Requirements.
5.5.7.2 Height  RMDs shall conform to the height regulations set forth in Section 4.2 of the Stow
Zoning Bylaw.
5.5.7.3 Parking and Loading  The required number of parking and loading areas servicing the
RMD shall conform to Parking Regulations in Section 7 of the Zoning Bylaw. The
Planning Board, at its sole discretion, may require a copy of projected need and patient
population studies pursuant to the DPH Regulations to determine whether there is
sufficient parking and loading area on site for the expected traffic and demand. Based
on the transportation analysis, or other relevant documents, not limited to market
analyses and/or trade area studies submitted as part of the Special Permit application,
the Planning Board may deviate from the required number of parking spaces to ensure
an adequate number of parking spaces and to preclude an excess amount of traffic on
site.
5.5.7.4 Signage  RMDs shall meet the requirements of Section 6.3 of Zoning Bylaw regulating
signs, in addition to conforming to sign regulations pursuant to 105 CMR 725.000.
5.5.7.5 Lighting  Lighting for the RMD, including all accessory structures, parking and security
requirements, shall comply with Section 3.8.1.5 (exterior lighting) of the BYLAW, unless
upon review of a lighting plan, the Planning Board determines that additional light is
needed to facilitate exterior surveillance in accordance with the DPH Regulations 105
CMR 725.110 A10.
5.5.8 Planning Board Action
5.5.8.1 In evaluating the proposed RMD Special Permit application, the Planning Board shall
consider the general objectives of the Zoning Bylaw, as well as the degree to which the
following criteria are met:
a) The RMD is located to serve a population that does not have reasonable access to
RMD services.
b) The RMD site is located at least (300) three hundred feet distant from areas where
children commonly congregate, as well as land uses containing a rehabilitation or
group home.
c) The site is designed to create safe, secure and efficient access and egress to
customers and employees using multiple modes of transportation, including vehicle,
bicycle and pedestrians.
d) Traffic generated by clients, employees and delivery schedules from the RMD shall
not create a substantial adverse impact on nearby residential uses.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 74
e) The RMD proposal complies with all legal requirements for a Special Permit,
including the Stow Zoning Bylaw, the Site Plan Approval Rules and Regulations for
a REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY and all requirements pursuant to the
Department of Public Health Regulations 105 CMR 725.000: Implementation of an
Act for the Humanitarian Medical Use of Marijuana.
f) Loading and refuse disposal areas are designed to be safe, secure and shielded
from abutting uses.
g) The building and site have been designed in a manner consistent and compatible
with nearby structures of a similar size and use and in a manner that mitigates any
negative aesthetic impact imposed by the required security conditions, measures
and restrictions stated in the Department of Public Health Regulations pursuant to
105 CMR 725.000.
5.5.8.2 The Planning Board shall consider the recommendation of the Board of Health, the
Conservation Commission, the Towns consulting engineer, and other Boards,
Departments and agents, in making said findings.
5.5.8.3 The Planning Board may require changes to the RMD Site Plan and impose additional
conditions, safeguards and limitations, as it deems necessary, to secure the objectives of
this Bylaw.
5.5.9 If any provision of this Section or the application of any such provision to any person or
circumstance shall be held invalid, or the application of those provisions to persons or
circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, the remaining provisions of this
Bylaw shall not be affected thereby, and to this end the provisions of this Bylaw are
severable.
5.5.10 A REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY permitted under this Bylaw shall as a
condition of its special permit file an annual report to the Special Permit Granting
Authority no later than January 31st, providing a copy of all current applicable state
licenses for the Dispensary and/or its owners and demonstrate continued compliance
with the conditions of the Special Permit.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 75
SECTION 6
GENERAL REGULATIONS
6.1 Hammerhead LOTs
In a Residential District, a LOT known as "Hammerhead LOT" may be granted by special
permit by the Planning Board, under the requirements and process for a special permit,
provided that the Board is able to make a finding that all the following conditions have been
met:
6.1.1 The LOT has a frontage of at least 50 feet;
6.1.2 The LOT has an area of at least 180,000 square feet;
6.1.3 The LOT has sufficient area suitable for BUILDINGs. The area suitable for BUILDINGs
shall be considered sufficient if
6.1.3.1 a circle of 150 feet in diameter, or
6.1.3.2 a rectangle with an area of 20,000 square feet and a minimum side of 80 feet can be
drawn on the LOT plan within the buildable area and not overlap any LOT line or any
wetlands or Flood Plain District;
6.1.4 The LOT has a minimum width of 50 feet between the STREET LINE and the buildable
area. A LOT means the minimum width requirement if a 50-foot diameter circle can move
on the LOT plan from the STREET LINE to the buildable area without overlapping or
crossing any LOT line or any Flood Plain District line;
6.1.5 Any BUILDING on the LOT be set back at least 40 feet from every property line;
6.1.6 A condition of the permit be that the LOT shall not be further divided; and
6.1.7 Sufficient sight distance to permit safe access to the way is provided in both directions at
the point of access from the LOT across its frontage. Sight distance shall be deemed
sufficient if, in feet, it is equal to at least six times the posted or allowable speed (miles
per hour) of the way onto which access is provided.
6.2 Common Drive
Common drives are encouraged and may be allowed as provided in this section. In the
Residential District, construction of a private drive to be shared by more than one LOT,
but not more than three (3) LOTS, is permitted subject to the following specifications:
6.2.1 The common drive surface shall be twelve (12) feet wide. It shall have an 11-inch gravel
base and a 4-inch compacted dense graded surface.
6.2.2 The maximum length of the common drive shall be five hundred (500) feet and shall be
measured from the near side line of the street along the center line of the common drive
to the throat of the furthest junction. As part of an approved subdivision or special permit
granted by the Planning Board, the length of a common drive may be longer than five
hundred (500) feet.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 76
6.2.3 The common drive shall lie entirely within the LOTs being served.
6.2.4 Use of the common drive by vehicle traffic shall be limited to ingress and egress and
does not include the parking of vehicles on the common drive, except that occasional
overflow parking of guests' vehicles shall be permitted, provided that such vehicles are
parked in a manner that does not impede traffic flow and that such parking does not
extend overnight.
6.2.5 The owners of the LOTS shall bear and have joint and several responsibilities and
obligations for the repair, maintenance, reconstruction and snowplowing of the common
drive, so as to provide continuous year-round access for vehicle traffic for the
convenience of the owners of the LOTS, and to provide continuous year-round access for
all emergency, fire, rescue, police, moving, construction and maintenance vehicles. No
building permit shall be issued until a restriction or covenant to run with the land has been
approved by the Planning Board in a form satisfactory to assure compliance with this
provision and a copy of the document received by the BUILDING INSPECTOR.
6.2.6 An Erosion Control and Sedimentation Plan, in accordance with Planning Board Rules
and Regulations governing the same, shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning
Board.
6.2.7 As part of an approved subdivision or special permit granted by the Planning Board, the
number of LOTs served by a common drive may be increased to five (5).
6.3 SIGNS
6.3.1 The following general regulations shall apply to all SIGNS in all districts:
6.3.1.1 No SIGN shall be ERECTED except as provided in this Bylaw;
6.3.1.2 No SIGN shall be ERECTED to in any way create a traffic hazard or confuse traffic
control;
6.3.1.3 Only continuous white lights shall be used for illumination of a SIGN. The illumination
for any SIGN shall be shielded, directed and maintained so as to cast no direct beam
up into the sky, on a public or private way, pedestrian way, or adjacent property, and
shall be of sufficiently low intensity that it shall not cause a glare or reflection that may
constitute a traffic hazard or a nuisance. SIGNS shall not be illuminated between
9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., except during business hours;
6.3.1.4 Any SIGN, including pre-existing signs, not properly maintained or which applies to
products or activities which are no longer offered shall be removed;
6.3.1.5 SIGNS which are oscillating, internally illuminated, flashing or operating with moving
parts are not permitted;
6.3.1.6 Each PERMANENT SIGN shall display its permit number at a location readily visible
to the inspector;
6.3.2 Pre-existing SIGNS - Any SIGN legally ERECTED prior to the adoption of this Bylaw may
continue to be maintained, provided, however, that no such SIGN shall be enlarged or
altered except in conformance with a permit issued in accordance with the provisions of
this Bylaw.
6.3.3 On Site - Permanent - PERMANENT SIGNS are permitted subject to the General
Regulations of following subsections:
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 77
6.3.3.1 Residential and Recreation-Conservation Districts:
1. One (1) ON-SITE SIGN is permitted not exceeding five (5) square feet in area on
State numbered highways and three (3) square feet in area elsewhere.
2. One (1) ON-SITE SIGN pertaining to the rent, lease or sale of land or
BUILDING(s) not exceeding three (3) square feet in area. All such SIGNS shall
be removed within seven (7) days of rental, lease or sale of land or BUILDING.
3. One ON-SITE SIGN pertaining to agriculture, as permitted in Sections 3.1.1.2,
3.1.1.3, 3.1.1.5, and Section 3.2.1,1, each not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet
in area, may be ERECTED.
6.3.3.2 Business, Compact Business, Commercial, Industrial and Refuse Disposal Districts:
1. For each establishment, one (1) ON-SITE SIGN attached to the facade of the
BUILDING not exceeding the lesser of one square foot for each one lineal foot of
business, commercial or industrial BUILDING frontage or eighty (80) square feet
in area.
2. Window SIGNS in total may be the larger of 30% of the window or three (3)
square feet.
3. One (1) primary free standing SIGN visible from the main public way not
exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area.
4. In the case of multiple businesses in the same BUILDING or sharing the same
access and/or parking facilities, only one SIGN is permitted per principal access.
5. If the business is on a corner LOT and the primary SIGN is not visible from the
intersecting road, a secondary SIGN not larger than 50% of the primary SIGN is
permitted.
6. One (1) ON-SITE SIGN pertaining to the rent, lease or sale of land or
BUILDING(s) not exceeding six (6) square feet in area. All such SIGNS shall be
removed within seven (7) days of rental, lease or sale of land or BUILDING.
6.3.4 Off-site SIGNS - The following off-site SIGNS are permitted subject to any required
approvals of the State Department of Public Works or the Outdoor Advertising Board.
6.3.4.1 Seasonal Agriculture:
1. SIGNs for uses permitted/allowed in Sections 3.1.1.2, 3.1.1.3, 3.1.1.5 and Section
3.2.1.1, one not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area, and other such SIGNs
not to exceed twelve (12) square feet, with a total square footage of all such
SIGNs not to exceed seventy five (75) square feet.
2. One (1) slot on each community agricultural ladder SIGN posted at the Town
entrances, subject to dimension and format requirements of the Planning Board
and written approval of the Stow Agricultural Commission.
3. Seasonal agriculture SIGNs may be ERECTED one (1) week prior to the
beginning of sales and must be removed one (1) week after sales are completed.
4. The Planning Board may grant a waiver from the requirements of this Section.
6.3.4.2 Directional SIGNs for Businesses located in Stow: A free-standing pole may be
ERECTED at intersections of town roads, located not to obstruct vision on the right of
way and affixed with directional SIGNS, with the approval of the Board of Selectmen;
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 78
1. Non-agricultural directional SIGNS shall be 6" x 24" and have a dark green
background. Lettering shall be yellow and no more than 4" in height.
2. A directional SIGN may bear only the name of a business, logotype, distance and
directional arrow.
3. Directional SIGNS shall not be illuminated.
4. The maximum number of SIGNS per business shall not exceed three (3) located
at different intersections.
5. Maximum of two (2) direction SIGN poles per intersection, excluding agricultrual
directional SIGNs.
6. The maximum height of a direction SIGN pole is eight (8) feet above the road
surface.
7. Direction SIGN poles and locations will be subject to the approval of the
BUILDING INSPECTOR and Superintendent of Streets.
8. A maximum of eight (8) businesses may share a pole for direction SIGNS.
9. The cost of the SIGNS, pole and maintenance shall be the sole responsibility of
the SIGN owners.
10. Agricultural directional SIGNS shall be 6" x 24". The colors for the background
and lettering and logos may be consistent with the marketing colors and logo
used by the agricultural businesses. There is no restriction to lettering or logo
size.
6.3.5 TEMPORARY SIGNS - TEMPORARY SIGNS up to three (3) square feet in area may be
placed on private or public land. Each SIGN shall include the name, address and
telephone number of the person responsible for the SIGN and date of posting. Any SIGN
without this information is in violation of this Bylaw and shall be removed at the owner's
expense. Failure of the owner to remove any SIGN within twenty-one (21) days of
posting is a violation of this Bylaw.
Each event shall be allowed up to ten (10) TEMPORARY SIGNS. Similar events which
occur at the same location and on consecutive days shall be deemed to be one event.
6.3.6 Exceptions - In all districts the following exceptions shall apply, but these SIGNS should
reasonably comply with Town bylaws where possible. No permit is required unless
otherwise specified:
6.3.6.1 Federal, state and Town of Stow SIGNS are exempt from the provisions of this
section;
6.3.6.2 Religious and charitable organizations are permitted up to three (3) SIGNS with a
combined area not exceeding forty (40) square feet, but require a permit;
6.3.6.3 Historical markers or tablets, if approved by the Stow Historical Commission, are
exempt;
6.3.6.4 Window SIGNS stating hours of operation, affiliations, credit cards and emergency
information are exempt, provided each such SIGN does not exceed one half (1/2)
square foot;
6.3.6.5 SIGNS regulating the use of or access to land are exempt if less than one (1) square
foot in area;
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 79
6.3.6.6 SIGNS endorsing political campaigns or issues are exempt, provided such SIGNS are
no larger than six (6) square feet and are removed within seven (7) days after the
election to which they pertain; and
6.3.6.7 SIGNS showing the name only of the resident for identification are not exempt, but
shall not require a permit.
6.3.7 Administration and Enforcement
6.3.7.1 Administration - There is hereby created a Sign Officer who shall be appointed
annually by the Board of Selectmen.
6.3.7.2 Permits - No PERMANENT SIGN shall be ERECTED unless a permit has been
issued by the Sign Officer. TEMPORARY SIGNS do not require a permit. The permit
fee shall be $2.00 per square foot payable to the Town of Stow when the permit
application is submitted. There shall be no charge for seasonal agricultural SIGNS.
6.3.7.3 Application - Permit applications shall be submitted to the Building Department and
shall include at least:
1. the location, by street number, of the proposed SIGN;
2. the name and address of the SIGN owner and of the owner of the premises where
the SIGN is to be located;
3. a scale drawing showing the proposed construction, method of installation or
support, colors, dimensions, location of the SIGN on the site and method of illumination;
4. all existing SIGNS maintained on the premises;
5. such other pertinent information as the BUILDING INSPECTOR and/or Sign
Officer may require to ensure compliance with this Bylaw and any other applicable
law; and
6. the signature of the owner of the SIGN and the owner of the premises where the
SIGN is to be located.
The Sign Officer shall have the authority to reject any SIGN permit application which
is not complete when submitted.
6.3.7.4 Approval - The Sign Officer shall approve or disapprove any application for a SIGN
permit within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application by the Building Department.
If the Sign Officer should fail to approve or disapprove an application for a SIGN
permit within such thirty (30) day period, the application shall be deemed to be
approved. The Sign Officer shall issue a permit number with each approval or
deemed approval.
6.3.7.5 Enforcement -
1. The BUILDING INSPECTOR and/or Sign Officer shall, at reasonable times, have
the power to enter upon the premises on which any SIGN is ERECTED or
maintained in order to inspect said SIGN.
2. If the BUILDING INSPECTOR determines that a SIGN is in violation of this
Bylaw, he shall give written notice to the owner of such SIGN, and to the owner
of the premises on which such SIGN is located, to remove or modify the SIGN
within thirty (30) days to be in accordance with the provisions of this Bylaw.
Failure to comply with the notice or appeal the decision constitutes a violation of
this Bylaw. Immediate removal may be ordered for any SIGN requiring a permit
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 80
which is ERECTED without first obtaining such permit, or which is a safety
hazard.
3. All SIGNS without a permit number displayed will be removed at the owner's
expense, except any SIGN legally ERECTED prior to the adoption of this Bylaw.
6.3.7.6 Right of Appeal - Any person who is dissatisfied with the decision of the BUILDING
INSPECTOR or Sign Officer may appeal to the Board of Appeals within thirty (30)
days from the date of such refusal, order or decision. If the action of the Inspector is
modified or annulled, the BUILDING INSPECTOR shall issue a permit or order in
accordance with the decision of the Board.
6.3.7.7 Variation in Specific Cases - The Board of Appeals may vary the provisions of this
Bylaw in specific cases which appear to them not to have been contemplated by this
Bylaw, and in cases wherein its enforcement would involve practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardship, if, in each instance, desirable relief may be granted without
substantially derogating from the intent of this bylaw but not otherwise. Any decision
to vary the provisions of this Bylaw shall be by at least a 4/5 vote of the Board and
shall specify any variance allowed and the reasons therefor.
6.3.7.8 Penalties - Any SIGN owner or property owner who violates this Bylaw shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $50.00 per day. Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
6.4 TRAILERS and MOBILE HOMES
No TRAILER or MOBILE HOME shall be moved onto any LOT within the Town for use as a
DWELLING except as provided in MGL Ch. 40A, s.3.
6.5 Earth Removal
Unless specifically exempted under Article 17 of the Stow General Bylaws, a permit is
required for the removal of earth in conjunction with a lawfully permitted use, provided that
the Permit Granting Authority determines that such earth removal is necessary and
consistent with the provisions of federal and state law, the General Bylaw and the Zoning
Bylaw.
6.6 FENCES
6.6.1 In residential districts, no FENCE or WALL shall exceed eight feet in height.
6.6.2 In residential districts, FENCES shall be set back a minimum of one foot from the
property lines. In instances when the FENCE is primarily intended to enclose animals, it
shall be set back a minimum of three (3) feet from the property line.
6.6.3 Swimming Pools Fencing:
6.6.3.1 Every outdoor swimming pool, whether or not filled with water, shall be completely
surrounded at all times by a FENCE or WALL, in compliance with The Massachusetts
State Building Code, 780 CMR, Section 421.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 81
SECTION 7
PARKING REGULATIONS
7.1 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to ensure that all uses be provided with sufficient off-street
parking and loading facilities to meet the needs of the proposed and actual uses; to ensure
that off-street parking and loading facilities are designed so as to reduce hazards to
pedestrians and drivers; to reduce congestion in the STREETS; to reduce nuisance to
abutters from noise, fumes and headlight glare ordinarily associated with parking and
loading areas; to reduce the environmental deterioration to surrounding neighborhoods
resulting from glare, storm water runoff, heat, dust and unattractive views associated with
large expanses of pavement and vehicles.
7.2 General Provisions
An adequate number of off-street parking spaces shall be required in all districts to
accommodate residents and visitors. Therefore, no BUILDING or STRUCTURE shall be
located upon any LOT and no activity shall be conducted upon any LOT unless the
required parking facilities are provided on site in accordance with this Section.
7.2.1 Changes - Any change to a BUILDING, STRUCTURE or USE, or a change from one
permitted USE to another permitted USE shall comply with the requirements of the
Schedule of Minimum Parking for the entire BUILDING, STRUCTURE or USE as
changed.
7.2.2 Undetermined Uses - Where the use of a BUILDING or BUILDINGs has not been
determined at the time of application for a building permit or special permit, the parking
requirements applicable to the most intensive use allowed in the district where such
undetermined use is to be located shall apply provided, however, that the number of
parking spaces actually built need not exceed the number required by the actual use or
uses of the BUILDING when established to the satisfaction of the permit granting
authority by calculation and/or appropriate condition or covenant in recordable form.
7.2.3 Relief from Parking Regulations - Relief from the Parking Regulations as otherwise
required in the Bylaw may be obtained as follows:
7.2.3.1 Special Permit from the Board of Appeals - Relief from the parking regulations may be
granted by special permit from the Board of Appeals, where the Board finds that it is not
practicable to provide the number of parking spaces required, if either (1) in the case of
a change from a NONCONFORMING USE to a conforming USE, that the benefits of a
change to a conforming USE outweigh the lack of parking spaces, or (2) in the case of a
change from one conforming USE to another conforming USE, that the lack of parking
spaces will not create undue congestion or traffic hazards on or off the site.
7.2.3.2 Industrial Uses - Relief from buffer and landscape requirements for Industrial Uses - In
the case of a continuous parking lot(s) associated with a conforming use in an industrial
district, the buffer and landscape requirements in Subsections 7.7.5, 7.7.6 and 7.7.7
may be varied in accordance with Planning Board Rules and Regulations governing the
same or in accordance with the Planning Boards Design Review Approval of off-street
parking and loading area design requirements. Design Review Approval shall include
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 82
the requirement for a landscape parking plan using Stormwater Best Management
Practices.
7.2.4 Use of Required Parking as Commercial or Public LOT - No parking area designated as
required parking in connection with a BUILDING, STRUCTURE or USE shall be operated
as a commercial or public parking lot to provide spaces for the general public (excluding
customers, clients, patients, guests or business invitees of the owner or tenant of each
BUILDING or STRUCTURE) for a fee or other compensation.
7.2.5 Reserved Parking spaces - Where the total number of off-street parking spaces required
are not immediately required for a particular intended USE as established to the
satisfaction of the permit granting authority (or BUILDING INSPECTOR if no special
permit or site plan approval is required), a phased development plan may be permitted
requiring that only a portion of the parking area, but not less than sixty-five percent (65%)
of the required spaces, be completed initially, subject to the following provisions:
7.2.5.1 The total number of spaces required to be shown on the plan shall be determined in
accordance with the provisions of this Bylaw;
7.2.5.2 The spaces that are not intended for construction immediately shall be labeled
"Reserve Parking" on the plan and shall be properly designed as an integral part of the
overall parking layout, located on land suitable for parking development, and in no case
located within area counted as buffer, setback or OPEN SPACE under other provisions
of this Bylaw;
7.2.5.3 Adequate drainage shall be provided for both the partial and total parking areas;
7.2.5.4 The portion of the parking areas not to be paved initially shall be landscaped with a
ground cover to prevent erosion. The ground cover shall be appropriate for soil
conditions, water availability and the environment;
7.2.5.5 An appropriate condition shall be in the special permit or other instrument, such as a
covenant, in recordable form, which shall be recorded at the Registry of Deeds or filed
with the Land Court, as the case may be, to establish the intended use and provisions
for any future changes to the satisfaction of the Permit Granting Authority, which
condition or covenant shall run with the land and be enforceable by the Town.
7.3 Schedule of Minimum Parking - General Requirements
7.3.1 Comparable USE Requirement - Where a USE is not specifically included in the
Schedule of Minimum Parking, it is intended that the regulations for the most nearly
comparable USE specified shall apply. Alternative off-street parking standards to those
shown below may be accepted if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
Permit Granting Authority (or BUILDING INSPECTOR if no special permit or site plan
approval is required), or their designee, that such standards are adequate for the
intended USE.
7.3.2 Mixed Use Facilities - BUILDINGs or LOTS which contain more than one USE are
considered mixed use facilities. In the case of mixed uses, the requirements shall be the
sum of the requirement calculated separately for each use, so that adequate space shall
be provided to accommodate all vehicles anticipated on the premises at any one time.
Parking spaces for one USE shall not be considered as providing the required spaces for
any other USE, except when it can be clearly demonstrated that the need for parking
occurs at different times.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 83
7.3.3 Schedule of Minimum Parking
7.3.3.1 Agricultural
Greenhouse 1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of GROSS FLOOR AREA of
inside sales or display room.
7.3.3.2 Recreation
Camps
1 space per 10 children of rated capacity of camp plus 1
space per employee and 1 space per camp vehicle kept
on the premises.
Handball, racquetball, tennis courts 3 spaces per court plus 1 space per employee on the
largest shift.
Golf Courses 5 spaces per hole plus 1 space per employee on the
largest shift plus 50 percent of the spaces otherwise
required for accessory uses (restaurants, bar, etc.).
Swimming pool 1 space per 75 sq. ft. of GROSS FLOOR AREA.
Bowling alley 4 spaces per alley.
Skating rink 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GROSS FLOOR AREA of
facility plus 1 space per employee on the largest shift.
Other outdoor recreational facilities 1 space per 4 persons generally expected on the
premises at any one time.
7.3.3.3 Residential
DWELLINGS 2 spaces for each DWELLING UNIT containing less than
5 bedrooms plus one parking space for each additional
bedroom and sufficient off-street parking for visitors.
BOARDING HOUSE 2 spaces plus 1 space per rentable room or suite.
Bed and Breakfast 1 space for each bedroom plus 1 space per employee on
the largest shift.
Home Occupation 2 spaces for the DWELLING UNIT and sufficient spaces
to comply with section 3.2.1.7.
INDEPENDENT ADULT LIVING
RESIDENCE
1 space for each employee on the shift having the
greatest number of employees, including resident staff.
The number of resident spaces shall be 40% of the total
units.
7.3.3.4 Institutional
Schools, elementary and middle 2 spaces for each classroom, but not less than 1 space
per teacher and staff position plus 1 space for each 5
seats of rated capacity of the largest auditorium or
gymnasium.
High schools 1 space per teacher and staff position plus 1 space per 5
students.
Other non-profit educational uses To be determined by Permit Granting Authority (or
BUILDING INSPECTOR if no special permit required)
based upon the most comparable other use in the table.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 84
Nursing home, elder care facility 1 space for each 2 beds plus 1 space for each employee
on the largest shift and adequate spaces for delivery
vehicles.
Religious 1 space per 3 seats or 1 space for each 4 persons to
maximum rated capacity of the hall or meeting room,
whichever is greater.
Libraries, museums, community
centers
1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GROSS FLOOR AREA.
Lodge or club 1 space per 3 seats.
Day-care 1 space per 10 children of rated capacity of the day-care
facility plus 1 space for each teacher and staff person on
the largest shift.
7.3.3.5 Business
Retail stores not listed below,
general and personal services,
studio
1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of GROSS FLOOR AREA.
Business or professional office 1 space per 250 sq. ft. of GROSS FLOOR AREA.
Restaurant, funeral home 1 space for each 3 seats plus 1 space for each employee
on the largest shift.
Quick food restaurant, video rental
store, other quick service
establishments
1 space for each 30 sq. ft. of GROSS FLOOR AREA.
Motor vehicle service station, repair
or body shop
4 spaces for each service bay and work area.
Shopping center 1 space per 250 sq. ft. of gross leasable area.
Vehicle dealership, boat sales,
rentals
1 space per 1,500 sq. ft. of GROSS FLOOR AREA and 1
space per 1,500 sq. ft. of exterior display area
Veterinary, kennel 2 spaces per exam room plus 1 space for each additional
employee on largest shift.
Medical center, laboratories 1 space per 250 sq. ft. of GROSS FLOOR AREA.
Building trade shop 1 space for each 800 sq. ft. of GROSS FLOOR AREA.
Convenience store 1 space per 250 sq. ft. of GROSS FLOOR AREA.
Financial institutions 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of GROSS FLOOR AREA.
HOTEL, INN, MOTEL 1 space for each bedroom plus 10 per 1,000 sq. ft. of
GROSS FLOOR AREA and adequate spaces for delivery
vehicles.
7.3.3.6 Industrial
Manufacturing, packaging,
processing and testing
1 space for each 800 sq. ft. of GROSS FLOOR AREA.
Warehouse 1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. of GROSS FLOOR AREA.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 85
7.4 Off-Street Loading Areas
One or more off-street loading areas shall be provided for any business that may be
regularly serviced by tractor-trailer trucks, SU-30 design vehicles or other similar delivery
vehicles. Adequate areas shall be provided to accommodate all delivery vehicles expected
at the premises at any one time. Loading areas shall be located at either the side or rear of
each BUILDING and shall be designed to avoid traffic conflicts with vehicles using the site
or vehicles using adjacent sites.
7.5 Standard Parking Dimensional Regulations
7.5.1 Off-street parking areas shall be located on the same or adjacent parcel as the use they
are designed to serve.
7.5.2 Access to parking and loading areas shall be designed so as not to obstruct free flow of
traffic. There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress from all parking spaces
and loading areas to ensure ease of mobility, ample clearance, and safety of vehicles
and pedestrians.
7.5.3 Where sidewalks occur in parking areas, parked vehicles shall not overhang the sidewalk
unless an additional two (2) foot sidewalk width is provided in order to accommodate
such overhang.
7.5.4 Parking areas shall comply with the requirements of the Architectural Access Board or
other such regulatory authority.
7.5.5 Paved off-street parking areas shall be laid out and striped in compliance with the
following minimum provisions:
Angle of
Parking
Width of
Parking Stall
Parking Stall
Length of Line
Width of
MANEUVERING
AISLE
90o (two-way) 9.0' 18.0 24.0'
75o (one-way) 9.0' 19.0' 22.0'
60o (one-way) 10.4' 22.0' 18.0'
45o (one-way) 12.7' 25.0' 14.0'
Parallel (one-way) 8.0' 22.0' 14.0'
Parallel (two-way) 8.0' 22.0' 18.0'
7.6 Small Car Stalls
In parking areas containing more than forty (40) parking stalls, thirty percent (30%) of such
parking stalls may be for small car use, except for retail store, personal service facility,
general services or restaurant uses. Such small car stalls shall be grouped in one or more
contiguous areas and shall be identified by a SIGN(S).
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 86
7.6.1 Small Car Parking Dimensional Regulations - Off-street small car parking areas shall
be laid out and striped in compliance with the following minimum provisions:
Angle of
Parking
Width of
Parking Stall
Parking Stall
Length of Line
Width of
MANEUVERING
AISLE
90o (two-way) 8.0 16.0 24.0'
75o (one-way) 8.5 17.0' 22.0'
60o (one-way) 9.8 18.5 18.0'
45o (one-way) 12.0' 21.5 14.0'
Parallel (one-way) 8.0' 18.0 14.0'
Parallel (two-way) 8.0' 18.0' 18.0'
7.7 Off-Street Parking and Loading Area Design Requirements
Any parking area serving a USE or USEs other than a single-family DWELLING, duplex
DWELLINGS, ACCESSORY APARTMENTs, SENIOR LIVING RESIDENCE or an
INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCE with ten (10) or fewer residents, shall be designed in
compliance with the following standards. Required parking spaces, loading areas and
driveways shall be provided and maintained with suitable grading, paved surfaces and
adequate drainage which is suitable in accordance with good engineering practices. Any
parking area containing five (5) or more parking spaces shall include landscaping as
required below which is satisfactory to the Permit Granting Authority (if the parking area is
related to a PERMITTED USE for which a special permit or site plan approval is required),
or the BUILDING INSPECTOR (for other parking areas), or their designee, in accordance
with good engineering practices, located and designed to enhance the visual appearance
of the parking or loading facility, to ensure traffic safety and to minimize the adverse effects
of the parking or loading facility on the natural environment.
7.7.1 Setbacks: Except where greater setbacks may be required elsewhere in this Bylaw, no
parking space or other paved surface, other than ACCESS DRIVEWAYs, common
driveways or walkways, shall be located within thirty (30) feet of the front LOT line and
within ten (10) feet of the side and rear LOT lines.
7.7.2 ACCESS DRIVEWAYs: Each LOT may have one ACCESS DRIVEWAY through its
FRONT YARD, which shall be twenty-four (24) feet wide, unless in the opinion of the
Permit Granting Authority (if the parking area is related to a PERMITTED USE for which
a special permit or site plan approval is required), or the BUILDING INSPECTOR (for
other parking areas), or their designee, in accordance with good engineering practice for
safety or other reasons, a wider and/or greater number of ACCESS DRIVEWAY is
necessary to provide adequate area for safe vehicular turning movements and
circulation. An ACCESS DRIVEWAY for one-way traffic only may be a minimum of
fourteen (14) feet wide. There shall be no more than one additional ACCESS
DRIVEWAY for each 200 feet of frontage, and all such additional ACCESS DRIVEWAYs
shall be at least 200 feet apart on the LOT, measured from the centerline of each
ACCESS DRIVEWAY. Other than secondary access for emergency use, no driveway for
a non-residential principal use shall cross land in a residential zoning district in which the
principal use is not allowed.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 87
7.7.3 INTERIOR DRIVEWAYs: INTERIOR DRIVEWAYs shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide
for two-way traffic and fourteen (14) feet for one-way traffic.
7.7.4 Perimeter Landscaping Requirements: All parking areas with more than five (5) spaces
and all loading areas shall be bordered on all sides with a minimum of a ten (10) foot
wide buffer strip on which shall be located and maintained appropriate landscaping of
suitable type, density and height to effectively screen the parking area.
7.7.4.1 Off-street parking and loading areas which are located within or adjacent to a
Residential District or a Recreation-Conservation District (whether on the side or rear)
shall be screened from all adjacent LOTS in said district by a landscaped buffer strip of
at least thirty (30) feet in width through the use of an opaque screen. Said screen shall
be opaque from the ground to a height of at least six (6) feet with intermittent visual
obstruction to a height of at least twenty (20) feet. An opaque screen is intended to
exclude all visual contact between uses and to create a strong impression of spatial
separation. The opaque screen may be composed of a wall, FENCE, landscaped earth
berm or densely planted vegetation in a mix of deciduous and evergreen varieties,
tolerant to the climatic conditions of Stow. The opaque portion of the screen must be
opaque in all seasons of the year. At maturity, the portion of intermittent visual
obstructions should not contain any completely unobstructed openings more than ten
(10) feet wide.
7.7.5 Interior Area Landscaping Requirements: A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the interior
area, exclusive of perimeter landscaping, must be planted as landscaped island areas.
Planting required within the parking area is exclusive of other planting requirements, such
as for shade trees planted along the STREET and shall not be included as part of any
minimum OPEN SPACE required elsewhere in this Bylaw.
7.7.6 Plantings for Perimeter and Interior Area Landscaping Requirements shall consist of:
7.7.6.1 A minimum of one (1) shrub per thirty (30) square feet of landscaped island area and
one (1) shade tree per every ten (10) parking spaces shall be installed, unless the
Permit Granting Authority (if the parking area is related to a permitted use for which a
special permit or site plan approval is required), or the BUILDING INSPECTOR (for
other parking areas), or their designee, determines that there is sufficient existing
vegetation to allow a reduction in the amount of new landscaping;
7.7.6.2 Shade trees shall be of a species tolerant to the climatic conditions of Stow and/or
parking area conditions and be of at least two inch (2) caliper.
7.7.6.3 Shrubs shall be a mix of deciduous and evergreen varieties, tolerant to the climatic
conditions of Stow, and be at least eighteen (18) inches in height at time of planting.
Snow storage areas shall be planted with shrubs that are tolerant to weight and
extended duration of snow cover.
7.7.6.4 Except for the portion of the landscaped island that will be under the car overhang,
which shall be mulched, the area between trees and shrubs shall be covered with loam
to a depth of six inches (6) and planted with turf grass or a hardy noninvasive, lowmaintenance
ground cover.
7.7.6.5 Wherever possible, the above requirements shall be met by retention of existing
vegetation.
7.7.6.6 Planting shall be done in accordance with proper landscaping practices.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 88
7.7.6.7 Trees, shrubs, grass and ground cover which die or become diseased shall be
replaced.
7.7.6.8 All landscaping in parking areas shall be placed so that it will not obstruct sight
distance. Final locations of all plantings shall be inspected and approved by the Permit
Granting Authority (if the parking area is related to a permitted use for which a special
permit or site plan approval is required), or the BUILDING INSPECTOR (for other
parking areas), or their designee, including the viability of existing vegetation retained
after development and any necessary replacements thereof.
7.7.7 Lighting - Off-street parking and loading areas used after sunset shall be illuminated while
in use. The height and shielding of lighting standards shall provide proper lighting without
hazard to drivers or nuisance to residents, and the design of lighting standards shall be of a
type appropriate to the development and Stow and otherwise in compliance with Section
3.8.1.5 of this Bylaw.
A fixture with an INITIAL DESIGN LIGHT OUTPUT of more than 2,000 lumens that shines
DIRECT LIGHT into the sky or onto any DWELLING on another LOT shall be considered a
NUISANCE and not proper lighting under this section.
Parking lot and driveway lighting with a total INITIAL DESIGN LIGHT OUTPUT of more
than 10,000 lumens shall be subject to a Special Permit, which shall show the location,
output and type of all fixtures. The total INITIAL DESIGN LIGHT OUTPUT of all fixtures
shall not be greater than 6 lumens per square meter of parking lot or driveway.
7.7.8 Bonds, Securities - The Permit Granting Authority (if the parking area is related to a
permitted use for which a special permit or site plan approval is required), or the BUILDING
INSPECTOR (for other parking area), or their designee, may require a bond or other form
of security to ensure the satisfactory planting of required landscaping and to ensure the
survival of such landscaping for up to two (2) years following such planting. All required
landscaping and plantings must be maintained in a neat, attractive appearance as a
condition of the continued PRINCIPAL USE of the LOT.
7.8 Structured Parking
The accommodation of required off-street parking spaces in a garage, deck or other
STRUCTURE shall require, in addition to all other OPEN SPACE requirements of this
Bylaw, the set-aside of OPEN SPACE of an area equal to the footprint of the structured
parking facility. Structured parking facilities shall not be counted in calculating the NET
FLOOR AREA of a BUILDING.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 89
SECTION 8
SPECIAL REGULATIONS
8.1 ACCESSORY APARTMENTs
8.1.1 Purpose - As provided herein, one additional DWELLING UNIT may be allowed as an
ACCESSORY APARTMENT in a single-family DWELLING or ACCESSORY BUILDING
located on a LOT with a single-family DWELLING for the purpose of providing small
additional DWELLING UNITs without adding to the number of BUILDINGs in the Town or
substantially altering the appearance of BUILDINGs, the neighborhood or the Town;
increasing the range of housing accommodations; encouraging a greater diversity of
population; and encouraging a more efficient and economic use of existing housing stock
by enabling owners of single-family DWELLINGS larger than required for their present
needs to share space and the burdens of homeownership while maintaining the singlefamily
appearance and character of BUILDINGs, the neighborhood and the Town.
8.1.2 ACCESSORY APARTMENTs Allowed by Right - The BUILDING INSPECTOR may grant
a building permit for one ACCESSORY APARTMENT provided that:
8.1.2.1 The single-family DWELLING or ACCESSORY BUILDING was in existence on or
before May 6, 1991, or
8.1.2.2 The ACCESSORY APARTMENT is attached to or within a single-family DWELLING
constructed after May 6, 1991; and
8.1.2.3 provided that all of the following requirements are met:
1. The ACCESSORY APARTMENT shall be a use secondary and incidental to the
single-family DWELLING and shall contain no more than 700 square feet of
GROSS FLOOR AREA.
2. No more than one ACCESSORY APARTMENT shall exist on the LOT.
3. Either the single-family DWELLING or the ACCESSORY APARTMENT shall be
occupied by the owner of the LOT. For the purposes of this section, the "owner"
shall be one or more individuals who holds legal or beneficial title to said LOT and
for whom the DWELLING is the primary residence for voting and tax purposes.
4. Both the single-family DWELLING and the ACCESSORY APARTMENT shall
satisfy the requirements of 310 CMR 15.00 (Sanitary Code - Title 5) and Stow
Board of Health regulations.
5. The LOT on which the single family DWELLING or ACCESSORY BUILDING is
located shall contain no less than 1.5 acres.
7. Any entrance required by the inclusion of an ACCESSORY APARTMENT shall be
clearly secondary to the main entrance of the primary DWELLING UNIT.
8. Any modification to the existing entrances on the front facade of the single-family
DWELLING shall result in the appearance of a single main entrance.
9. A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each
DWELLING UNIT. There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress from
all parking spaces.
10. There shall be no more than one (1) driveway per LOT.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 90
8.1.3 ACCESSORY APARTMENTs Allowed by Special Permit - A special permit for an
ACCESSORY APARTMENT may be granted by the Planning Board provided that:
8.1.3.1 All of the conditions and requirements of Section 8.1.2 are met, with the exception of
Sections 8.1.2.3.5 and 8.1.2.3.10.
8.1.3.2 All conditions and requirements for approval of a special permit are satisfied.
8.2 Duplex Residential Uses in a Residential District Subject to a Special Permit by the
Planning Board
8.2.1 Purposes: The duplex option is intended to achieve a broader range of housing choices
within the community; to stimulate more affordable housing units through the creation of
duplex development on individual LOTS within a subdivision; and to permit a developer,
public agency, or developer in conjunction with a public agency, to propose duplex
development in subdivisions which shall be affordable to households whose incomes
meet the Town's criteria for affordable housing.
8.2.2 Dimensional Requirements - On LOTS that are proposed for subdivision, duplexes must
be situated on individual LOTs which conform to the density and dimensional regulations
of the Residential District. Each LOT shall require a minimum LOT size of 65,340 square
feet, 43,000 square feet of which is "buildable" land. Under no circumstances will a
special permit be granted for projects the construction of which is sited in whole or in part
in the Water Resource Protection District. The maximum square footage of the total
duplex STRUCTURE (both units combined) shall be no greater that 3,000 square feet of
FLOOR AREA. In no event shall duplexes be permitted on more than 25% of the LOTS
within a subdivision.
8.2.3 General Requirements - Two-family development in the Residential District may only
occur within a proposed subdivision by obtaining a special permit and upon obtaining
certification from the Board of Health that all waste disposal standards are met.
Construction must commence within two years of obtaining the special permit and must
be completed within the two years following the start, or the permit will expire.
8.2.4 Special Permit Requirements - Duplex development is subject to approval as provided in
this subsection.
8.2.4.1 Application for a special permit under this Section shall be made to the Planning
Board through the Town Clerk by submitting ten (10) copies of all submission material
and paying the required application fee.
8.2.4.2 The application shall include the following:
1. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall specify a submission fee in its Rules
and Regulations and in no case shall the fee be less than $350.00;
2. all information required for a special permit;
3. all information required for a subdivision;
4. a legally recordable document that details the long term provisions that are
required for the retention of the affordable units for affordability purposes;
5. information describing the projected ownership pattern of the proposed
development once completed;
6 a property rights plan based on an instrument survey identifying parcels, if any, to
be conveyed to the Town by deed or easement; and
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 91
7. a site grading plan showing proposed changes in contours and identifying
landscaping materials, species of plants and sizes and specific plans for any
common OPEN SPACE.
8.2.4.3 Public Hearing - The public hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions of
the Massachusetts General Laws.
8.2.4.4 Criteria of Approval - The special permit may be approved if the Special Permit
Granting Authority finds that all the following conditions are met:
1. All of the criteria required for a special permit are met; and
2. There is a minimum of 10% or one DWELLING UNIT (whichever is more) and a
maximum of 40% of all DWELLING UNITs within the proposed subdivision that
are affordable according to the Town's published criteria.
8.3 Cross-Country Ski Uses in the Residential District subject to a Special Permit by the
Planning Board:
Commercial cross-country ski courses on at least twenty-five (25) acres of land with
common and incidental ACCESSORY USES including parking; clubhouse (inclusive of
store for the rental and sale of ski related items only, administrative office, and snack bar
but not a restaurant), with a total GROSS FLOOR AREA not to exceed one thousand
(1,000) square feet unless entirely within a STRUCTURE in existence at the time of
adoption of this Bylaw (11/6/89) but in no case shall the total GROSS FLOOR AREA
devoted to cross-country ski related uses exceed twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet;
and a single family caretaker's residence, provided that:
8.3.1 no snow-making equipment shall be used;
8.3.2 the operation of the course, including ACCESSORY USES, trail grooming and
maintenance equipment, shall be limited to the hours between 7:00 A.M. and one-half
(1/2) hour after sunset;
8.3.3 new BUILDINGs, including improvements to existing BUILDINGs for ski related activities
and new parking areas shall be screened year round from the adjacent property by
evergreens and other vegetative growth of mixed variety;
8.3.4 no trail or new BUILDING including improvements to existing BUILDINGs for ski related
activities and new parking area is within fifty (50) feet of any property line.
8.3.5 No so-called snowmobiles or other recreational motorized vehicles shall be permitted
except for emergency or maintenance purposes.
8.4 Golf Course Uses in the Residential District subject to a Special Permit by the
Planning Board:
8.4.1 Commercial 18-hole golf courses of at least fifty-five hundred (5,500) linear yards and at
least seventy-five (75) acres with common and incidental ACCESSORY USES including
parking; clubhouse (inclusive of pro shop for sale of golf related items only, administrative
office, and snack bar, but not a restaurant), with a total GROSS FLOOR AREA not to
exceed twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet unless entirely within a STRUCTURE in
existence at the time of adoption of this Bylaw (11/6/89) but in no case shall the total
GROSS FLOOR AREA devoted to golf related uses exceed three thousand (3,000)
square feet; and a single family caretaker's residence, provided that:
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 92
8.4.1.1 no fairway, new BUILDING including improvements to existing BUILDINGs for golf
related activities, and new parking area is within fifty (50) feet of any property line;
8.4.1.2 new BUILDINGs and improvements on existing BUILDINGs for golf related activities
and new parking areas shall be screened year round from adjacent property by
evergreens and other vegetative growth of mixed variety;
8.4.1.3 the operation of the course, including ACCESSORY USES, shall be limited to the
hours between one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise and one-half (1/2) hour after
sunset;
8.4.1.4 at least forty percent (40%) of the residential zoned area of the parcel(s) devoted to
the golf course and ACCESSORY USES shall be placed under a conservation
restriction to the Stow Conservation Commission and approved by the Stow Board of
Selectmen. Such restriction shall be for a period of time not less than thirty (30)
years in duration and be evidenced by a deed in proper form and duly recorded with
the Middlesex County Registry of Deeds or Land Court. Ten percent (10%) of the
total residential zoned area shall be placed under a permanent conservation
restriction as allowed by the provisions of Mass. General Laws Chapter 184, Sections
31 and 32. Neither the 30% area placed under conservation restriction nor the 10%
area placed under a permanent conservation restriction shall contain a greater
percentage of wetlands, as defined in Mass. General Laws Chapter 131, Section 40
and the Town of Stow Wetlands Protection Bylaw, than the percentage of wetlands
found in the overall tract of land on which the golf course is to be located.
8.4.1.5 The Planning Board may require as a condition a public access pedestrian right of
way of at least ten (10) feet in width provided to and along any natural watercourse or
wetland in or running through the parcel or to any other portion of the parcel as
deemed acceptable by the Planning Board.
8.4.1.6 A state licensed person shall be responsible for applying pesticides/herbicides on the
golf course site. Results from an approved laboratory of surface and GROUND
WATER samples shall be periodically provided to the Conservation Commission and
the Board of Health, the location and frequency of testing to be determined by the
Planning Board.
8.5 PLANNED CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT (PCD)
8.5.1 Purpose - The purpose of the PCD is to allow context sensitive design of residential
development that:
a) Provides for compact development of land in a manner that protects Stow's rural
character and scenic vistas, including but not limited to viewscapes dominated by
natural, agricultural, cultural or historic landmarks and features;
b) Mitigates disturbance of natural hydrologic flows through reduced grading and road
construction;
c) Creates a detailed design process for the Town to provide early input into priority
preservation and development areas;
d) Encourages the permanent preservation of OPEN LAND, agricultural land, forestry
land, wildlife habitat, other natural resources including aquifers, water bodies and
wetlands, recreation, historical and archaeological resources;
e) Provides more energy-efficient and cost-effective residential development; and
f) Reduces costs of providing municipal services.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 93
It is not the intent of this bylaw to make undevelopable land developable, nor to permit an
increase in the number of BUILDING LOTs that would otherwise be possible on a
conventional plan pursuant to the provisions of the zoning bylaws that otherwise apply,
but rather to encourage the preservation of important site features.
8.5.2 Special Permit - PCD as set forth in this section is authorized by the Zoning Act, G.L.
c.40A, s.9, and is based on the general concept of cluster development described
therein. As the Special Permit Granting Authority, the Planning Board may grant a
Special Permit for the development and construction of a PCD on all land and parcels in
the Residential District subject to the following requirements.
8.5.3 Procedural Requirements - If the PCD requires approval under the Subdivision Control
Law, G.L. c.41, the "PCD Site Plan" shall contain a plan in the form and with the contents
required of a Definitive Subdivision by the Rules and Regulations Governing the
Subdivision of Land in Stow. The application for a PCD Special Permit and for approval
of a Definitive Subdivision plan shall be filed concurrently. To the extent permitted by
law, the Planning Board shall consider both applications at the same time.
8.5.3.1 In order to streamline the permitting process, if the proposed PCD involves any other use
that requires a Special Permit or Site Plan Approval by the Planning Board, the
proceedings for all such Special Permit and the Site Plan review shall occur in one
consolidated Special Permit and/or Site Plan Approval proceeding. If the proposed PCD
requires a permit from two different permit granting authorities, the Planning Board or
other Permit Granting Authority may request that a joint public hearing be held and shall
conduct reviews simultaneously, to the extent possible.
8.5.4 Application for a PCD Special Permit - Any person who desires a PCD Special Permit
shall submit an application in writing which meets the requirements set forth herein and
all other information which may be required by the Planning Board under its Rules and
Regulations for PCDs.
8.5.4.1 Submission Requirements - In order to enable the Planning Board to determine whether
or not a proposed PCD satisfies the purposes and standards of the PCD section of the
Zoning Bylaw an applicant must present sufficient information on the environmental and
OPEN LAND resources for the Board to make such a determination. The required
information shall be provided in the form of the PLANNED CONSERVATION
DEVELOPMENT DESIGN PROCESS described in Section 8.5.5 (Design Process) of this
Bylaw.
8.5.4.2 Contents of an Application for a PCD Special Permit - The application for a PCD Special
Permit shall be accompanied by:
? A "PCD Site Plan" demonstrating adherence to the Design Process outlined in
Section 8.5.5 (Design Process) of this Bylaw, as well as any other information
required by the Rules and Regulations for a PCD and this bylaw.
8.5.5 Design Process
The application for a PCD shall demonstrate to the Planning Board that the following
design process was performed, in the order prescribed below. The design process shall
be undertaken by an interdisciplinary team of qualified professionals, including but not
limited to landscape architects, engineers or environmental professionals, and in
conformance with the Rules and Regulations for Planned Conservation Development
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 94
Special Permits, to determine the layout of proposed streets, parcel boundaries, building
envelopes, easements and locations of all common areas and open land.
1. Calculate the gross area of the proposed PCD locus, which shall include all parcels of
land that are to be developed, preserved or otherwise altered in accordance with
Section 8.5 (Planned Conservation Development) of this Bylaw.
2. Calculate the size of the OPEN LAND to be preserved by multiplying the PCD locus
by 60%.
3. Prepare a PROOF PLAN to determine the LOT YIELD in accordance with Section
8.5.6.2 (YIELD) of this Bylaw.
4. Identification of Conservation Resources  The Applicant shall identify and show the
location of PRIMARY CONSERVATION RESOURCES and SECONDARY
CONSERVATION RESOURCES. The potentially developable area of the site will
consist of land outside identified PRIMARY CONSERVATION RESOURCES to the
extent described in Section 8.5.1 (PCD Purpose) of this Bylaw and outside the
SECONDARY CONSERVATION RESOURCES to the fullest extent practicable. It is
strongly recommended that the Applicant meet with Planning Board and Conservation
Commission staff during the process of identifying conservation resources.
5. Locating Dwelling Sites  Locate the approximate sites of individual dwellings within
the potentially developable area, including the delineation of private yards and shared
amenities if it is proposed for common ownership.
6. Locating Streets and Trails  Layout streets in order to access the individual
dwellings. Any trails should be laid out to create internal and external connections to
existing and/or potential future streets, sidewalks and/or trails.
7. Lot Lines  Draw proposed lot lines in conformance with Section 8.5.7 (dimensional
requirements) of this Bylaw or areas of exclusive use if proposed for condominium or
other common ownership.
8.5.6 Standards for PCDs
8.5.6.1 Minimum Tract Size - A PCD shall be permitted upon a tract of land with definite
boundaries ascertained from a recorded deed(s) or recorded plan(s) which contains an
area of not less than ten (10) acres in the Residential District(s).
1. The Planning Board may permit lots on directly opposite sides of a street to qualify as
a single tract of land. To permit such division of a tract of land by a street, the
Planning Board must find that this would fulfill the purposes of the PCD Bylaw
provision and would not result in any more DWELLING UNITs than would be possible
in accordance with the provisions of this Bylaw if the lots on either side of the street
were developed separately.
2. Where a tract of land is divided by a zoning district boundary between any residential
district and the Recreation-Conservation District, the total area of the tract of land
may be used in the PCD solely for the purpose of qualifying the tract of land as a
PCD, provided that the portion of the tract of land contained within the RecreationTown
of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 95
Conservation District is entirely preserved as OPEN LAND within the PCD in
accordance with the OPEN LAND requirements described herein.
8.5.6.2 YIELD (Allowable Residential LOTs)  The maximum number of residential LOTs in a
PCD is determined by a PROOF PLAN as approved by the Planning Board.
The PROOF PLAN shall show site-specific development limitations that make some land
less suitable for development than other land. The PROOF PLAN shall include:
? Total area of parcel(s) to be included in the PCD site plan
? Location of PRIMARY CONSERVATION RESOURCES
? Assumed infrastructure requirements for roads on all areas outside of PRIMARY
CONSERVATION RESOURCES
? Topographical contours
? Minimum LOT area requirements in the Residential District (65,340 sq. ft.), in
accordance with Section 4.4 (Table of Dimensional Requirements) of the Zoning
Bylaw.
8.5.7 Dimensional Requirements - Where the dimensional requirements of the PCD differ from
or conflict with other requirements of the Zoning Bylaw, the requirements established for
PCDs in Section 8.5.1.7 (PCD Dimensional Requirements) of this Bylaw, shall prevail.
The following requirements shall be met in all PCDs.
8.5.7.1 The following minimum requirements shall be met:
1. Minimum frontage: 100 feet
The Planning Board may allow for a reduction in frontage up to 50 feet if one or more
of the following criteria are demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning Board:
a) The reduction will provide for improved configuration and access to areas of OPEN
LAND.
b) The reduction will enhance preservation of PRIMARY CONSERVATION
RESOURCES and SECONDARY CONSERVATION RESOURCES as identified in
the design process described in Section 8.5.5 (Design Process) of this Bylaw.
c) The reduction will provide for development of land in a manner that protects Stows
rural character and scenic vistas
2. Minimum front, rear and side yard setbacks: 20 feet
The Planning Board may permit smaller, or require larger setbacks and distances if it
finds that alternate setbacks and distances will measurably improve the preservation
of PRIMARY or SECONDARY CONSERVATION RESOURCES.
3. Minimum LOT area per DWELLING: 20,000 sq. ft.
The Planning Board may allow for a reduction in LOT area up to 5,000 sq. ft., but not
to create a lot less than 15,000 sq. ft., if the reduction of LOT size will not cause a
substantial increase in the associated visual impacts of the development and where
one or more of the following criteria can be demonstrated to the Planning Boards
satisfaction:
a) The reduction will provide for improved public access to areas of Open Land.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 96
b) The reduction will enhance preservation of PRIMARY CONSERVATION
RESOURCES and SECONDARY CONSERVATION RESOURCES, as identified in
the PLANNED CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT DESIGN PROCESS described
in Section 8.5.5 (Design Process) of this Bylaw.
c) The reduction will provide for development of land in a manner that protects Stows
rural character and scenic vistas.
The reduction in minimum lot size does not affect the ability of the Board of Health to
require sufficient area on a lot for water supply protection and the disposal of
wastewater.
8.5.7.2 To preserve the scenic integrity of Stow's neighborhoods, including the prevalence of
Stows tree lined streets, no BUILDING shall be located within 100 feet of an existing
public way.
1. Where the preservation of site features, and/or physical constraints of the proposed
PCD locus necessitate the drawing of proposed LOTs in a manner which impairs the
scenic values of the existing streetscape, the Planning Board may require an OPEN
LAND buffer.
2. To preserve the scenic integrity of Stows existing streetscapes and encourage
connection between neighborhoods, the Planning Board may require a walkway along
the frontage that meanders in a manner to preserve public shade trees and stone
walls.
8.5.7.3 No principal structure constructed as part of a PCD shall be located within 100 feet of a
building located outside of the PCD Locus.
8.5.8 The limitation on the number of lots served by a common drive under Section 6.2
(Common Drive) of the Zoning Bylaw shall not apply to lots within a PCD. Specifications
for common drives within a PCD shall be included within the Planned Conservation
Development Rules and Regulations.
8.5.8.1 A common drive is required for reduced frontage LOTs where two (2) or more of the
reduced frontage LOTs abut one another.
8.5.8.2 Each common drive shall be spaced at a minimum of 100 feet measured along the
frontage of the public or private way.
8.5.9 Parking shall be provided as required in Section 7 (Parking Regulations) of the Zoning
Bylaw, provided that no more than eight (8) parking spaces shall be grouped together.
8.5.10 Unless specifically waived by the Planning Board pursuant to G.L. c.41, s.81-R, all
streets and ways, whether public or private, wastewater disposal systems, drainage
facilities, drinking water supplies, and utilities shall be designed and constructed in
compliance with the Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of
Land, as amended.
8.5.11 Permitted Uses - There shall be permitted in any PCD:
1. Single-family DWELLINGs, single-family DWELLINGs with ACCESSORY
APARTMENTs pursuant to Section 8.1 (Accessory Apartments) of the Zoning Bylaw;
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 97
2. DUPLEX DWELLINGs which are designed to be consistent in character with the
single-family DWELLINGs in the same development. Such DUPLEX DWELLINGs
may be allowed provided that:
a. In terms of exterior appearance, the BUILDING is compatible in design, to the
extent practicable, for the single-family DWELLINGs in the same development;
and
b. not more than ten percent (10%) of the total number of LOTs are in DUPLEX
DWELLINGs
c. In its Rules and Regulations for PCDs, the Planning Board may establish design
guidelines for DUPLEX DWELLINGs, require submission of architectural floor
plans and side elevation plans for all proposed DWELLINGs, and impose
additional conditions affecting the design and location of DWELLINGs.
3. Special Conditions for DUPLEX DWELLINGs - Where DUPLEX DWELLINGs are
allowed, the total LOT area upon which the DUPLEX DWELLING is located shall
comply with the minimum LOT area requirement(s) for a PCDs single-family
DWELLING and shall not be further reduced.
4. Accessory uses and structures incidental to principal uses indicated above.
8.5.12 Where a PCDs yield calculation provides for less than 10 LOTs, as set forth in Section
8.5.6.2 (YIELD) of this Bylaw, then the total number of LOTs on which DUPLEX
DWELLINGS may be constructed is limited to one. Nothing in this section supercedes
the requirements set forth under Section 8.9 (Inclusion of Affordable Housing) of the
Zoning Bylaw.
8.5.13 Prohibition of Future Development - No tract, LOT, parcel or exclusive use area for
which a Special Permit is granted under this section shall be further subdivided, and
such restriction, which shall note that the same is for the benefit of the Town of Stow,
shall be shown on the plan and set forth in the deed, to be recorded with the Registry of
Deeds.
8.5.14 OPEN LAND Requirements
8.5.14.1 The OPEN LAND within a PCD shall be perpetually kept in an open state, preserved
exclusively for the purposes set forth in Section 8.5.14.6 (Allowable use of OPEN LAND)
of this Bylaw, and maintained in a manner that will ensure its suitability for its intended
purposes.
8.5.14.2 Minimum - A minimum of 60% of the gross area of the proposed PCD locus, which shall
include all parcels of land that are to be developed, preserved or otherwise altered in
accordance with Section 8.5 (Planned Conservation Development) of this Bylaw shall be
set aside as permanently conserved OPEN LAND.
The minimum required area of the OPEN LAND shall not contain more than 50%
wetlands, as defined in G.L. c.13, s.40 and the Stow Wetland Protection Bylaw.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 98
8.5.14.3 OPEN LAND Design Requirements  The location of OPEN LAND provided through this
bylaw shall be consistent with the PLANNED CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT
DESIGN PROCESS, as well as policies contained in the Town of Stow Master Plan and
Open Space and Recreation Plan. The following design requirements shall apply to the
OPEN LAND:
1. Open Land shall be planned as large, contiguous areas. Long, thin strips or narrow
areas of OPEN LAND shall occur only when necessary to provide for:
a. Enhanced access to the OPEN LAND
b. Vegetated buffers along wetlands
c. Buffers to areas of existing or potential agricultural use
d. Buffers to any other existing use abutting the PCD Locus if it can be shown, to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board that such areas are particularly sensitive to the
PCD development due to specific site characteristics
e. connections between open space areas.
2. OPEN LAND may be in more than one parcel provided that the size, shape and
location of such parcels are suitable for the designated uses. Where feasible, these
parcels shall be linked by trails.
3. Where the proposed development abuts or includes a body of water or a wetland,
these areas and the 100 foot buffer to such areas should be incorporated into the
OPEN LAND where feasible.
4. OPEN LAND shall be designed to encourage access from existing or proposed
roads and abutting open space lands by providing for adequate upland access at
least forty (40) feet wide and suitable for a footpath.
5. OPEN LAND should primarily consist of open fields and undisturbed woodlands and
other natural areas, or restored areas. Lawn and landscaped areas should not
generally be counted toward OPEN LAND requirements.
6. Prior to conveyance, the Planning Board may require OPEN LAND that has been
degraded by extraction, site grading or similar activites to be restored, where such
restoration would benefit PRIMARY CONSERVATION RESOURCES and
SECONDARY CONSERVATION RESOURCES.
7. Where a proposed development abuts existing land held for conservation purposes,
the development shall be designed to maximize contiguous protected land, and
minimize adverse impacts to the existing conserved land. Trail connections shall be
provided where appropriate. The Planning Board shall give consideration to the
recommendations of the existing conservation land owner with regard to access,
parking and connecting trails.
8.5.14.4 Ownership of the OPEN LAND - At the applicants discretion and subject to Planning
Board Approval, the OPEN LAND may be owned by one or more of the following:
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 99
a) The Town of Stow and accepted by it for park or open space use consistent with
G.L. c.40A, s.9;
b) A non-profit organization, or agency of the Commonwealth, with their consent,
whose principal purpose is the conservation of OPEN LAND for any of the
purposes set forth herein;
c) A HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION as defined herein owned jointly in common by
the owners of LOTs or units within the project.
8.5.14.4.1 Selection of ownership option c above requires:
a) A conservation and/or historic restriction to a third party conservation organization
or agency pursuant to G.L. c.184, s.31-33 as outlined herein;
b) The granting of an access easement to the Town over such land sufficient to
ensure its perpetual maintenance as agricultural, conservation, or recreation land.
Such easement shall provide that in the event the trust or other owner fails to
maintain the OPEN LAND in reasonable condition, the Town may, after notice to
the lot owners and after a public hearing is held, enter upon such land to maintain it
in order to prevent or abate a nuisance. The cost of such maintenance by the Town
shall be assessed against the property owners within the development and/or to the
owner of the OPEN LAND. Pursuant to G.L. c.40, s.58 the Town may file a lien
against the lot or lots to ensure payment for such maintenance. Pursuant to G.L.
c.40, s.57 the Town may also deny any application for, or revoke or suspend a
building permit or any local license or permit, due to neglect or refusal by any
property owner to pay any maintenance assessments levied.
8.5.14.5 Timing  The Planning Board shall specify in its final Decision at what phase in the
development any deed, restriction or other legal document necessary to permanently
conserve OPEN LAND as required herein shall be recorded with the Registry of Deeds.
8.5.14.6 Allowable Use of the OPEN LAND - Such land shall be perpetually kept in an open
state, preserved exclusively for the purposes set forth in this Bylaw and in the deed
and/or in the restriction, and maintained in a manner which will ensure its suitability for
its intended purposes.
8.5.14.6.1 The OPEN LAND shall only be used for the following purposes: wildlife habitat,
conservation, historic preservation, outdoor education, passive and active recreation,
aquifer protection and public water supply, agriculture, horticulture, forestry, and shall
be served by suitable access for such purposes. Potential, current or acceptable uses
of the open land identified during the Design Process shall be noted on the PCD plan
with reference in the deeds of the lots created or altered through the PCD plan approval
process. Permissible uses of the OPEN LAND shall not be inconsistent with protection
of the resources in the OPEN LAND.
8.5.14.6.2 The Planning Board shall permit a small portion of the Open Land, not to exceed 5%, to
be paved or built upon for STRUCTURES accessory to the dedicated use or use(s) of
such OPEN LAND (i.e. barns, or other farm structures, parking to facilitate public
access for passive recreation, informational kiosks, pedestrian walks and bike paths) so
long as the conservation values of the OPEN LAND are not compromised beyond what
is reasonably necessary to facilitate the allowed uses.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 100
8.5.14.6.3 Preferably any such area to be paved or built upon shall utilize permeable pavement
and/or other means of retaining natural hydrology. Treated stormwater may be
discharged into the protected OPEN LAND or land subject to a restrictive covenant.
8.5.14.6.4 The following infrastructure may be located on the OPEN LAND as permitted or
regulated by Title 5 or local Board of Health regulations, if serving the PCD, and if such
use, in the opinion of the Planning Board, enhances the specific purpose of the PCD to
promote better overall site planning.
? common subsurface leaching fields and other underground components of
wastewater systems
? rain gardens
? constructed wetlands
? any other decentralized stormwater management systems consistent with the
Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook, as amended, that serve the PCD.
8.5.14.6.5 Easements for infrastructure outlined in Section 8.5.14.6.4 of this Bylaw shall be no
larger than reasonably necessary. To the extent feasible, infrastructure referenced in
Section 8.5.14.6.4 of this Bylaw shall be located to minimize any effect on the
PRIMARY and SECONDARY CONSERVATION RESOURCES of the site.
8.5.14.6.6 The OPEN LAND may be used as the land subject to a restriction for the purpose of an
aggregate calculation under Title 5 of the Sanitary Code.
8.5.14.7 Monumentation - Monumentation shall clearly delineate the boundaries of the protected
OPEN LAND in manner that facilitates monitoring and enforcement.
8.5.14.8 Subdivision - Neither further division of the protected OPEN LAND into LOTs nor the
use of the protected OPEN LAND toward any further building requirements on this or
any other LOT is permitted;
8.5.14.9 Maintenance - The Planning Board shall require, in accordance with the PLANNED
CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT Rules and Regulations, the submission of an
operations and maintenance plan for the OPEN LAND in the event the OPEN LAND is
owned by a HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION, and may require an operations and
maintenance for the OPEN LAND in the event the OPEN LAND is owned by the Town
of Stow, a non-profit organization or agency of the Commonwealth. Such operations
and maintenance plan is intended to ensure that stormwater facilities and utilities are
properly maintained and the OPEN LAND is not used for storage or dumping of refuse,
junk, or other offensive or hazardous materials inconsistent with intended uses of the
OPEN LAND as stated in Section 8.5.14.6 (Allowable Use of the OPEN LAND) of this
Bylaw and/or as stated in the language of an applicable conservation or agricultural
deed restriction.
8.5.14.10 Conveyance - At the time of its conveyance the Open Land shall be free of all
encumbrances, mortgages, liens or other claims, except as to easements, restrictions
and encumbrances required or permitted by this Bylaw.
8.5.15 Planning Board Action - In evaluating the proposed PCD, the Planning Board shall
consider the general purposes of this bylaw; information gained through the design
process; site plan; the existing and probable future development of surrounding areas;
and the appropriateness of the proposed layout of the lots and the proposed layout and
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 101
use of the Open Land in relation to the topography, soils and other characteristics and
resources of the tract of land in question. The Planning Board shall grant a Special
Permit for a PCD if it finds that the proposed plan:
a) contains an application conforming to the Design Process outlined in Section 8.5.5
(Design Process) of this Bylaw;
b) protects and enhances the rural character and environment of Stow;
c) provides Open Land which is of a size, shape and location that has adequate
access so as to benefit the town and/or the residents of the PCD;
d) is appropriate to the natural terrain of the tract of land to be developed;
e) provides for the convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement in
the development in a manner that is compatible with the narrow, tree-lined country
roads of Stow;
f) the application sets forth a specific plan for management of all Open Land, waste
disposal and drainage facilities, roadways and other improvements to be
constructed in the development;
g) complies with all other legal requirements for a Special Permit and the Zoning
Bylaw, including those for a PCD; and
h) is consistent with the Stow Master Plan or succeeding plan, as amended.
The Planning Board may require changes to the "PCD Site Plan" and impose additional
conditions, safeguards and limitations as it deems necessary to secure the objectives
of this bylaw provision.
8.5.16 Performance Guarantee - Before the issuance of any building permits for the PCD, the
petitioner shall agree to complete the required improvements specified in the decision,
such construction and installation to be secured in accordance with performance
guarantee requirements of the Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the
Subdivision of Land. Pursuant to G.L. c.41, s.81-R, waivers from the Subdivision Rules
and Regulations may be granted by the Planning Board in granting a Special Permit
hereunder, provided the Board determines such waivers are in the public interest and
are consistent with the purposes of Section 8.5 (Planned Conservation Development) of
this Bylaw and the Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
8.5.17 Revisions and Amendments of PCD Special Permit - Any change in the layout of
streets; LOTs; in the configuration of the OPEN LAND; in the ownership or use of the
OPEN LAND; or any other change which, in the opinion of the Planning Board, would
significantly alter the character of the PCD, shall require the written approval of the
Planning Board. The Planning Board may, upon its own determination, require a new
Special Permit and hold a public hearing pursuant to the requirements of this bylaw if it
finds that the proposed changes are substantial in nature and of public concern.
8.6 Phasing of Growth
Over the past decade, the Town of Stow has been subject to extensive growth that has
strained its ability to govern. With this point in mind, the purpose of this Section is to
ensure that future growth occurs in an orderly and planned manner that allows the Town
time for preparation to maintain high quality municipal services for an expanded residential
population while allowing a reasonable amount of additional residential growth during those
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 102
preparations. The citizens of Stow insist on, take pride in, and enjoy a reputation for such
high quality and reliable municipal services. Several key municipal services, including
human services and schools, are currently or may soon be under considerable strain. This
Section will relate the timing of residential development to the Town's ability to provide
services.
In addition, this Section also proposes to encourage certain types of residential growth
which reflect the values of the Town as previously expressed in its policies and
appropriations.
8.6.1 Regulations:
8.6.1.1 Beginning on the effective date of this Section, no building permit for construction of
projects involving four or more residential units shall be issued unless in accordance
with the regulations of this Section.
8.6.1.2 DWELLING UNITs shall be considered as part of a single development if located
either on a single parcel or contiguous parcels of land which have been in the same
ownership at any time subsequent to the date of adoption of this Section.
8.6.1.3 All newly authorized residential units for which individual or several building permits
have been issued pursuant to the Massachusetts State Building Code, 780 CMR shall
count toward the growth rate limit of 35 DWELLING UNITs defined in Section 8.6.2.1
of the Zoning Bylaw.
8.6.2 Planned Growth Rate
8.6.2.1 This Section shall take effect beginning on the date of adoption by Town Meeting
(December 12, 1988). Beginning on this date of adoption, the applicable permit
granting authority (Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals or BUILDING
INSPECTOR) shall not approve any residential development which would result in
authorizations for more than 35 DWELLING UNITs over a 730 consecutive day (twoyear)
period unless (a) specifically exempted (the project has less than four
residential units); or (b) it is duly authorized in a development schedule.
8.6.2.2 Once a development schedule is approved, building permits shall be issued in
conformity with that schedule. Once authorized by the development schedule, said
building permits shall be issued even if the 35-unit limit has been reached.
8.6.3 Development Schedule - Building permits for new DWELLING UNITs shall be authorized
only in accordance with the following schedule:
# of New Units in Development Maximum DWELLING UNITs per Year*
1 - 24 4
25 - 29 5
30  46 6
47+ up to 15%
* Number of units in the development for which building permits may be authorized
each year beginning on the anniversary date of issuance date of the first building
permit for the development. In instances where the calculated numbers are less
than whole numbers, they will be rounded down to the nearest whole number.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 103
8.6.4 Modification to Schedule - The following modifications to the development schedule
found in Section 8.6.3 shall be allowed by the Planning Board (for Definitive Subdivision,
ANR, and special permits) or Zoning Board of Appeals (for special permits) as part of the
approval of any development. Points assigned in each category are to be cumulatively
totaled to determine the modification to the schedule based on the Modification to
Schedule Table found in Section 8.6.4.7.
8.6.4.1 Affordable Housing
1. Any development which includes 25 to 100% of its units for low and/or moderate income
people and which is subsidized by federal, state or local programs, or proposed by the
Stow Housing Authority, or by a non-profit or limited dividend partnership, or any
development which includes non-subsidized housing units priced to be affordable to people
whose income is equal to or less than 120% of the median income for Stow and which
provides that the mix of affordable and market rate housing built in any one year is
equivalent to the overall mix for the entire development, and which further provides that
resale restrictions are established by the developer which ensure that the affordable units
remain affordable for a period of thirty years, shall be exempt from the Planned Growth
Rate in Section 8.6.3 and shall be allowed in accordance with the following schedule:
# of New Units DWELLING UNITs/ Year*
1-50 100%
51-80 up to 50%
80+ total units up to 33%
Points Assigned
2. Any development that meets the criteria found in Section 8.6.4.1,
but which includes 10% to 24% of its units for low and moderate
income people.
20
3. Any development that includes no affordable units that meet the
criteria in Section 8.6.4.1.
-10
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 104
8.6.4.2 Open Land/Farmland:
Points Assigned
1. Provision of open land/parkland, as part of any
development. For the purposes of this provision "usable
land" shall be defined as in Section 8.5.4 and "open land"
shall be defined as in Section 8.5.8.
(1) Open land consisting of 4,000 to 4,999 square feet
of usable land per DWELLING UNIT which is
protected from future development through deed
restrictions and/or protective covenant, and
including provisions for renewal.
10
(2) Open land consisting of 5,000 to 5,999 square feet
of usable land per DWELLING UNIT which is
protected from future development through deed
restrictions and/or protective covenant, and
including provisions for renewal.
15
(3) Open land consisting of at least 6,000 square feet
or more usable land area per DWELLING UNIT which
is protected from future development through deed
restrictions and/or protective covenant, and
including provisions for renewal.
20
(4) Improved open land that meets the defined
recreation needs of the Town of Stow as defined by
Open Space Plan and deeded to the Town of Stow
(Add 5 points to the applicable category above.)
(5) No usable open land. -10
2. Protection and retention of farmland according to the
following impacts on working farms:
(1) Development of agricultural land, defined as land
classified prime, unique or of state or local
importance by the USDA, SCS or land
characterized by active agricultural use as defined
by Chapter 61A of the Mass. General Laws.
-30
(2) Provision of a permanent 100-foot buffer zone as a
deed restriction, including a FENCE and screening
vegetation from the property boundary of a working
farm.
10
8.6.4.3 AQUIFER Protection:
Points Assigned
1. Development in the Aquifer Protection Overlay District
(1) Average LOT size less than two acres. -30
(2) Average LOT size two acres or more. -15
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 105
8.6.4.4 Planned Conservation Development - Any proposed approval under Section 8.5 will
be subject to the following schedule provided that the OPEN SPACE is deeded to the
Town:
# Units in Development Maximum DWELLING UNITs per
Year*
1 - 11 8
12 - 33 9
34 - 66 30%
67 - 99 19 units or 26%
100 + 25 units or 22%
* Number of units in the development for which building permits may be authorized
each year beginning on the anniversary date of the issuance date of the first
building permit for the development. In instances where the calculated numbers
are less than whole numbers, they will be rounded down to the nearest whole
number.
8.6.4.5 Infrastructure:
Points Assigned
1. Any development which commits to completing all roads
and utilities prior to issuance of building permits during the
first year of the total project.
30
2. Any development that commits to completing all roads or
utilities (one or the other) prior to issuance of building
permits.
15
3. Any development which commits to completing all roads
and utilities during years one to three of the project.
5
4. Any development which commits to completing all roads
and utilities after the third year of the project.
-15
8.6.4.6 Other - The Planning Board (Definitive Subdivision, Approval Not Required and
special permits) and Zoning Board of Appeals (special permits) may grant up to a
total maximum of 40 points after making the relevant findings based on submitted
documentation and giving due consideration to the following:
1. Ability of the Town to adequately serve the proposed development with
STREETS, utilities, drainage, educational and protective services.
2. The amelioration of development impacts, such as through lower densities,
preservation of natural or agricultural resources, preservation of scenic views, or
other approaches approved by the Planning Board.
3. Other arrangements which will provide for or reduce the cost of public services
and facilities such as child care, health care, elder services, disabled services,
recreation, transportation or water conservation.
4. Provision of housing needs for diverse population groups.
5. Commitments to improve town facilities.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 106
6. Site design which responds to, incorporates and protects natural features such as
vegetation, topography, water courses and views, or which is designed to respond
to the character of the neighborhood.
7. Housing and site features that emphasize safety aspects such as sidewalks,
school bus stops or fire protection systems.
8.6.4.7 Development Schedule Modification Table - Points accumulated under Section
8.6.4.1 through 8.6.4.6 shall be totaled and the total shall modify the development
schedule in Section 8.6.3 according to the following table.
DEVELOPMENT SCHEDULE
POINT TOTAL
# of
Units
-30 -29 to -15 -14 to -1 0 1 to 5 6 to 12 13 to 20 21 to 28 29 to 36 37+
1-24 1 2 3 4 5 5 6 7 8 9
25-29 2 3 4 5 6 6 7 8 10 11
30-46 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 12 13
47-76 9% 10% 13% 15% 18% 21% 25% 30% 35% 40%
77-106 8% 7 units or
9%
12% 11 units
or 14%
17% 20% 19 units
or 23%
22 units
or 27%
26 units
or 31%
30 units
or 35%
107+ 8 units
or 7%
9 units
or 8%
12 units
or 11%
14 units
or 13%
18 units
or 16%
21 units
or 18%
24 units
or 20%
28 units
or 23%
32 units
or 27%
37 units
or 30%
8.6.5 Requirements:
8.6.5.1 All Definitive Subdivision, Approval Not Required and Special Permit applications
shall include a proposed development schedule by the applicant.
8.6.5.2 Development schedules as proposed or modified shall be approved by the appropriate
body (Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals), shall be recorded at the Middlesex
County Registry of Deeds, and shall have no effect until recorded. The schedule shall
specify the earliest date that each unit/LOT may become eligible for the issuance of a
building permit.
8.6.6 Zoning Change Protection
The protection against zoning changes as granted by Section 6 of Chapter 40A, Mass.
General Laws, shall, in the case of a development whose completion has been
constrained by this Bylaw, be extended to the minimum time for completion allowed
under this Bylaw.
8.7 INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs
Purpose - The purpose of INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs is to provide the
opportunity for the development of housing most beneficial for the SENIOR and ELDER
population of Stow at greater density than would normally be allowed provided that said
LAND development:
a) protects Stow's rural character by development of land which preserves land for
conservation, OPEN SPACE, recreation, agriculture and forestry;
b) promotes more efficient use of land while protecting natural resources, such as water
resources, wetlands, flood plains and wildlife;
c) does not detract from the livability and aesthetic qualities of the environment;
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 107
d) preserves unique and significant historical and archaeological resources, and scenic
vistas;
e) is consistent with the objectives of the Zoning Bylaw;
f) provides a greater mixture of housing types and more energy-efficient and costeffective
residential development; and
g) reduces the typical costs of providing municipal services to residential developments.
8.7.1 Districts in which the USE is Allowed - The Planning Board may grant a special permit for
the development and construction of INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs in the
Business District in accordance with this Section and MGL Ch. 40A, s.9.
8.7.1.1 The total number of INDEPENDENT ADULT UNITs shall not exceed 6% of the total
single family DWELLING UNITS in Stow.
8.7.2 Procedural Requirements
8.7.2.1 All proposed INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs shall require the record owner to
obtain a special permit from the Planning Board. It is strongly recommended that an
applicant submit a preliminary site plan of the proposed development for review by
the Planning Board, other Town Boards, and abutters before an application for
Special Permit is formally filed with the Town Clerk and the Planning Board.
8.7.2.2 If the INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs require approval under the Subdivision
Control Law, MGL Ch. 41, the INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs Site Plan"
shall contain a plan in the form and with the contents required of a Definitive
Subdivision by the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in Stow.
The application for a Special Permit for INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs and
for approval of a Definitive Subdivision plan shall be filed and considered concurrently
to the greatest extent possible and practicable in the Planning Boards sole judgment
and determination to the extent permitted by law.
8.7.3 Planning Board Action - In evaluating the proposed INDEPENDENT ADULT
RESIDENCEs, the Planning Board shall consider the general objectives of this bylaw and
of INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs in particular. It shall also consider the existing
and probable future development of surrounding areas, the appropriateness of the
proposed layout of the site, and the proposed layout and use of the Open Land in relation
to the topography, soils and other characteristics and resources of the tract of land in
question. The Planning Board shall grant a Special Permit for INDEPENDENT ADULT
RESIDENCEs if it finds that the INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs:
a) are appropriate to the natural terrain of the tract of land to be developed;
b) provide for the convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement in the
development in a manner that is compatible with the narrow, tree-lined country roads
of Stow;
c) the application sets forth a specific plan for maintenance of all OPEN SPACE, waste
disposal and drainage facilities, roadways and other improvements to be constructed
in the development;
d) comply in all respects to the requirements of the Bylaw and enhance the purpose and
intents of INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs, and
e) are consistent with the Stow Master Plan or succeeding plan, as amended.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 108
8.7.3.1 The Planning Board shall consider the recommendations of the Board of Health, the
Conservation Commission, other Town Boards, and the Town's consulting engineer in
making said findings.
8.7.3.2 The Planning Board may require changes to the " INDEPENDENT ADULT
RESIDENCE Site Plan" and impose additional conditions, safeguards and
limitations, as it deems
necessary to secure the objectives of this bylaw provision.
8.7.4 Application for an INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCE Special Permit - Any person who
desires an INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCE Special Permit shall submit an
application in writing which meets the requirements set forth herein and all other
information which may be required by the Planning Board under its Rules and
Regulations for INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCE.
8.7.4.1 Contents of an Application for a Special Permit for INDEPENDENT ADULT
RESIDENCE - The application for a Special Permit for INDEPENDENT ADULT
RESIDENCEs shall be accompanied by an "INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs
Site Plan" showing the information required by the Rules and Regulations for
INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs. The information shall include, but not be
limited to: topography; soil characteristics as shown on the Soil Conservation Service
maps; wetlands as defined by MGL Ch. 131, s.40 and the Stow Wetlands Protection
Bylaw; flood plain boundary lines; existing types of vegetation; any other unique
natural, historical, archaeological and aesthetic resources; the proposed layout of the
LOTs; the proposed location of INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs, garages and
other accessory structures; the proposed location of roads, driveways, wells, septic
systems and utilities; proposed finished grades; proposed landscaping; the proposed
layout and land use plan of the OPEN SPACE in the INDEPENDENT ADULT
RESIDENCE development.
8.7.5 Permitted USES - There shall be permitted in any INDEPENDENT ADULT LIVING
RESIDENCE development:
8.7.5.1 INDEPENDENT ADULT UNITs
8.7.5.2 Accessory uses and structures incidental to principal uses indicated above.
8.7.5.3 Support services that are necessary to meet the needs of its residents such as but
not limited to skilled nursing, medical and other health services, recreation and leisure
facilities, a community center, or food services.
8.7.5.4 Convenience services intended primarily for its residents may be included, such as
Retail Stores, Banks, Restaurants, and Service Establishments, provided that not
more than 10% of the total FLOOR AREA of the development is dedicated to such
uses.
8.7.6 Special Regulations for INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCE:
8.7.6.1 The Planning Board may permit the SIDE YARD requirement to be eliminated so as
to allow the separate sale of individual INDEPENDENT ADULT UNITs within an
INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCE along with its accompanying YARD area.
8.7.6.2 All privileges and exemptions provided to single-family residential uses or BUILDINGs
under this Bylaw, as set forth in Section 3.8.1.11 or otherwise, shall also apply to
INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs.
8.7.6.3 BUILDING design for INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs:
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 109
a) BUILDINGs shall be of a design similar to the architecture in historic villages of
New England in terms of scale, massing, roof shape, spacing and exterior
materials. Alternative designs may be allowed provided the Special Permit
Granting Authority finds the alternative design is consistent with the purpose and
intent of the Bylaw.
b) BUILDINGs shall have a vertical orientation, meaning either that the BUILDING
shall actually have a greater height than width, or that the facades and roof lines
of the BUILDING are designed to reduce the massing and bulk so that it appears
as a group of smaller masses with a distinct vertical orientation.
c) The BUILDINGs shall be articulated to achieve a human scale and interest. The
use of different textures, shadow lines, detailing and contrasting shapes is
required. Not more than fifty (50) feet of a BUILDING shall be in the same
vertical plane.
d) The BUILDINGs shall be faced with materials used in historic New England
architecture. Alternative designs may be allowed provided the Special Permit
Granting Authority finds the alternative design is consistent with the purpose and
intent of the Bylaw.
8.7.7 Special Regulations for INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs:
8.7.7.1 In the Business District, no INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCE development shall
exceed a FLOOR AREA RATIO of 0.30.
8.7.7.2 INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs and INDEPENDENT ADULT UNITs shall not
be eligible for subsequent conversion to conventional apartments or DWELLING
UNITs.
8.7.7.3 Each INDEPENDENT ADULT UNIT shall be occupied by at least one person fifty-five
(55) years of age or older and no INDEPENDENT ADULT UNIT shall be occupied by
more than three persons. No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall reside
within an INDEPENDENT ADULT UNIT in INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs for
more than three (3) months in any twelve (12) consecutive month period, which shall
be set forth in a deed restriction, restrictive covenant, or other document to be
recorded with the Special Permit and to run with the land in perpetuity. This
requirement shall be an express condition of any Special Permit granted hereunder
and shall be in such form as is satisfactory to the Planning Board, to be enforceable
by any unit owners association or by the owner in any legal action as may be
permitted by law or equity.
8.7.7.4 A minimum of 33% of the INDEPENDENT ADULT UNITs shall comply with ADA
accessibility standards for all living areas.
8.7.7.5 The Planning Board may require a landscaped buffer for INDEPENDENT ADULT
RESIDENCEs in addition to the minimum required YARD as deemed appropriate in
the opinion of the Planning Board based on the size, shape, location, zoning, and
uses of abutting parcels, topography, or other similar considerations for the tract of
land.
8.7.7.6 INDEPENDENT ADULT UNITs constructed under a Special Permit issued in
accordance with this section are exempt from Section 8.6, Phasing of Growth.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 110
8.7.8 Dimensional Requirements for OPEN SPACE - A minimum of 30% of the total area of the
tract of land to be developed as INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs shall be
designated as OPEN SPACE.
8.7.9 Use of the OPEN SPACE - The OPEN SPACE shall be dedicated and used for
conservation, historic preservation and education, outdoor education, recreation, park
purposes, agriculture, horticulture, forestry, or for a combination of these uses. No other
uses shall be allowed in the OPEN SPACE, except as otherwise provided herein.
8.7.9.1 Wells and sewage disposal areas or facilities may be located on the OPEN SPACE
as permitted or regulated by Title 5 or local Board of Health regulations, if serving the
INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs, and if such use, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, enhances the specific purpose of INDEPENDENT ADULT
RESIDENCEs to promote better overall site planning. Septic disposal easements
shall be no larger than necessary. If any portion of the OPEN SPACE is used for the
purpose of a community well or leaching area, the Planning Board shall require
adequate assurances and covenants that such facilities shall be maintained by the
LOT owners within the INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs development.
8.7.9.2 In addition, a portion of the OPEN SPACE may also be used for ways serving as
pedestrian walks, bicycle paths and emergency access or egress to INDEPENDENT
ADULT RESIDENCEs or adjacent land if such a use, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, enhances the general purpose of this Bylaw and enhances better site and
community planning, and if the Planning Board finds that adequate assurances and
covenants exist, to ensure proper maintenance of such facilities by the owner of the
Open Space.
a) Ownership of the OPEN SPACE - The OPEN SPACE shall be owned in common
by the owners of the INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs or by a corporation
or trust owned, or to be owned, by the owners of the INDEPENDENT ADULT
LIVING RESIDENCEs. If such a corporation or trust is utilized, ownership thereof
shall pass with conveyances of the residential units.
8.7.9.3 In all cases, a perpetual restriction approved by the Planning Board and enforceable
by the Town of Stow shall be imposed on the use of such land, providing in substance
that the land be kept in its natural state and that the land shall not be built upon or
developed or used except in accordance with the provisions of INDEPENDENT
ADULT RESIDENCEs as set forth herein and, if applicable, as further specified in the
decision of the Planning Board governing the individual INDEPENDENT ADULT
RESIDENCEs.
8.7.9.4 At the time of its conveyance the Open Space shall be free of all encumbrances,
mortgages or other claims, except as to easements, restrictions and encumbrances
required or permitted by this Bylaw.
8.7.10 Streets and Utilities - All streets and ways, whether public or private, wastewater disposal
systems, drainage facilities, drinking water supplies, and utilities shall be designed and
constructed in compliance with the Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the
Subdivision of Land, as amended, whether or not the INDEPENDENT ADULT
RESIDENCEs are located in a subdivision.
8.7.11 Performance Guarantee- Before the issuance of any building permits for INDEPENDENT
ADULT RESIDENCEs, the petitioner shall agree to complete the required improvements
specified in the decision, such construction and installation to be secured in accordance
with performance guarantee requirements of the Town of Stow Rules and Regulations
Governing the Subdivision of Land. Special exceptions to the Subdivision Rules and
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 111
Regulations may be authorized by the Planning Board in granting a Special Permit
hereunder, provided the Board determines such exceptions are in the public interest and
are consistent with the purposes of Section 8.7 of the Bylaw.
8.7.12 Revisions and Amendments of an INDEPENDENT ADULT RESIDENCEs Special Permit
- Any change in the layout of streets, in the configuration of the OPEN SPACE, in the
ownership or use of the OPEN SPACE, or any other change which, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, would significantly alter the character of INDEPENDENT ADULT
RESIDENCEs shall require the written approval of the Planning Board. The Planning
Board may, upon its own determination, require a new Special Permit and hold a public
hearing pursuant to the requirements of this bylaw if it finds that the proposed changes
are substantial in nature and of public concern.
8.8 Intentionally left blank
8.9 Inclusion of Affordable Housing
8.9.1 Purpose and Intent - The purpose of this Bylaw is to increase the supply of housing in the
Town of Stow that is available to and affordable by low income or moderate income
households who might otherwise have difficulty in finding homes in Stow, and to ensure that
such housing is affordable over the long-term and provided in accordance with the
requirements of Massachusetts General Law Chapter 40B and its implementing
regulations, Stow Comprehensive Permit Policy, the Stow Master Plan, and other ongoing
programs within the Town of Stow. It is intended that the AFFORDABLE DWELLING
UNITS authorized under the provisions of this Bylaw be considered as Local Initiative
Program (LIP) dwelling units in compliance with the requirements for the same as specified
by the Department of Community Affairs, Massachusetts Department of Housing and
Community Development (DHCD), or successor, or additional programs adopted by the
Commonwealth or its agencies, and that said units count toward Stows requirements under
Massachusetts General Law Chapter 40B, Sections 20-23, as amended. Through multifamily
units, developers will be able to increase the number of DWELLING UNITS within a
development versus conventional developments. The increased number of DWELLING
UNITS is intended to offset the reduced revenue from the affordable homes. In those
cases where the Inclusion of Affordable Housing may conflict or be inconsistent with
Section 8.5, Planned Conservation Development (PCD) or other sections of the Town of
Stow Zoning Bylaw, except as otherwise expressly provided herein, the provisions of
Inclusion of Affordable Housing shall be controlling.
8.9.2 Applicability
8.9.2.1 Beginning with the effective date of this Bylaw, any development or division of land,
which could result in the creation of six (6) or more DWELLING UNITS, shall
require a Special Permit from the Planning Board, and shall include as a condition
of said permit that:
A. At least 10% of the units be priced for QUALIFIED AFFORDABLE HOUSING
PURCHASERS;
B. The mix of AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS and market rate housing built in
any one year be equivalent to the overall mix for the entire development;
C. Deed restrictions, acceptable to the Town, and established in accordance with
the standards of DHCD or successor or additional programs adopted by the
Commonwealth or its agencies, shall be placed on the appropriate property to
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 112
ensure that AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS created under this section shall
remain AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS in perpetuity or for as long a period
as is allowed by law.
8.9.2.2 DWELLING UNITS shall be considered as part of a single development if located
either on a single parcel or contiguous parcels of land which have been in the same
ownership at any time subsequent to the date of adoption of Inclusion of Affordable
Housing.
8.9.3 Inclusion of Affordable Housing Regulations  The Planning Board shall adopt and
maintain a set of regulations that contains the necessary policies, procedures, and
requirements to implement the provisions of this Section.
8.9.4 Provision of AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS - AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS
required under Section 8.9.2.1 may be provided in any one or combination of
methods described below, subject to the approval of the Planning Board:
A. Constructed on the locus subject to the Special Permit;
B. Constructed on a locus different than the one subject to the Special Permit;
C. An applicant may offer, and the Planning Board, in concert with the Board of Selectmen
may accept, donations of land in fee simple, on or off-site, that the Planning Board
determines are suitable for the construction of an equivalent number of AFFORDABLE
DWELLING UNITS. The Planning Board may require, prior to acceptance of land by
the Town, satisfaction of the requirements of this Bylaw, that the applicant submit
appraisals of the land in question, as well as other data relevant to the determination of
value;
D. For fractional AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS, the applicant shall round up to the
next whole number of units or choose to pay equivalent fees-in-lieu of units (see
Section 8.9.6) proportionate to the percentage of the unit required;
E. Preservation of existing DWELLING UNITS as AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS
through the purchase of deed restrictions.
8.9.5 Provisions Applicable to AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS On- and Off-Site
8.9.5.1 Allowed types of AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS:
A. Single-family DWELLINGS;
B. Single-family DWELLINGS with ACCESSORY APARTMENTS;
C. MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS, which are designed to be consistent in character
with the single-family DWELLINGS in the same development. Such MULTIFAMILY
DWELLINGS may be allowed provided:
i. in terms of exterior appearance, the BUILDING is compatible in design and,
to the extent practicable, indistinguishable from the single-family
DWELLINGS in the same development; and
ii. there shall be no more than four (4) DWELLING UNITS in any residential
BUILDING; and
iii. the total number of MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS shall not exceed 10% of
the lots in the development; and
iv. the overall length of any residential BUILDING shall not exceed 100 feet.
D. Accessory uses and structures incidental to principal uses indicated above and
approved by the Planning Board.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 113
8.9.5.2 Siting of AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS. All AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS that
are constructed on-site under this Bylaw shall be situated within the development so as
not to be in less desirable locations than market-rate units in the development and
shall, on average, be no less accessible to public amenities, such as open space, as
the market-rate units. The Site Plan shall identify those lots selected for AFFORDABLE
DWELLING UNITS.
8.9.5.3 Minimum Design and Construction Standards for AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS.
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS within market-rate developments shall be integrated
with the rest of the development and shall be compatible to the extent practicable in
exterior design and appearance with other units, to the extent that such regulation is
not inconsistent with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40B, Section 3.
8.9.5.4 With the approval of the Planning Board, as an alternative to the requirements of
Section 8.9.4.A, an applicant subject to the Bylaw may develop, construct or otherwise
provide AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS equivalent to those required by Section
8.9.2.1 off-site. To the maximum extent practicable, all requirements of this Bylaw that
apply to on-site provision of AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS shall apply to provision
of off-site AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS. In addition, the Planning Board shall
approve the location of the off-site units to be provided as an integral element of the
Special Permit review and approval process.
8.9.6 Fees-in-Lieu of AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT Provision - As an alternative to the
requirements of Section 8.9.2.1, and as allowed by law and with the approval of the
Planning Board, an applicant may contribute an amount in cash equal to the costs of
constructing such AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS, and satisfactory to the Planning
Board in consultation with other relevant Town boards, to the Town of Stow Affordable
Housing Trust Fund, for the development and preservation of affordable housing, in
consultation with the Planning Board and other appropriate Town Boards, in lieu of
constructing and offering AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS within the locus of the
proposed development or off-site, as set forth in Section 8.9.6.1 below.
8.9.6.1. Calculation of fees-in-lieu of units. The applicant for development subject to this Bylaw
may pay fees-in-lieu of the construction. For the purposes of this Bylaw, the fees-inlieu
of the construction or provision of each AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT is
determined to be three (3) times 80% of the median income for a household of four (4),
as reported by the most recent information from the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and/or the Massachusetts Department of
Housing and Community Development (DHCD).
8.10 COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATIONs
8.10.1 Purpose - The purpose of this section is to promote the creation of new COMMERCIAL
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATIONs by providing
standards for the placement, design, construction, operation, monitoring, modification
and removal of such installations that address and protects public safety, minimizes
undesirable impacts on residential property and neighborhoods, protects scenic, natural
and historic resources, does not diminish abutting property values and provides
adequate financial assurance for the eventual decommissioning of such installations.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 114
The provisions set forth in this section shall apply to the construction, operation, and/or
repair of COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY
INSTALLATIONs.
8.10.2 Applicability - No COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY
INSTALLATION shall be ERECTED or installed except in compliance with the
provisions of this Section and other applicable Sections of the Zoning Bylaw, as well as
state and federal law. Such use shall not create a nuisance, which is discernible from
other properties by virtue of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare and
radiation, unsightliness or other nuisance as determined by the Special Permit/Site Plan
Approval Granting Authority.
8.10.2.1 The construction and use of a COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE
ENERGY INSTALLATION with 250 kW or larger of rated NAMEPLATE CAPACITY
within the Industrial, Commercial District and Refuse Disposal District shall undergo site
plan review by the Planning Board prior to construction, installation or modification as
provided in this section.
8.10.2.2 Construction and use of a COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE
ENERGY INSTALLATION with 250 kW or larger of rated NAMEPLATE CAPACITY in
the Residential, Business and Recreation Conservation District shall be subject to
Special Permit and Site Plan Approval from the Planning Board in accordance with the
additional requirements specified herein.
8.10.2.3 This section also pertains to physical modifications that materially alter the type,
configuration or size of these installations or related equipment throughout the useful
life of the system or where alterations may impact abutters.
8.10.3 General Requirements
8.10.3.1 Lot Requirements - A COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE
ENERGY INSTALLATION may be permitted on a lot, which contains an area of not
less than three (3) acres.
8.10.3.2 Visual Impact - The visual impact of the COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC
RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION, including all accessory structures and
appurtenances, shall be mitigated. All accessory structures and appurtenances shall
be architecturally compatible with each other. Structures shall be shielded from view
and/or joined and clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts as deemed necessary by
and in the sole opinion of the Special Permit/Site Plan Approval Granting Authority.
Methods such as the use of landscaping, natural features and opaque fencing shall be
utilized.
8.10.3.3 Compliance with Laws, Ordinances and Regulations - The construction and operation
of all COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY
INSTALLATIONs shall be consistent with all applicable local regulations and bylaws,
and state and federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable safety,
construction, electrical, and communications requirements. All buildings and fixtures
forming part of A SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION
shall be constructed in accordance with the State Building Code.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 115
8.10.3.4 Utility Notification - No COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE
ENERGY INSTALLATION shall be constructed until evidence has been given to the
Special Permit/Site Plan Approval Granting Authority that the utility company that
operates the electrical grid where the installation is to be located has been informed
of the solar photovoltaic installation owner or operators intent to install an
interconnected customer-owned generator. Proof of a mutual agreement with the
utility company shall be provided to the Special Permit/Site Plan Approval Granting
Authority. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement. If the
COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION
goes on grid, it shall comply with this requirement.
8.10.3.5 Maintenance - The COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE
ENERGY INSTALLATION owner or operator shall maintain the facility in good
condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural
repairs, and integrity of security measures. Site access shall be maintained to a
level acceptable to the local Fire Chief, Police Chief, Emergency Medical Services
and Special Permit/Site Plan Approval Granting Authority. The owner or operator
shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining the solar photovoltaic installation
and any access road(s), unless accepted as a public way.
8.10.3.6 Emergency Services - The COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE
ENERGY INSTALLATION owner or operator shall provide a copy of the project
summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the local Fire Chief. The owner or
operator shall provide an emergency response plan. The emergency response plan is
subject to the approval of the Special Permit/Site Plan Approval Granting Authority, the
Fire Department and the Police Department, and shall include at a minimum, explicit
instructions on all means of shutting down the COMMERCIAL SOLAR
PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION, which shall be clearly
marked. The owner or operator shall identify a responsible person for public inquiries
throughout the life of the installation.
8.10.3.7 Safety and Security  Safety and measures of security shall be subject to the approval
of the Special Permit/Site Plan Approval Granting Authority, the Fire Department and
the Police Department.
8.10.4 Design Standards
8.10.4.1 Lighting - Lighting of the COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE
ENERGY INSTALLATION, including all accessory structures and appurtenances shall
not be permitted unless required by the Special Permit/Site Plan Approval Granting
Authority, Special Permit/Site Plan Approval Decision or required by the State Building
Code. Where used, lighting shall comply with the requirements of Section 3.8.1.5
(exterior lighting) of the Zoning Bylaw.
8.10.4.2 Signs and Advertising - Section 6.3 (Signs) of the Zoning Bylaw does not apply to this
Section. Signage for COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE
ENERGY INSTALLATIONs shall be limited in size as determined by the Special
Permit/Site Plan Approval Granting Authority.
COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY
INSTALLATIONs shall not be used for displaying any advertising except for
reasonable identification of the owner or operator of the COMMERCIAL SOLAR
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 116
PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION and emergency contact
information.
8.10.4.3 Utility Connections - All utility connections from the COMMERCIAL SOLAR
PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATIONs shall be underground
unless specifically permitted otherwise by a Special Permit/Site Plan Approval Decision.
Electrical transformers and inverters to enable utility interconnections may be above
ground if required by the utility provider.
8.10.4.4 Land Clearing, Soil Erosion and Habitat Impacts - Clearing of natural vegetation shall
be limited to what is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the
COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION or
otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations and bylaws.
8.10.4.5 Appurtenant Structures - All appurtenant structures to COMMERCIAL SOLAR
PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATIONs shall be subject to all
applicable bylaws and regulations concerning the bulk and height of structures,
lot area, setbacks, open space, parking and building coverage requirements.
8.10.5 Modifications
All substantive material modifications to a COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC
RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION made after issuance of the Special
Permit/Site Plan Approval Decision shall require modification to the Special
Permit/Site Plan Approval Decision.
8.10.6 Abandonment and Removal
8.10.6.1 Abandonment - Absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning or written
notice of extenuating circumstances, the COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC
RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION shall be considered abandoned when it
fails to operate for more than one year without the written consent of the Special
Permit/Site Plan Approval Granting Authority. If the owner or operator of the
COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION
fails to remove the installation in accordance with the requirements of this section
within 150 days of abandonment or the proposed date of decommissioning, the
town may enter the property and physically remove the installation.
8.10.6.2 Removal Requirements - Any COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC
RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION, which has reached the end of its useful
life or has been abandoned, shall be removed. The owner or operator shall
physically remove the installation no more than 150 days after the date of
discontinued operations. The owner or operator shall notify the Special Permit/Site
Plan Approval Granting Authority by certified mail of the proposed date of
discontinued operations and plans for removal. Decommissioning shall consist of:
1. Physical removal of all COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC
RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION, structures, equipment, security
barriers and transmission lines from the site.
2. Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local, state, and
federal waste disposal regulations.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 117
3. Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion. The
Special Permit/Site Plan Approval Granting Authority may allow the owner or
operator to leave landscaping or designated below-grade foundations in order
to minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation.
8.10.7 Financial Surety
Proponents of COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY
INSTALLATION projects shall provide a form of surety, either through escrow account,
bond or otherwise, to cover the cost of removal in the event the town must remove the
installation and remediate the landscape, in an amount and form determined to be
reasonable by the Special Permit/Site Plan Approval Granting Authority, but in no event
to exceed more than 150 percent of the cost of removal and compliance with the
additional requirements set forth herein, as determined by the project proponent. The
project proponent shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with
removal, prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount shall include a mechanism for
calculating increased removal costs due to inflation.
Before issuance of any building permits for the COMMERCIAL SOLAR
PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION, such construction and
installation shall be secured in accordance with performance guarantee requirements of
the Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land to the
extent applicable and/or the regulations adopted pursuant to the COMMERCIAL
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION Bylaw for this
purpose.
8.10.8 Special Permit and Site Plan Approval Decisions
Special Permit and Site Plan Approval decisions shall conform to the requirements of
this Section, section 9.2 and 9.3 of the Zoning Bylaw and other relevant Sections of the
Zoning Bylaw.
All COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION
Special Permit and Site Plan Approval Decisions shall be valid for a twelve (12) month
period unless renewed or extended by the Special Permit/Site Plan Approval Granting
Authority following application made by the applicant. There is no limit to the number of
renewals or extensions the special Permit/Site plan Approval Granting Authority may
grant for a COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWALBE ENERGY
INSTALLATION.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 118
SECTION 9
ADMINISTRATION
9.1 Board of Appeals
The Board of Appeals under this Bylaw shall be the existing Board of Appeals established
in accordance with Section 12 of Chapter 40A and Article 3, Section 12 of the General
Bylaws of the Town. The Board of Appeals shall constitute the permit granting authority
and the special permit granting authority, except as otherwise provided in the Bylaw, and
shall exercise the powers contained in Chapter 40A, Section 14 of the General Laws, as
amended.
9.2 Special Permits
9.2.1 Special Permit Granting Authority - Certain uses are designated in the Bylaw as requiring
a special permit. The Board of Appeals, the Planning Board or the Board of Selectmen
are herein designated as a Special Permit Granting Authority for specific purposes.
Wherever specific designation is not made, the Planning Board shall be deemed the
Special Permit Granting Authority. The Board of Appeals, the Planning Board or the
Board of Selectmen may grant special permits for such designated uses as authorized in
this Bylaw and shown in the Table of Principal Uses.
9.2.2 Rules and Regulations and Fees - Each Special Permit Granting Authority shall
promulgate, adopt and, from time to time, amend rules and regulations, not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Bylaw or Chapter 40A of the General Laws or other applicable
provision of the General Laws, and shall file a copy of said rules and regulations with the
Town Clerk. Such rules and regulations shall prescribe as a minimum:
9.2.2.1 the size, form, contents, style and number of copies of plans and specifications;
9.2.2.2 the town boards or agencies from which the Special Permit Granting Authority may
require reports; and
9.2.2.3 fees sufficient to cover reasonable costs incurred by the Town in the review and
administration of special permits.
9.2.3 Petition - Any person seeking to obtain a special permit (hereinafter referred to as the
Petitioner) shall file a petition with the Town Clerk, and the required number of copies of
said petition, including the date and time of filing certified by the Town Clerk, shall be filed
forthwith by the petitioner with the Special Permit Granting Authority. Each petition shall
be completed on the proper forms and accompanied by the information required by the
Special Permit Granting Authority as set forth in its rules and regulations.
9.2.4 Reports from Town Boards or Agencies - The Special Permit Granting Authority shall
transmit forthwith one copy each to the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals,
BUILDING INSPECTOR, Board of Health, Conservation Commission, Board of
Selectmen, Highway Department, Fire Department, Police Department, Historical
Commission and other such board or agency deemed necessary by the Special Permit
Granting Authority for their written reports. Failure of any such board or agency to make
a recommendation within thirty-five (35) days of receipt of said petition shall be deemed
lack of opposition by said board or agency in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
40A of the General Laws. However, additional comments from any such board or agency
may be received prior to the close of the public hearing.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 119
9.2.5 Public Hearing and Decision - The Special Permit Granting Authority shall hold a public
hearing after proper notification in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 40A of the
General Laws no later than sixty-five (65) days after the filing of a petition. As all uses
requiring a special permit also require site plan approval, one public hearing shall be
deemed sufficient for both the special permit petition and the application for site plan
approval. The decision of the Special Permit Granting Authority shall be made within
ninety (90) days following the date of the public hearing. The Special Permit Granting
Authority shall have the power to continue a public hearing if it finds that such continuance
is necessary to obtain additional information in order to make an informed decision.
The required times for a public hearing and said action may be extended by written
agreement between the petitioner and the Special Permit Granting Authority, a copy of
which is filed with the Town Clerk.
9.2.6 Mandatory Findings by Special Permit Granting Authority - The Special Permit Granting
Authority shall not issue a special permit unless without exception it shall find that the
proposed use and development:
9.2.6.1 is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Bylaw;
9.2.6.2 will not be detrimental or injurious to abutting properties or ways, the neighborhood,
community amenities or the Town of Stow;
9.2.6.3 is appropriate for the site for which the petition is submitted and is related
harmoniously to the terrain and to the use, scale and proportions of existing and
proposed BUILDINGs in the immediate vicinity that have functional or visual
relationship to the proposed use;
9.2.6.4 includes sufficient mitigating measures which shall be implemented as part of the
special permit for any adverse effects noted in the Development Impact Statement,
reports from town boards and agencies, reports from consultants and public hearings;
9.2.6.5 will result in no pollution or contamination of the GROUND WATER, a GROUND
WATER recharge area, a well, pond, stream, watercourse or inland wetland;
9.2.6.6 will result in no significant effect on the "level of service" (LOS) of the town roads or
intersections of these roads. A significant effect on level of service is a projected use
of greater than five percent (5%) of the reserve capacity of a road segment or turning
movement by the proposed use at the completion of its development. Reserve
capacity calculations are to be done by a registered professional engineer using
accepted methods of traffic analysis and shall include both projected growth in traffic
during the period of development and projected traffic from other uses and
developments which have applied for approval under the Zoning Bylaw prior to the
close of the public hearing;
9.2.6.7 will result in no significant effect on level of service for any service provided by the
Town, including fire, police and ambulance. Proof of no significant effect is the lack
of need for the Town to add equipment and/or staff specifically due to the
development;
9.2.6.8 will result in no redirection of existing surface water runoff such that there would be
material impact on abutting parcels or downstream properties unless an appropriate
easement is obtained to an existing watercourse;
9.2.6.9 will result in no transport by air or water of erodible material beyond the boundary line
of the LOT ( See also Section 3.8. Use Regulations, General);
9.2.6.10 will provide adequate provision for pedestrian traffic; and
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 120
9.2.6.11 will comply with all requirements of Site Plan Approval and all other applicable
requirements of this Bylaw.
9.2.7 Special Permit Conditions - The Special Permit Granting Authority shall impose such
conditions, safeguards and limitations as it deems appropriate to protect abutting
properties or ways, the neighborhood, community amenities or the Town of Stow
including, but not limited to:
9.2.7.1 Limitation of size, number of occupants, method and time of operation, lighting,
signage and extent of facilities;
9.2.7.2 Dimensional setback requirements greater than the minimum required by this Bylaw;
9.2.7.3 Modification of the exterior features or appearances of the STRUCTURE(S);
9.2.7.4 Screening of parking areas or other parts of the premises from adjoining premises or
from the STREET by specified walls, FENCEs, plantings or other devices, including a
program of maintenance for said screening which will continue for the life of the
permitted use;
9.2.7.5 Continuing provision for adequate and legal disposal of all solid waste, sewage,
REFUSE and any other potential pollutant generated by any use;
9.2.7.6 A program of snow storage or removal to continue for the life of the permitted project;
9.2.7.7 Inclusion of measures to ensure GROUND WATER protection, and to ensure the
proposed development will not redirect existing surface water runoff such that there
would be adverse impact on abutting parcels or downstream properties unless an
appropriate easement is obtained to an existing watercourse;
9.2.7.8 Provision of easements, restrictions and other means enabling other uses in
accordance with the Bylaw;
9.2.7.9 Requirement of off-street parking and other special features;
9.2.7.10 Regulation of number, design and location of access drives, drive-up windows and
other traffic measures;
9.2.7.11 Provision for the safety and convenience of pedestrian traffic;
9.2.7.12 Requirement for performance bonds or other security; and
9.2.7.13 Installation and certification of mechanical or other devices to limit present or potential
hazard to human health, safety, welfare or the environment resulting from smoke,
odor, particulate matter, toxic matter, fire or explosive hazard, glare, noise, vibration
or any other objectionable impact generated by any given use of land. If said devices
are of a new technology or design not in general use, it shall be the petitioner's
responsibility to provide sufficient information to verify the safety and efficacy of said
technology or devices to the satisfaction of the Town of Stow through all the
appropriate boards.
9.2.7.14 A sidewalk, walkway or path shall be required along the entire frontage of a LOT.
The Special Permit Granting Authority may also require other walkways and paths as
it deems necessary to accommodate the safe movement of pedestrians and
bicyclists. Said sidewalks, walkways or paths may be located on the LOT or within the
layout of the STREET, with the Towns permission, depending on the nature of the
work and upon obtaining whatever permits are required, construction, alterations of
existing STRUCTURES and parking areas/LOT, and changes in use are designed in
a manner which complies with the provisions of the Bylaw as to demonstrate
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 121
protection of visual and environmental qualities and property values of the Town, and
assurances of adequate drainage of surface water and safe vehicular and pedestrian
access, and all other requirements of the Bylaw.
9.2.8 Time Limitation on Special Permit - A special permit shall lapse if a substantial use
thereof has not commenced except for good cause or, in the case of a permit for
construction, if construction has not commenced except for good cause within a period of
time to be specified by the Special Permit Granting Authority, not to exceed two years
from the date of grant thereof, in accordance with Chapter 40A, Section 9 of the General
Laws.
9.2.8.1 A reasonable extension of said time, but not more than two additional years, may be
granted by the Special Permit Granting Authority after a public hearing has been held
where good cause is shown. Any request to the Special Permit Granting Authority for
such extension of time shall be submitted to the Special Permit Granting Authority
and a copy to the Stow Town Clerk at least sixty (60) days prior to the date when the
special permit is due to lapse. Failure to submit such a request as prescribed herein
shall be sufficient cause for the Special Permit Granting Authority to deny the
requested time extension.
9.2.9 Maintenance of Special Permit - A periodic review, at least annually, shall be conducted
by the Special Permit Granting Authority to ensure compliance with the conditions
imposed within the special permit. The BUILDING INSPECTOR shall assist the Special
Permit Granting Authority in the review. Notification of any deficiencies found through
said review shall be forwarded to the property owner and special permit holder. Failure to
rectify said deficiencies may result in rescission of the special permit or other zoning
enforcement proceedings. Upon determination by the Special Permit Granting Authority
that the conditions of the special permit have been met, no such further review shall be
conducted.
9.2.10 Effective Date of Special Permit - No special permit or any modification or extension
thereof shall take effect until a copy of the decision has been recorded in the Middlesex
County South Registry of Deeds or Land Court. Such decision shall bear the certification
of the Town Clerk that twenty (20) days have elapsed after the decision has been filed in
the office of the Town Clerk and no appeal has been filed, or that if such an appeal has
been filed, it has been dismissed or denied.
9.2.10.1 No construction activity, including site alteration, for any use or STRUCTURE
authorized by the special permit shall take place on the proposed development site
until all relevant documents including easements are approved, executed, filed with
the appropriate Special Permit Granting Authority and recorded in the Middlesex
County South Registry of Deeds or Land Court.
9.3 Site Plan Approval
9.3.1 Site Plan Approval Granting Authority - Certain uses are designated in the Table of
Principal Uses as requiring site plan approval. The Board of Appeals, Planning Board or
the Board of Selectmen may grant site plan approval in accordance with the standards
set forth in this Bylaw. Wherever a specific designation is not made, the Planning Board
shall be deemed the Site Plan Approval Granting Authority.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 122
9.3.2 Rules and Regulations and Fees - Each board designated as a Site Plan Approval
Granting Authority in the Table of Principal Uses, or otherwise so designated in the
Bylaw, shall promulgate, adopt and, from time to time, amend rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with the provisions of the General Laws, and shall file a copy of said rules
and regulations with the Town Clerk. Such rules and regulations shall prescribe as a
minimum:
9.3.2.1 the size, form, contents, style and number of copies of plans, applications and
specifications;
9.3.2.2 the town boards or agencies from which the Site Plan Approval Granting Authority
may require reports; and
9.3.2.3 fees sufficient to cover reasonable costs incurred by the Town in the review and
administration of site plan approval.
9.3.3 Projects Requiring Site Plan Approval - Site plan approval and a building permit shall be
required for any of the following uses, as set forth below or in the Table of Principal Uses:
9.3.3.1 The construction or exterior alteration of a business or commercial STRUCTURE or
parking area/LOT;
9.3.3.2 The construction or exterior alteration of an industrial STRUCTURE or parking
area/LOT;
9.3.3.3 Notwithstanding that any particular use is an allowed use, site plan approval is
also required for the following:
1. single family DWELLING with ACCESSORY APARTMENT;
2. BED AND BREAKFAST HOME;
3. BOARDING HOUSE or ROOMING HOUSE;
4. permanent BUILDING or STRUCTURE for the sale of farm produce;
5. in the Business District, uses permitted, provided that the BUILDING is less than
1,000 square feet GROSS FLOOR AREA; and
6. in the Commercial and Industrial Districts, uses permitted, provided that the
BUILDING is less than 1,500 square feet GROSS FLOOR AREA;
9.3.3.4 Change from one permitted use to another permitted use of an existing STRUCTURE
or LOT;
9.3.3.5 Change in or establishment of an area for vehicle parking, loading, storage or
vehicular access; and
9.3.3.6 Any other use specified in the Table of Principal Uses which indicates a special
permit or site plan approval is required.
9.3.4 The Site Plan Approval Granting Authority may waive any or all requirements of site
plan approval process for external enlargements or alterations of less than 10% or five hundred
(500) square feet, whichever is less, of the existing FLOOR AREA if the Site Plan Approval
Granting Authority finds that the requirements of this Bylaw have been met.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 123
9.3.5 Purpose - The purpose of site plan approval is to ensure that new construction,
alterations of existing STRUCTURES and parking areas/LOT, and changes in use are
designed in a manner which complies with the provisions of the Bylaw as to demonstrate
protection of visual and environmental qualities and property values of the Town, and
assurances of adequate drainage of surface water and safe vehicular and pedestrian
access, and all other requirements of the Bylaw.
9.3.6 Application - Any person who seeks to obtain site plan approval shall file a written
application, signed by the applicant and the current property owner, with the Site Plan
Approval Granting Authority, and forthwith file a copy with the office of the Town Clerk.
The applicant shall submit said application, including the date and time of filing, certified
by the Town Clerk, to the appropriate office of the Site Plan Approval Granting Authority,
accompanied by the required number of copies of the site plan in accordance with the
rules and regulations.
9.3.7 Reports from Town Boards or Agencies - The Site Plan Approval Granting Authority shall
transmit forthwith one copy each to the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals,
BUILDING INSPECTOR, Board of Health, Conservation Commission, Board of
Selectmen, Highway Department, Fire Department, Police Department, Historical
Commission and other such board or agency deemed necessary by the Site Plan
Approval Granting Authority for their written reports. Failure of any such board or agency
to make a recommendation within thirty-five (35) days of receipt of said application shall
be deemed lack of opposition by said board or agency. However, additional comments
from any such board or agency may be received prior to the close of the public hearing.
9.3.8 Public Hearing and Decision - The Site Plan Approval Granting Authority shall hold a
public hearing no later than sixty-five (65) days after the filing of an application. If the site
plan approval is sought in conjunction with a special permit, one hearing and decision
shall suffice for both site plan approval and special permit. The decision of the Site Plan
Approval Granting Authority shall be made within ninety (90) days following the date of
the public hearing. The Site Plan Approval Granting Authority shall have the power to
continue a public hearing if it finds that such continuance is necessary to gather
additional information in order to make an informed decision. Such continuance shall not
automatically extend the required time limits set forth herein. The required time limits for
a public hearing and/or decision may be extended by written agreement between the
applicant and the Site Plan Approval Granting Authority. A copy of such agreement shall
be filed in the office of the Town Clerk. Failure by the Site Plan Approval Granting
Authority to take final action within said ninety (90) days or extended time, if applicable,
shall be deemed to be a grant of the site plan approval.
9.3.9 Time Limitation on Site Plan Approval - Site plan approval shall lapse if construction has
not commenced, except for good cause, within a period of time to be specified by the Site
Plan Approval Granting Authority, not to exceed two (2) years from the date of grant
thereof.
9.3.10 A reasonable extension of said time, but not more than two (2) additional years, may be
granted by the Site Plan Approval Granting Authority where good cause is shown. Any
request for such extension of time shall be submitted to the Site Plan Approval Granting
Authority and a copy to the Stow Town Clerk at least thirty (30) days prior to the date
when the site plan approval is due to lapse. Failure to submit such a request as
prescribed herein shall entitle the Site Plan Approval Granting Authority to deny the
requested time extension.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 124
9.3.11 Site Plan Design Criteria - The purpose of the following site plan design criteria is to
ensure that adequate consideration will be given to the natural resources and
characteristics of a site, to its topographic, hydrologic and geologic conditions, to public
convenience and safety, and to the suitability of a proposed use on a site. Before the
granting of any site plan approval, the Site Plan Approval Granting Authority shall
determine compliance with the following:
9.3.11.1 The development shall be integrated into the existing terrain and surrounding
landscape and shall be designed to protect abutting properties or ways, the
neighborhood, community amenities or the Town of Stow in accordance with, but not
limited to, the following:
1. Site development shall minimize impacts on wetlands, steep SLOPES, flood
plains, hilltops;
2. Site development, including building sites and STRUCTURES proposed thereon,
should not obstruct scenic views from publicly accessible locations;
3. Sites shall be developed so as to preserve unique natural or historical features;
4. Site development shall minimize deforestation, vegetation and soil removal and
shall avoid grade changes;
5. Development of the site shall be in accordance with OPEN SPACE provisions of
the Bylaw; and
6. Screening of objectionable features, including, but not limited to, exposed
storage areas, storage tanks, machinery, service areas, truck loading areas, and
utility BUILDINGs and STRUCTURES, from abutting properties and roadways
shall be year-round and provided in the site development plan;
9.3.11.2 No BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES, except driveways, roads and septic systems,
shall be located outside the DEVELOPABLE SITE AREA, and the DEVELOPABLE
SITE AREA shall be clearly identified on the plan and shall meet the requirements of
the definition in Section 1.3;
9.3.11.3 Architectural style should be in harmony with the prevailing character and scale of
BUILDINGs in the neighborhood and the town through the use of similar building
materials, screening, roof and wall lines and other architectural features. Variation in
detail, form and siting should be used to provide visual interest and avoid monotony.
Proposed site development shall provide adequate light, air circulation and separation
between BUILDINGs;
9.3.11.4 The development shall be served with adequate water supply and waste disposal
systems. For STRUCTURES to be served by on-site waste disposal systems, the
applicant shall submit a septic system design prepared by a registered professional
engineer and approval by the Board of Health;
9.3.11.5 The plan shall maximize the convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian
movement within the site and in relation to adjacent ways. Unless waived by the Site
Plan Approval Granting Authority, a traffic study plan shall be prepared by a
registered professional engineer and shall prescribe estimated average daily and
peak hour vehicle trips to be generated by the site and traffic flow patterns for
vehicles and pedestrians showing adequate access to and from the site and
adequate circulation within the site;
9.3.11.6 The site plan shall show adequate proven measures to prevent pollution of surface or
GROUND WATER, to prevent erosion and sedimentation, and to prevent significant
changes in GROUND WATER levels, increased runoff and potential for flooding.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 125
Drainage shall be designed so that the rate and volume of runoff from the site shall
not be increased, and abutting properties and ways, the neighborhood and
community amenities will not be adversely impacted;
9.3.11.7 The development shall not excessively burden town services and infrastructures. To
that end, the development shall place no more than the minimum demands on town
services and infrastructures as may be reasonably taken care of on site or by
alternate means. If the foregoing is not reasonably feasible, the site plan approval
shall include provisions to assure that adequate provision for any significant increase
in demands on town services and infrastructures which result from the development
are provided or secured by the applicant;
9.3.11.8 Electric, telephone, natural gas, cable television and other such utilities and services
shall be underground unless otherwise authorized by the Site Plan Approval Granting
Authority;
9.3.11.9 The site plan shall comply with all zoning requirements for parking, loading, lighting,
dimensions, environmental performance standards, and all other provisions of this
Bylaw; and
9.3.11.10 Before approval of a site plan, the Site Plan Approval Granting Authority may request
the applicant make modifications in the proposed design to ensure that the above
criteria are met.
9.3.12 Findings by the Site Plan Approval Granting Authority - The Site Plan Approval Granting
Authority, in order to grant site plan approval, shall find the proposed use of the site
consistent with the uses permitted in the district in which the site is located and shall give
due consideration to the reports received under Section 9.3.7. Prior to the granting of
any site plan approval, the Site Plan Approval Granting Authority shall find that the site
plan:
9.3.12.1 Protects the abutting properties and ways, the neighborhood, community amenities
and the Town against seriously detrimental or offensive uses on the site and against
adverse effects on the natural environment;
9.3.12.2 Provides for convenient and safe vehicular and pedestrian movement and that the
locations of road and driveway openings are convenient and safe in relation to
vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation, including emergency vehicles, on or
adjoining the site;
9.3.12.3 Provides an adequate, convenient and safe arrangement of parking and LOADING
SPACES in relation to the proposed uses of the site;
9.3.12.4 Provides adequate and safe methods of disposal of REFUSE or other wastes
resulting from the uses permitted on the site;
9.3.12.5 Will not derogate from the purpose of this Bylaw; and
9.3.12.6 Complies with all applicable requirements of this Bylaw.
9.3.13 Final Action by the Site Plan Approval Granting Authority - Final action in connection with
site plan approval shall consist of either:
9.3.13.1 a determination that the proposed project as set forth in the application constitutes a
suitable development and is in compliance with the criteria set forth in this Bylaw, and
the approval thereof; or
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 126
9.3.13.2 a written denial of the application stating the reasons for such denial.
9.3.14 As-Built Plan - At the time the BUILDINGs contained within the development site are
ready for occupancy and prior to the issuance of an Occupancy Permit by the BUILDING
INSPECTOR, the applicant shall have prepared and certified by a registered professional
engineer or land surveyor an "As-Built Plan" drawn with dark lines on a medium
acceptable for recording with the Middlesex County Registry of Deeds or Land Court
showing the following:
9.3.14.1 property boundary lines;
9.3.14.2 location of all BUILDINGs and other STRUCTURES, including utility sheds, storage
areas and storage tanks;
9.3.14.3 actual widths, lengths and bearings of all boundary lines of STREETS, driveways,
parking lots/areas, drainage structures and easements;
9.3.14.4 grades of streets, driveways, parking lots/areas, drainage structures, pipes and
easements; and
9.3.14.5 locations of all pipes and utilities.
Said "As-Built Plan" shall be accepted by the Site Plan Approval Granting
Authority prior to the issuance of any Occupancy Permit.
9.4 Procedures
All procedure, time periods, hearings, actions taken and the adoption of rules and
requirements shall be in accordance with Chapter 40A of the General Laws, as amended
by Chapter 808 of the Acts of 1975, and any subsequent amendments thereto.
9.5 Planning Board Associate Member
The Planning Board under this Bylaw may appoint one (1) Associate Member, and the
chairman may designate said Associate Member, to sit on the Planning Board for purposes
of action on a special permit application in the case of absence, inability to act or conflict of
interest on the part of any member of the Planning Board, or in the event of a vacancy on
the Board.
9.6 Enforcement
The provisions of the Bylaw and any amendments thereto shall be administered and
enforced by the BUILDING INSPECTOR.
9.6.1 Building Permits - Building permits are required in accord with the State Building Code.
9.6.2 Certificate of Occupancy - Certificates of occupancy are required in accord with the State
Building Code.
9.6.3 Violations and Enforcement - Enforcement shall be in accord with provisions of the State
Building Code.
9.6.4 Penalty for Violation - The penalty for violation of this Bylaw shall be a fine of one
hundred dollars ($100) for the first offense, two hundred dollars ($200) for the second
offense, three hundred dollars ($300) for the third offense and three hundred dollars
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 127
($300) for each succeeding offense. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
9.7 Amendment
This Bylaw may from time to time by changed by amendment, addition or repeal by a town
meeting in a manner provided in Section 5 of Chapter 40A of the General Laws.
9.8 Validity
Where this Bylaw imposes a greater restriction upon the use, height and the area of
STRUCTURES or the use of premises than is imposed by other bylaws, the provisions of
this Bylaw shall control. The invalidity of any section or provision of this Bylaw shall not
invalidate any other section or provision thereof.
9.9 Exemptions - Religious, Educational, Agricultural or Municipal Uses
Nothing in this Bylaw shall be construed to limit or prohibit the use of land in any district, or
any BUILDING or STRUCTURE, for any church or religious purpose, for any non-profit
educational purpose which is religious, sectarian, denominational or public, for agricultural
use except piggeries or raising animals for fur, or for any municipal purpose with the
exception of a REFUSE disposal area. Such uses shall nevertheless conform to the
dimensional, parking and BUILDING coverage requirements of this Bylaw.
SECTION 10.
TEMPORARY MORATORIUM ON RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTs
10.1 Purpose
By vote at the State election of November 8, 2016, the voters of the Commonwealth approved a
law regulating the cultivation, distribution, possession and use of marijuana for recreational
purposes. The law, Chapter 334 of the Acts of 2016, An Act The Regulation and Taxation of
Marijuana Act, and as amended by Chapter 351 of the Acts of 2016, became effective December
15, 2016, and requires the Governor to appoint a Cannabis Control Commission which shall adopt
final regulations governing RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTs by April 1, 2018.
Currently, a RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT is not a permitted use in the Town
and any regulations promulgated by the Cannabis Advisory Board and Cannabis Control
Commission are expected to provide guidance to the Town in regulating RECREATIONAL
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTs.
The regulation of RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTs raises novel and complex
legal, planning, and public safety issues and the Town needs time to study and consider the
regulation of RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTs and address such novel and
complex issues, as well as to address the potential impact of evolving State regulations on local
zoning and to undertake a planning process to consider amending the Zoning Bylaw regarding
regulation of RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTs and other uses related to the
regulation of recreational marijuana. The Town intends to adopt a temporary moratorium on the
use of land and structures in the Town for RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTs so
as to allow the Town sufficient time to engage in a planning process to address the effects of such
structures and uses in the Town and to adopt provisions of the Zoning Bylaw in a manner
consistent with sound land use planning goals and objectives.
Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw - Including Amendments through May 7, 2018
Page 128
10.2 Definition
RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT - A marijuana cultivator, marijuana testing
facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or any other type of licensed
recreational marijuana-related business.
10.3 Temporary Moratorium
There is hereby established a temporary moratorium on the use of land or structures for a
RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT, the moratorium shall be in effect until
December 31, 2018, or any date prior. During the moratorium period, the use of land or structures
for a RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT shall be prohibited.
Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed to permit, or authorize to be permitted, the use
of land or structures for any activity involving marijuana, other than as a RECREATIONAL
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT.
10.4 Planning Process
During the temporary moratorium established in section 10.3, the Town shall undertake a planning
process to address the potential effects of RECRETIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTs and
other land uses and structures related to the use of marijuana for medical purposes, shall consider
the final regulations promulgated by the State of Massachusetts, and shall make
recommendations regarding the adoption of new Zoning Bylaw provisions governing the location,
operation and effects of RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTs and other land uses
and structures related to the use of marijuana for recreational purposes.
A true copy. _____________________
Attest: Linda E. Hathaway
Town Clerk of Stow
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
129
History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
March 3 and 4, 1969
(Approved by Attorney General May 22, 1969)
ZONING MAP:
? Included in the Industrial District a parcel of land on the westerly side of Hudson Road,
adjoining and southerly of the existing Industrial District and beginning at a point on the
westerly side of Hudson Road at the northerly side of Athens Street. And further, by redefining
the southerly line of the existing Industrial District as a segment of a straight line from the
intersection of Edson Street and Hudson Road to the town bound at Maple Street.
? Included in the Recreation-Conservation District the land on both sides of Assabet Brook, from
the point where Potash Brook joins Assabet Brook downstream to the point where the Assabet
Brook joins the existing flood plain zone which extends northerly of the Assabet River, along
Assabet Brook, and which lies within two hundred (200) feet of the center line of Assabet
Brook.
? Included in the Industrial District a strip of land along the westerly side of Boxboro Road, by the
Boxborough town line and by the easterly line of the existing Industrial District.
Voted to accept the provisions of General Laws Chapter 40A, Section 8 concerning
reconsideration of changes in the zoning bylaw after unfavorable action.
November 24, 1969
(Approved by Attorney General June 16, 1970)
Minor amendments
March 2 and 3, 1970
(Approved by Attorney General June 16, 1970)
Section VII-B: I Inserted subsection 5, cluster zoning.
March 3, 1971
(Approved by Attorney General April 12, 1971)
Zoning Map: Changed from Residential to Commercial a parcel of land between Great Road
and Delaney Street next to the Bolton Line.
November 1, 1971
(Approved by Attorney General February 25, 1972)
Section XI Amended to provide a municipal exemption for certain purposes.
October 5, 1972
(Approved by attorney General August 27, 1973)
Section III-A "Establishment of Districts": added "6. Wetlands District".
Section III-C "Location of Boundaries of Districts": added paragraph 7.
Section VI "Use Regulations": added subsection "G. Wetlands District"
Section VII-B-4 Amended
Zoning Map Amended to add "Wetlands District"
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
130
October 15, 1973
(Approved by Attorney General November 13, 1973)
Section VII-B "Area, Frontage, Yard, & FLOOR AREA Requirements" and the
accompanying table for the Residential District:
? Column entitled "Minimum LOT Area in Square Feet", changed the
number "40,000" to read "65,340".
? Column entitled "Minimum Contiguous LOT Frontage in Feet",
changed the number "150" to read "200"
Section VII-B-5-b-(4) Second sentence: changed "40,000 square feet" to read "65,340 square
feet".
Section VII-B-6-c Added paragraph (3) to read:
"Those lots within the cluster, but having frontage on existing roads, must
meet the frontage and area requirements of the District without regard to the
provisions of this section."
May 6, 7, 8 and 20, 1974
(Approved by Attorney General October 7, 1974)
Section VII-B-5-b-(4) Added the words "In a wetlands district or" to the third sentence of the
section.
Section VII-B-5-b-(8) Added the words "if it is not in a Wetlands District" to the second sentence of
the section.
May 5, 6, 7 and 8, 1975
(Approved by Attorney General September 9, 1975)
ZONING MAP Included within the Wetlands District all land subject to periodic flooding by
adopting the following changes, and amended the zoning map of the Town
accordingly:
Section III-A "Establishment of Districts" changed item 6 to read "6. Flood Plain/Wetlands
District.
Section III-C "Location of Boundaries of Districts": added a new paragraph 8.
Section VI "Use Regulations" paragraph G: struck out the words "Wetlands District"
wherever they appear and substituted therefore the words "Flood
Plain/Wetlands District".
Section VI-G-1 "Uses Permitted": added a new paragraph g.
Section VII-B-4 Amended to read:
"4. In no case shall a BUILDING or structure of sewage disposal area
hereafter be located, constructed or substantially improved in a Flood
Plain/Wetlands District or within thirty (30) feet of the bank or boundary of a
stream, river, watercourse, flood plain or wetland except as provided in
Section V-D and Section VI-G-1-g. "Substantial improvement", for the
purposes of this section, shall mean any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50)
percent of the actual cash value of the structure either before the
improvement is started, or in the case where the structure has been
damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred."
Section V-D "New Construction and New Uses": deleted the language in its entirety and
inserting a new Section V-D to read:"D. No BUILDING except piers, warfs or
other structures to serve boats shall be ERECTED below the flood contour
lines as shown on the maps and plans set forth in Section III-C-8 of this
bylaw, as indicated on and incorporated in by reference on the zoning map
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
131
accompanying this bylaw, except upon a special permit granted by the
Board of Appeals as hereinafter provided for in Section VI-G-1-g."
November 10,1975
(Approved by Attorney General February 23, 1976)
Section III-A "Establishment of Districts": added a new district "3a. Compact Business
District".
Section VI "Use Regulations": added a new subsection H. "H. Compact Business
District.
Section VII-B "Area, Frontage, Yard and FLOOR AREA Requirements" table: added
Compact Business District and Footnotes (7), (7A) and (8).
Zoning Map Rezoned from Residential to Compact Business two parcels of land on the
easterly side of Gleasondale Road, beginning at a point approximately 334
feet from the easterly corner of Great Road and Gleasondale Road and
extending southerly along the easterly side of Gleasondale Road to the
southern boundary of the parcel containing the Post Office.
May 3, 4 and 5, 1976
(Approved by Attorney General August 10, 1976)
Section V Added a new paragraph F. to provide for a special permit for various lots of
at least 40,000 square feet and 150 feet of frontage.
November 17, 1976
(Approved by Attorney General February 28, 1977)
Section III-A "Establishment of Districts": added a new district "7. Refuse Disposal
District".
Section VI "Use Regulations": added a new subsection "I. Refuse Disposal District".
Section VII "Site Plan Approval": inserted after the words "Board of Appeals" wherever
they occur the words "or the Board of Selectmen, whichever applies".
Section VII-F Deleted the last sentence and inserted in place thereof:
"The public hearing on the special permit and site plan shall be held within
sixty-five (65) days after the filing of an application for special permit, and
final action taken within ninety (90) days of the date of the public hearing,
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General
Laws, as amended by Chapter 808 of the Acts of 1975. Failure to act within
the specified time shall constitute approval."
Section VII-B "Area, Frontage, Yard and FLOOR AREA Requirements" table: added Refuse
Disposal District and Footnotes (9), (9A) and (10).
Section VII-E "Signs": struck out the first part of the first sentence and paragraph 2 and
inserted in its place "2. in Business, Commercial, Industrial and Refuse
disposal Districts additional signs are permitted as follows:"
Paragraph 2, subparagraph b: inserted after the words "industrial park" the
words "or a refuse disposal facility.
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
132
May 2, 3 and 4, 1977
(Approved by Attorney General August 18, 1977)
Zoning Map Rezoned from Residential to Refuse Disposal a portion of a parcel of land
located in Stow and Hudson, containing approximately thirty-four (34) acres
in Stow.
May 1 and 2, 1978
(Approved by Attorney General August 18, 1978)
Amended in order to bring zoning bylaws into conformity with the provisions of Chapter 808 of the
Acts of 1975 and the new Chapter 40A of the General Laws.
Section I "Purposes": deleted and a new Section 1 inserted.
Section II-C Deleted the words "Building Code" and inserted the words "State Building
Code".
Section II-M "Non-Conforming Uses, Structures and Lots": deleted and added a new
Section M.
Section III-B Adopted the revised and updated zoning district map dated April 5, 1978;
deleted the present date of the map and added the date of the new map in
Its place.
Section III-B Deleted all the language after the words "Town Clerk" and added language
in place thereof.
Section III-C-3 Added at the end of the sentence "in existence and as recorded at the time
of the adoption of or amendment to the Zoning Map".
Section III-C-8 Adopted updated flood plain maps by deleting the last sentence and adding
in its place; "Boundary lines of the flood plain elsewhere in the Town shall be
the limits of the "Special Flood Hazard Areas" delineated on maps entitled
"FIA Flood Hazard Boundary Maps", Nos. HO1-HO11 inclusive, Town of
Stow, revised December 6, 1977 and on file with the Town Clerk."
Section IV Deleted title and introductory sentence and added "Continuance of Existing,
Non-Conforming Uses and Structures
A pre-existing , non-conforming use or structure may continue. However:"
Section IV-A Added a new first sentence:
"No pre-existing, non-conforming uses or structures may be extended or
altered except upon application for a special permit and a finding by the
Board of Appeals that such change is not substantially more detrimental to
the neighborhood than the existing non-conforming use."
Section IV-C Deleted the words "one (1) year" and inserted the words "two (2) years".
Section IV-D Deleted the words "non-conforming BUILDING" and added in place thereof
the words "non-conforming single or two family DWELLING or agricultural
structure:.
Section VI-F-1-a Deleted the words "Building Code of the Town of Stow" and inserted in place
thereof "State Building Code".
Section VI-F-1-h Added a new subsection h. Scientific Uses.
Section VII-B "Area, Frontage, Yard, and FLOOR AREA Requirements" table: deleted the
entries in the last column under "minimum FLOOR AREA: and the existing
footnote (5) and added in place thereof a new footnote (5).
Section VII-B-5-e Deleted the second sentence and inserted in place thereof "if in the opinion
of the Board of Appeals the granting of a permit would not be in harmony
with the general purpose and intent of the Zoning Bylaw, this shall be
deemed good and sufficient reason for not granting a permit.
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
133
Section VII-B-5-f Deleted the end of the first sentence the words "forty-five (45) days within
which to submit such report: and added in place thereof the words "thirty-five
(35) days from the date of receipt within which to submit such report.
Section VIII-A, B, C Deleted in each section the words "Building Code of the Town of Stow; or
"Stow Building Code" and inserted in place thereof the words "State Building
Code.
Section IX Deleted reference to " Section 14 of Chapter 40A: and inserted in place
thereof the words "Section 12 of Chapter 40A and Article 3, Section 12 of the
General Bylaws of the Town: and added an additional sentence at the end to
read "The Board of Appeals shall constitute the permit granting authority and
the special permit granting authority, except as otherwise provided in the
Zoning Bylaw, and shall exercise the powers contained in Chapter 40A,
Section 14 of the General Laws, as amended."
Section X Deleted the reference to Section 6 of Chapter 40A and inserted in its place
the words "Section 5 of Chapter 40A."
Section XI Deleted title and added in its place the title "Religious Educational,
Agricultural or Municipal Uses"; added the word "non-profit" before the words
"educational purpose" and the words "for agricultural use except piggeries or
raising animals for fur: before the words "or for any municipal purpose";
added a sentence to the end of the Section - "such uses shall nevertheless
conform to the dimensional, parking and BUILDING coverage requirements of
this bylaw".
Section XIII Added this Section entitled "Procedure".
October 5, 1981
(Approved by Attorney General January 25, 1982)
Added Section XIV "Suspension of Airport or landing Field Uses and Site Plan Approvals for
Such Use: to provide a nine-month moratorium on those uses.
Section VI-B-1 Deleted subparagraph g. in its entirety and inserted a new
subparagraph g. "Professional office or home occupation, provided that:"
May 3 and 4, 1982
(Approved by Attorney General October 12, 1982)
Section III-C Deleted paragraph 7 in its entirety and substituted in place thereof a new
paragraph 7 in order to define the wetlands map reference.
Section VII-D "Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas": deleted paragraph 2 in its entirety
and substituted a new paragraph 2 "Design of Off-Street Parking and
Loading Spaces".
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
134
June 28, 1982
(Approved by Attorney General October 12, 1982)
Section VI-A-1 Deleted paragraph f and substituted in place thereof a new paragraph f
regarding display and sale or offering for sale farm produce.
Section VI-A-2 Deleted from paragraph b the words "airports or landing fields".
Section VII-F Deleted paragraph F in its entirety and substituted in place thereof a new
paragraph F to provide for Level 1 special permit (site plan approval).
Section VII-G Renumbered to Section VII-H
Section VII-H Renumbered to Section VII-I
Section VII-G (new) inserted to provide for Level 2 special permit.
Site Plan Approval:
Deleted the words "site plan approval: wherever they appeared and
substituted in place thereof the words "Level 2 special permit".
SpecialPermit:
Deleted the words "special permit: wherever they appeared and substituted
in place thereof the words "Level 2 special permit".
Section XIV Deleted "Suspension of Airport or Landing Field Uses and Site Plan
Approvals for Such Use".
May 2, 3, 4 and 25, 1983
(Approved by Attorney General August 26, 1983)
Section VII-B-4 Deleted from the first sentence the words "thirty (30") and adopted the words
"one hundred (100)".
May 6, 7 and 8, 1985
(Approved by Attorney General August 5, 1985)
Section VII-A-1 Added second sentence regarding tower, chimney, etc., heights.
Section VII-A-3 Deleted and substituted new sentence.
December 9, 1985
(Approved by Attorney General February 24, 1986)
Section VII-E Signs - deleted existing paragraph E and adopted new paragraph E.
May 5, 6 and 7, 1986
(Approved by Attorney General July 25, 1986)
Section II Definitions - added the words "parking lots, driveways, roads and septic
systems".
Section III-C Added subparagraph 9
Section VI-A Recreation-Conservation District - deleted subparagraph 1.e. and relettered
subparagraph 1.f. and 1.g. to 1.e and 1.f.
Section VII-D-1 Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas - deleted existing second paragraph of
subparagraph f. and added new subparagraphs g. and h.
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
135
January 27 and 28, 1987
(Approved by Attorney General April 21, 1987)
Section VI-C Business District - added second sentence to subparagraph d. of paragraph
1.
Section VII Added a new paragraph J. - Common Drives.
Section VII-B Added paragraph 6 re "hammerhead lots".
Section VII-B Added second sentence to footnote (1).
Section VII-B Added footnote (11) to Footnote to Chart (superseded by vote of May 4, 5,
and 6, 1987 as procedural defect was discovered).
Zoning Map Included in Residential District all of the land contained in five existing Red
Acre Road parcels.
May 4, 5 and 6, 1987
(Approved by Attorney General August 24, 1987)
Section VI-F-1 Added a new subparagraph i. - Drainage.
Section VII-B Deleted paragraph 7 and added new paragraph 6 re hammerhead lots.
Section VII-B Added footnote (111) to tow columns of the Chart and added footnote (11) to
Footnote to Chart.
Section VII-F-1 Level 1 Special Permit - deleted first paragraph and adopted new first
paragraph.
January 19, 1988
(Approved by Attorney General February 18, 1988)
Section III-A Added Water Resource Protection District.
Section III-C Added subparagraph 10.
Section VI Added paragraph J. Water Resource Protection District.
Section VII-B Added Water Resource Protection District to the Chart and added Footnote
(12).
Zoning Map Added legend re Water Resource Protection District.
Rezoned from Industrial to Residential approximately 8.7045 acres off
Gleasondale Road, identified as Parcel No. 3 on stow Property Map Sheet
U-8.
May 2 and 3, 1988
(Approved by Attorney General August 25, 1988)
Section II Definitions - added "Green space".
Section VI-A Recreation-Conservation District - amended paragraph 1.d and added
paragraph 2.e.
Section VI-B Residential District - amended paragraph 1.d.; deleted and replaced
paragraph 2.b.
Section VI-C Business District - deleted in its entirety and replaced.
Section VI-D Commercial District t- deleted in its entirety and replaced.
Section VI-E Industrial District - deleted in its entirety and replaced.
Section VII-B Footnote to Chart - added Footnote (13).
Section VII-F Level 1 Special Permit - deleted in its entirety and replaced with "Special
Permit".
Section VII-G Level 2 Special Permit - relabelled Section VII-F.7.
Section VII-H Earth Removal - relettered to section VII-G.
Section VII-I Trailers and Mobile Homes - relettered to Section VII-H.
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
136
Zoning Map Rezoned from Recreation-Conservation to Residential approximately 1.5
acres on the easterly side of Box Mill Road, identified as Parcel No. 2 on
Stow Property Map Sheet R-22.
December 12, 1988
(Approved by Attorney General March 16, 1989)
Section I Purposes - added "to achieve housing choices and a range of housing
costs".
Section II Definitions - added "ACCESSORY APARTMENT", "BED AND BREAKFAST
HOME or ESTABLISHMENT", "FENCE", "Slope", "Wall".
Section IV Continuance of Existing, Non-Conforming Uses and Structures - added
second paragraph to A.
Section VI-B Residential District - added new paragraph 1.i "BED AND BREAKFAST
HOME"; added new paragraph 2. f "BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT";
added new paragraph 2.g. "Nursing homes or elderly care facilities".
Section VI-B Residential District - added new paragraphs 3. and 4. "Accessory
Residential Uses on One-Family Lots"; added new paragraph 4. "Duplex
Residential Uses in the Residential District....".
Section VI-C Business District - added "BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT or
HOME: to paragraphs 1.a and 3.a.
Section VI-D Commercial District - added "BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT or
HOME: to paragraph 2.a; added new paragraph 3.i. "BED AND BREAKFAST
ESTABLISHMENT or HOME".
Section VI-E Industrial District- added new paragraph 3.h. "conversion of existing
residence to BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT or HOME".
Section VI-F General - added new paragraph 1.j. "Erosion control".
Section VII-B Area, Frontage, Yard, and FLOOR AREA Requirements - replaced paragraph
1.
Section VII-K Added "FENCEs".
Section VIII-D Penalty for Violation - deleted and replaced.
Section XIV Added "Phasing of Growth".
Zoning Map Rezoned from Industrial to Residential approximately 32,800 square feet of
Parcel 49 and approximately 1,300 square feet of Parcel 52 on Stow
Property Map Sheet R-10.
November 6, 1989
(Approved by Attorney General February 16, 1990)
Section VI-B Residential District - added new paragraph 6. "Cross Country Ski Uses".
Section VI-B Residential District - added new paragraph 7. "Golf Course Uses"
Section VI-B Residential District - deleted from paragraph 2.d. "golf courses, ski areas
and tows".
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
137
May 7, 1990
(Approved by Attorney General September 13, 1990)
Section II Definitions - added "DEVELOPABLE SITE AREA: and "Open Space".
Sections VI, VII, IV, VI, VII, XIV
Deleted the words "Level 1" and Level 2" with reference to special permits
Section VI Use Regulations - added "Table of Principal Uses".
Sections VI-C.1, VI-D.2,VI-E.2.
Deleted "Green Space: and inserted "Open Space".
Section VI-D Commercial District - deleted from paragraph 3. the existing subparagraph i.
and inserted new subparagraphs i., j. and k.
Section VI-F Use Regulations - added new subparagraph 3. re exterior lighting in the
Residential District.
Section VII-B Table of Requirements to Be Satisfied Entirely Within Each District - added
to footnote (3) "Driveways are allowed within front yards.
Section VII Development of sites and Locations of BUILDINGs and Structures - deleted
paragraph F. "Special Permits: and inserted new paragraph F. " Special
Permits".
Section VII Development of Sites and Locations of BUILDINGs and Structures - added
paragraph I. "Site plan Approval".
Section XIII Procedure - added second paragraph re appointment by Planning Board of
one associate member.
Zoning Map Rezoned from Industrial to Residential portions of Hudson Road Parcels 6
and 7, stow Property Map Sheet R-2.
November 13, 1990
(Approved by Attorney General February 7, 1991)
Section III-C Location of Boundaries of Districts - deleted from the last sentence of
paragraph 8. "revised December 6, 1977: and inserted "as revised".
Sections IV-A,V-C,V-D, V-E, V-F, VI-D.3
Deleted "Level 1" and "Level 2" with reference to special permits.
May 6, 1991
(Approved by Attorney General September 13, 1991)
Section II Definitions - added to "FLOOR AREA:, "FLOOR AREA, GROSS".
Section VI-B Residential District - deleted paragraph 3. and 4. and inserted new
paragraph 3. "ACCESSORY APARTMENTs:.
Section VI-F.1 Use Regulations -added new subparagraph k. "Special Provisions to
Enhance Access for Handicapped Persons".
Section VII-B Area, Frontage, Yard, and FLOOR AREA Requirements - deleted paragraph
4. and inserted new paragraph 4.
Section VII-D Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces - deleted and inserted new
paragraph D. "Parking Standards".
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
138
January 21, 1992
(Approved by Attorney General March 5, 1992)
Section II Definitions - added "CHILD CARE FACILITY: and "FAMILY DAY CARE HOME";
added to "FLOOR AREA", "FLOOR AREA, NET".
Section III-C Location of Boundaries of Districts - deleted last sentence of subparagraph
8. and inserted new sentence.
Section IV Continuance of Existing Non-Conforming Uses and structures - added
paragraph E.
Section VI-B.1 Residential District - added subparagraph j. "CHILD CARE FACILITY: and
subparagraph k. "FAMILY DAY CARE HOMEs".
Section VI-B.2 Residential District - deleted "nursery and kindergarten schools: from
subparagraph a.
Section VI-B.6 Residential District, Golf Course Uses - deleted last sentence of
subparagraph a.(4) and inserted new sentence.
Section VI-C.1 Business District - added subparagraph d. "CHILD CARE FACILITY".
Section VI-D.1 Commercial District - added subparagraph b. "CHILD CARE FACILITY".
Section VI-E1 Industrial District - added subparagraph b. "CHILD CARE FACILITY".
Section VI-H.1 Compact Business District - added subparagraph a. "CHILD CARE FACILITY".
Section VII-F.6 Special Permits - replaced subparagraph f.
Zoning Map Changed from Industrial to Residential:
1991 Property Map Address
Map U-8, Parcel 7 1,2,& 3 Rockbottom Road
Map U-8, Parcel 8 473 & 475 Gleasondale Road
Map U-8, Parcel 9 471 Gleasondale Road
Map R-10, Parcel 53 Hudson Road
Changed from Industrial/Recreation-Conservation to Residential
1991 Property Map Address
Map U-8, Parcel 10 469 Gleasondale Road
Changed from Recreation-Conservation/Residential to Residential
1991 Property Map Address
Map U-8, Parcel 11 461, 463, 465, 467 Gleasondale Road
Map U-8, Parcel 12 Gleasondale Road
Map U-8, Parcel 13 457, 459 Gleasondale Road
Map U-8, Parcel 15 Off Gleasondale Road
Map U-8, Parcel 35 506, 508 Gleasondale Road
Map U-8, Parcel 37 516 Gleasondale Road
Changed from Industrial/Residential to Residential
1991 Property Map Address
Map R-2, Parcels 10,
10A
189 Hudson Road
Map R-2, Parcel 11 179 Hudson Road
Map R-2, Parcel 12 173 Hudson Road
Map R-2, Parcel 13 151 Hudson Road
Map R-2, Parcel 14 147 Hudson Road
Map R-2, Parcel 15 143 Hudson Road
Map R-2, Parcel 16 Goshen Lane
Map R-2, Parcel 17 Goshen Lane
Map R-2, Parcel 19A Off Goshen Lane
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
139
1991 Property Map Address
Map R-2, Parcel 20 194 Maple Street
Map R-3, Parcel 12 722 Great Road
Map R-3, Parcel 13 12 Old Bolton Road
Map R-3, Parcel 18 Old Bolton Road
Map R-3, Parcel 23 32 Maple Street
Map R-3, Parcel 27 Stiles Farm Road
Map R-3, Parcel 27A Stiles Farm Road
Map R-8, Parcel 19 Taylor Road
Map R-8, Parcel 20 181 Taylor Road
Map R-8, Parcel 21 171 Taylor Road
Map R-8, Parcel 22 163 Taylor Road
Map R-10, Parcel 55 81 Hudson Road
Map R-18, Parcl 6 71 Taylor Road
Map R-18, Parcel 8 63 Taylor Road
Map R-18, Parcel 9 51 Taylor Road
Map R-18, Parcel 13 158 Boxboro Road
Map R-18, Parcel 14 166 Boxboro Road
Map R-18, Parcel 15 170 Boxboro Road
Map R-18, Parcel 16 176 Boxboro Road
Map R-18, Parcel 17 182 Boxboro Road
Map R-18, Parcel 23 212 Boxboro Road
Changed from Industrial/Residential to Industrial
1991 Property Map Address
Map R-2, Parcel 19 Off Goshen Lane
Map R-3, Parcel 12A Off Great Road
Map R-7, Parcel 35 302 Boxboro Road
Changed from Industrial/Residential to Industrial/Residential
1991 Property Map Address
Map R-10, Parcel 56 79 Hudson Road
Map R-10, Parcel 58 Hudson Road
Changed from Industrial/Business/Residential to Industrial/Residential
1991 Property Map Address
Map R-10, Parcel 65 642 Great Road
December 8, 1992
(Approved by Attorney General March 15, 1993)
Section VII-B Deleted paragraph 4. concerning activity within 100 feet of the bank or
boundary of a stream, river watercourse, flood plain or wetland.
Renumbered existing paragraphs 5 and 6 to read "4" and "5".
Zoning Map Rezoned from Industrial/Residential to Residential a parcel of approximately
three acres identified as Parcel No. 1 on Stow Property Map Sheet R-11
(134 Hudson Road).
Rezoned from Industrial/Residential to Industrial the parcel of land identified
as Parcel No. 22 on Stow Property map Sheet R-18 on Boxboro Road.
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
140
May 3, 4, 5 and 6, 1993
(Approved by Attorney General July 27, 1993)
Zoning Bylaw Recodification
Note: The Attorney General approved the recodified Zoning Bylaw on July
27, 1993 except that Section 3.2.1.10 (2) was stricken and deleted.
May 31, June 1 and June 2, 1994
(Approved by Attorney General August 26, 1994)
Section 1.3.19 Delete the words "of a DWELLING UNIT" .
Section 3.2.10.10 Add "2. Maximum NET FLOOR AREA of 4,000 square feet".
Section 3.8.3.1 Delete the words "Section 3.8.4" in the first sentence and insert the words
"Section 3.8.1.5".
Section 7.7.8 Delete the words "Section 3.8.5" in the last sentence and insert the words
"Section 3.8.1.5".
May 2 and June 5, 1995
(Approved by Attorney General July 21, 1995)
Section 2.2 Accept new Zoning Map dated May 1, 1995
Section 3.3.2.2 Add "U. S. Post Office"
Section 3.5.3.10 Add "banks, U. S. Post Office"
Section 8.5 Replace cluster special permit provision with Planned Conservation
Development special permit
June 3 and 4, 1996
(Approved by Attorney General August 15, 1996)
Section 4.3 Replace Area, Frontage, YARD, and FLOOR AREA Requirements
Section 4.4 Replace Table of Dimensional Requirements
Section 4.4 Replace Footnotes to Table of Dimensional Requirements
Section 9.2.7.8 Delete Section 9.2.6.8 in its entirety (Provision for OPEN SPACE....)
Section 9.2.9 Replace Maintenance of Special Permit
May 18, 1998
(Approved by Attorney General August 24, 1998)
Section 8.6.1.1 Rremove time limitation of the Phased Growth Bylaw
Section 8.6.3 Amend Development Schedule and footnote
Section 8.6.4.4 Amend schedule and add footnote
Section 8.6.4.7 Amend table
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
141
November 1998
(Approved by Attorney General February 25, 1999)
Section 1.3.3 Amend definition ACCESSORY BUILDING
Section 1.3.6 Add defintiion INDEPENDENT LIVING RESIDENCE
Section 1.3.7 Add definition INDEPENDENT LIVING UNIT
Section 1.3.10 Delete words or LOT
Section 1.3.18 Add definition FLOOR AREA RATIO
Section 1.3.23 Delete definition of Green Space
Section 1.3.25 Add defintiion LOT
Section 1.3.34 Add defintiion MULTI-PFAMILY DWELLING
Section 1.3.47 Add definition USE, ACCESSORY
Section 1.3.48 Add definition USE, PRINCIPAL
Section 3.2.2.7 Delete the words or elderly care facilities
Section 3.3.2.8 Add Assisted Lving Residence as use permitted by Special Permit in the
Business District
Section 3.8.1.12 Add new Section  Wireless Communication Facility
Section 3.10 Add Wireless Communication Facilities to Table of Principal Usesadd
INDEPENDENT LIVING RESIDENCEs to Table of Principal Uses and footnote
9 change theline that reads Nursing Homes or Elderly Care Facilitiy to read
Nursing Home
Section 3.11 Add new Section - Special Requirements for Wireless Communication
Facilities
Section 4.3.2.5 Add new Section  LOT Shape
Section 4.5 Add new Section 4.5 - Special Provisions and Exceptions to Dimensional
Regulations
Section 4.5.1 Add new Section 4.5.1  Dimensional Regulations for Assisted Lving
Residence
Section 6.1.7 Delete Section 6.1.7 in its entirety
Section 7.3.3.3 Add new row to Parking Regulation table for INDEPENDENT LIVING
RESIDENCE
Section 7.7 Amend first sentence of Section 7.7 (Off-Street Parking and Loading Area
Design Requirements)
Section 8.7 Add new Section  INDEPENDENT LIVING RESIDENCE
Section 9.2.7.14 Add new Section 9.2.7.14 (sidewalks, walkways, paths)
Zoning Map Amendment: Rezone the following parcels from Residential to
Recreation/Conservation
Map R-4, Parcel 39A and 43
 off Harvard Road
Map R-8, Parcel 7A
- off Taylor Road
Map R-9, Parcels 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 53 and 54
- off Wedgewood Road
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
142
February 16, 2000
(Approved by Attorney General May 1, 2000)
Section 1.3.52 Amend definition Street
Section 6.3 Signs  Amend Sections 6.3.1.3, 6.3.3.1.1, 6.3.6.6, 6.3.6.7, 6.3.7.3,
6.3.7.4 and 6.3.7.5.3
Zoning Map Amendment: Rezone the following parcels from Residential to
Recreation/Conservation:
Flagg Hill Conservation Land
Map Sheet R-19, Parcels 1, 3, 8 and 11.
Map Sheet R-20, Parcels 6, 10, 10-2, 10-3, 10-4, 10-5
Heath Hen Meadow Brook Conservation Land
Map Sheet R-18, Parcels 29-1 and 31-2
Captain Sargent Land
Map Sheet R-31, Parcels 15 and 43
Deer Field Lane Conservation Land
Map Sheet U-11, Parcel 39C-1
Gardner Hill Conservation Land
Map Sheet R-29, Parcels 74-A, 74-2, 85-B and 105
Memorial Field
Map Sheet R-29, Parcel 104
Marble Hill Conservation Land
Map Sheet R-9, Parcel 80
Annie Moore Conservation Land
Map Sheet R-3, Parcel 35
Pine Bluff Recreation Area
Map Sheet U-3, Parcel 12
February 12, 2001
(Approved by Attorney General May 9, 2001)
Section 2.1 Amend Section 2.1.2 by adding Wireless Service Facility District
Section 2.3 Add new Section 2.3.11 Boundaries of the Wireless Service Facility District
Section 3.1 Delete Section 3.1.2.6 Wireless Communication Facilities
Section 3.2 Delete Section 3.2.3.5 Wireless Communication Facilities
Section 3.3 Delete Section 3.3.1.5 Wireless Communication Facilities
Section 3.9 Amend Section 3.9.1 Non-Conforming Uses or Structures
Section 3.9.5 Replace with New Section 3.9.5 Non-Conforming Uses and Structures
Section 3.10 Amend Section 3.10 Table of Principal Uses
Section 3.11 Delete Section 3.11 Wireless Communications Facilities - Replace with
New Section 3.11 Wireless Service Facilities
Section 3.12 Add New Section 3.12 Wireless Communications Facilities Moratorium
Section 4.4 Amend Section 4.4 (Table of Dimensional Requirements) by adding a new
footnote 4
Section 4.5 Amend Section 4.5 by adding a New Section 4.5.2
Zoning Map Amendment:
Amend the Recreation-Conservation District Line on Parcels 24, 25, 25A
and 25B, Shown on Property Map Sheet U-10
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
143
June 6, 2002
(Approved by Attorney General September 25, 2002)
Section 1.3 Add new Section 1.3.4 "Active Adult Neighborhood"
Add new Section 1.3.5 "Affordable Dwelling Unit"
Add new Section 1.3.47 "Qualified Affordable Housing Purchaser"
Section 2.1 Add new Section 2.1.2 "Active Adult Neighborhood District"
Section 2.3 Add new Section 2.3.12 - boundaries of the Active Adult Neighborhood
District
Section 3.10 Add "Active Adult Neighborhood" to Table of Principal Uses
Add new Footnote (10)
Section 4.4 Add new Footnote (5) to Table of Dimensional Requirements
Section 4.5 Add new Section 4.5.3 "Special Provisions & Exceptions to
DimensionalRequirements"
Section 8.8 Add new Section 8.8 "Active Adult Neighborhood (AAN)"
January 13, 2003
(Approved by Attorney General March 3, 2003)
Section 8.8 Amend Section 8.8.1 Active Adult Neighborhood (AAN) - Purpose - third
sentence
May 21, 2003
(Approved by Attorney General September 9, 2003)
Section 3.10 Add Footnote (11) to several uses
Section 5.2 Correct reference in Section 5.2.1.1.7
Section 8.8 Amend Section 8.8.3 by deleting existing section and adding new section
Section 8.9 Add Section 8.9 "Inclusion of Affordable Housing"
October 25, 2003
(Approved by Attorney General December 2, 2003)
Section 3.3 Amend Section 3.3 by adding new Section 3.3.4 (Access to Industrial-zoned
land)
Section 3.10 Amend Section 3.10 by adding new Business Use
Section 7 Amend Section 7.2.3 by deleting the existing section and adding new section
7.2.3, 7.2.3.1 and 7.2.3.2 (Relief from Parking Regulations)
Section 7 Amend Section 7.2.5 by deleting Section 7.2.5.5 and renumbering the
remaining subsections (Reserved Parking Spaces)
Section 7 Amend Sections 7.5.5, 7.6.1, 7.7.3, 7.7.5, 7.7.6, 7.7.7.2, 7.7.7.4,
7.7.7.8 and 7.8 (Parking)
Section 7 Delete Section 7.7.1 (Parking)
Zoning Map Amendment:
Amend Zoning District Map by amending Business District Line on Parcel
65, shown on Property Map Sheet R-10 (Great Road), as shown on Plan
entitled Plan of Land in Stow, Massachusetts, dated October 20, 2003,
prepared by Stamski and McNary, Inc.
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
144
May 17, 2004
(Approved by Attorney General August 18, 2004)
Section 6 Amend Sections 6.2 and 6.2.1 by adding new Section 6.2.6 (Common
Drives)
Section 8 Amend Section 8.5.6.4 by deleting Sub-Section 1 and replacing with new
Sub-Section 1, deleting Sub-Section 2 and replacing with new Sub-Section
2, deleting Sub-Section 3 and replacing with new Sub-Section 3
Amend Section 8.5.7.2 (Planned Conservation Development)
Section 9 Amend Sections 9.3.3.3 and 9.3.3.5 (Site Plan Approval)
Zoning Map Amendment:
Amend Zoning District Map by rezoning Business portion of certain parcel of
land on Great Road to Industrial, as shown on Plan entitled Town of Stow 
Proposed Zoning Map Change  Parcel 65, Map R-10, dated September
25, 2003, identified on Stow Assessors Records as Map R-10, Parcel 65.
Amend Zoning District Map by rezoning Residentially zoned portions of 2
parcels of land on Great Road to Business, identified on Stow Assessors
Records as Map R-29, Parcels 83 and 85A..
May 17, 2005
(Approved by Attorney General July 13, 2005)
Section 8.5 Amend Section 8.5.1, by changing the bullets to letters
Amend Section 8.5.4, by changing the words Growth Management Plan in
the last bullet to Master Plan and changing the format from bullets to letters
Amend Section 8.5.10, by changing the format from bullets to letters
Section 8.6 Amend Section 8.6.4.4, by changing the words Open Space Residential
Development to  Planned Conservation Development
Section 8.8 Add a new section 8.8.12
Section 9.3 Amend Section 9.3.11.2 by changing the reference to section 1.3.1.2 to
1.3.16
October 24, 2005
(Approved by Attorney General January 20, 2006)
Section 1.3 Amend Section 1.3.39 (definition for Multi-Family Dwelling
Section 1.3 Amend Section 1.3.42, by changing the word impermeable to permeable
Section 4.1 Amending Section 4.1.2, by adding the words commercial, or
industrial
Section 4.4 Amend correct the section number referenced in footnote (1) from 7.7.5.1 to
7.7.4.1
Section 6.2 Amending Section 6.2.2, by adding a second sentence
Section 6.6 Amend Section 6.6.3
Section 8.1 Amend Section 8.1.2.3 by adding the words secondary and to
subsection 1; correcting the reference (Sanitary Code  Title V) to
(Sanitary Code  Title 5) and deleting the current language in
subsection 6 and replacing it with the words this subsection language
deleted October 24, 2005
Section 8.9 Amending Section 8.9.2.1, by changing the word will to could in the
second line, Amend Section 8.9.2.1, by deleting the words subject to
Massachusetts General law Chapter 41 Sections 81-K through 81-
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
145
GG,Amend Section 8.9.6, by changing the words Housing Authority or its
designee to  Affordable Housing Trust Fund
December 13, 2005
(Approved by Attorney General _- April 4, 2006)
Section 3.8 Amend Section 3.8.1.10, Subsection 3 by replacing the words areas with
the word area and the words two acres with the words one acre,Amend
Section 3.8.1.10 by adding a new Subsection 7
Section 3.9 Delete the first paragraph of Section 3.9 and the entirety of Section 3.9.1 and
substituting new section 3.9 and section 3.9.1 and adding new sections 3.9.6
and 3.9.7
Section 6.2 Add a new Subsection 6.2.7
May 1, 2006
(Approved by Attorney General _- June 14, 2006)
Section 3.8 Amend Section 3.8.1.9 (drainage), by deleting Subsection 2
Section 8.6 Amend Section 8.6.1.2 and 8.6.1.3 (Phasing of Growth)
May 7, 2007
(Approved by Attorney General - August 13, 2007)
Section 1.3 Remove subsection numbers and list Definitions in alphabetical order
Change the title ASSISTED LIVING to INDEPENDENT ADULT
Change Defintion of BED and BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT
Add new Definitions:
EXTERIOR LIGHT
FULL-CUTOFF FIXTURE
INITIAL DESIGN LIGHT OUTPUT
PUBLIC STREETLIGHT
Section 3.2 Add new Section 3.2.3.5 - Uses not otherwise permitted in the Residential
District
Section 3.3 Add new Section 3.3.2.9 - Uses not otherwise permitted in the Business
District
Section 3.3.2.8 Change the title ASSISTED LIVING to INDEPENDENT ADULT
Section 3.4 Add new Section 3.4.2.6 - Uses not otherwise permitted in the Compact
Business District
Section 3.5 Add new Section 3.5.3.12 - Uses not otherwise permitted in the Commercial
District
Section 3.6 Add new Section 3.6.3.9 - Uses not otherwise permitted in the Industrial
District
Section 3.8.1.5 (Exterior Lighting) Add new subsections 3.8.1.5.1, 3.8.1.5.2, 3.8.1.5.3,
3.8.1.5.4, 3.8.1.5.5, 3.8.1.5.6 and 3.8.1.5.7
Section 3.11 Delete Wireless Service Facility Section and insert in Section 5 (Overlay
Districts) as a new Section 5.3
Section 4.5 Change the title ASSISTED LIVING to INDEPENDENT ADULT
Section 5.3 Wireless Service Facility Section moved from Section 3.11
Section 5.4 Active Adult Neighborhood Section moved from Section 8.8
Section 6.3 (Agricultural Signs) Amend subsections 6.3.3.1, 6.3.4.1 and 6.3.4.2
Section 7.3.3.3 Change the title ASSISTED LIVING to INDEPENDENT ADULT
Section 7.7 Change the title ASSISTED LIVING to INDEPENDENT ADULT
Section 7.7.7 Add two new paragraphs
Section 8.7 Change the title ASSISTED LIVING to INDEPENDENT ADULT
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
146
Section 8.8 Delete Active Adult Neighborhood Section and insert in Section 5 (Overlay
Districts) as a new Section 5.4
Section 9.3.11.2 DEVELOPABLE SITE AREA  Amend reference to Defintion Section 1.3
December 3, 2007
(Approved by Attorney General - March 26, 2008)
Section 3.1 Deleting the words swamp land and inserting the word wetlands
Section 3.1.1 Delete the word permitted and insert the word allowed,
Section 3.1.1.4 Insert the words cross country ski areas, and
Section 3.1.1.5 Delete the reference to paragraphs b and c and inserting the reference to
paragraphs 3.1.1.2 and 3.1.1.3,
Section 3.1.1.7 New Section
Section 3.1.1.8 New Section
Section 3.1.2.6 New Section
Section 8.3.5 Insert the words or other recreational motorized vehicles
Section 8.4.1 Delete the words but not a and inserting /
May 6, 2008
Annual Town Meeting Convened May 5, 2008
(Approved by Attorney General  August 25, 2008)
Section 3.12 Delete Wireless Communications Facilities Moratorium
Section 4.3.2.6 Change subsection letters a), b) and c) to numbers 1), 2) and 3)
Section 4.3.2.7 Add new subsection 1)
Section 5.3.7.6 Replace the word STRUCTURE with the words BUILDING or
STRUCTURE and change subsection letters a), b) and c) to numbers
1), 2) and 3)
May 4, 2009
(Approved by Attorney General  August 31, 2009)
Section 1.3 Definitions  Developable Site Area
Section 5.4.3 Active Adult Neighborhood  amend to exclude provisions of Section
8.9.4.1.C.iii, Inclusion of Affordable Housing
Section 5.4.6 Active Adult Neighborhood  amend dimensional standards by defining
OPEN SPACE
Section 5.4.9 Active Adult Neighborhood  amend affordable housing standards to
comply with Section 8.9, Inclusion of Affordable Housing
Delete Subsections B through F
Amend Subsection G by adding and middle income purchasers
Section 9.2.8 Erroneously omitted due to scriveners error. Reinserted in Zoning Bylaw
including amendments through May 6th 2014.
Section 9.2.9 Erroneously omitted due to scriveners error. Reinserted in Zoning Bylaw
including amendments through May 6th 2014.
Section 9.2.10 Erroneously omitted due to scriveners error. Reinserted in Zoning Bylaw
including amendments through May 6th 2014.
Section 9.3.11.2 Site Plan Approval  DEVELOPABLE SITE AREAS
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
147
October 20, 2009
Special Town Meeting Convened October 19, 2009
(Approved by Attorney General  February 5, 2010)
Section 3.2 Residential District Uses (Agricultural uses)- amended Section 3.2.1 by
adding a new subsection 3.2.1.12, amended Section 3.2.2.5, and amended
Section 3.2 by adding a new subsection 3.2.2.8
Section 4.3 Area, Frontage, YARD, and FLOOR AREA Requirements- amended
Subsection 4.3.2.1 (LOT area).
Section 5.3 Wireless Service Facility- Amend Section 5.3.7.1 by deleting subsection e.
May 3, 2010
(Approved by Attorney General  June 17, 2010)
Section 2.3 Location of Boundaries of Districts (Flood Plain/Wetlands)  amended
Section 2.3.8 by adding the new subsection 2.3.8
Section 5.1 Flood Plain/Wetland District  amended Section 5.1 by adding Sections
5.1.2, 5.1.2.1, 5.1.3, 5.1.4, 5.1.5
November 7, 2011
(Approved by Attorney General  December 9, 2011)
Section 1.3 Add new Definitions COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC
RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION and NAMEPLATE CAPACITY
Section 3 Adding new subsections 3.1.2.7, 3.2.3.6, 3.3.2.10, 3.5.1.4, 3.6.1.4, 3.7.3 and
3.7.3.1 COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY
INSTALLATION
Section 3.10 Add COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC RENEWABLE ENERGY
INSTALLATION to Table of Principal Uses
Section 8 Add new Section 8.10 COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC
RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION
October 28, 2013
(Approved by the Attorney General  January 14, 2014)
Section 8.9.4 Amend fractional AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNIT equivalent fee in lieu of
units, changing may to shall round up.
(Approved by the Attorney General  February 24, 2014)
Section 10 Add new Section 10 Temporary Moratorium on MEDICAL MARIJUANA
TREATMENT CENTERS.
May 6, 2014
Annual Town Meeting Convened May 5, 2014
(Approved by the Attorney General  August 12, 2014)
Section 1.3 Amend Definitions for Developable Site Area to delete wetland from
Floodplain District and add MARIJUANA, MARIJUANA INFUSED
PRODUCT (MIP), MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTER,
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
148
MEDICAL USE OF MARIJUANA, REGISTERED MARIJUANA
DISPENSARY (RMD).
Section 2 Amend Subsection 2.2 Establishment of Zoning Districts to delete wetland
to read Floodplain. Add REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY
DISTRICT to Subsection 2.1.2.
Section 2.3 Location of Boundaries of Districts - Delete Subsection 2.3.7. Add new
Subsection 2.3.13. Amend Subsection 2.3.8 to update FEMA Flood
Insurance Rate Maps.
Section 3 Amend Subsection 3.3.2 by adding Subsection 3.3.2.11. Amend Subsection
3.10 (Table of Principle Uses) by adding Retail Store as Part of a
REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY to commercial uses. Amend
Subsection 3.10 by adding a new footnote.
Section 4.3 Amend Subsection 4.3.2.1, 4.3.2.3, 4.3.2.4 to delete wetland from
Floodplain District.
Section 5 Amend Section 5 Overlay Districts, subsections 5.1, 5.1.1.5, 5.1.1.7, 5.4.6 by
deleting wetland from Floodplain District. Amend Section 5 by adding new
Subsection 5.5 REGISTERED MARIJUNA DISTRICT.
Amend Subsection 5.1.2.1 Base Flood Elevation Data and Subsection 5.1.4
Other Regulations.
February 11, 2015
(Sections Reinserted after erroneously omitted due to scriveners error)
Section 6 Amend Subsection 6.1.3.2, and 6.1.4 to delete wetland from Floodplain
District.
Section 9.2.8 Reinserted after erroneously omitted due to scriveners error in Zoning Bylaw
inlcuding amendments through May, 2009.
Section 9.2.9 Reinserted after erroneously omitted due to scriveners error in Zoning Bylaw
inlcuding amendments through May, 2009.
Section 9.2.10 Reinserted after erroneously omitted due to scriveners error in Zoning Bylaw
inlcuding amendments through May, 2009.
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
149
May 4, 2015
(Approved by the Attorney General - August 10, 2015)
Section 2.2 Amend Zoning Map, changing Assessors Map R-4 Parcel 39A from
Recreation Conservation District to Residential District for an area
approximately 65,340 s.f.
Section 10 Delete Section 10 Temporary Moratorium on MEDICAL MARIJUANA
TREATMENT CENTERS.
November 16, 2015
(Approved by the Attorney General  March 10, 2016)
Section 1.3 Deleted definition of MINING OF LAND
Section 5.2 Amend Subsection 5.2.1.1(7) to delete reference to MINING of land,
replacing with language consistent with Section 6.5.
Amend Subsection 5.2.5.3 to delete reference to MINING OF LAND
definition.
Section 6.5 Remove Earth Removal Bylaw reference and replace with reference
consistent with Article 17 of the Stow General Bylaws as amended at
November 16, 2015 Town Meeting.
May 3, 2016
Annual Town Meeting Convened May 2, 2017
(Approved by the Attorney General  August 10, 2016)
Section 1.3 Added new definitions for HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION, PLANNED
CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT, PLANNED CONSERVATION
DEVELOPMENT DESIGN PROCESS (full title omitted from t.m.vote.in 2016
corrected in 2017), YIELD, OPEN LAND, PRIMARYCONSERVATION
RESOURCES, SECONDARY CONSERVATION RESOURCES, and
PROOF PLAN.
Section 8.5 Revised Section 8.5 PLANNED CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT
Section 8.5.1 Revised Purpose Section
Section 8.5.3.1 Created new section to include allowance of joint public hearing for PCD.
Section 8.5.4 Deleted Section 8.5.4 and Subsection 8.5.4.1-8.5.4.2 in its entirety and
replaced with new subsection 8.5.4  Application for a PCD Special Permit,
8.5.4.1  Submission Requirements, and 8.5.4.2  Contents of an
Application for a PCD Special Permit.
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
150
Section 8.5.5 Deleted existing Section 8.5.5 and 8.5.5.1 and replaced with new Section
8.5.5  PLANNED CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT DESIGN PROCESS
Section 8.5.6 Revised Section 8.5.6 and 8.5.6.1 to reference new definition of OPEN
LAND. Replaced Section 8.5.6.2 with new section referencing new
definitions of YIELD and PROOF PLAN. Deleted Sections 8.5.6.3, 8.5.6.4,
and 8.5.6.5 in its entirety.
Section 8.5.7 Revised Section 8.5.7 and 8.5.7.1 to allow for reduced minimum frontage to
50 feet and allow the Planning Board flexibility in dimensional standards.
Replaced Section 8.5.7.2 to reference a 100 foot setback for BUILDINGs
from a public way. Deleted existing Section 8.5.7.3 and replaced with new
section. Deleted Sections 8.5.7.4, and 8.5.7.5 in its entirety.
Section 8.5.8 Deleted existing Sections 8.5.8 and Subsections 8.5.8.1, 8.5.8.2, 8.5.8.3,
8.5.8.4, 8.5.8.5 and replaced with new Section 8.5.8, 8.5.8.1, 8.5.8.2
regarding Common Driveway requirements.
Section 8.5.9 Deleted existing Sections 8.5.9, subsections 8.5.9.1, 8.5.9.2, 8.5.9.3, 8.5.9.4,
and 8.5.9.5 to be replaced with Section 8.5.9  Parking.
Section 8.5.10 Deleted existing Sections 8.5.10 and Subsections 8.5.10.1, 8.5.10.3,
8.5.10.4 to be replaced with new Section 8.5.10 regarding reference to
Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
Section 8.5.11 Deleted existing Sections 8.5.11 and Subsection 8.5.11.1 in its entirety and
replaced with Section 8.5.11  Permitted Uses.
Section 8.5.12 Deleted existing Section 8.5.12 in its entirety and replaced with new Section
8.5.12 regarding applicability of Inclusionary Housing provisions.
Section 8.5.13 Added new Section 8.5.13  Prohibition of Future Development
Section 8.5.14 Added new Section 8.5.14  OPEN LAND REQUIREMENTS, new
Subsections 8.5.14.1, 8.5.14.2, and 8.5.14.3 regarding dimension and
design of OPEN LAND. new Subsection 8.5.14.4  Ownership of the OPEN
LAND, new Subsection 8.5.14.4.1  Selection of Ownership Options,
8.5.14.5  Timing, 8.5.14.6  Allowable Use of the OPEN LAND, 8.5.14.6.1,
8.5.14.6.2, 8.5.14.6.3, 8.5.14.6.4, 8.5.14.6.5, and 8.5.14.6.6 regarding use of
the OPEN LAND.
Section 8.5.14.7 Added new Section 8.5.14.7  Monumentation
Section 8.5.14.8 Added new Section 8.5.14.8  Subdivision
Section 8.5.14.9 Added new Section 8.5.14.9  Maintenance
Section 8.5.14.10 Added new Section 8.5.14.10  Conveyance
Section 8.5.15 Added new Section 8.5.15  Planning Board Action
Appendix History of Zoning Bylaw Amendments
151
Section 8.5.16 Added new Section 8.5.16  Performance Guarantee
Section 8.5.17 Added new Section 8.5.17  Revisions and Amendments
May 2, 2017
Annual Town Meeting Convened May 1, 2017
(Approved by the Attorney General  August 15, 2017)
Section 1.3 Amended Section 1.3  PLANNED CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT
DESIGN PROCESS to resolved scriveners error.
Section 5.4.8 Amend Section 5.4.8 to reference compliance with the Title 42 S.3607 of the
Federal Code requiring that at least 80% of age restricted units in an Active
Adult Neighborhood are compliant at any one time.
(Approved by the Attorney General  August 25, 2017)
Section 10 Add Section 10; 10.2; 10.3; 10.4  Temporary Moratorium on
RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS.
May 7, 2018
Annual Town Meeting Convened May 7, 2018
(Approved by the Attorney General July 12, 2018)
Section 3.6.3 Add Section 3.6.3.10 allowing accessory retail uses in the Industrial District
by Special Permit from the Planning Board.
Add Section 3.6.3.10.1 allowing for outdoor display of goods with conditions.
Section 3.8.1.10 Amend Section 3.8.1.10 by adding new subsections 1  3 to clarify
requirements for Erosion Control Special Permits. Re-numbered subsections
and adjusted references to match new numbering.
Section 10 Amend Section 10 Temporary Moratorium on RECREATIONAL
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS by extending the moratorium date to
December 31, 2018 and clarifying the names of relevant state commissions.
TOWN OF STOW
Rules and Regulations
Governing the Subdivision of Land
Adopted June 15, 1956
Including Amendments through April 18, 2017
And filed with the Town Clerk on May 8, 2017
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
SECTION 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.1 Authority .............................................................................................................................. 4
1.2 Purpose ............................................................................................................................... 4
1.3 Definitions ............................................................................................................................ 4
1.4 Compliance of Rules with Subdivision Control Law .............................................................. 7
1.5 Unapproved Subdivision Prohibited ..................................................................................... 8
1.6 Fees .................................................................................................................................... 8
1.7 References .......................................................................................................................... 9
SECTION 2 PLAN BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE SUBDIVISION APPROVAL (ANR)
2.1 Filing of an Approval Not Required (ANR) Plan ................................................................. 10
2.2 Determination that Subdivision Approval is Not Required .................................................. 12
2.3 Determination that Subdivision Approval is Required ......................................................... 12
2.4 Failure of Board to Act ....................................................................................................... 12
SECTION 3 CONCEPTUAL AND PRELIMINARY PLANS
3.1 Conceptual Plan ................................................................................................................ 13
3.2 Preliminary Plan ................................................................................................................. 13
SECTION 4 PROCEDURE FOR SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF DEFINITIVE
SUBDIVISION PLAN
4.1 Pre-Application Consultation .............................................................................................. 16
4.2 Submission of Definitive Plan ............................................................................................ 16
4.3 Contents of Definitive Plan................................................................................................. 17
4.4 Notice to Town Clerk ......................................................................................................... 20
4.5 Review by Board of Health ................................................................................................ 20
4.6 Review by Other Town Officials ......................................................................................... 21
4.7 Public Hearing ................................................................................................................... 21
4.8 Board Action on Application for Approval of Definitive Plan ............................................... 21
4.9 Certificate of Action ........................................................................................................... 22
4.10 Time Limitation on Approval .............................................................................................. 22
SECTION 5 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
5.1 Performance Guarantee Required ..................................................................................... 24
5.2 Types of Performance Guarantees .................................................................................... 24
5.3 Form of Performance Guarantees ..................................................................................... 25
5.4 Partial Release .................................................................................................................. 27
5.5 Final Release ..................................................................................................................... 27
SECTION 6 ENDORSEMENT AND RECORDING OF APPROVED PLAN
6.1 Endorsement of Approved Plan ......................................................................................... 29
6.2 Recording Plans ................................................................................................................ 29
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 2
SECTION 7 DESIGN STANDARDS
7.1 Basic Requirements ........................................................................................................... 30
7.2 Variation from Design Standards ....................................................................................... 30
7.3 Protection of Natural Resources ........................................................................................ 30
7.4 Lots.................................................................................................................................... 31
7.5 Streets - Location and Alignment ....................................................................................... 31
7.6 Streets  Classifications .................................................................................................... 33
7.7 Special Purpose Streets .................................................................................................... 34
7.8 Street Design Standards .................................................................................................... 35
7.9 Stormwater Management................................................................................................... 39
7.10 Open Space ....................................................................................................................... 42
7.11 Utility Easements ............................................................................................................... 42
7.12 Erosion and Sediment Control ........................................................................................... 42
SECTION 8 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
8.1 General .............................................................................................................................. 44
8.2 Street and Right-of-Way .................................................................................................... 44
8.3 Utilities ............................................................................................................................... 45
8.4 Monuments ........................................................................................................................ 45
8.5 Driveways .......................................................................................................................... 46
8.6 Curbs ................................................................................................................................. 46
8.7 Sidewalks, Pedestrian Ways and Bicycle Paths ................................................................ 46
8.8 Street Signs ....................................................................................................................... 47
8.9 Street Trees and other Vegetation ..................................................................................... 47
8.10 Street Lighting ................................................................................................................... 48
8.11 Sanitary Sewer .................................................................................................................. 48
8.12 Water Systems .................................................................................................................. 48
8.13 Fire Protection ................................................................................................................... 48
SECTION 9 OPTIONAL RESIDENTIAL CLOSE PLAN
9.1 Purpose ............................................................................................................................. 49
SECTION 10 ADMINISTRATION
10.1 Waivers of Rules and Regulations ..................................................................................... 50
10.2 Earth Removal ................................................................................................................... 50
10.3 Building Permit .................................................................................................................. 50
10.4 Mandatory Notice Prior to Commencement of Construction Work ..................................... 51
10.5 Inspections ........................................................................................................................ 51
10.6 Legal Costs........................................................................................................................ 52
10.7 Town Bylaws...................................................................................................................... 52
10.8 Completion within Eight Years ........................................................................................... 52
10.9 Acceptance of Roads ......................................................................................................... 52
10.10 Forms ................................................................................................................................ 54
10.11 Amendments ..................................................................................................................... 54
10.12 Validity ............................................................................................................................... 54
SECTION 11 APPENDIX
Appendix A .................................................................................................................................... 55
Form ANR - Application for Endorsement of Plan Believed Not To Require Approval ............. 56
Forrm PP -- Application for Approval of Preliminary Plan ........................................................... 58
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 3
Form DP - Application for Approval of Definitive Plan .............................................................. 60
Form DC - Designer's Certificate ............................................................................................. 62
Form RC - Restrictive Covenant ............................................................................................. 64
Form LR-CP - Release of Lots - Certificate of Performance .................................................... 70
Form LR-PS - Release of Lots - Provision of Surety ................................................................ 72
Form CB - Certification of Bounds ........................................................................................... 74
Form DP-LN - Legal Notice of Public Hearing ......................................................................... 76
Form DIS - Development Impact Statement ............................................................................ 78
Form CAP - Covenant Authorizing Town Representatives to Enter onto the Property ............. 84
Form DPC - Declaration of Protective Covenants and Restrictive Agreement ......................... 86
Form PG - Performance Guarantees  Tri-Partite Agreement ................................................ 90
Appendix B .................................................................................................................................... 96
Plant Species for Cul-De-Sac Islands ...................................................................................... 97
Typical Tree Planting Detail ..................................................................................................... 98
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 4
SECTION 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.1 Authority
Under the authority vested in the Planning Board of the Town of Stow, by Section 81Q of
Chapter 41 of the General Laws, said Board hereby adopts these rules and regulations
governing the subdivision of land in the Town of Stow.
1.2 Purpose
These subdivision regulations are adopted for the purpose of protecting the safety,
convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Stow, by "regulating the laying
out and construction of ways in subdivisions providing access to the several lots therein,
but which have not become public ways, and ensuring sanitary conditions in subdivisions
and in proper cases parks and open areas. The powers of the Planning Board and of the
Board of Appeals under the subdivision control law shall be exercised with due regard for
the provision of adequate access to all of the lots in a subdivision by ways that will be safe
and convenient for travel; for lessening congestion in such ways and in the adjacent public
ways: for reducing danger to life and limb in the operation of motor vehicles; for securing
safety in the case of fire, flood, panic and other emergencies; for insuring compliance with
the applicable zoning bylaws; for securing adequate provision for water, sewerage,
drainage, and other requirements where necessary in a subdivision; and for coordinating
the ways in a subdivision with each other and with the public ways in the town and with the
ways in neighboring subdivisions.
It is the intent of the subdivision control law (under which these regulations are adopted)
that any subdivision plan filed with the Planning Board shall receive the approval of such
board if said plan conforms to the recommendation of the Board of Health and to the
reasonable rules and regulations of the Planning Board pertaining to subdivisions of land;
provided, however, that such Board may, when appropriate, waive as provided for in
section eighty-one R, such portions of the rules and regulations as is deemed advisable.
(Section 81K of Chapter 41 G.L.)
1.3 Definitions
In these Rules the following terms shall have the following meanings:
Abutter Shall mean abutters and property owners of land directly opposite on
any public or private street or way and abutters to the abutters within
300' of the property line, all as they appear on the most recent
applicable tax record.
Access Street Provides frontage for access to residential lots and carries traffic having
destination or origin on the street itself.
Applicant Any person or such person's authorized representative who files an
application under these rules.
Application The application form and all accompanying documents required by the
Bylaw and these rules
Arterial Street An interregional road that conveys traffic between centers and carries a
traffic volume in excess of 3,000 ADT.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 5
Average Daily Traffic The average number of cars per day that pass over a given point.
Board The Planning Board of the Town of Stow.
Bylaw The Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw.
Collector Street Conducts and distributes traffic between lower-order residential streets
and higher volume streets and carries no more than 3,000 ADT.
Dead End Street A Street, or a combination of streets open at one end only without
special provision for reversal of traffic movement.
Definitive Plan Shall mean a plan of a subdivision meeting the requirements of these
subdivision rules and regulations for submission, with appropriate and
complete application, submitted to the Board for approval, to be
recorded in the Registry of Deeds or filed with the Land Court when
approved by the Board, all as distinguished from a preliminary plan. A
definitive plan shall include a division of land otherwise defined as a
subdivision in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law
notwithstanding the filing of said plan to the Board of Appeals under the
provisions of G.L. c.40B, s.20-23. A filing with the Board of Appeals
under the provisions of G.L. c.40B, s.20-23 shall not relieve the
applicant from the provisions of the Subdivision Control Law nor these
Rules and Regulations.
Developable Site
Area
DEVELOPABLE SITE AREA - The DEVELOPABLE SITE AREA shall
be calculated by subtracting from the LOT area all land which is located
in:
? a wetlands resource area (excluding the buffer zone) as defined by
Article 9, Wetlands Protection, of the Town of Stow General Bylaw;
? a Flood Plain/Wetlands District as defined in the Stow Zoning Bylaw;
? another zoning district in which the principal use of the LOT is not
also permitted;
? an access, roadway or right of way easement or any portion thereof;
? any portion of the site with grades greater than 15%; and
? any portion of the site within a Natural Heritage Endangered
Species Program.
Driveway A paved or unpaved area used for ingress and egress of vehicles, and
allowing access from a street to a building, structure or facility.
Easement A right granted for limited use of private land for a public or quasi-public
purpose and within which the owner of the property shall not erect any
permanent structures.
Emergency Access
Way
A public or private way for secondary emergency access that is not
generally available for vehicular travel, with a minimum twenty (20) foot
right-of-way, a minimum ten (10) foot wide paved surface, three (3) foot
shoulders, and posts or gates installed at all entrances. Emergency
Access Ways do not provide frontage.
Frontage That contiguous portion of a lot or parcel extending along a street line(s)
(see definition of Subdivision).
Industrial Street A street designed to serve subdivisions to be developed as industrial,
commercial, business, or office parks. Industrial streets carry large
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 6
volumes of traffic at moderate speeds.
Lot An area of land, undivided by any street, in one ownership with
definitive boundaries ascertainable from the most recently recorded
deed or plan which is (1) a deed recorded in Middlesex County So.
District Registry of Deeds, or (2) a Certificate of Title issued by the Land
Court and registered in the Land Court of such registry, or (3) title of
record disclosed by any and all pertinent public records.
Marginal Access
Street
A service street that runs parallel to a collector street or arterial street
which provides access to abutting properties and separation from
through traffic.
Municipal Services Sewers, storm water drains, water pipes, gas pipes, electric lines,
telephone lines, television cables, fire alarm system, street lights, similar
service installations and their respective appurtenances.
Restrictive Covenant A contract between the applicant and the Board or other public authority
concerning the use of the land, either inscribed on the definitive plan, or
contained in a separate document referred to on the definitive plan.
Roadway That portion of a way, which is designed and prepared for vehicular
travel.
Rules The Stow Subdivision Rules and Regulations set forth herein, as
amended.
Rural Lane A street in a very low density area serving no more than five (5) lots.
Single Access Street A street with a cul-de-sac, circle, loop or turnaround; or other street
having only one terminus at a through street. A single access street
may provide access to other streets with cul-de-sacs, dead-end streets,
or streets forming a closed loop or circle.
Standard
Specifications
The Standard Specifications for Highways & Bridges published by the
Massachusetts Department of Highways, as amended.
Street or Road A street shall be (1) an approved public way laid out by the Town of
Stow, or Middlesex County Commissioners, or the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts; or (2) A way which the Stow Town Clerk certifies is
maintained by public authority and used as a public way; or (3) a public
or private way shown on a plan theretofore approved and endorsed in
accordance with the Subdivision control Law; or (4) a way in existence
as of June 15, 1956 having in the opinion of the Planning Board
sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate construction to
accommodate the vehicle traffic anticipated by reason of the proposed
use of the land abutting thereon or served thereby and for the
installation of municipal services to serve such land and the building
erected or to be erected thereon. A public or private way shall not be
deemed to be a STREET as to any lot of land that does not have rights
of access and passage over said way.
Street Loop A street that has its only ingress and egress at two points on the same
subcollector street or collector street.
Subcollector Street Provides frontage for access to lots and carries traffic of adjoining
streets. Not intended to interconnect adjoining neighborhoods or
subdivisions and should will not carry regional through traffic or ADT
greater than 500.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 7
Subdivision "Subdivision" shall mean the division of a tract of land into two (2) or
more lots including re-subdivision and, when appropriate to the context,
shall relate to the process of subdivision of the land or territory
subdivided; provided, however, that the division of a tract of land into
two (2) or more lots shall not be deemed to constitute a subdivision
within the meaning of the subdivision control law if, at the time when it is
made, every lot within the tract so divided has frontage on:
? A public street accepted by the Town of Stow, the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, or Middlesex County under MGL Chapter 82, or a
street which the Town Clerk certifies is maintained and used as a
public street, or
? A street shown on a plan theretofore approved and endorsed in
accordance with the Subdivision Control Law, or
? A street in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became
effective in the Town of Stow, having, in the opinion of the Board,
sufficient width, suitable grade, and adequate construction to
provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed
use of the land abutting thereon or served thereby, and for the
installation of municipal services to serve such land and the
buildings erected thereon. Such frontage shall be of at least such
distance as is required by the Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw. In
rendering an opinion as to the adequacy of the way noted in this
paragraph, the Planning Board shall consider, but not be limited to,
consideration of the following: (i) whether the existing horizontal and
vertical alignment of the way provides safe visibility and (ii) whether
the travel surface width is at least eighteen feet (18) and paved with
adequate provisions for stormwater disposal.
"Conveyances or other instruments adding to, taking away from, or
changing the size and shape of, lots in such a manner as not to leave
any lot so affected without the frontage above set forth, or the division
of a tract of land on which two (2) or more buildings were standing when
the Subdivision Control Law went into effect in the town into separate
lots on each of which one of such buildings remains standing, shall not
constitute a subdivision."
Subdivision Control
Law
Section 81-K to 81-GG, inclusive, of Chapter 41 of the General Laws
and any acts and amendment thereof, or addition thereto or in
substitution therefore.
Through Street A street having, by itself or by means of other streets, a connection at
both ends to the overall road system of the Town or of neighboring
towns, so that each location on such street can be accessed through at
least two (2) streets or combination of streets.
Town Town of Stow, unless otherwise specified.
1.4 Compliance of Rules with Subdivision Control Law
These rules contain for the readers convenience, either verbatim or in slightly modified
form, relevant statutory of MGL Chapter 41, the Subdivision Control Law. These rules are
intended to comply with the Subdivision Control Law and should be read to incorporate
future changes in the Subdivision Control Law. However, many aspects of the subdivision
of land are not completely covered by the Subdivision Control Law, and these rules contain
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 8
definitions, procedural requirements, and design standards that are intended to be specific
to the Town.
1.5 Unapproved Subdivision Prohibited
No person shall make a division or subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision
Control Law of any land within the Town, or proceed with the improvement for sale of lots in
a subdivision, or the construction of ways or preparation therefore or the installation of
utilities and municipal services therein, unless and until a proper plan of such subdivision
has been submitted and approved by the Board as hereinafter provided.
1.6 Fees
Filing fees are non-refundable fees to cover the cost of administration, legal fees, and plan
review and are due at the time of submission of the plan. The fee shall be submitted in
check form and made payable to the "Town of Stow".
All expenses for advertising, engineering, professional review, construction inspection,
recording and filing of plans and documents and all other expenses in connection with or
for a subdivision shall be borne by the applicant.
Fee Schedule:
Plan Believed Not to Require Approval
(ANR)
$250.00, plus $50.00 each new lot or parcel
created by the plan.
Preliminary Plan $500.00, plus $.50 per linear foot of proposed
roadway, or $1,000.00, whichever is greater
Definitive Plan (If filed within seven (7)
months after a Preliminary Plan
$2,000.00, plus $5.00 per linear foot of
proposed roadway.
Definitive Plan (If no Preliminary Plan
was filed within seven (7) months prior
$3,000.00, plus $10.00 per linear foot of
proposed roadway
Definitive Plan Modification, requiring a
public hearing
$500.00
Definitive Plan Modification, not
requiring a public hearing
$50.00
Re-issue Lot Release $50.00
1.6.2 Intentionally left blank
1.6.3 Intentionally left blank
1.6.4 Intentionally left blank
1.6.5 Intentionally left blank
1.6.6 Additional Review Fee Deposits - Pursuant to G.L. c.44, s. 53G and so that the Board may
conduct a thorough and proper review of the Definitive Plan to insure that the plan complies
with these Rules and the Subdivision Control Law, the Board may hire outside traffic,
engineering, legal or planning consultants to review an Application. To cover the cost of
these reviews a review fee deposit may also be required of an Applicant at the time of
submission or at any appropriate time in the review process. As the scope of the study and
review will vary according to the size of a particular project, the Applicant is hereby strongly
advised to consult the Board concerning the scope and cost of any such studies during the
preliminary review. Failure to do so could result in serious delays in the processing of an
Application. The amount of the fee deposit will reflect the anticipated consultant fees(s)
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 9
plus 10%. Note that some projects may require additional fees to cover further study if
significant impact or problems are found in the initial review. Any amount of the deposits
remaining after the issuance of building permits for the proposed construction plus any
remaining accrued interest will be repaid to the Applicant or the Applicants successor in
interest. The selection of the consultant will comply with CH.30B of MGL as applicable.
1.7 References
For matters not covered by these Rules, reference is made to the Subdivision Control Law,
MGL Ch. 41, S.81-K through 81-GG; the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL Ch. 131, S.40; and
the State Environmental Code, Title 5 (310 CMR 15.00).
Design and construction of streets, ways, sidewalks, drainage structures, sewage disposal
structures and other appurtenant structures, shall comply with the appropriate standards
set forth in these Rules:
a) "Residential Street Design and Traffic Control", Institute of Transportation Engineers,
1989 or latest edition;
b) "The Subdivision and Site Plan Handbook" Listokin & Walker, Rutgers University, 1989
or latest edition; "A Policy on Geometric Design of Rural Highways and Streets"
published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials,
1984 or latest edition;
c) The "Highway Design Manual", published by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Department of Highways, latest edition;
d) The "Standard Specification for Highways and Bridges", published by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Public Works, 1988 or latest edition;
e) The Massachusetts Department of Public Works Construction Standards", 1977 or
latest edition;
f) The "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices" published by the Federal Highway
Administration, latest edition;
g) The "Seeley's Data Book for Civil Engineers", Volume I - Design, published by John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, latest edition;
h) The "Guidelines for Soil and Water Conservation in Urbanizing Areas of
Massachusetts", published by the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, 1977 or latest edition;
i) "Residential Streets", published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, the
National Association of Home Builders and the Urban Land Institute, 1990 or latest
edition;
j) 2008 Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook, subsequently known as the Handbook.
The above referenced manuals may be referred to in various sections of these Rules.
The Board reserves the right to determine applicable standards.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 10
SECTION 2
PLAN BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE SUBDIVISION APPROVAL (ANR))
2.1 Filing of an Approval Not Required (ANR) Plan
Any person who wishes to cause to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds or to be filed with
the Land Court a plan of land, and who believes that his plan does not require approval
under the Subdivision Control Law must:
File with the Office of the Board five (5) copies of a properly executed Application for
Endorsement of Plan Believed not to Require Approval and the proper application fee as
required by these rules.
Submit a plan prepared by a registered land surveyor, clearly and legibly drawn in
compatible drawing ink on polyester drafting film, or other similar medium, acceptable to
the registry of deeds or land court, with four, (4) prints thereof accompanied by the
necessary evidence to show that the plan does not require approval. The dimensions of
said plan shall be as required by the Registry of Deeds or the Land Court, as appropriate.
If the ANR plan is prepared using a computer-aided drafting program, an electronic copy of
the plan (on medium and in a format directed by the Planning Board) shall be filed with the
Stow Planning Department prior to endorsement. The plan shall contain the following
information:
2.1.2.1 Identification of the plan by name of owner of record and location of the land in question.
2.1.2.2 Locus of plan at Assessors Property Map Sheet scale
2.1.2.3 The statement "Approval under Subdivision Control Law not Required"
2.1.2.4 Sufficient space for the date and the signatures of the Board or its designee.
2.1.2.5 Zoning classifications; including overlay districts
2.1.2.6 Location of any Zoning District boundaries that lie within the plan area.
2.1.2.7 Property Map Sheet number(s) and parcel number(s)
2.1.2.8 The entirety of any lot having its boundaries changed shall be shown.
2.1.2.9 In the case of the creation of a new lot, the remaining frontage and area shall be shown
2.1.2.10 Location of all existing and proposed bounds or permanent monuments marking lot lines.
2.1.2.11 The location of any building, structure, stonewalls, existing driveway(s), cart paths,
easements, rights of way, resource areas of the Wetlands Protection Act, areas
protected by the Wetlands Protection Act, water courses and buffer zones shall be
shown.
2.1.2.12 The location of wells and septic systems within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the new lot
lines shall be shown.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 11
2.1.2.13 Notice of any decisions by the Zoning Board of Appeals, including but not limited to
variances and exceptions regarding the land or any buildings thereon or a statement that
no such decisions exist.
2.1.2.14 Description of location of property related to a known road, intersection or highway
boundary.
2.1.2.15 A statement that the plan is meant and intended to supersede all plans which predate the
endorsement.
2.1.2.16 North point, date of survey and scale.
2.1.2.17 Name, signature and seal of the professional land surveyor who prepared the plan.
2.1.2.18 A statement of whether all streets and ways shown or referred to are public or private
ways.
2.1.2.19 Sufficient information to show that each building lot complies with Section 4.3.2.1 of the
Zoning Bylaw, by indicating at least 50% of the minimum required LOT area shall be land
which is not in a wetlands or Flood Plain/Wetlands District.
2.1.2.20 Sufficient information to show that each building lot complies with Section 4.3.2.3 of the
Zoning Bylaw, by depicting the area suitable for BUILDINGS. (A circle of 150 feet in
diameter, or a rectangle with an area of 20,000 square feet and a minimum side of 80
feet can be drawn on the LOT plan without overlapping any LOT line or any wetlands or
Flood Plain/Wetlands District.) or
2.1.2.21 Sufficient information to show that each building lot complies with Section 4.3.2.4 of the
Zoning Bylaw by depicting a 100-foot diameter circle can move on the LOT plan from the
STREET LINE to the area suitable for BUILDINGs without overlapping any side or rear
LOT line or any Flood Plain/Wetlands District line, or
In the case of a hammerhead lot, the LOT has a minimum width of 50 feet between the
STREET LINE and the buildable area. A LOT meets the minimum width requirement if a
50-foot diameter circle can move on the LOT plan from the STREET LINE to the
buildable area without overlapping or crossing any LOT line or any Flood Plain/Wetlands
district line;
2.1.2.22 Sufficient information to show that each building lot complies with Zoning Bylaw
requirements for index of regularity.
2.1.2.23 A statement that any further development or division of land, which will result in the
creation of a total of six (6) or more DWELLING UNITS on the property shown on this
plan, shall require a Special Permit from the Planning Board in accordance with Section
8.9 (Inclusion of Affordable Housing) of the Zoning Bylaw.
2.1.2.24 A statement that the land outside of the proposed ANR shall not be considered as part of
this endorsement.
2.1.2.25 A statement that Planning Board endorsement of this plan indicates only that the plan is
not a subdivision pursuant to the definition contained in G.L. c.41, s.81-L and does not
indicate that the lot is buildable, or that it complies with the Stow Zoning Bylaw, rules and
regulations governing wastewater disposal, wetlands protection or any general bylaw in
the Town of Stow.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 12
2.1.3 File, by delivery or by registered or certified mail, a written notice with the Town Clerk which
contains certification of the date of submission to the board, accompanied by a copy of the
application for endorsement of plan believed not to require approval. If notice is given by
delivery, the Town Clerk, if requested, shall give written receipt therefor.
2.2 Determination that Subdivision Approval is Not Required
If the Board determines that the plan does not require approval, it shall without a public
hearing and within twenty-one (21) days endorse on the plan the words "Approval under
the Subdivision Control Law not Required". This endorsement does not imply that the plan
which has been submitted complies with the Zoning Bylaw of the Town of Stow. The Board
may add to such endorsement a statement of the reason approval is not required. The
signed original of said plan will be returned to the applicant and the Board shall notify the
Town Clerk, in writing, of its action.
2.3 Determination that Subdivision Approval is Required
If the Board determines that the plan does require approval under the Subdivision Control
Law, it shall inform the applicant and the Town Clerk in writing within twenty-one (21) days
and return the plan.
2.4 Failure of Board to Act
If the Board fails to act upon a plan submitted under this section or fails to notify the Town
Clerk and the person submitting the plan of its action within twenty-one (21) days after its
submission, it shall be deemed to have determined that approval under the Subdivision
Control Law is not required. The Board shall forthwith make such endorsement to said
plan, and on its failure to do so forthwith, the Town Clerk shall issue a certificate to the
same effect.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 13
SECTION 3
CONCEPTUAL AND PRELIMINARY PLANS
3.1 Conceptual Plan
Many development impacts can be avoided or mitigated if recognized early in the
development process. It is therefore recommended that the applicant prepare and submit
a conceptual subdivision plan and a draft Development Impact Statement as early as
possible.
3.1.1 Prior to the filing of a preliminary plan, the applicant should informally consult with the
Board to review a conceptual plan of a subdivision proposal and to discuss any issues
raised in the preparation of the Development Impact Statement. The Board will answer
questions, and may offer suggestions related to the general concept presented, and
discuss possibilities to minimize negative development impacts.
3.1.2 The purpose of this consultation is to provide the applicant an opportunity to present the
proposed subdivision in the earliest stages of the development process, before a significant
amount of money is spent on engineering details.
3.2 Preliminary Plan
A Preliminary Plan of a subdivision may be submitted by the applicant for discussion,
modification, approval or disapproval by the Board. The submission of such preliminary
plan will enable the applicant, the Board and other municipal agencies and owners of
property abutting the subdivision, to discuss and clarify any of the problems of such a
subdivision before a Definitive Plan is prepared. Therefore, it is strongly recommended
that a preliminary plan be filed in every case. As of April 7, 1987, non-residential
subdivisions are required to submit a preliminary plan. The filing of a plan that requires
approval under the Subdivision Control Law shall be considered irrebuttable proof that the
plan consists of a related application pursuant to G.L. c.40B, s.20-23 and its
implementing regulations found at 760 CMR 56.00, specifically 760 CMR 56.03.
3.2.1 Prior to the discussion of the Preliminary Plan with the Board, the applicant should discuss
his plans with the Fire Chief, the Superintendent of Streets, the Board of Health, and the
Conservation Commission. Note, that pursuant to the Subdivision Control Law the filing of
a Preliminary Plan in the case of a non-residential subdivision is required.
3.2.2 Application - Any person who wishes to apply for approval of a preliminary subdivision plan
shall file with the Board by delivery or registered mail the following:
3.2.2.1 Twenty (20) copies of a properly executed "Application for Approval of Preliminary Plan".
3.2.2.2 Twenty (20) copies of the Development Impact Statement.
3.2.2.3 Eleven (11) copies of the preliminary plan in the form set forth below.
3.2.2.4 Twenty (20) copies of the preliminary plan reduced to fit legibly on 11"x17" or 8.5"x11"
sheets.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 14
3.2.2.5 Submit a preliminary plan filing fee in accordance with these Rules to cover the expenses
incurred by the Town in reviewing the application. The filing fee shall be submitted in
check form and made payable to the Town of Stow The filing fee is not refundable.
3.2.2.6 All documents shall also be made available in PDF format.
3.2.3 File, by delivery or by registered mail to the BOARD in care of the Stow Planning
Department. If so mailed, the date of receipt shall be the date of submission of the plan.
3.2.4 Form and Contents of Preliminary Plan - The Preliminary Plan shall be drawn by a
registered professional engineer or land surveyor in dark lines on light background, at a
suitable scale (preferably 1" = 40') to fit on a single D size (24x36) sheet and it should
be properly identified as a Preliminary Plan. It should show sufficient information about the
subdivision to form a clear basis for discussion and for the preparation of the definitive plan
and shall include any requested waivers. During the discussion of the preliminary plan, the
complete information required for the definitive plan, the financial arrangements and
proposed restrictive covenants will be developed. The preliminary plan shall contain the
following information:
3.2.4.1 The subdivision name, boundaries, north point, date, scale, legend and title "Preliminary
Plan".
3.2.4.2 The names and addresses of the record owners of the land and the applicant, and the
name of the designer, engineer or surveyor who made the plan and their appropriate seal.
3.2.4.3 The names of all abutters, as determined from the most recent tax list, unless the
applicant shall have more recent knowledge of such abutters.
3.2.4.4 The existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements and any public or common
areas within the subdivision in a general manner.
3.2.4.5 The resource areas as defined by MGL Ch. 131 S. 40 Wetlands Protection Act and the
Town of Stow Wetlands Protection Bylaw.
3.2.4.6 Major features of the land such as existing stone walls, fences, buildings, historic sites,
large trees (12 inch diameter or greater), wooded areas, rock ridges and outcroppings,
ditches, swamps and water bodies. Special attention should be given to noting physical
features which define the boundaries of the subdivision.
3.2.4.7 The existing and proposed system of drainage, including adjacent existing natural
waterways, in a general manner.
3.2.4.8 The approximate boundary lines of proposed lots, with approximate areas and
dimensions.
3.2.4.9 The names, locations and widths of adjacent streets approaching or within 500' of the
subdivision.
3.2.4.10 The existing topography of the land in a general manner.
3.2.4.11 The proposed names of the proposed streets, a number on each lot, and labels on each
parcel.
3.2.4.12 The profiles of existing grades and approximate proposed finished grades of the roadway,
and drain and sewer utilities.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 15
3.2.4.13 A locus map at a scale suitable to the Board, showing the entire subdivision and any
abutting property, adjacent streets, reference to Assessor's Map, the existing zoning and
any zoning boundary lines that lie within the locus.
3.2.5 Public Meeting
A public meeting shall be held by the Board to ensure that all abutters have the opportunity
to view the proposed development and discuss any potential problems that may arise
through the development of such a subdivision, before approval, modification and approval,
or disapproval of the preliminary plan is given,. A notice of the time and place of the public
meeting and of the subject matter to be discussed, sufficient for identification, shall be
given by the Board at the expense of the applicant by advertisement in a newspaper of
general circulation in Stow not less than fourteen days before the day of such meeting, and
by the applicant mailing a copy of such advertisement by first class mail to the property
owner and to all abutters.
3.2.6 Board Action - The Board may give such preliminary plan its approval with or without
modification, or may disapprove the plan, either of which will facilitate the preparation of a
Definitive Plan. Approval of a preliminary plan does not constitute approval of a
subdivision, but does facilitate the preparation of the Definitive Plan. The Board shall send
a notice of its action to the Town Clerk and to the applicant within forty-five (45) days after
the date of submission of the application.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 16
SECTION 4
PROCEDURE FOR SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF DEFINITIVE
SUBDIVISION PLAN
4.1 Pre-Application Consultation
A pre-application consultation between an applicant and the Board is recommended. The
Board will review applications in an attempt to avoid unnecessary technical deficiencies in
the application and promote efficiency in the formal review and hearing process. The
Board will not be responsible for assuring the accuracy and completeness or thoroughness
of any application submitted for review. It is the responsibility of the applicant to assure
that the application to be submitted to the Board for its review is thorough, complete and
accurate.
Any action or communication initiated by the applicant prior to the filing of an application
with the Town Clerk and the Board shall not constitute or be considered part of an
application.
4.2 Submission of Definitive Plan
Any person who submits a Definitive Plan of a subdivision to the Board for approval,
modification, amendment or rescission of a subdivision shall file with the Board, by delivery
or registered mail, the following:
4.2.1 Prints of the Definitive Plan, 11 copies full scale, (24"x 36"), and 20 copies reduced scale,
(11"x17"), thereof, dark line on white background.
All documents shall also be made available in PDF format.
4.2.2 Twenty (20) copies of a properly executed "Application for Approval of Definitive Plan".
4.2.3 Draft of a legal advertisement (see Appendix A) describing the land.
4.2.4 Copy of the deed for all parcels contained within the subdivision and proof of ownership for
each parcel.
4.2.5 Development Impact Statement with supporting documentation.
4.2.6 Written list of any requested waivers from the rules and regulations with reasons why those
waivers would permit a superior design that would be in the public interest and not
inconsistent with the purpose and intent of the Subdivision Control Law.
4.2.7 Covenant in recordable form authorizing the Town or authorized agent to enter on the
subdivision to complete the ways and services if the developer does not complete them
according to his obligations. (See Appendix A)
4.2.8 Letter documenting authorizing vote if the developer is acting in the name of a trust,
corporation or company.
4.2.9 List of mortgage holders which shall be kept current during the period of the subdivision
development.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 17
4.2.10 Written statement from the developer that he will retain the fee in the streets shown on the
plan and upon construction of the streets and installation of services will, at the request of
the Town, grant to the Town the fee (or an easement for all purposes for which streets are
used) in such streets; and will, at the request of the Town, grant to it any drainage or other
easements shown on the plan. In order to retain the fee in the street, the developer must
clearly define lot lines to make clear that the lot stops at the street layout.
4.2.11 Draft of the document establishing a homeowners association where there are common
facilities including, but not limited to, street lighting; water systems; parks and open space
and recreation areas.
4.2.12 Draft of the document which conveys the road and drainage easements to the Town.
4.2.13 A statement from the applicant in which the applicant agrees to complete the ways and
install the public utilities in the subdivision within the time required by the Board.
4.2.14 The required filing fee.
4.2.15 A completed Designer's Certificate (see Appendix A).
4.2.16 A complete list of abutters certified by the Board of Assessors or its authorized
representative (see Appendx)
4.2.17 Approval of all plans shall be upon the condition that all ways shown thereon and public
utilities required by the Board shall be completed and installed within the time so specified
as set forth in the Board's Certificate of Action.
4.2.17.1 The Board may decline to approve any plan unless the applicant agrees to complete
the ways shown thereon and install the public utilities aforesaid within two (2) years or
other such time deemed appropriate by the Board, of the date of endorsement.
4.2.17.2 If the ways in any subdivision are not completed and the utilities aforesaid are not
installed within the time so agreed to by the applicant or so required by the Board, no
such way shall thereafter be laid out, constructed, completed or opened for public use
unless and until a new application is filed with and approved by the Board.
4.2.17.3 Ways or portions thereof not completed within two (2) years, or other such time
deemed appropriate by the Board, from the date of approval by the Board, shall
thereafter be completed in accordance with the then in force construction standards of
these Rules.
4.3 Contents of Definitive Plan
The Definitive Plan shall be prepared, stamped and signed by a professional engineer and
land surveyor registered in Massachusetts and shall be clearly and legibly drawn in dark
lines on white background. The plan shall be at a scale of one inch equals forty feet
(1"=40'), or such scale as approved by the Board to show details clearly and adequately,
and shall include plans and profiles of each individual street at a scale of one inch equals
forty feet (1"=40') horizontal and one inch equals four feet (1"=4') vertical. Sheet sizes
shall be twenty-four by thirty-size (24" x 36") including a one (1) inch border. If multiple
sheets are used, they shall be accompanied by an index sheet at a scale of one inch
equals one hundred feet (1"=100'), or suitable scale, showing the entire subdivision and
adjacent streets and dimensions of the lots and streets and lot numbers. The Definitive
Plan shall contain the following information:
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 18
4.3.1 Subdivision name; the date; scale and legend; and the names and addresses of the
designer, engineer and surveyor who made the plan.
4.3.2 North point, locus map, boundaries of the subdivision and elevations based on the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD).
4.3.3 The names and addresses of the owner of record and applicant and the book and page
number of the recording of deed or the Land Court certificate of title.
4.3.4 Location and ownership of abutting property as it appears on the Certified List of Abutters,
unless the applicant shall have more recent knowledge of such abutters.
4.3.5 All Board modifications and conditions from the Preliminary Plan, if submitted.
4.3.6 Major features of the land, including resource areas defined by the Wetlands Protection Act
(MGL Ch. 131 S. 40) and the Town of Stow Wetlands Protection Bylaw as determined
through issuance of an Order of Resource Area Determination" by the Stow Conservation
Commission, natural drainage courses, walls, fences, buildings, historic sites, large trees,
shade trees within the public way which will be removed, wooded areas, out-croppings,
ditches which exist on or near the site at the time of survey, slopes greater than 15% and
Natural Heritage Endangered Species Program areas.
4.3.7 Lines of existing and proposed streets, ways, lots, sidewalks, easements, street numbers
of each lot, lot numbers or other designation of each lot, and public or common areas
within the subdivision.
4.3.8 Sufficient data to determine the location, direction, width and length of every street,
easement, walk and way line, lot line, boundary line, and to establish these lines on the
ground. This shall include the lengths and bearings of plot and boundary lines of all
subdivision lot lines including lot frontage on the streets, of boundary lines of all streets and
easements, and the length, radii, tangents and central angles of all curves in lot lines and
street lines. All angle points, or intersections of tangents along the street lines, shall be
shown.
4.3.9 Areas of lots with lot numbers and frontage on public ways as set forth in Section 81-L of
the Subdivision Control Law of adjoining lands of the applicant not included in the
subdivision shall be shown.
4.3.10 The centerline of the proposed streets and easements shall be staked, at 50' intervals, on
the ground and the location of said stakes shown on the topographic plan required herein.
4.3.11 A clear indication of all permanent boundary markers properly identified by symbols,
markings, dates or other notes as were found in the traverses and/or perimeter surveys.
Location of all permanent monuments properly identified as existing or proposed.
4.3.12 Location of all proposed permanent monuments including all access easements. All
proposed access easements shall be constructed to ensure that adequate access is
provided. Said access easements shall be marked with permanent monuments. For runs
of less than 30 in length, iron pins shall be used. Runs in excess of 30 in length shall be
marked with standard granite boundary markers six (6) inches square by four (4) feet long
and shall be set flush with the finished grade.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 19
4.3.13 Location, names and present width of streets or private ways and sidewalks bounding,
approaching or within reasonable proximity of the subdivision, showing both roadway
widths and rights-of-way widths.
4.3.14 Indication of all easements, covenants or restrictions applying to the land and their
purposes, whether or not within the subdivision, including any decision on appeal or any
variances granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals applicable to the subdivision of the land
or any buildings thereon.
4.3.15 If the property that comprises the subdivision or any part or boundary thereof has been
examined, approved, and confirmed by the Massachusetts Land Court, such information
shall be noted on the plan with case numbers and other pertinent references to Land Court
procedure, and the same requirement shall apply to any adjoining parcels of land of the
applicant. A copy of the Land Court decision or Certificate shall be provided.
4.3.16 Suitable space to record the action of the Board and the signature of the five (5) members
of the Board and date thereof and to record or make reference to the decision or Certificate
of Action of the Board, any restrictive covenants given under MGL Ch. 41, S. 81-U, or any
amendments thereto, and any conditions required by the Board of Health.
4.3.17 Existing profiles on the exterior lines drawn in fine black line, dotted for left and dashed for
right side, and proposed profile on the center-line drawn in fine black solid line of proposed
streets at a horizontal scale of one inch equals forty feet (1"=40') and vertical scale of one
inch equals four feet (1"=4'), or such other scales acceptable to the Board. At least two (2)
bench marks are to be shown on plans and profiles, and grade elevations at every fifty (50)
foot station except in vertical curves which shall be at every twenty-five (25) foot station.
All existing and proposed intersections shall be shown with all proposed grade elevations
calculated. Grades shall be shown by figures expressed in percent.
4.3.18 Size and location of existing and proposed water systems; sewer systems; storm drainage
systems and appurtenances and easements pertaining thereto.
4.3.19 Location of all proposed subsurface sewage disposal systems in accordance with
procedures promulgated by the Stow Board of Health.
4.3.20 A log of the deep test holes performed in the subdivision as witnessed by a representative
of the Stow Board of Health.
4.3.21 If the proposed use of a lot and/or the location of a proposed use is unknown at the time of
submission of the definitive plan, the applicant shall show on the plan sufficient information
with respect to, existing and proposed, underground structures and septic disposal areas,
to enable the Board of Health to evaluate whether a sewage disposal system can be
located on the lot to serve any permitted use on the lot. Where a lot(s) is to be served by a
sewage treatment plant, the application shall contain a certificate from the Board of Health
stating that such sewage treatment plant is adequate to serve any permitted use on the
lot(s).
4.3.22 The existing and proposed location of all buildings, foundations, wells, septic systems, and
underground storage tanks within the subdivision and the location of all existing structures
including wells, septic systems and underground storage tanks within one hundred and fifty
feet (150') of the perimeter of the subdivision in a general manner.
4.3.23 A Definitive Stormwater Management Design shall be submitted in accordance with Section
7.9 (Stormwater Management) of these rules.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 20
4.3.24 Location and species of proposed street trees and location and species of existing trees
with trunks over eighteen (18) inches in diameter, measured four feet (4') above the
finished ground level, located within the street right-of way of existing or proposed streets.
4.3.25 Cross sections typical of each street, roadway and walkway to be constructed showing all
details; details of all facilities, surface and subsurface drainage facilities and ways, and all
other appurtenances, structures and utilities.
4.3.26 Detail of stone construction entrance(s) at each intersection of a subdivision road(s) with an
existing street(s).
4.3.27 Location of proposed street lights and the design thereof, sidewalks and walkways.
4.3.28 In tabular form as follows, of the subdivision plan as submitted:
1. The total area which is being subdivided on each sheet.
2. The total area of lots included on each sheet.
3. The total of areas dedicated for street purposes, drainage, sewer or utility
easements on each sheet.
4. The total of areas reserved for parks, schools, and other public use on each
sheet.
4.3.29 An erosion and sedimentation control plan.
4.3.30 Developable Site Area for each lot.
4.3.31 Sufficient space for the date and the signatures of the Board or its designee indicating
Subdivision Approval including the date of approval and the date of endorsement. If the
subdivision also requires a special permit, it shall also be noted.
4.3.32 Town Clerk s certification statement  I _____, clerk of the Town of Stow, hereby certify
that the Notice of Approval of this plan by the Planning Board has been received an
recorded at this office and no Notice of Appeal was received during the next twenty days
after such receipt and recording of said notice with signature line.
4.4 Notice to Town Clerk
The applicant shall file by delivery or registered mail a notice with the Town Clerk stating
the date of submission for such approval and accompanied by a copy of the completed
Application for Approval of Definitive Plan.
4.5 Review by Board of Health
At the time of filing of the Definitive Plan, the applicant shall also file with the Board of
Health three (3) full scale prints of the Definitive Plan, together with all information with
regards to results and locations of percolation tests and deep test holes as the Board of
Health requires.
4.5.1 The Board of Health shall report, in writing, to the Board its approval or disapproval of the
Definitive Plan within forty-five (45) days after the plan is filed with the Town Clerk.
4.5.2 If the Board of Health disapproves the plan, it shall make specific findings as to which, if
any, areas shown on the plan cannot be used for building sites without injury to the public
health, and include such specific findings and the reasons therefore in a report, and where
possible, shall make recommendations for the adjustment thereof.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 21
4.5.3 Every lot shall be provided with an on-site wastewater disposal system in compliance with
Title 5 of the State Sanitary Code (310 CMR 15.00 et seq.) and the Stow Board of Health
regulations.
4.5.4 Intentionally left blank
4.5.5 If the Board of Health determines that all or part of the lots in the subdivision cannot
support individual water and sewage system without danger to public health, the Board
shall disapprove the plan in whole or in part.
4.5.6 Failure of the Board of Health to report shall be deemed approval.
4.6 Review by Other Town Officials
The Board will transmit copies of the Application for Approval of Definitive Plan to other
Town Officials and Boards for their review and comments.
4.7 Public Hearing
Before approval, modification, amendment and approval, rescission or disapproval of the
Definitive Subdivision can occur, a public hearing shall be held by the Board.
Notice of the time and place of the hearing and of the subject matter, sufficient for
identification, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Stow
once in each of two, (2), successive weeks, the first publication to be not less than
fourteen, (14), days before the day of the hearing, or if there is no such newspaper in town
then by posting such notice in a conspicuous place in the town hall for a period of not less
than fourteen (14) days before the day of such hearing. The day of the Hearing shall not be
counted as one of the required fourteen days. In addition, copies of the notice shall be
sent by certified mail by the Applicant to all parties in interest at least fourteen, (14), days
prior to the date of the Public Hearing. Certified mail receipts and proof of publication shall
be submitted to the Planning Board no later than the commencement of the Public Hearing.
4.7.1 In the case of a public hearing continuance, new information shall be submitted no less
than three (3) weeks prior to the scheduled continuance.
4.8 Board Action on Application for Approval of Definitive Plan
The action of the Board on a definitive plan shall be by vote of a simple majority of the
Board within ninety (90) days of the date of submission, if the application for approval of
the definitive plans was preceded by a preliminary plan in accordance with these rules. If
no such preliminary plan was filed, the Board shall act within 135 days from the date of
submission.
4.8.1 The procedure that the Board will follow with regards to approval, disapproval or
modification or rescission of the final plan submitted by the applicant will be that as set
forth in Section 81-U of the Subdivision Control Law, as amended.
4.8.2 Before final approval of the plan the applicant shall establish that lots in a definitive plan are
in conformity with the controlling Bylaw, and failure of the lots to so comply will be adequate
grounds for disapproval of the definitive plan. See Section 81-Q of the Subdivision Control
Law and amendments thereto.
4.8.3 The Board shall include within the Decision, as a condition of its approval, that the Boards
approval of the Definitive Plan shall expire within a specified time period from the date of
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 22
approval unless a final Definitive Plan, in accordance with the Decision, is submitted and
endorsed by the Board.
4.8.3.1 Any request for an extension of the specified time limitation set forth in the Decision
shall be made in writing to the Board at least thirty days prior to the expiration date. The
Board reserves its rights to grant or to deny such extension if good cause for such
extension is not shown.
4.8.4 The Board may, as a condition of granting approval under Section 81-U of the Subdivision
Control Law, impose reasonable requirements designed to promote the health,
convenience, safety and general welfare of the community and to benefit the Town. In
such event the Board shall endorse such conditions on the plan to which they relate, or set
forth a separate instrument attached thereto, to which reference is made on such plan and
which shall, for the purpose of the Subdivision Control Law, be deemed to be a part of the
plan.
4.8.5 Final approval, if granted, shall be endorsed on the original drawing of the definitive plan as
amended by the Board's action by the signatures of the majority of the board, but not until
the statutory twenty (20) day appeal period has elapsed following the filing of the Certificate
of Action with the Town Clerk and said Clerk has notified the Board that no appeal has
been filed. The plans shall be presented to the Board for endorsement within six (6)
months of the date of approval (or resolution of an appeal in the court), or the subdivision
approval shall be deemed null and void.
4.8.5.1 If the definitive plan is prepared using a computer aided drafting program, an electronic
copy of the final definitive plan (on a medium and in a format as directed by the Board)
shall be filed with the Office of the Planning Board at the time of endorsement.
4.9 Certificate of Action
The action shall be accompanied by a decision that shall serve as the "Certificate of
Action", and copies of said decision shall be certified and filed with the Town Clerk and
sent by delivery or by registered mail to the applicant. If the Board modifies or disapproves
such plan, it shall state in its decision the reasons for its action.
4.10 Time Limitation on Approval
If, within two (2) years from the date of the Board's endorsement of the Definitive Plan, or
such other time as may be stated in the Certificate of Action, the terms and conditions have
not been fulfilled, the Board may, upon its own motion or upon the petition of any person
interested, rescind the Performance Guarantee agreement and its approval of the plan,
provided no lots, site or divisions which have been sold or mortgaged in good faith and for
a valuable consideration subsequent to the approval of the Definitive Plan, or any lots
appurtenant thereto shall be affected unless the owner and the holder of the mortgage or
mortgages of the same shall consent in writing.
4.10.1 If, at the expiration of two (2) years, or such other time as may be stated in the Certificate
of Action, the work has not been performed acceptable to the Board, any such bond may
be enforced and any such deposit may be applied by the Board for the benefit of the Town,
as provided in Section 81U and 81Y of the Subdivision Control Law, upon failure of the
performance for which any such bond or deposit was given, to the extent of the reasonable
cost to the Town of completing such construction and installation.
4.10.2 Failure of an applicant to record the Definitive Plan within six months of its endorsement, or
to comply with the construction schedule, if any, incorporated into the performance
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 23
agreement, or to initiate construction of improvements within two years of the subdivision
approval, or sell lots in a subdivision or portion thereof within eight (8) years of the approval
of the Definitive Plan, or to comply with all applicable sections of the Zoning Bylaw, these
Rules and Regulations or the Wetlands Protection Act and the Stow Wetlands Bylaw, or
unauthorized departure from any agreements made from these Regulations or plans
submitted, whether or not at the direction of other public agencies, shall constitute sufficient
reason for the Planning Board to consider rescission of such approval, in accordance with
requirements and procedures of G.L. c.41, s.81-W.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 24
SECTION 5
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
5.1 Performance Guarantee Required
Before endorsement of the Board's approval of a Definitive Plan of a subdivision, the
applicant shall agree to complete the required improvements specified in these Rules for
any lots in a subdivision, such construction and installation to be secured by one, or in part
by one and in part by the other, of the following methods, which may from time to time be
varied by the applicant with the written approval of the Board.
5.1.1 As a result of prior experience with the inflation of construction costs over time, the Board
shall require a performance guarantee in the amount of one hundred and fifty percent
(150%) of the estimated cost.
5.1.1.1 Also, as a result of prior experience, the Board reserves the right to increase the required
amount deposited as necessary over time to ensure sufficient performance guarantee.
5.2 Types of Performance Guarantees
5.2.1 Restrictive covenant - The applicant shall file a restrictive covenant which has been
approved by the Board, executed and duly recorded by the owner of record, running with
the land, whereby such ways and services shall be provided to serve any lot before such lot
may be built upon or conveyed, other than by mortgage deed; provided, that a mortgagee
who acquires title to the mortgaged premises by foreclosure or otherwise and any
succeeding owner of such premises or part thereof may sell any such lot, subject to that
portion of the restrictive covenant which provides that no lot shall be built upon until such
ways and utilities have been provided to serve such lot, and provided, further, that nothing
herein shall be deemed to prohibit a conveyance by a single deed, subject to such
restrictive covenant, or either the entire parcel of land shown on the subdivision plan or of
all lots not previously released by the Board. A deed of any part of the subdivision in
violation hereof shall be voidable by the grantee prior to the release of the restrictive
covenant but not later than three years from the date of such deed.
The form of the performance guarantee shall comply with requirements of Section 5.3,
Form of Performance Guarantees.
5.2.2 Proper bond. - The applicant shall file a proper bond, sufficient in the opinion of the Board
to secure performance of the construction of ways and the installation of utilities required
for lots in the subdivision shown on the plan, and the Board shall require that the applicant
specify the time within which such construction shall be completed. Performance time shall
be subject to the Board approval. Within six months from the date of completion of the
subdivision roads and related drainage, the Board may require the applicant using a
performance guarantee in the form of a bond to replace the form of guarantee in
accordance with Sections 5.2.3 or 5.2.4 below.
The form of the performance guarantee shall comply with requirements of Section 5.3,
Form of Performance Guarantees.
5.2.3 Deposit of money or negotiable securities - The applicant shall file money or negotiable
securities, sufficient in the opinion of the Board to secure performance of the construction
of ways and installation of utilities required for lots in the subdivision shown on the plan,
and the Board shall require that the Applicant specify the time within with such
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 25
construction shall be completed. The applicant shall provide proof that the deposit of
money or negotiable securities shall remain available to the Town of Stow until such time
as the Board approves a release of said monies.
The form of the performance guarantee shall comply with requirements of Section 5.3,
Form of Performance Guarantees.
5.2.4 Funds retained by lender - The applicant shall deliver to the Board an agreement
executed after the recording of a first mortgage covering the premises shown on the plan
or a portion thereof given as security for advances to be made to the applicant by the
lender, which agreement shall be executed by the applicant and the lender and shall
provide for the retention by the lender of funds sufficient in the opinion of the Board and
otherwise due the applicant, to secure the construction of streets and the installation of
municipal services.
The form of the performance guarantee shall comply with requirements of Section 5.3,
Form of Performance Guarantees.
5.2.4.1 Unless the applicant and the lender shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning
Board, who may consult with the Treasurer/Collector for this purpose, that a) lender is of
sound financial condition or b) the funds to secure such an agreement are beyond the
reach of the applicant's or lender's creditors and will be available regardless of the bank's
financial condition at the time of entering into the agreement or thereafter for payment to
the Town in the event of any default or failure of performance, then the Board in its sole
discretion and determination may reject such agreement as insufficient to serve as a
performance guarantee.
5.2.4.2 Said agreement shall also provide for a schedule of disbursements which may be made
from time to time to the applicant upon completion of various stages of the work, and shall
further provide that in the event the work is not completed within the time set forth by the
applicant, any remaining funds not disbursed shall be available for completion.
5.3 Form of Performance Guarantees
Performance guarantees shall be filed with the Board and shall be subject to the following
requirements:
5.3.1 If performance is guaranteed by means of a restrictive covenant pursuant to Section 5.2.1
such restrictive covenant shall be in the form and contain the language as shown in the
form entitled "Approval with Restrictive Covenant", or as otherwise required or approved by
the board.
5.3.2 If performance is guaranteed by means of a bond (Section 5.2.2), a deposit of money or
negotiable securities (Section 5.2.3) or an agreement whereby the construction lender
retains loan funds (Section 5.2.4), the performance guarantee shall comply with the
following: If the peformance guarantee is the form of a bond (Secton 5.2.2), the bonding
company shall be legally incorporated in the State of Massachusetts.
5.3.2.1 The performance guarantee shall define the applicant's obligation as "the construction of
streets and ways, the installation of municipal services and the construction of certain other
improvements for lots as shown in the Definitive Plan approved by the Board.
5.3.2.2 The performance guarantee shall specify a scheduled completion date on which the
construction of the approved subdivision streets and improvements shall be completed by
the applicant. The Board may extend such time as it deems appropriate after receipt of a
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 26
written request received by the Board forty-five (45) days prior to the scheduled date of
completion.
5.3.2.3.1 The performance guarantee shall include a statement that the Board has the exclusive
authority to release performance guarantee funds.
5.3.2.3 The performance guarantee shall acknowledge the Boards exclusive authority, and shall
state that it shall not expire until the Board, upon written request, certifies that all road
work and improvements have been completed according to the approved plan and that
the performance guarantee is released, or until forty-five (45) days have lapsed from the
date the board received, by certified mail, a request for such certification and release,
whichever comes first.
5.3.2.4 The performance guarantee shall acknowledge the Boards exclusive authority and state
that it applies in full to all successors and assigns of the applicant whose performance is
guaranteed.
5.3.2.5 The performance guarantee shall state that the full amount of the guarantee for each task
that was not completed as defined in Section 5.3.3 shall be due immediately to the Town
of Stow in case of the default of the applicant or his/her successor in constructing the
streets and ways, municipal services and other improvements in accordance with the
approved Definitive Plan. Default of the applicant or successor shall be defined in the
performance guarantee as meaning:
a) failure to complete all roadways according to the approved Definitive Plan by the
scheduled completion date, or
b) bankruptcy of the applicant for the benefit of the creditors of the applicant, or the
foreclosure of any mortgage on all or part of the land of the approved subdivision
before the scheduled completion date, as evidenced by court filings or
c) notice to the Board of the withdrawal or termination of any performance guarantee
given hereunder, or of a request to substitute performance guarantee hereunder,
prior to the scheduled completion date of the work, unless it is given forty-five (45)
days prior to the anticipated date of such withdrawal, termination or substitution, or
d) any other condition or circumstance that constitutes default, in the opinion of the
Board.
5.3.3 The performance guarantee shall include a detailed scope of work to be completed under
the performance guarantee and shall provide for a schedule of disbursements, in
accordance with Section 5.4 below, which may be made to the applicant upon completion
of various stages of work (Schedule A).
5.3.4 The performance guarantee shall not contain any language, which contradicts the above
state requirements.
5.3.5 A bond estimate may be requested from the Board once prior to the establishment of the
performance guarantee and once with each subsequent full or partial bond release; the
estimate will remain effective for 90 days. The estimate will reflect the cost for the Town to
complete the work as a public works project, which may necessitate legal fees, public
bidding, additional staff time, etc.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 27
5.4 Partial Release
Prior to final release of a performance guarantee, the Board may grant up to two partial
releases from the required performance guarantee for partial completion of improvements
(or three partial releases in the event the original performance guarantee exceeds the sum
of $1,000,000.00 or 50 lots) provided that:
5.4.1 No lot(s) shall be released from the restrictive covenant unless construction of streets and
ways, and installation of municipal services and other improvements in accordance with the
approved Definitive Plan for said lots has been completed or another form of security has
been substituted, sufficient to complete said streets and ways, municipal services and other
improvements. The form entitled "Release of Lots - Certificate of Performance", or the
form entitled "Release of Lots - Provision of Surety", whichever is appropriate, shall be
submitted when applying for a partial release of lots from a restrictive covenant.
5.4.2 No reduction in the amount of the performance guarantee shall reduce the performance
guarantee to a value below the estimated cost of completing the unfinished portions of the
improvements. The penal sum of any such bond held under Section 5.2.2 or any deposit
held under Section 5.2.3 or any amount of funds retained pursuant to an agreement under
Section 5.2.4 shall bear a direct and reasonable relationship to the expected cost, including
a contingency amount of no more than 50% of the expected cost to guard against the
effects of inflation, necessary to complete the subject work.
5.4.3 No partial release of security shall be granted until the Board has received written
verification from the town's consulting engineer that a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the
required improvements have been satisfactorily completed.
5.4.4 The amount of the surety shall be 75% of the total surety amount or $20,000.00; whichever
is greater, until such time the final as-built plans are accepted by the Board.
5.5 Final Release
Upon the completion of the construction of streets and ways, and the installation of
municipal services and other improvements in accordance with the approved Definitive
Plan, the applicant may request release of the bond, deposit of money or securities, or
funds retained by lender by sending a statement of completion and a request for release by
registered mail to the Town Clerk and the Board.
5.5.1 Such statement shall be accompanied by the following:
5.5.1.1 A written certificate from a registered professional engineer that the streets, drainage and
utilities conform to the Board's requirements in accordance with the approved Definitive
Plan.
5.5.1.2 A written certificate from a registered land surveyor that the As-Built Plan submitted
accurately reflects the conditions in the completed subdivision are in compliance with the
approved Definitive Plan.
5.5.1.3 A written certification by a registered professional engineer that the streets, drainage and
utilities conform to the Board's requirements in accordance with the approved Definitive
Plan.
5.5.1.4 A written confirmation from the Planning Boards inspector or agent that the
improvements have been exposed to one complete winter environment (November 15 -
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 28
April 15) without damage, or that damage, if incurred, has been repaired to the
satisfaction of the Highway Department.
5.5.1.5 A written confirmation from the Tree Warden that installation of street trees and other
plantings required by these Rules and the decision have been completed satisfactorily
and that damaged plantings have been replaced.
5.5.1.6 The address of the applicant.
5.5.1.7 Five, (5), copies, plus one, (1), electronic copy of the final plan in PDF format of an asbuilt
plan of the streets and ways within the subdivision. The as-built plan shall show all
physical features within the right of way including all required improvements such as
street trees, sidewalks and paths. The location and volumetric calculations for all stormwater
detention facilities shall also be shown on the as-built plan. The as-built centerline
and proposed profile shall be shown with gradients.
5.5.2 If the Board determines that said construction or installation has been completed, it shall
release the interest of the Town in such performance guarantee. If performance was
secured by means of a Restrictive Covenant the interest of the Town shall be released by
execution of a "Lot Release - Certification of Performance".
5.5.3 If the Board determines that said construction or installation has not been completed in
accordance with the approved Definitive Plan, it shall specify in a notice sent to the Town
Clerk and, by registered mail, to the applicant, the details wherein said construction or
installation fails to comply with the approved Definitive Plan. Upon failure to do so within
forty-five (45) days after the receipt by said clerk of the statement requesting release of the
Town's interests, all obligations under the bond shall cease and terminate by operation of
law, any deposit shall be returned and any such restrictive covenant shall become void. In
the event that said forty-five (45) day period expires without such specification by the
Board, or without the release and return of the bond or return of the deposit or release of
the restrictive covenant as aforesaid, the Town Clerk shall, upon request, issue a certificate
to such effect, duly acknowledged, which may be recorded.
5.5.4 Even though all improvements covered by a bond, deposit or restrictive covenant have
been completed, the Board may refuse to release the performance guarantee if completion
of construction on any remaining undeveloped or partially developed lot poses a substantial
risk or injury to the covered improvements.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 29
SECTION 6
ENDORSEMENT AND RECORDING OF APPROVED PLAN
6.1 Endorsement of Approved Plan
The approved Definitive Plan is intended to be used as a contract document for the
construction and inspection of streets and utilities in the subdivision in conformity with
these Rules. The approved plan shall also contain the Record Plan for purposes of filing
with the Registry of Deeds or the Land Court. The following information and form is
required for submission of the Record Plan for endorsement by the Board:
6.1.1 The entire approved Definitive Plan of the subdivision as amended by the Board in its
decision of approval.
6.1.2 One (1) copy of the plan drawn in compatible black drawing ink on polyester drafting film or
other medium acceptable to the Registry of Deeds or Land Court for those sheets intended
for recording, and two contact prints of the entire plan set. If the definitive plan is prepared
using a computer-aided drafting program, an electronic copy of the final definitive plan (on
medium and in a format as directed by the Planning Department) shall be filed with the
Stow Planning Department at the time of endorsement. After endorsement, five (5) full size
copies and one reduced scale copy (11x17) shall be provided to the Planning Board with
an electronic copy of the endorsed plans in a PDF format.
6.1.3 Reference to any required documents such as the vote and decision of the board,
restrictive covenant, easements deeded to the Town, conditions of the Board of Health or
reference of Board of Health failure to report, etc, shall be inscribed on the Record Plan
with a note that such documents shall be recorded with the Record Plan.
6.2 Recording Plans
The approved "Record Plan", the decision of the Board, any restrictive covenant, a
municipal lien certificate indicating that all taxes, assessments, and charges then assessed
against the land shown on the Plan have been paid in full as required under Massachusetts
General Laws, Ch. 60, s. 23, and any other supplementary documentation as required by
the Board shall be recorded or filed, as the case may be, by the applicant or his qualified
agent at the Registry of Deeds or Land Court.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 30
SECTION 7
DESIGN STANDARDS
7.1 Basic Requirements
The standards contained in these Rules and Regulations shall be applied by the Board in
evaluating proposed subdivisions, and shall be considered minimum standards. The
applicant shall comply with all design standards for division of land as provided herein and
shall be guided by the goals and objectives of the Stow Master Plan.
7.1.1 Subdivisions shall be designed so that compatibility with existing neighborhoods is
achieved, and the maximum amenities within the new subdivision are created.
7.2 Variation from Design Standards
The Board may, where it deems necessary, require more stringent standards through
conditions of approval. The Board may waive any design requirement if the Board finds
that such waivers or additional requirements are necessary or desirable to provide for safe
and convenient vehicular and pedestrian travel.
7.3 Protection of Natural Resources
Natural features such as mature vegetation, watercourses, scenic points and vistas,
aquifers, flood plains, habitats of rare and endangered species, and historic spots and
other similar community assets shall be protected and preserved when, in the opinion of
the Board, such protection and preservation would be in the interest of the community.
7.3.1 Unsuitable Land - Land which the Board finds to be unsuitable for development due to
flooding, improper drainage or adverse drainage, adverse topography, poor soils, bedrock,
location of utility easements, or other features which the Board has reason to believe would
be harmful to the safety, health and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of
the subdivision and/or its surrounding area, shall not be subdivided or developed unless
adequate measures are formulated by the applicant and approved by the Board to
eliminate any short-term or long-term impacts created by the development of the unsuitable
land.
7.3.2 Cutting and Filling - Wherever possible, streets shall be laid out to minimize cutting and
filling. If the construction of the street would require filling or disruption of a wetland, such
filling or disruption shall be made in compliance with the Wetlands Protection Act, M.G.L.
Ch. 131, S. 40 and the Stow Wetlands Bylaw. Filling or disruption of a wetland shall be
avoided wherever possible by utilizing alternative upland access over the parcel to be
subdivided or over an adjacent parcel which is also owned by the owner of the land to be
subdivided either in person or through a separate realty trust or similar form of ownership.
Where no such alternative upland access is available, the filling and disruption shall be
minimized.
7.3.2.1 The Board may grant appropriate waivers from these Rules in order to minimize the
filling and disruption of wetlands provided that such waivers are in the public interest,
address the requirements of the Stow Conservation Commission, and are not
inconsistent with the purpose and intent of the Subdivision Control Law.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 31
7.4 Lots
7.4.1 Conformance with Zoning Bylaws - All lots within a proposed subdivision shall comply
with the requirements of the Stow Zoning Bylaw.
7.4.2 Lot Arrangement - All lots within a proposed subdivision shall be arranged so that there
will be no foreseeable difficulties for reasons of topography, soils, bedrock, improper
drainage or other conditions in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance
with the Town of Stow Zoning Bylaw, or in providing practical, feasible driveway access to
the building on such lots.
7.4.3 Soil Preservation and Final Grading - The Board may condition approval of a Definitive
Plan by requiring that no Certificate of Occupancy be issued for a building in the
subdivision until final grading of the lot has been completed in accordance with the
Definitive Plan.
7.4.4 Lot Drainage - Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all
proposed buildings. Individual lot drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration
of stormwater drainage from each lot to adjacent lots or to the street. If provision is
necessary to carry drainage to or across a lot, an easement or drainage right-of-way of
adequate width and proper side slope shall be provided.
7.4.5 Debris and Waste - No debris, junk, rubbish or other non-biodegradable waste materials
shall be buried on any land in the subdivision or left on any lot or on the street right-of-way,
and removal of same shall be required prior to final release of any covenants of security.
Burial of biodegradable materials on the site shall be subject to approval of the Board of
Health. The burial locations and description of buried materials shall be noted on the asbuilt
plan.
7.4.5.1 The Board may require that the plan showing the description and location of buried
materials be recorded in the Registry of Deeds, or filed with the Land Court as applicable
in accordance with DEP Stump Permit guidelines, prior to release of affected lots for sale
and building.
7.5 Streets - Location and Alignment
7.5.1 Design and Layout - All streets, roads and ways in the subdivision shall be designed so
that, in the opinion of the Board, they will provide for safe and adequate vehicular and
pedestrian travel within the proposed subdivision and in coordination with adjacent streets
and ways. To that end, the Board may require certain traffic studies to be performed to
support the developer's proposed layout.
7.5.1.1 The Board may waive any design requirement or impose additional design requirements
if the Board finds, based upon the conditions of the site, that such waivers or additional
requirements are necessary or desirable to provide for safe and convenient vehicular
and pedestrian travel.
7.5.1.2 The design and layout shall comply with these Rules and conform to any circulation plan
contained in the Stow Master Plan.
7.5.1.3 The Board shall consider the configuration of the street layout and the arrangement of
lots abutting thereon in order to achieve the appropriate usage of the land with regard to
situation of dwellings, privacy, light and space, and access to the street.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 32
7.5.2 Frontage - Roads or roadways in a subdivision shall be connected to existing streets in
Stow as required by M.G.L. Chapter 41, Section 81L.
7.5.3 Improving Existing Streets
7.5.3.1 In order to ensure vehicular and pedestrian safety, the Board will consider the adequacy
of public ways adjacent to or providing access to a proposed subdivision. It is the Board's
intent that a proposed subdivision not overly strain the capacity of existing or planned
public ways so as to result in traffic congestion and safety problems
7.5.3.2 Where deemed necessary by the Board, a traffic study shall be performed, at the
applicants expense by a registered professional civil engineer experienced and
competent in the field of traffic engineering.
7.5.3.3 When, in the opinion of the Board, a subdivision is deemed to have a detrimental effect
on existing or proposed streets and intersections or where a subdivision borders on an
existing but inadequately constructed public street or way, the Board may require
appropriate and reasonable improvements in streets and ways bordering or providing
access to the subdivision to minimize congestion and to ensure safe and adequate
vehicular and pedestrian travel in a coordinated system of streets and ways in Stow.
7.5.4 Projection of Streets - Provisions shall be made for proper projection of streets and ways
to ensure adequate future access to adjoining property. If suitable easements or other
connections to a street exist on adjacent streets, streets and ways shall be constructed to
connect the subdivision street with the existing street.
7.5.5 Intentionally left blank
7.5.6 Pedestrian Travel - The Board may require the installation of pedestrian ways, bridle
paths or bicycle paths having a right-of-way of not less than fifteen feet (15') in width where
deemed necessary to provide adequate circulation or access to schools, playgrounds,
parks, conservation land, shops, transportation, open spaces, other community facilities,
and to and between existing, proposed and future subdivisions and neighborhoods.
7.5.7 Reserve Strips - Reserve strips prohibiting access to existing or proposed streets or
adjoining property shall not be permitted.
7.5.8 Curvelinear Streets - All proposed streets shall be curvelinear and generally reflect the
contour of the land. Streets shall follow contour lines wherever possible, cuts and fills shall
be minimized, the unstable areas shall be avoided, and street alignments shall maximize
views. The road rights-of-way shall be located on land with natural slopes of less than 20%
grade or less.
7.5.9 Street Names - Street names shall be sufficiently different in sound and in spelling from
other street names in the Town so as not to cause confusion in the event of an emergency.
A street which is planned as a continuation of an existing street shall bear the same name.
Street names should be of historical significance to the Town and/or the site. The Board
shall have final authority over the names of streets in a subdivision.
7.5.10 Sight Distances - Proposed streets and driveways shall be located so as to provide
adequate sight with respect to both horizontal and vertical alignment, as well as at
intersections. Site distances shall meet requirements of AASHTO Geometric Design of
Highways and Streets to determine adequate site distance including stopping sight
distance, and intersection sight distance, at a minimum.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 33
7.5.11 Clear Sight Triangles - There shall be provided and maintained at all intersections clear
sight triangles of seventy-five feet (75'), measured along the centerline from the point of
intersection. No obstructions or plantings higher than thirty (30) inches or tree limbs lower
than eight feet (8') shall be permitted within this area.
7.5.12 Termination Setback from Town Boundaries - Streets shall not be located in such a
manner as to terminate within one hundred feet (100') of any boundary of the Town of Stow
or to project or extend across such boundary unless specifically approved by the Board as
being in the public interest, having regard to safety of travel, congestion of adjacent public
ways, and coordination with other ways. Roads or roadways in a subdivision shall not
provide the only access to lots in an adjoining town unless there is also adequate access
over streets in the adjoining town.
7.5.13 Safety Enhancement - In order to enhance safety and to improve the street environment,
the Board may require devices and design features such as landscaped chokers,
(encroachments on the standard pavement width) at intersections and at mid-block location
or additional curves or other features that have a proven effectiveness in reducing vehicular
speed.
7.5.14 All construction within a road right-of-way shall be located so as to limit the cutting and
filling of soil or subsoil to depths of less than 8 feet. The cut or fill depths shall be measured
from the pre-construction natural grade to the proposed grades within the right-of-way.
7.6 Streets - Classifications
The Board will determine the classification to be applied to all streets shown on a
subdivision plan. Classifications will be assigned on the following basis, except for those
streets classified as Special Purpose Streets and described in Section 7.7 of these Rules.
Access Street
Sub-collector Street
Collector Street
Industrial Street
Arterial Street
7.6.1 Access Street - Lowest order of residential streets. Provides frontage for access to lots,
and carries traffic having destination or origin on the street itself, and are designed to carry
the least amount of traffic at the lowest speed. Residential subdivisions should be
designed so that all, or the maximum number possible, of the homes will front on this class
of street.
7.6.1.1 Access streets should be designed so that no section conveys an Average Daily Traffic
(ADT) greater than 250 vehicles. Each half of a loop street may be classified as a single
residential access street, but the total traffic volume generated on the loop street should
not exceed 500 ADT, nor should it exceed 250 ADT at any point of traffic concentration.
7.6.2 Sub-collector Street - Middle order of residential streets. Provides frontage for access to
lots and carries traffic of adjoining access streets. They are designed to carry somewhat
higher traffic volumes with traffic limited to motorists having origin or destination within the
immediate neighborhoods. It is not intended to interconnect adjoining neighborhoods or
subdivisions and should not carry regional through traffic.
7.6.2.1 Sub-collector Streets should be designed so that no section conveys an ADT greater
than 500. Each half of a loop sub-collector may be classified as a single sub-collector
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 34
street, but the total traffic volume conveyed on the loop street should not exceed 1,000
ADT, nor should it exceed 500 ADT at any point of traffic concentration.
7.6.3 Collector Street - Highest order of residential streets. Conducts and distributes traffic
between lower-order residential streets and high volume streets. This carries the largest
volume of residential traffic at higher speeds. Function is to promote free traffic flow with
minimum interruption or curb cuts; therefore, parking and direct access to homes from this
level of street should be prohibited. Collectors should be designed so that they cannot be
used as shortcuts by non-neighborhood traffic. No section of a collector street should
convey an ADT greater than 3,000 ADT.
7.6.4 Industrial Street - Designed to serve subdivisions to be developed as industrial,
commercial, business, or office parks. Industrial streets carry large volumes of traffic at
moderate speeds. Function is to promote free traffic flow from residential streets and
arterial streets to lots within subdivision. Industrial streets should be designed so that they
cannot be used as shortcuts by residential traffic. No section of an industrial street should
convey an ADT greater than 3,000.
7.6.5 Arterial Street - A higher order, interregional road in the street hierarchy. Conveys traffic
between centers and should be excluded from residential areas. Arterial streets should be
designed so that they can safely carry a traffic volume in excess of 3,000 ADT.
7.7 Special Purpose Streets
7.7.1 Rural Lane - A street serving a very low-density area. Rural lanes shall serve no more
than five (5) lots.
Rural lanes as described herein may not be used to provide frontage or access, either for a
further subdivision of land or use on approval not required plans, if such use would result in
the road serving more than five (5) lots.
7.7.2 Marginal Access Street - A service street that runs parallel to a higher-order street and
provides access to abutting properties and separation from through traffic may be designed
as an access street or sub-collector according to anticipated daily traffic.
7.7.3 Single Access Street- A street with a single means of ingress and egress and having a
turnaround. Single access streets shall be designed according to anticipated ADT level.
7.7.3.1 For the purpose of this section, any proposed street which intersects solely with a deadend
street shall be deemed to be an extension of the dead-end street.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 35
7.8 Street Design Standards
The following standards shall be used in the design of proposed streets:
STREET CLASSIFICATION
Access
Subcollector
Industrial &
Collector
Arterial
Rural Lane
Marginal
Access
Single
Access
Minimum R.O.W. 50 50 60 70 40 50 40
Minimum Pavement Width 22 24 28 30 Two (2) nine
foot (9) lanes
Two (2)
eleven foot
(11) lanes
Two (2) ten
foot (10) lanes
Maximum Grade 10% 8% 8% 6% 10% 8% 10% (5)
Minimum Grade 1% 1% 1% 1% 1% 1% 1%
Minimum Centerline Radius 200 250 350 450 175 250 150
Minimum Tangent Length
Between Reverse Curves
50 100 150 200 --- 100 50
Curb Radii 25 30 35 35 25 30 25
Transition Areas - Maximum
Grade within 100 of
Intersection
5% 3% 3% 3% 5% 3% 5%
Minimum Road Crown 3/8 /ft 3/8 /ft 3/8 /ft 3/8 /ft 3/8 /ft 3/8 /ft 3/8 /ft
Maximum Average Daily
Traffic (ADT)
250 (2) 500 (3) 3,000 3,000+ 50 250 70 (4)
(1) All streets with sidewalks shall be designed with a grass strip of at least four (4) feet between the sidewalk and the street
(2) Minimum per loop, 500 ADT overall maximum
(3) Minimum per loop, 1000 ADT overall maximum
(4) If Board allows extended length, maximum is 250 ADT
(5) Maximum grade through cul-de-sac turnaround shall be 5%
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 36
7.8.1 Additional Design Standards for Rural Lanes
7.8.1.1 The approval of a rural lane shall be contingent upon the voluntary execution by the
applicant and binding upon his heirs, successors and assigns, of a covenant running to
the Town that such rural lane shall not be presented to Town Meeting for acceptance nor
be petitioned for the Town to provide for maintenance, including snowplowing. Said
covenant shall be recorded by the Applicant in the Middlesex County Registry of Deeds,
or filed with Land Court, as appropriate, and shall be cross referenced to each plan to
which it pertains.
7.8.1.2 The Board may approve the use of alternative turnarounds such as the "Y-shaped" or "Tturn"
turnaround designs, within rural lane subdivisions.
7.8.1.3 Rural lanes shall have a paved width of eighteen feet (18'). Each side of the paved
roadway shall have a three (3) foot wide packed gravel shoulder. The pavement and
foundation of the roadway shall conform to the standards set forth in these Rules for
residential streets.
7.8.1.4 The creation of permanent dead-end streets as rural lanes without turnarounds shall not
be allowed.
7.8.2 Additional Standards for Single Access Streets
7.8.2.1 The creation of permanent dead-end streets as single access streets without turnarounds
shall not be allowed.
7.8.2.2 Single access streets shall not exceed five hundred feet (500') in length (as measured
from the point of intersection with the existing street to the furthest point away from the
intersection measured along the centerline of the roadway. The Board may allow a street
terminated with a cul-de-sac or loop to be extended to one thousand, five hundred feet
(1,500') in length when the following additional terms and conditions are met. No waiver
will be granted unless the following conditions are met, in which case the single access
street may be extended to one thousand, five hundred feet (1,500) in length.
a) Cul-de-sac turnarounds shall be designed with a minimum property line diameter of
one hundred fifty feet (150') and a minimum inside pavement radius of forty feet (40').
b) A turnout is provided along the roadway at a location between the 500 foot and 1,200
foot length marker. The turnout shall be a minimum of 9 wide x 20 long with
transition to existing pavement to allow passing vehicles.
c) The applicant shall provide a method of fire protection satisfactory to the Board for all
dwelling units proposed within the subdivision.
d) The applicant provides a minimum of ten percent of the land suitable for
development (excluding wetlands) contained within the Subdivision to be dedicated
for publicly accessible open space, parks or future public facilities and infrastructure.
A covenant limiting said land shall be provided in a form suitable for recording at the
Registry of Deeds or Land Court as appropriate.
e) If the subdivision is a Planned Conservation Development as defined in the Stow
Zoning Bylaw then 1,500 is the maximum length of a single access street for the
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 37
conceptual plan drawn for the purpose of determining the maximum number of
building lots as required in the Stow Zoning Bylaw.
f) An open space buffer is provided along that portion of any existing street upon which
the proposed subdivision had frontage as of June 1, 1995. The open space buffer
shall have a minimum depth of 300 feet. There shall be no buildings or structures
located within the open space buffer.
7.8.2.3 The Board may require alternate means of access to a through street or improvements
on the existing single access street or within the adjacent street network in order to
ensure adequate safety and access to all dwellings in the proposed subdivision.
7.8.3 Additional Design Standards for Cul-de-sacs, Loops and Turnarounds
a) The sideline diameter of a cul-de-sac circle or loop shall be selected to provide a
constant shoulder width throughout the entire road except that at the intersection the
shoulder width may vary to meet other requirements of these Rules.
b) There shall be a minimum radius of thirty feet (30) at the intersection of a street with
a cul-de-sac circle or loop.
c) A landscape plan shall meet the approval of the Board.
d) A cul-de-sac, turnaround shall feature a landscaped center island encircled by sloped
granite curb, type SA.
(Refer to Appendix B for required spacing and minimum caliper size of trees and for
suggested plant species.)
7.8.3.2 Single access streets of five hundred feet (500) or less in length, or serving fewer than
six (6) lots, may be designed with alternative turnaround designs such as Y-shaped and
T-turn turnarounds designed to accommodate SU30 vehicles.
(a) Intentionally left blank
(b) Intentionally left blank
(c) Intentionally left blank
(d) The street approaching the turnaround shall also be straight for a minimum distance
of 60 feet.
(e) There shall be no driveways or common driveways off the ends of the turn-around
legs, within 10 feet from the end of pavement, or in the intersection roundings.
(f) A "No Parking" restriction shall be posted in the turnaround.
7.8.3.3 Intentionally left blank
7.8.3.4 In non-residential subdivisions, there shall be no more than 250,000 square feet of floor
area on a single access street or a series of streets having only one terminus onto a
through street. To construct more than 250,000 square feet of floor space, a secondary
means of access, adequate in the opinion of the Board, shall be provided.
7.8.3.5 Subdivision design shall provide for continuation of streets between adjacent properties.
If the adjacent property is undeveloped and a street must be dead-ended temporarily, the
right-of-way shall extend to the property line. A cul-de-sac, circle, loop or turnaround
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 38
shall be provided in accordance with these Rules, and a stub street shall be constructed
from the end of the cul-de-sac, circle, loop or turnaround for a distance of fifty feet (50')
or to the end of the right-of-way, whichever is shorter. Roadway easements in the
segments of a turnaround lying outside of the right-of-way shall be temporary and shall
terminate pursuant to G.L. Chapter 41, Section 81M when the street is extended beyond
the stub street.
a) The applicant who extends a temporary cul-de-sac, circle, loop or turnaround at a later
date shall remove the pavement, relocate any sidewalks, extend any driveway entrance
and properly grade, loam and seed the areas included within the temporary easements.
All such work shall be deemed to be part of the required improvements of the connecting
subdivision.
7.8.4 Street Intersections
7.8.4.1 Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles.
7.8.4.2 No street shall intersect any other street at less than 60 degrees.
7.8.4.3 Curves of street sidelines at street intersections must have a radius of not less than 25
feet, except where the angle of intersection varies more than 10 degrees from a right
angle, in which case the radius of the curve connecting the acute angle may be less and
the opposite radius must be correspondingly greater.
7.8.4.4 New street intersections with collector or arterial streets shall be kept at a minimum.
7.8.4.5 Street lines at intersections shall be cut back to provide for sideline radii of not less than
25 feet.
7.8.4.6 Wherever possible, adjacent street intersections along an existing and/or proposed
arterial or collector street shall have a minimum centerline offset of 500.
7.8.4.7 Adjacent access street intersections within a network of existing and/or proposed access
streets shall have a minimum centerline offset of 125 (see sketch).
7.8.4.8 An intersection of access streets adjacent to an intersection with an arterial or collector
street shall have a minimum centerline offset of 300 from the arterial or collector-street.
(see sketch).
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 39
A
R
T
E
R
I
A
L
S
T
R
E
E
T
min. 300 min. 125 min. 125
ACCESS
STREETS
ACCESS STREE T
S
T
R
E
E
T
(Not to Scale)
ARTERIAL or COLLECTOR STREET
S
T
R
E
E
T
S
T
R
E
E
T
min. 500
A
C
C
E
S
S
7.8.4.9 Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street and/or
collector street, the board may limit or restrict driveway cuts or curb cuts onto the arterial
and collector streets and may require service streets or driveway easements within the
proposed subdivision to ensure adequate access and the separation of local traffic for lot
access from through traffic. The board may also require a non-access reservation along
the arterial and collector streets.
7.8.4.10 Is Intentionally left blank
7.8.4.11 Cross intersections, x-intersections or four leg intersections are not permitted except
when, in the opinion of the Board, such intersection is necessary to provide adequate
circulation of traffic.
7.9 Stormwater Management
The Planning Board will presume that projects meeting the 2008 Massachusetts
Stormwater Handbook, or as subsequently amended, satisfy the requirements of Section
3.1.8.9 of the Stow Zoning Bylaw and related Subdivision Rules and Regulations, Site Plan
Approval Rules and Regulations and Special Permit Rules and Regulations, and therefore
are presumed to also satisfy other regulatory requirements, as stated in said handbook.
7.9.1 Stormwater Management
The objective of stormwater management for Stow is to design a system in such a way so
that the volume and peak runoff from the development of a parcel will be no greater after
the development is completed than it was before the development was started, and that the
water quality will meet required Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) standards.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 40
7.9.2 Stormwater Management Requirements
The design of a Stormwater Management System shall comply with the requirements of
the 2008 Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook, subsequently known as the Handbook.
Throughout the Handbook, where the Conservation Commission is identified, substitute
Planning Board and Conservation Commission. This does not relieve the applicant from
complying independently with the Conservation Commissions requirements.
The Planning Board, through its review process, may set more stringent requirements than
are specified in the Handbook. The Planning Board may require subdivisions of any size,
as well as Special Permit applications and site plans, to be compliant with the Handbook.
The Planning Board adopts the requirements of the stormwater management standards
listed in the Handbook.
7.9.3 Best Management Practice (BMP) Prioritization
Although the Planning Board is aware that the Best Management Practice (BMP)
techniques employed depends largely on the sites hydrological features, it has placed a
high priority on environmentally sensitive site design techniques for stormwater
management, including:
? Minimizing impervious surfaces
? Fitting the development to the terrain
? Preserving and using natural drainage systems
? Reproducing pre-development hydrologic conditions
7.9.4 Stormwater Management Design Process
7.9.4.1 Preliminary Stormwater Design Plan
The applicant shall present a Preliminary Design Plan for the stormwater management
system prior to submission of a Definitive Plan.
In the Preliminary Design Plan, the applicant shall be prepared to discuss and justify the
design approach for stormwater management. The Planning Board will consider the
three stormwater management components in order of priority as described in the
Handbook:
a) Site Planning: Design the development using environmentally sensitive site design
and low impact development techniques to preserve natural vegetation, minimize
impervious surfaces, slow down times of concentration, and reduce runoff;
b) Source Controls, Pollution Prevention, and Construction Period Erosion and Sediment
Control: Implement nonstructural measures to prevent pollution or control it at its
source; and
c) Structural BMPs (physical devices typically designed and constructed to trap or filter
pollutants from runoff or to reduce runoff velocities): Design, construct and maintain
structural BMPs to attenuate peak flows, capture and treat runoff, and provide
recharge to groundwater.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 41
The Planning Board will emphasize using environmentally sensitive site design and low
impact development techniques to minimize the amount of onsite disturbance and to
lessen the need for BMPs for stormwater quality treatment and volume/velocity
management.
The applicant shall provide a detailed description of the approach being applied to satisfy
the standards in the Handbook. At a minimum, the applicant shall consider and present
the design based on the Checklist for Stormwater Report, located in the Handbook, to the
Planning Board.
For the parcel being developed, the applicant shall provide a drawing of the site that
identifies each watershed in the parcel and every watershed of which the parcel is a part,
the Hydrological Soil Group (A, B, C& D) for each of the sub-areas, and the impervious
areas to be developed on the parcel. All wells, septic systems and critical areas are to be
identified on the drawing for the parcel and abutting parcels within 150 ft of the parcel
being developed
The Planning Board will review the proposed design, evaluate the design, and provide
comments on the design.
7.9.4.2 Definitive Stormwater Design Plan
The applicant shall:
a) Implement the design proposed in the preliminary design plan as modified by the
comments received from the Planning Board. The final detailed design shall be
presented to the Planning Board for final review and comment. The Planning Board
may reject a detailed design, which does not address the issues identified by the
Planning Board from the preliminary design.
b) Provide data for all Water Quality and Recharge calculations based on the
Stormwater Management System design.
c) Provide the source data for all Water Quantity Volume calculations.
a) Provide the source data for all Stormwater Recharge calculations.
b) Provide the source data for all Peak Discharge Rate Calculations
c) Provide data for the TSS removal calculations.
In addition, the Planning Board may require that the data necessary to use Rational
Equation Method be provided.
7.9.5 Stormwater Management System Appropriate for a Parcel
The submission to the Board of any development of land has to recognize that stormwater
management requirements may be the constraining factor in the amount of the proposed
impervious surface and thus the number of units that can be built on a parcel in Stow.
7.9.6 Other Stormwater Design Criteria to be Considered:
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 42
a) Test holes are required in each stormwater detention or retention area and must be to a
depth at least two feet below the bottom of the drainage facility and shall be performed
by a Soil Evaluator. Test data shall be included in the drainage report.
b) The drainage report shall be stamped by a Professional Engineer and shall include a
plan showing drainage subcatchments and travel time paths.
c) In areas of overland flow, the drainage analysis shall consider the property line the
point of analysis to mitigate impacts on abutting properties.
d) Soil beneath drainage facilities shall be naturally occurring unless in fill and shall not be
mined for use elsewhere on the site.
e) If a site requires extensive fill, including individual lots, the drainage calculations shall
consider the soils for these areas to be a hydrologic soil group C.
f) The definitive subdivision plans shall identify the approximate area of impervious
surface per lot. Additional recharge shall be required to mitigate the additional runoff
from the impervious surfaces.
7.10 Open Space
Before approval of a Definitive Plan, the Board, may in proper cases, require the plan to
show a park or parks suitably located for playground or recreation purposes and for
providing light and air.
The park or parks shall not be unreasonable in area in relation to the land being subdivided
and to the prospective uses of such land. In general such areas should include at least two
thousand (2000) square feet per lot of dry, level accessible land for active recreation.
Pedestrian ways, bicycle paths or bridle paths of not less than fifteen feet (15') in width may
be required where deemed desirable to provide access to required open space.
The Board shall, by appropriate endorsement on the plan, require that no building be
erected upon such park or parks without its approval for a period of three (3) years.
The perimeter of the designated Open Space Parcels shall have iron pins/pipes set at all
lot corners or change in direction where the Open Space abuts lots in the subdivision.
7.11 Utility Easements
Where necessary, the Board shall require perpetual, unobstructed easements for power
lines, natural gas lines, cable TV, communication lines, water mains, sewers and other
such utilities. Such easement shall be a minimum width of twenty feet (20') and shall be
indicated on the Definitive Plan.
7.11.1 Future Road Construction - If on the subdivision plan, an area is left for the future
possible construction of a road to back or adjacent land, a ten foot (10') wide slope
easement shall be shown on all lots abutting such road area to enable proper slope
construction if an when the road is constructed. The slope easements shall go with the
easement for future roadway and utility construction of the road area.
7.12 Erosion and Sediment Control
7.12.1 During development and construction, adequate protective measures shall be provided to
minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface
of fills.
7.12.2 Land shall be developed in increments of workable size which can be completed during a
single construction season. Erosion and sediment control measures shall be coordinated
with the sequence of grading, development, and construction operations. Control
measures such as hydro seeding, berms, interceptor ditches, terraces, and sediment traps
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 43
shall be put into effect prior to the commencement of each increment of the
development/construction process.
7.12.3 Sediment basins (debris basins, de-silting basins, or silt traps) shall be installed in
conjunction with the initial grading operations and maintained through the development
process to remove sediment from runoff waters draining from land undergoing
development.
7.12.4 Erosion clean up - A note on the Erosion and Sedimentation Plan shall state that the
developer is required to clean up any sand, dirt, or debris which erodes from the
subdivision onto any public street or private property, and to remove silt or debris that
enters any existing drainage system including catch basin sumps, pipe lines, manholes and
ditches.
7.12.5 Velocity Check Dams - Hay bales will be used around the catch basins on the proposed
streets to protect them from the eroding soils and provide a check dam* to slow the runoff
during the construction. The developer shall provide velocity check dams* in all unpaved
street areas at the intervals indicated below:
Grade of the Street Intervals between Check Dams
Less than 4% 100 feet
4% to 10% 50 feet
over 10% 25 feet
The developer shall provide velocity check dams* in all un-vegetated or unpaved channels
at the intervals indicated below:
Grade of the Channel Intervals between Check Dams
Less than 3% 100 feet
3% to 6% 50 feet
over 6% 25 feet
* Check dams in unpaved streets and un-vegetated or unpaved graded channels may be
constructed of staked hay bales or other erosion resistant materials approved by the
Board. The check dams shall be installed at the end of each working day, and in the event
of rainfall being predicted. The hay bales should be securely staked to prevent
overturning, floatation, or displacement. They shall extend completely across the street or
channel at right angles to the centerline. Also, a velocity check dam shall be provided
along the entrance of the lot to protect the public streets and adjacent properties from the
hazards of erosion. All check dams shall be cleaned out of all debris and silt periodically.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 44
SECTION 8
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
8.1 General
This section contains certain specific construction standards, specifications, and
procedures for the installation of required subdivision improvements.
8.2 Street and Right-of-Way
All street materials and construction methods shall comply with the current edition of
"Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Highway Department, Standard Specifications for
Highways and Bridges" (MHD) and the applicable standard cross section contained in
Section 7.8 of these Rules.
8.2.1 Clearing and Grubbing of Right-of-Way - All trees not intended for preservation, brush,
stumps, roots, boulders, and like materials shall be removed from the full length and width
of the street right-of-way.
8.2.2 Loam and other Yielding Material - All loam or other yielding material shall be removed
from the entire length and width of the street right-of-way and replaced with suitable
material. Provisions shall be made for dust control.
8.2.3 Intentionally left blank
8.2.4 Pavement
8.2.4.1 Finish Grade - All streets shall be brought to Finish Grade as shown on the profiles of the
Definitive Plan, meeting the minimum requirements specified in the Table below and shall
be located as shown on the detail in Section 7.8 of these Rules.
ADT > 250 Daily Trips
Subgrade Two (2) four inch (4) layers of well drained
gravel meeting MHD 1.03.0 beneath four
inches (4) of Dense Graded Base meeting
MHD M.2.01.7 compacted thickness.
Binder Two inch (2) compacted thickness Class I,
Type 1 Bituminous Concrete Pavement
Finish 1  inch (1 ) compacted thickness Class
I, Type 1 Bituminous Concrete Pavement
8.2.4.2 The subgrade shall be one foot (1) wider on each side than the requried pavement and
green strip.
8.2.4.3 The binder course shall be exposed to one winter season (November 15 to March 15)
prior to the application of the Finish course.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 45
8.2.4.4 Prior to installaton of the Finish course, the binder shall be swept clean, dried if
necessary, and treated with an asphalt emulsion or tack coat to ensure a satisfactory
bond between pavement courses.
8.2.4.5 In order to minimize damage to the Finish course, the Finish course shall not be applied
until all construction on LOTs served by the SUBDIVISION STREETs are, in the opinion
of the BOARD, completed or substantially completed. Failure to comply with this
requiremente may result in further conditions being placed on roadway bonding and street
acceptance.
8.2.4.6 Following the installation of the Finish course, no excavation shall be permitted in the road
surface fro a period of five, (5), years except in emergency cases. Any such excavating
shall be repaired with infrared patching equipment or other method approved by the
BOARD.
8.2.4.7 No paving shall take place from November 15 to March 15 of any year without prior
Planning Board approval.
8.2.4.8 All catchbasin grates shall be functional with the binder pavement. Manhole covers shall
be set flush with the binder pavement.
8.2.5 Any fill material used shall be free of hazardous materials and free of construction debris.
The BOARD may approve the use of recycled crushed pavement, concrete or recycled
granite for use in the subsurface during STREET construction. Any rock imported for use
as fill shall not be from any blasting operations using perchlorate and documentation
regarding such shall be submitted to the Planning Board.
8.3 Utilities
All utilities including services to the street line or property line shall be installed, upon
completion of the subgrade and prior to the placement of gravel. All utility lines shall be
installed underground. Design and location of utilities must be approved by each pertinent
utility company.
Magnetic marking tape, labeled for the particular utility, shall be required during backfill for
all utilities.
8.3.1 Intentionally left blank
8.3.2 Intentionally left blank
8.3.3 DIGSAFE - M.G.L. Chapter 82, Section 40, as amended, requires that contractors notify
public utility companies, in writing, at least 72 hours before digging or excavating on public
or private property. One phone call to the Massachusetts Public Utilities Underground Plan
Damage Prevention System, called "DIGSAFE", will satisfy the law, the telephone number
is 1-800-322-4844. This is to permit the companies to cooperate in protecting underground
cables and mains from accidental damage.
8.4 Monuments
Monuments shall be installed at all street intersections, at all points of change in direction
or curvature of streets. Such monuments shall be of granite six, (6), inches square by four
feet, (4'), long with a metal rod set beside the bound and shall be set flush with the finished
grade. No permanent monuments shall be installed until all construction, which would
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 46
disturb or destroy the monuments is completed. If the location for a bound falls within a
paved driveway, a railroad spike shall be set flush to the pavement.
8.4.1 Placement and location of all monuments shall be certified by a registered land surveyor
after installation of the street, and shall be shown on the as-built plan.
8.4.2 The perimeter of the designated Open Space Parcels shall have iron pins/pipes set at all
lot corners or change in direction where the Open Space abuts lots in the subdivision.
8.4.3 Iron pins/pipes shall be set at front corners of lots in the subdivision.
8.5 Driveways
When a driveway meets the street, there shall be a paved area of at least twelve feet (12')
extending from the edge of the public way of not less than two inches (2") of bituminous
concrete to prevent unstable driveway material from washing out onto the street. A lip of
not less than two inches (2") shall be constructed at the edge of the driveway to facilitate
drainage along the driveway.
8.6 Curbs
If curbs are proposed for new streets, low-profile modified Cape Cod berm shall be
provided. The Board may require alternate curb materials depending on local conditions
and the purpose of the curb.
8.6.1 Sloped granite curbs, type SA as defined in section M9.04.2 of the Mass. D.P.W. Standard
Specifications for Highways and Bridges shall be required as follows: At the point of
intersection with the existing road and at intersections along the roadway for the distance of
the arcs of the curve plus a straight section at each end of at least eight feet (8') in length,
and surrounding street islands or chokers within streets including landscaped islands in culde-
sacs.
8.6.2 At the intersection with an existing roadway, the curbing shall be set back 2 from the
existing edge of pavement to prevent plow damage.
8.7 Sidewalks, Pedestrian Ways and Bicycle Paths
To provide for safe pedestrian travel, sidewalks shall be required in all subdivisions in
accordance with the following schedule:
Access Street &
Sub-Collector
Street:
Sidewalk required on one side of traveled street.
Single Access
Streets:
Sidewalk required on one side of the street and
around the entire length of the turnaround.
Collector Street,
Industrial Street,
Arterial Street:
Sidewalks required on both sides of traveled street.
8.7.1 Sidewalk Along Frontage - A sidewalk shall be required along that portion of any existing
public street upon which the subdivision has frontage.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 47
8.7.2 Sidewalk Construction Specifications - The sidewalks shall be five feet (5') in width and
constructed so as to comply with the relevant requirements of the Massachusetts
Architectural Access Board and in accordance with Sections 701.20, 701.40, 701.60, and
701.62 of the Mass DPW "Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges" unless the
Board authorizes a meandering design which follows the existing terrain and major features
such as stone walls, large trees, rock outcroppings, etc. in response to local topography.
8.7.2.1 Sidewalks, walkways and bicycle paths shall consist of six inches (6") of bank run gravel
(or equivalent) covered with three inches, (3"), of processed grading gravel. The gravel
base shall be covered with a wearing surface of two and one half inches (2 1/2") of
Class I, Type I, bituminous concrete applied in two courses. Sidewalks shall have a
maximum cross slope of 2% and shall comply with the applicable standards of the
Massachusetts Architectural Access Board.
8.7.3 Green Strip - A green strip shall be provided between the edge of the pavement and the
sidewalk. The Green Strip shall be a minimum of four feet, (4'), in width and shall consist
of six inches (6") of bank run gravel (or equivalent) covered with three inches, (3"), of
processed grading gravel. The gravel base shall be covered with six inches, (6"),
compacted depth of good quality loam and shall be seeded with turf grass seed or sodded
and planted with street trees where appropriate in the opinion of the Board.
8.7.4 Walkways and Bicycle Paths - Walkways and bicycle paths shall be required where
appropriate to improve circulation.
8.7.4.1 Bicycle Paths shall be constructed to standards of The Massachusetts Highway
Department.
8.7.4.2 In the location of crosswalks or bicycle path crossings the Board may require a reduction
in the standard pavement width in order to shorten the crossing distance, and a raised
pavement to reduce vehicular speed.
8.7.5. Handicapped Access - Handicapped ramps shall be installed at all cross walks in
accordance with the Mass. Architectural Access Board.
8.7.6. Exceptions - Where new sidewalks are to be constructed in short sections to connect
existing sidewalks, the new sections shall be constructed to the same specifications as the
existing sidewalks but shall be in accordance with the Massachusetts Architectural Access
Board.
8.8 Street Signs
Street signs shall be erected at all intersections. These signs shall meet the specifications
of the Stow Highway Department and conform to the Manual of Uniform Traffic Devices.
They shall be erected from the time of rough grading and conform to the Manual of Uniform
Traffic Devices.
8.8.1 Until such time as the street is accepted as a public way, the sign posts at the intersection
of such street shall have affixed thereto a sign designating such street as a private way.
8.9 Street Trees and other Vegetation
Deciduous shade street trees shall be planted approximately 10 feet from the street
sideline where trees are lacking. Where there is a sidewalk provided in the street layout,
the street trees shall be planted in the green strip that is provided between the edge of
pavement and the sidewalk. Trees shall be planted on both sides of the street at not more
than 40 foot intervals along the entire length of the subdivision roads.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 48
8.9.1 Species - The species of street trees shall be selected from deciduous shade trees of
Zone 4 hardiness and shall be of licensed nursery stock with good root development and
branching characteristics. Existing trees may be preserved as street trees if inspected and
approved by the Stow Tree Warden.
8.9.2 Size - Street trees shall be a minimum of two and one-half inches (2 1/2") in caliper
measured four feet (4') above the ground, and shall be ten (10) to twelve feet (12') of
height in place.
8.9.3 Planting - Street trees shall be planted at their previous depth in good quality topsoil and
shall be securely staked.
8.9.4 Slopes - All cut and fill slopes within or contiguous to the street right-of-way shall be
planted with suitable, well-rooted, low growing plant materials as determined by the Board.
Wood chips, mulch, seeding or sodding shall be used to eliminate erosion. The Board may
require alternative measures, appropriate in the opinion of the Board, for slopes equal to or
greater than 3:1.
8.9.5 Cleared Areas - All cleared areas of the street right-of-way, not to be planted with
groundcover, and all disturbed area within public easements, shall be loamed with not less
than six inches (6") compacted depth of good quality loam and seeded with turf grass seed
in accordance with good planting practice.
8.10 Street Lighting
Street lights shall be installed as required below and shall conform to the Town of Stow
Zoning bylaw.
8.10.1. Location - Street lights shall be located in the green strip at the intersection of the
subdivision road and the existing public street, at each intersection within the subdivision,
and at such intervals and other locations as deemed necessary by the Board.
8.10.2 Installation and Operation - The applicant, his heirs, successors or assigns shall be
responsible for the installation, operation and maintenance of such street lighting until the
street is accepted by the Town as a public way.
8.10.2.1 The applicant shall provide a covenant, running with each lot, in suitable form for
recording with the Registry of Deeds or Land Court, as appropriate, which requires that
the operating costs and maintenance of street lighting within the subdivision shall
become the responsibility of a homeowners association, or other similar entity, upon the
Town's acceptance of the subdivision road(s) as a public way.
8.11 Sanitary Sewer
Whenever septic tanks, or other similar systems, are allowed by the Stow Board of Health,
they shall be designed and constructed in conformance with its requirements and
standards.
8.12 Water Systems
Whenever a well or other private water system is allowed by the Board of Health of Stow, it
shall meet the required standards of the Board of Health and any other pertinent standards.
8.13 Fire Protection
Fire protection methods shall meet the required standards of the Stow Fire Department, as
may be modified by the Planning Board, and shall meet all State fire regulations.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 49
SECTION 9
OPTIONAL RESIDENTIAL CLOSE PLAN
9.1 Purpose
The purpose of this rule is to permit small-scale residential subdivisions (hereinafter called
a Residential Close) in a manner, which minimizes Town maintenance responsibility and
cost, while simultaneously preserving the rural character of the Town.
9.1.1 The Board may waive compliance with some of the design and improvement
requirements of Sections 7 and 8, where such action is in the public interest and not inconsistent
with the intent and purposes of the Subdivision Control Law and where the
following conditions are met:
9.1.1.1 A residential close shall contain not more than five (5) lots which may only be used for
single family dwellings and associated accessory uses and structures as permitted
under the Stow Zoning Bylaw.
9.1.1.2 All dimensional requirements applicable to the zoning district in which the land is
located shall be complied with.
9.1.1.3 Each building lot shall have the frontage required by the zoning bylaw on a public
street, or on a private street within the Residential Close which provides all present and
future owners of lots within the Residential Close adequate and legally enforceable
rights of access to a public street.
9.1.1.4 Any land within the Residential Close not designated as a building lot or private-street
shall be dedicated as permanent open space. Such land may only be used for
conservation, outdoor recreational facilities of a noncommercial nature, agriculture,
preservation of scenic or historic sites or structures, and structures accessory to any of
the above uses.
9.1.1.5 Assurances through deed restrictions or otherwise shall be given that the Town will not
be requested to accept or maintain the private streets, drainage systems, open space,
or any other improvements within the Residential Close for which design or
improvement requirements contained in Section 7 and 8 of these Rules have been
waived, and that the land within the Residential Close shall only be used for the
purposes set forth in the developer's proposed Definitive Plan.
9.1.1.6 The approved Definitive Subdivision Plan of a Residential Close shall contain conditions
that:
a) there shall be no further division of the tract or lots contained therein;
b) development of the land is permitted only in accordance with the land uses
indicated thereon;
c) the covenants of the developer regarding ownership, maintenance and utilization of
common property, including, but not limited to, streets, drainage systems and open
space, continue to be complied with.
9.1.1.7 The covenants or other written assurances regarding ownership, maintenance and
utilization of common property, as required by the Board, shall be recorded prior to or
simultaneously with the recording of the approved Definitive Plan.
9.1.2 As a general rule, the design and construction standards set forth in the Stow Zoning Bylaw
for Common Drives, as amended, shall be applied to a Residential Close.
Form ANR
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 50
SECTION 10
ADMINISTRATION
10.1 Waivers of Rules and Regulations
The provisions of these Rules are considered minimum standards for the protection of the
public welfare and safety. Strict compliance with the requirements of these Rules and
Regulations may be waived when and only when, in the judgment of the Board, such action
is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the Subdivision Control Law.
Determination of what is in the public interest for the purposes of a requested waiver from
these Rules and Regulations shall include a finding by the Planning Board that the Towns
or regions natural or built environment or public heath or safety would be better protected
by the grant of the waiver sought. These findings may include, but are not limited to: a
finding that water quality will be improved; that the development density will be more
harmonious with surrounding neighborhoods; that the development will generate less
storm-water runoff, that the development will improve and not detract from, views, vistas
and open space protection and that pedestrian and/or vehicular safety would be improved.
Determination of what is not inconsistent with the Subdivision Control Law shall include a
finding by the Planning Board that the waiver sought is not inconsistent with the Towns
planning policies and documents, including the Open Space Plan, Zoning Bylaw and other
related documents. Any and all waivers sought by the applicant shall be requested in
writing and shall contain a statement and supportive analysis as to how the waiver is in the
public interest and not inconsistent with the Subdivision Control Law.
10.2 Earth Removal
Where earth removal is associated with the construction of subdivision streets and
drainage, the developer shall provide the following information.
10.2.1 Amount of earth to be removed.
10.2.2 Proposed disposition of such earth.
10.2.3 Method of removal, including the means proposed to prevent erosion and sedimentation,
control dust, and to protect adjacent areas.
10.3 Building Permit
The Building Inspector shall not issue any permit for the construction of a building or
structure until he has determined whether the lot on which construction is proposed is
located within a subdivision. If said lot is located within a subdivision, the Building
Inspector shall not issue a permit for construction on said lot unless and until the following
have occurred:
10.3.1 The way providing access to the lot is shown on a plan recorded with the South Middlesex
County Registry of Deeds or land Court, as required by the Subdivision Control Law;
10.3.2 All terms and conditions limiting the right to commence construction activity within a
subdivision have been complied with to the satisfaction of the Board in accordance with the
Certificate of Approval for the subdivision; and
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 51
10.3.3 The applicant has provided evidence to the Building Inspector of the recording with the
Registry of Deeds (or filing with the Land Court, as the case may be) of the Board's
decision granting approval of the definitive plan and of all deeds, easements, covenants
and lot releases pertinent thereto, and of the definitive plan.
No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located
on a lot subdivided or sold in violation of the provision of these rules.
10.4 Mandatory Notice Prior to Commencement of Construction Work
Written notice shall be sent by certified mail to the Board advising the Board that
construction within an approved subdivision shall commence not sooner than seven (7)
days from the date that such notice is mailed to the Board. Such notice shall be signed by
the applicant, subdivider, developer, or other authorized representative of the record owner
of the Subdivision.
10.5 Inspections
Each phase or step in the construction of required improvements shall be inspected and
approved in writing by the Board's authorized inspector at least forty-eight (48) hours prior
to commencement of any construction and before resuming work after the stoppage in
construction, that such construction has progressed to a stage that inspection is required.
The Planning Board office shall be notified each time an inspection is requested.
10.5.1 The Board may require tests to be done by the applicant as a condition of approval when,
in the opinion of the Board, it is advisable to do so.
10.5.2 The inspector shall not authorize any changes from these Rules or from the approved
Definitive Plan for the Subdivision without specific approval of the Board except as follows:
10.5.2.1 The Board's inspector may authorize field changes subject to review by the Board at their
next regular meeting. If the Board does not approve within fifteen (15) days of the
meeting at which the requested change(s) was submitted, the original plan will remain in
effect and the applicant will be required to reconstruct in accordance with the original
plan.
10.5.2.2 At the time the change is requested two (2) copies of a "red-lined" plan shall be submitted
to the Board's inspector who will review the plan, stamp "subject to approval of the
Board" and sign it if he approves the plan (or return it if he disapproves or believes the
proposed change should be approved by the Board before construction), and submit it to
the Board for review and their signature if they approve.
10.5.2.3 When it is deemed necessary by the Board, a properly revised plan showing the change
may be required in addition to the "red-lined" plan.
10.5.2.4 At the time the change is reviewed by the Board it shall be accompanied by an
explanation of the reason for the requested change.
10.5.3 As a minimum, the applicant shall request an inspection at the following stages of
development at a reasonable hour:
10.5.3.1 following installation of all underground drainage and utilities, prior to backfilling;
10.5.3.2 following preparations of the street subgrade and shoulders;
10.5.3.3 following spreading and compaction of the gravel base, prior to application of the binder
course on the street;
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 52
10.5.3.4 During the application of the binder course on the street to assure proper depth of
pavement.
10.5.3.5 immediately prior to and during the application and compaction of the surface course on
the street and, if required, on the sidewalk;
10.5.3.6 following completion of all improvements and installation of bounds;
10.5.3.7 before acceptance by the Town at Annual Town Meeting.
10.5.3.8 at such other intervals as may be deemed necessary to assure proper construction of
improvements.
10.5.3.9 Work not inspected as required herein shall be exposed for proper inspection.
10.6 Legal Costs
Legal costs incurred by the Board during the consideration of the preliminary plan, the
definitive plan and/or the record plan and during the preparation and recording of the
Decision and the approved record plan shall be billed to the applicant, at cost, by the Town.
10.7 Town Bylaws
The applicant should acquaint him/herself with the Bylaws and regulations of the Town of
Stow which affect the Subdivision. The particular bylaws which should be considered when
designing a subdivision should include but not be limited to, the following:
10.7.1 Zoning Bylaw of the Town of Stow, as amended.
10.7.2 Earth Removal Bylaw, as amended.
10.7.3 Regulations of the Stow Board of Health.
10.7.4 Wetlands Protection Bylaw.
10.7.5 Regulations of the Stow Conservation Commission.
10.7.6 Plumbing and Wiring Regulations.
10.8 Completion within Eight Years
If the construction and installation of all streets and municipal services required in the
Board's approval of a subdivision are not completed within eight years of the date of
approval, the approval shall automatically lapse and no street shall be laid out, constructed
or opened for public use unless and until a new Definitive Plan application has been filed in
accordance with the Rules then in effect and the new plan has been approved by the
Board.
10.9 Acceptance of Roads
When a road or street in a subdivision has been completed in a manner fulfilling the
requirements of the Board and there are no outstanding performance guarantees
remaining in effect that were required as security to ensure completion of required
improvements within the subdivision, the applicant may request the Board to inspect the
road or street in order to give a recommendation to the Board of Selectmen who will
consider the question of laying out said road or street under M.G.L. Ch. 82. Street
acceptances within a subdivision are the financial and legal responsibility of the applicant.
The Board shall require submission of the following information at least one hundred and
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 53
twenty (120) days prior to Annual Town meeting before making a recommendation to the
Board of Selectmen.
10.9.1 Two copies plus the original mylar of the plan of the road or street "as built", at a scale of
forty feet to the inch (40'=1") at size 24" X 36". All utilities, public and private, above and
below grade, shall be shown on the plan as they exist. The plan shall show the
monuments (road bounds) with the dates they were set and the traverse and fixed points
on the subdivision perimeter used to establish the bound locations, all with bearings,
distances or coordinate values sufficient to re-establish these points. All elevations shall
refer to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929.
10.9.2 A letter from the registered engineer certifying that all work, as required by the Rules and
approved Definitive Plan, has been completed.
10.9.3 A certificate by a registered land surveyor indicating that all permanent monuments are in
place and are accurately located, including evidence that the bound traverse had a ration
error of closure of 1:15,000 or better. (Use form - Certificate of Bounds in Appendix A)
10.9.4 Two typewritten copies of a legal description by metes and bounds of each road and
easement considered for acceptance by the Town,and a copy of said document on a 3.5
2HD diskette in a format compatible with the current version of Microsoft Word, or other
medium or format as may be directed by the Board..
10.9.5 Two copies of the proposed deed conveying the fee in the street plus the associated
easements to the Town, and legal evidence that the fee in the street has not been
inadvertently conveyed to abutting lot owners,and a copy of said deeds on a 3.5 2HD
diskette in a format compatible with the current version of Microsoft Word, or other medium
or format as may be directed by the Board
10.9.6 Two typewritten copies of the proposed article for the Town Meeting generally describing
the location and length of the road or street to be considered for acceptance by the Town
and a copy of said article on a 3.5 2HD diskette in a format compatible with the current
version of Microsoft Word, or other medium or format as may be directed by the Board.
10.9.7 Written approval by the Stow Tree Warden of the required tree plantings.
10.9.8 Written certification by the Board's inspector that the binder course was exposed through
one winter season prior to the application of the wearing course and that all subdivision
improvements have been exposed through one winter season (Nov. 15 - April 15) without
damage, or that damage, if incurred, has been repaired to the satisfaction of the Board.
10.9.9 Certificate of Compliance with conditions imposed on the subdivision by the Conservation
Commission under M.G.L. Ch. 131. S.40 and the Stow Wetlands Protection Bylaw.
10.9.10 If the "as built  definitive plan is prepared using a computer aided drafting program, an
electronic copy of the as built definitive plan (on a 3.5 2HD diskette in a format
compatible with the current version of AutoCAD, or other medium or format as may be
directed by the Board ) shall be filed with the Stow Planning Board Office.
10.9.11 Draft copy of proposed deed(s) and other instruments which shall be recorded at the
Middlesex South District Registry of Deeds or the Land Court for any Common Land or
Open Space parcels contained within the subdivision.
10.9.12 Written evidence from the Town Treasurer that all property taxes owed to the Town for
land contained within the subdivision have been paid to the Town.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 54
10.9.13 Check made payable to the Town for the recording of instruments and deeds in an
amount to be determined by Town Counsel.
10.10 Forms
All mentioned forms may be obtained from the Office of the Board.
10.11 Amendments
The Board may, from time to time, amend these Rules by appropriate action taken at a
public hearing, as provided by the M.G.L., Ch. 41, Section 81Q, as amended.
10.12 Validity
If any provision or provisions of these Rules are finally adjudged invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such action shall not affect the validity of any other provision nor of
the Rules as a whole.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 55
SECTION 11
APPENDIX
11.1 Appendix A
This contains forms, application forms, and other such materials. These forms and other
materials are used by the Board in the orderly and reasonable administration of its duties
under the Subdivision Control Law and are included herein as a convenience to the
applicant.
Form ANR Application for Endorsement of Plan Believed Not To Require Approval
Form PP Application for Approval of Preliminary Plan
Form DP Application for Approval of Definitive Plan
Form DC Designer's Certificate
Form RC Restrictive Covenant
Form LR-CP Release of Lots - Certificate of Performance
Form LR-PS Release of Lots - Provision of Surety
Form CB Certification of Bounds
Form DP-LN Legal Notice of Public Hearing
Form DIS Development Impact Statement
Form CAP Covenant Authorizing Town Representatives to Enter onto the Property
Form DPC Declaration of Protective Covenants and Restrictive Agreement
Form PG Performance Guarantees  Tri-Partite Agreement
Appendix A - may, from time to time, be added to or diminished in number by the Board
without a public hearing, and any time now or hereafter a part of Appendix A may be
modified, amended or changed, also without a public hearing.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 56
FORM ANR
APPLICATION FOR ENDORSEMENT OF PLAN
BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE APPROVAL
The undersigned, believing that the accompanying plan of his property in the Town of Stow does not constitute a
subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision Control Law, herewith submits said plan for a determination and
endorsement that Planning Board approval under the Subdivision Control Law is not required.
Please type or print information in blanks below.
1. Name of Applicant(s) ______________________________________________________
Contact Address ____________________________________ Phone ______________
2. Name of Property Owner(s) _________________________________________________
Contact Address ____________________________________ Phone _______________
3. Name of Registered Land Surveyor ___________________________________________
Address ___________________________________________ Phone _______________
4. Deed of property recorded in Middlesex South Registry of Deeds,
Book Number ___________, Page Number __________; and/or registered in Middlesex
Registry of land Court, Certificate of Title Number ______________.
5. Zoning District ________________, Town Map No. __________, Parcel No. __________
Location and Description of Property__________________________________________
6. Board of Appeals decisions pertaining to land or building (attach decision).
____________________________________________________________________
7. Reason plan does not constitute a subdivision _______________________________
____________________________________________________________________
________________________________ _____________________________________
Applicant(s) Signature, Date Applicant(s) Signature, Date
________________________________ _____________________________________
Owner(s) Signature, Date Owner(s) Signature, Date
All owners (in the case of a corporation, an authorized officer; in the case of a trust, all trustees)
must sign.
******************************************************************************
Planning Board approval under the Subdivision Control Law not Required
Signed ___________________________________________ for the Stow Planning Board
Date ____________________________
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 57
- INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK -
Form PP
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 58
APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN
The undersigned herewith submits the accompanying Preliminary Plan of property located in the Town of Stow for
approval under the suggested procedure in the Rules and Regulations governing the Subdivision of Land in the
Town of Stow, Massachusetts.
Please type or print information in blanks below.
1. Name of Proposed Subdivision _______________________________________________
2. Name of Applicant(s) _______________________________________________________
Contact Address ___________________________________ Phone _________________
3. Name of Property Owner(s) __________________________________________________
Contact Address ______________________________________ Phone ______________
4. Name of Engineer _________________________________________________________
Address ____________________________________________ Phone _______________
5. Name of Land Surveyor _____________________________________________________
Address ____________________________________________ Phone _______________
6. Deed of property recorded in Middlesex South Registry of Deeds, Book Number
__________, Page Number _________; and/or registered in Middlesex Registry of land
Court, Certificate of Title Number ____________.
7. Zoning District(s) ______________, _____________, _____________, _______________
Town Map No. ___________, Parcel No. __________
8. Approximate acreage in subdivision _____________, Number of Lots _________________
9. Total Length of road(s) in linear feet____________________________________________
10. Location and Description of Property___________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
______________________________ ____________________________________
Applicant(s) Signature, Date Applicant(s) Signature, Date
_______________________________ _____________________________________
Owner(s) Signature, Date Owner(s) Signature, Date
All owners (in the case of a corporation, an authorized officer; in the case of a trust, all trustees) must sign.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 59
- INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK -
Form DP
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 60
APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF DEFINITIVE PLAN
The undersigned herewith submits the accompanying Definitive Plan of property located in the Town of Stow for
Approval as a subdivision under the requirements of the Subdivision Control Law and the Rules and Regulations
Governing the Subdivision of Land in the Town of Stow.
Please type or print information in blanks below.
1. Name of Proposed Subdivision ______________________________________________
2. Name of Applicant(s) ______________________________________________________
Contact Address ___________________________________ Phone ________________
3. Name of Property Owner(s) _________________________________________________
Contact Address ___________________________________ Phone ________________
4. Name of Engineer ________________________________________________________
Address ___________________________________________ Phone _______________
5. Name of Land Surveyor ____________________________________________________
Address ___________________________________________ Phone _______________
6. Deed of property recorded in Middlesex South Registry of Deeds,
Book Number __________, Page Number __________; and/or registered in Middlesex
Registry of land Court, Certificate of Title Number ______________.
7. Zoning District (s)______________, ______________, ______________, ____________
Town Map No. ___________, Parcel No. __________
8. Approximate acreage in subdivision _____________, Number of Lots ________________
9. Total Length of road(s) in linear feet___________________________________________
10. Location and Description of Property___________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________
11. Said plan has (_) has not (_) evolved from a preliminary plan submitted to the Board on
___________; and approved (with modifications (_) or disapproved (_) on ____________.
______________________________ ___________________________________
Applicant(s) Signature, Date Applicant(s) Signature, Date
______________________________ ___________________________________
Owner(s) Signature, Date Owner(s) Signature, Date
All owners (in the case of a corporation, an authorized officer; in the case of a trust, all trustees) must sign.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 61
- INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK -
Form DC
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 62
DESIGNER'S CERTIFICATE
Please type or print information in blanks below.
I hereby certify that the accompanying plan entitled ____________________ dated ___________
is correct, stating that the perimeter traverse of the subdivision before adjustment was closed to
any accuracy of a ration "error of closure" not to exceed 1:15.000*: that it is a subdivision of
____________ acres conveyed by _____________________________ to ___________________
by a deed dated _______________ and recorded in Middlesex County Registry of Deeds,
Southern District. Book Number ___________ Page Number __________.
Other sources of information used in the preparation of the plan are:
1. Other deeds and Plans as follows _____________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
2. Oral information furnished by ________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
3. Other ___________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Furthermore, I certify that this survey was made on the ground in accordance with the "Procedural
and Technical Standards for the Practice of Land Surveying", Section 250 CMR** 5.0 between
________________ and _______________
(Date) (Date)
(Seal of Surveyor) Signed ______________________________ _______
Registered Land Surveyor Date
Address _________________________________________
Registration No. ___________________________________
* As described in the "1989 Manual of Instructions for the Survey of Lands and Preparation of Plans" published by
Land Court of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, as most recently amended.
** Code of Massachusetts Regulations
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 63
- INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK -
Form RC
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 64
RESTRICTIVE COVENANT
Please type or print information in blanks below.
In consideration of the approval by the Planning Board, of the Town of Stow Massachusetts, (hereinafter
referred to as the Board), of a plan of land, located in Stow, Middlesex County, Massachusetts entitled
______________________________________Dated___________
revised _________, by ________________________, approved by the Board on ____________ and the
waiver by the Board of a bond or other security for the construction of the ways and the installation of
certain services shown on said plan, in compliance with the Town of Stow, Massachusetts, (the "Town"),
Subdivision Rules and Regulations, last amended ______________; the undersigned, its successors
and assigns, hereby covenant and agree with the Board and the Town as follows:
1. The undersigned is the owner in fee simple absolute of all the land included in the subdivision and
that there are no mortgages of record or otherwise on any of said land, except for those described
below, and that the present holders of said mortgages have assented to this covenant prior to its
execution by the Developer.
2. The undersigned shall not sell or convey any lot or interest therein in the subdivision or erect or place
any permanent building on any lot until the construction of ways and installation of municipal
services necessary to adequately serve such lot has been completed in accordance with the
following:
a. The Subdivision Control Law and the Stow Planning Board's Rules and Regulations governing
this subdivision.
b. The certificate of approval and the conditions of approval specified therein, issued by the
Planning Board, and dated ___________.
c. The definitive plan as approved and as qualified by the certificate of approval.
d. Other document(s), namely: ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________
3. The undersigned will expeditiously and diligently proceed to construct the ways shown on the
aforesaid plan and in the event that the Board concludes, in its sole discretion, that the undersigned
is not so constructing such ways, the undersigned shall provide additional security other than this
covenant sufficient in the Board's opinion for the construction and completion of such ways and
services as shown on the aforesaid plan or for a portion thereof. Such additional securities shall
comply with the requirements of the Town's Subdivision Rules and Regulations, provided, however,
that the Board shall determine the date by which the work, for which additional security must be
posted, shall be completed.
4. This covenant shall be binding upon the executors, administrators, devisees, heirs, successors and
assigns of the undersigned and shall constitute a covenant running with the land included in the
subdivision and shall operate as restrictions upon the land.
5. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit a conveyance by a single deed subject to this covenant,
of either the entire parcel of land shown on the subdivision plan or of all lots not previously released
by the Planning Board.
6. If, in the Planning Boards sole judgment, the Board wishes to grant a partial release from the terms
and conditions of this agreement, particular lots within the subdivision may be released from this
FORM RC
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 65
covenant upon the recording of a certificate of performance executed by the Planning Board as
enumerating the specific lots to be released.
7. The undersigned agrees to record this covenant with the Middlesex County Registry of Deeds,
forthwith. Reference to this covenant shall be entered upon the definitive subdivision plan as
approved.
8. A deed of any part of the subdivision in violation of this agreement shall be voidable by the grantee
prior to the release of the covenant; but no later than three, (3), years from the date of such deed.
9. This covenant shall be executed before endorsement of the approval of the definitive plan by the
Planning Board and shall take effect upon such endorsement, whether or not the agreement is
recorded with the Registry of Deeds.
10. Upon final completion of the construction of ways and installation of municipal services as specified
herein, on or before _____________, the Planning Board, if in its sole judgment it is satisfied that
the terms and conditions of the definitive plan approval have been met, shall release this covenant
by an appropriate instrument, duly acknowledged. Failure to complete construction and installation
within the time specified herein or such later date as may be approved by the Planning Board shall
constitute reasons for rescission by the Board of the approval of the plan pursuant to G.L. c.41, s.
81-W.
11. Nothing herein shall prohibit the applicant from varying the method of securing the construction of
ways and installation of municipal services from time to time or from securing by one, or in part by
one and in part by another of the methods described in M.G.L. Chapter 41 81U, as long as such
security if sufficient in the sole opinion of the Planning Board to secure performance of the
construction and installation.
12. The land included in the subdivision is encumbered by the subject to the following mortgages which,
however, are subordinated to this covenant:
a) Mortgage granted by the undersigned to __________________, dated ___________, and
recorded with the Middlesex South Registry of Deeds at Book Number ________, Page
Number __________, and the Middlesex Registry of the Land Court as Document
Number_________, and
b) Other mortgagees:
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
FORM RC
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 66
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the mortgage holder(s) assents to this covenant and agrees to subordinate
said mortgage(s) to this covenant, signed under seal as of the _________ day of 20___.
First Mortgage Holder __________________________________________
By ________________________________________
Second Mortgage Holder __________________________________________
By ________________________________________
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
MIDDLESEX, SS.
On this ____ day of _______________,20__, before me, the undersigned notary public,
personally appeared ____________________________________, proved to me through satisfactory
evidence of identification, which was: (__) personally known to me to have the identity claimed; or (__)
examination of Massachusetts Drivers License, to be the person whose name is signed on the
preceding or attached document in my presence, and acknowledged to me that he/she signed it
voluntarily for its stated purpose.
_______________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:
____________________
FORM RC
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 67
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned has executed this Restrictive Covenant under seal as of the
__________ day of _______________, 19____.
OWNER(S) __________________________________________
By ________________________________________
By ________________________________________
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
MIDDLESEX, SS.
On this ____ day of _______________, 20__, before me, the undersigned notary public,
personally appeared ____________________________________, proved to me through satisfactory
evidence of identification, which was: (__) personally known to me to have the identity claimed; or (__)
examination of Massachusetts Drivers License, to be the person whose name is signed on the
preceding or attached document in my presence, and acknowledged to me that he/she signed it
voluntarily for its stated purpose.
_______________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:
____________________
FORM RC
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 68
Approved and accepted by the Stow Planning Board:
_________________________________________________ Date _________________
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
MIDDLESEX, SS.
On this ____ day of _______________, 20__, before me, the undersigned notary public,
personally appeared ____________________________________, proved to me through satisfactory
evidence of identification, which was: (__) personally known to me to have the identity claimed; or (__)
examination of Massachusetts Drivers License, to be the person whose name is signed on the
preceding or attached document in my presence, and acknowledged to me that he/she signed it
voluntarily for its stated purpose.
_______________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:
____________________
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 69
- INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK -
Stow Planning Board Form LR-CP
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 70
RELEASE OF LOTS - CERTIFICATE OF PERFORMANCE
Please type or print information in blanks below.
_______________________,20___
The Planning Board of the Town of Stow, Massachusetts hereby certifies that the requirement for work
on the ground called for by the Restrictive Agreement dated _________________, and recorded in the
Middlesex South District Registry of Deeds, Book Number ________, Page Number ________ have
been completed to the satisfaction of the Planning Board as to the following designated lots shown on a
Plan entitled ________________________________dated ____________, recorded with said Registry
of Deeds, Plan Book Number _____________ Page Number ________, and said lots are hereby
released from the restrictions as to sale and building specified thereon.
Lots designated on said Plan released hereunder _____________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________
Approved by the Stow Planning Board
by: ______________________________ ______________________________
______________________________ ______________________________
______________________________
Date: ___________________________
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
MIDDLESEX, SS.
On this ____ day of _______________, 20__, before me, the undersigned notary public,
personally appeared ____________________________________, proved to me through satisfactory
evidence of identification, which was: (__) personally known to me to have the identity claimed; or (__)
examination of Massachusetts Drivers License, to be the person whose name is signed on the
preceding or attached document in my presence, and acknowledged to me that he/she signed it
voluntarily for its stated purpose.
_______________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:
____________________
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 71
- INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK -
Stow Planning Board FORM LR-PS
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 72
RELEASE OF LOTS - PROVISION OF SURETY
Please type or print information in blanks below.
___________________, 19 ____
The Planning Board of the Town of Stow, Massachusetts, hereby certifies that sufficient surety, in the
opinion of said Board, has been provided for the cost of the completion of the ways and certain services
necessary to provide access and services to certain lots, hereinafter designated, in accordance with the
provisions of the Restrictive Agreement dated _______________, 19 ____ and recorded in the
Middlesex South District Registry of Deeds, Book Number ______, Page Number ______, or registered
in said Land Registry District in Plan Book Number _______, Plan Number ______ and said lots are
hereby released from the restrictions as to sale and building specified in the Restrictive Agreement.
Lots designated on said Plan released hereunder____________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________
Approved by the Stow Planning Board
by: ______________________________ ______________________________
______________________________ ______________________________
______________________________
Date: ___________________________
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
MIDDLESEX, SS.
On this ____ day of _______________, 20__, before me, the undersigned notary public,
personally appeared ____________________________________, proved to me through satisfactory
evidence of identification, which was: (__) personally known to me to have the identity claimed; or (__)
examination of Massachusetts Drivers License, to be the person whose name is signed on the
preceding or attached document in my presence, and acknowledged to me that he/she signed it
voluntarily for its stated purpose.
_______________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:
____________________
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 73
- INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK -
Stow Planning Board Form CB
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 74
CERTIFICATION OF BOUNDS
Please type or print information in blanks below.
I hereby certify that permanent monuments have been accurately installed on
________________________________(Street) and are located as described and shown on the "As
Built" plan dated ______________________ of said roadway submitted to the Planning Board, Town of
Stow, Massachusetts, as required by the Stow Subdivision Rules and Regulations. Furthermore, I
certify that the bound traverses had an error of closure of 1:15,000* or better and that these bounds
have been set in accordance with the "Procedural and Technical Standards for the Practice of Land
Surveying", Section 250 CMR** 5.0 between ___________ and __________.
Date Date
Signed _______________________________
Registered Land Surveyor
_______________________________
Registration Number
Seal of Surveyor Date _________________________________
Address ______________________________
* As described in the "1989 Manual of Instructions for the Survey of Lands and Preparation of Plans" publ ished by Land
Court of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, as most recently amended.
** Code of Massachusetts Regulations
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 75
- INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK -
Stow Planning Board Form DP-LN
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 76
LEGAL NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING
STOW PLANNING BOARD
Please type or print information in blanks below.
The Stow Planning Board will hold a public hearing on ______________________. 20____, at
________p.m., in the Stow Town Building, 380 Great Road, Stow, MA to discuss a proposed subdivision
of land entitled_____________________________________________________ as petitioned by
________________________________________________________________.
This subdivision consists of _________ acres to be divided into _______ lots. The land is located in
Stow, MA, off of________________________________________________ and shown on Stow
Property Map Sheet(s) _______________ as Parcel(s) ________________. Plans may be viewed at
the Office of the Planning Board or the Office of the Town Clerk during normal business hours.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 77
- INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK -
Form DIS
Development Impact Statement
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 78
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT STATEMENT
Please type or print information in blanks below.
1. Name of Proposed Subdivision_________________________________________________
2. Location __________________________________________________________________
3. Name of Applicant(s) ________________________________________________________
4. Brief Description of the Proposed Project_________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
5. Name of Individual Preparing this DIS____________________________________________
Address________________________________________ Business Phone _____________
_________________________________________
6. Professional Credentials______________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________
A. Site Description
7. Present permitted and actual land uses by percentage of the site.
___% Industrial ___% Commercial ___% Residential ___% Forest ___% Agricultural
___% Other (specify)________________________________________________________
8. Total acreage on the site: ________acres.
Approximate Acreage
Present
After
Completion
Meadow or Brushland (non agriculture)
Forested
Agricultural (includes orchards, cropland, pasture)
Wetland
Water Surface Area
Flood Plain
Unvegetated (rock, earth, or fill)
Roads, buildings and other impervious surfaces
Other (indicate type)
Developable Site Area
Form DIS
Development Impact Statement
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 79
9. List the zoning districts in which the site is located and indicate the percentage of the site in each
district.
Note: be sure to include overlay zoning districts.
District %
_________________________ _______
_________________________ _______
_________________________ _______
_________________________ _______
_________________________ _______
10. Predominant soil type(s) on the site: _________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
Soil drainage (Use the U.S. Soil Conservation Service's definition)
Well drained: Soil type ___________ ___% of site
Moderately well drained Soil type ___________ ___% of site
Poorly drained Soil type ___________ ___% of site
11. Are there bedrock outcroppings on the site?
? yes
? no
12. Approximate percentage of proposed site with slopes between:
0-10% _____
10-15% _____
Greater than 15% _____
13. Does the project site contain any species of plant or animal life that is identified as rare or
endangered?
? yes
? no
If yes, specify: ___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
14. Are there any unusual or unique features on the site such as trees larger than 30 inches D.B.H.,
bogs, kettle ponds, eskers, drumlins, quarries, distinctive rock formation or granite bridges?
? yes
? no
If yes, specify:____________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
15. Are there any established foot paths running through the site or railroad right of ways?
? yes
? no
If yes, specify:____________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
Form DIS
Development Impact Statement
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 80
16. Is the site adjacent to conservation land or a recreation area?
? yes
? no
If yes, specify:____________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
17. Does the site include scenic views or will the proposed development cause any scenic vistas to be
obstructed from view?
? yes
? no
If yes, specify:____________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
18. Are there wetlands, lakes, ponds, streams, or rivers within or contiguous to the site?
? yes
? no
If yes, specify:____________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
19. Is there any farmland, forest or recreation land on the site protected under Chapter 61, 61A or 61B
of the Massachusetts General Laws?
? yes
? no
If yes, specify:____________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________
20. Has the site ever been used for the disposal of hazardous waste? Has a 21E Study been
conducted for the site?
? yes
? no
If yes, specify results:______________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
21. Will the proposed activity require use and/or storage of hazardous materials, or generation of
hazardous waste?
? yes
? no
If yes, specify results:______________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
22. Does the project contain any buildings or sites of historic or archaeological significance?
? Yes
? no
If yes, please describe_____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
Form DIS
Development Impact Statement
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 81
B. Circulation System
23. What is the average weekday traffic and peak hour traffic volumes generated by the proposed
subdivision?
a. Average weekday: ______
b. Average peak hour: ______ morning
______ evening
24. Existing street (s) providing access to proposed subdivision:
Name ___________________________________ Classification ___________
25. Existing intersection(s): list intersections located within 1000 feet of any access to the proposed
development:
Name of ways ___________________________________________________________________
26. Location of existing sidewalks within 1000 feet of the proposed site? ________________________
________________________________________________________________________
27. Location of proposed new sidewalks and their connection to existing
sidewalks:_______________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
C. Utilities and Municipal Services
28. If dwelling units are to be constructed, what is the total number of bedrooms proposed?
________________
29. If the proposed use of the site is nonresidential, what will the site be specifically used for and how
many feet of Gross floor area will be constructed? _________________
30. Storm Drainage
a. Describe nature, location and surface water body receiving current surface water of the site:
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
b. Describe the proposed storm drainage system and how it will be altered by the proposed
development_________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
31. In the event of fire, estimate the response time of the fire department (consult with Fire Dept.)
32. Schools (if residential)
a. Projected number of new school age children.
E. Measures to Mitigate Impacts
Attach brief descriptions of the measures that will be taken to:
Form DIS
Development Impact Statement
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 82
33. Prevent surface water contamination.
34. Prevent groundwater contamination.
35. Maximize groundwater recharge.
36. Prevent erosion and sedimentation.
37. Maintain slope stability.
38. Design the project to conserve energy.
39. Preserve wildlife habitat.
40. Preserve wetlands.
41. Ensure compatibility with the surrounding land uses.
42. Control peak runoff from the site so that the post-development rate of runoff will be no greater than
the predevelopment in compliance with.
43. Preserve historically significant structures and features on the site.
44. Mitigate the impact of the traffic generated by the development.
45. Meet the 2008 Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook, or as subsequently amended.
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 83
- INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK -
Form CAP
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 84
COVENANT
AUTHORIZING TOWN REPRESENTATIVES TO ENTER ONTO THE PROPERTY
In consideration of the approval by the Planning Board, of the Town of Stow, Massachusetts,
(hereinafter referred to as the Board), of a plan of land located in Stow, Middlesex County,
Massachusetts entitled ______________________________________dated______________, revised -
___________________, by ________________________, approved by the Board on ____________.
The undersigned hereby covenant and authorize representatives of the Town of Stow to enter onto the
property, identified on the above referenced plan, to the streets and ways, services and other aspects of
the Plan in the event ____________________________does not complete the aforementioned
according to its obligations and to indemnify said Representatives and the Town of Stow from any
liability due to their actions, inactions or decisions with respect to their activities on said property.
(Owner/Developer)
Executed as a Sealed Instrument this _______ day of _____________, 20__________.
___________________________________
(Company)
By _________________________________
(Name  Authorized Agent)
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
MIDDLESEX, SS.
On this ____ day of _______________, 20__, before me, the undersigned notary public,
personally appeared ____________________________________, proved to me through satisfactory
evidence of identification, which was: (__) personally known to me to have the identity claimed; or (__)
examination of Massachusetts Drivers License, to be the person whose name is signed on the
preceding or attached document in my presence, and acknowledged to me that he/she signed it
voluntarily for its stated purpose.
_______________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:
____________________
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 85
- INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK -
Form DPC
Declaration of Protective Covenants and Restrictive Agreement
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 86
DECLARATION OF PROTECTIVE COVENANTS
and
RESTRICTIVE AGREEMENT
To facilitate the Plan of Ownership, herein established, to set forth standards for the ownership and sale
of building lots (LOTS) in Stow, Massachusetts, as hereinafter set forth, and to preserve and enhance
the character of the community and the enjoyment of life therein,
______________________________________________, a Massachusetts Limited Liability Company
of ________________________, ____________________ County, Massachusetts, its successors and
assigns, hereinafter (THE OWNER), and all future owners of LOTS in the below described property, as
hereinafter set forth, by their acquisition of title thereto, covenant and agrees, as follows:
THE PROPERTY
A certain parcel of land in Stow, Massachusetts, Middlesex County, located on ____________________
in Stow, Massachusetts, consisting of Lots _______________ inclusive, all as shown on a Plan entitled
Plan of Land in Stow, Massachusetts, Scale 1 = 50, dated _____________________, Revised
_____________________________, Engineer)____________________________________(Engineers
Address)_____________________, which Plan is recorded in the Middlesex South District Registry of
Deeds as Plan ______ of ________ and to which plan is made for a more particular description.
Title reference of the Parcel is a Deed to _______________________________ and recorded in the
Middlesex South District Registry of Deeds in Book ___________, Page ____________, Instrument
___________ of _________________, 2003.
The property shall henceforth be subject to the agreements, covenants, reservations, easements,
charges and restrictions, hereinafter set forth, all for the benefit and protection of every owner of any
LOT shown on the above referenced plan. These agreements, covenants, reservations, easements,
charges and restrictions shall run with the land.
RESIDENTIAL USE
Each and every LOT shall be limited to uses allowed in the Residential District. No building or structure
intended for or adopted for business purposes shall be erected, permitted or maintained on such
premises or any part thereof and no dwelling shall be erected, placed or maintained on said premises or
any part thereof, which is used for any purpose other than for residential use or otherwise not in
conformance with relevant provisions of the Stow Zoning Bylaw.
OPEN SPACE
There is designed on the above referenced plan Open Space Easement ____, containing
____________ sq. ft. on LOT _____ and Open Space Easement ____, containing ____________ sq.
ft. on LOT _____, designated as Open Space. The owners of the LOTS ____ and ____ agree that
the portion of the LOT designated as Open Space shall not be built upon and no structure, fence or
building shall be built upon that portion of the land. The land shall be maintained in its natural state. No
trees may be cut in the open space other than dead or diseased trees. Underbrush may be cleared from
time to time by the owners of the LOTS.
Form DPC
Declaration of Protective Covenants and Restrictive Agreement
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 87
SPRINKLERS
All houses or buildings designed on the LOTS shall be equipped with a residential sprinkler system.
Said residential sprinkler system shall be of a type and size to be approved by the Fire Chief of the Town
of Stow or his designee. No Occupancy Permit is to be issued by the Building Commissioner until after
the sprinkler system is installed and approved.
COMMON DRIVEWAYS
1. The above referenced plan shows ________ common driveways. One on the _______, which
gives access to LOTS ____________ and one on the _________, which gives access to LOTS
___________. The Common Driveway on the _________ is located within a 50 portion of LOT ___
and that portion running _____________ from ___________________ is the Common Driveway.
The Common Driveway is located as shown on said Plan _______ from ________________. The
Common Driveway on the ___________ across LOTS ______________, as shown on the plan and
extends to the ____________, as shown on said Plan to the lot line of LOTS _________.
2. The Common Driveways are also to be used for the installation, repair and replacement of utilities to
serve the respective lots and for a common drainage system, as described below.
3. Use of the Common Driveway by vehicle traffic shall be limited to ingress and egress and does not
include the parking of vehicles on the common driveway, except that occasional overflow parking of
guests vehicles shall be permitted, provided that such vehicles are parked in a manner that does
not impede traffic flow and that such parking does not extend overnight.
4. The owners of LOTS ___________, as to the ________ Common Driveway and LOTS _________,
as to the ________ Common Driveway, shall bear and have joint and several responsibilities and
obligations for repair, maintenance, reconstruction and snowplowing of the Common Driveway, so
as to provide continuous year-round access for vehicle traffic for the convenience of the owners of
the LOTS and to provide continuous year-round access for all emergency, fire, rescue, police,
moving, construction and maintenance vehicles.
5. The Town of Stow shall have no responsibility for the maintenance, repair or snowplowing of the
Common Driveways or drainage system. See Section _______ of the Town of Stows Planning
Board Special Permit, recorded in the Middlesex South District Registry of Deeds in Book _______,
Page ______, Instrument No. _______ of ______________________.
COMMON DRAINAGE
There is a drainage system for all of the LOTS shown on a Plan entitled Plan of Land in Stow,
Massachusetts, by ______________________, dated ______________,
on file with the Town of Stow Planning Board.
1. There are a series of detention basins on LOTS ____________ and grassed swales and culverts
shown on the Plan as Detention Basins _________________ and _________. It shall be the
obligation of the OWNERS of LOTS ______________ to maintain, repair and replace components
of the drainage system. Each of the OWNERS shall have the right of access over the other LOT for
the purpose of maintaining the drainage system. The OWNERS of LOTS _______________ shall
equally divide the cost of maintenance and repairs.
Form DPC
Declaration of Protective Covenants and Restrictive Agreement
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 88
2. There are a series of detention basins over LOTS _________ and grassed swales and culverts
shown on the Plan as Detention Basins ___________. It shall be the obligation of the OWNERS of
LOTS ___________ to maintain, repair and replace any components of the drainage system. Each
of the OWNERS shall have the right of access over the other LOT for the purpose of maintaining the
drainage system. The OWNERS of LOTS _____________ shall equally divide the cost of
maintenance and repairs.
3. The Town of Stow shall have no responsibility for the maintenance or repair of the drainage system.
TERMS
Unless otherwise established for a longer period of time, the provisions created by this INSTRUMENT
shall run with the land and insure to the benefit of and be enforceable by the OWNER and the OWNER
of any LOT subject hereto, their legal representatives, heirs, successors and assigns, as respectively
appropriate, for a period of thirty, (30), years from the date of this DECLARATION is recorded, after
which time, such provisions shall be extended by agreements executed and recorded prior to the
expiration of the initial period or of the extended period, executed by not less than two-thirds, (2/3), of
the LOTS, subject to such provisions or by the Town of Stow, at its election with the absence of such
agreement by the property owners of the LOTS affected thereby. Notwithstanding this Paragraph, all
easements shall continue in perpetuity.
ENFORCEMENTS
The OWNER and the Town of Stow shall have the right to enforce this DECLARATION. The OWNER
and any other person lawfully entitled thereto may enforce this DECLARATION by proceedings at law or
in equity against any person or persons violating or attempting to violate any restrictions or covenants
herein. Such enforcement proceedings may seek any form of relief available, including a prayer to
restrain the violation(s) or to recover damages, including the reasonable and necessary costs incurred
by the OWNER or such other person in enforcing this DECLARATION and against the land to enforce
any lien created by these COVENANTS. Failure of the OWNER or any other person lawfully entitled
thereto to enforce any COVENANTS or RESTRICTIONS herein contained shall in no event be deemed
a waiver of the right to do so thereafter.
ASSIGNMENT OF RIGHTS
Any and all of the rights, powers, easements, duties and reservations of the OWNER under this
Declaration may be assigned or transferred by the OWNER to an Association formed by the LOT
OWNERS or any other person by instrument duly recorded in the Middlesex South District Registry of
Deeds, which instrument shall be evidence of the Assignees or such other persons consent in writing to
accept such assignment and assume such duties.
SEVERABILITY
Invalidation of any one of these Covenants or Restrictions by judgment or court order shall in no way or
otherwise affect any of the other provisions, which shall remain in full force and effect.
Form DPC
Declaration of Protective Covenants and Restrictive Agreement
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 89
GOVERNING LAW
This Declaration shall be construed, interpreted and applied in accordance with the Laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Executed as a Sealed Instrument, this _______ day of _____________, 20__________.
___________________________________
(Company)
By _________________________________
(Name  Authorized Agent)
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
MIDDLESEX, SS.
On this ____ day of _______________, 20__, before me, the undersigned notary public,
personally appeared ____________________________________, proved to me through satisfactory
evidence of identification, which was: (__) personally known to me to have the identity claimed; or (__)
examination of Massachusetts Drivers License, to be the person whose name is signed on the
preceding or attached document in my presence, and acknowledged to me that he/she signed it
voluntarily for its stated purpose.
_______________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:
____________________
Form PG
Performance Guarantee/Tripartite Agreement
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 90
TRIPARTITE AGREEMENT
In consideration of the mutual promises contained herein by and between
___________________, having a usual place of business at ___________________________
(hereinafter referred to as the DEVELOPER) and ________________________________, a banking
corporation having a usual place of business at __________________________, Massachusetts
(hereinafter referred to as the BANK) and the STOW PLANNING BOARD (hereinafter referred to as
the BOARD)
WITNESSETH:
WHEREAS, the DEVELOPER is installing ways and completing municipal services as shown on
a certain Definitive Subdivision Plan entitled, _____________________________________________,
Dated ___________, Revised: ____________. By _____________________________________,
recorded with the Middlesex South District Registry of Deeds as Plan No. ____ of ________, showing
______ proposed lots.
WHEREAS, the DEVELOPER has executed a mortgage or related instrument to the BANK dated
____________, in the original principal amount of $___________ and recorded with the Middlesex
South District Registry of Deeds (Registry) in Book _______, Page ________;
WHEREAS, the BOARD requires certain performance guarantees that the installation of ways
and completion services will be completed in accordance with its Rules and Regulations and said
Definitive Subdivision Plans.
NOW THEREFORE, it is agreed as follows:
Form PG
Performance Guarantee/Tripartite Agreement
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 91
1. The DEVELOPER will complete the construction of and installation of all municipal services and
ways as shown on the aforesaid Plans in accordance with the applicable Rules and regulations of
the BOARD;
2. In order to secure performance of the DEVELOPERS obligations pursuant to the approved Definitive
Subdivision Plans consisting of ____ sheets, Schedule A attached hereto, and a certain Covenant
executed by DEVELOPER on ______________, and duly recorded with the Registry in Book
_________, Page ________, the BANK hereby agrees to withhold from the principal amount of the
mortgage or loan the sum of $__________ until municipal services shall have been installed and
ways constructed pursuant to said plans, and none of such retained proceeds will be disbursed to
the DEVELOPER except as authorized hereunder.
3. In the event that, in the sole opinion of the BOARD, performance of the aforementioned obligations
are not completed satisfactorily in accordance with all the Plan, Profile and other sheets referred to
above and Schedule A by _____________ any funds remaining undisbursed by the BANK shall be
immediately available to the BOARD for completion of said subdivisions and for payment of any legal
expenses and/or fees incurred by the Town of Stow in order to accomplish completion of said
subdivision.
4. The BANK will disburse funds to the DEVELOPER as the work progresses upon receipt by the
BANK of release certificates endorsed by at least three members of the BOARD and said releases
containing original signatures. The BANK shall have the right to rely on said written certificates from
the BOARD without further inquiry and shall be relieved of liability to the DEVELOPER and the
BOARD for its actions in reliance thereon. It is further agreed that failure on the part of the BOARD
to execute the said written releases will not relieve the BANK from its agreement hereunder.
5. The BOARD shall have recourse to the BANK for all of the undisbursed funds, notwithstanding any
transfer of title, assignment, judgment, bankruptcy, or imposition of lien by or against the
DEVELOPER; all as set forth in Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 41, Section 81U.
Form PG
Performance Guarantee/Tripartite Agreement
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 92
6. Upon completion of the DEVELOPERS aforementioned obligations, all as satisfactory to the
BOARD, the said DEVELOPER and BANK shall receive a written release of their agreement
hereunder from the BOARD, and no funds whatsoever shall be released without the BOARDs
written authorization as aforesaid.
7. This Tripartite Agreement shall not be extended beyond __________ provided however, that in the
event that said funds remaining undisbursed by this agreement are, in the opinion of the BOARD,
inadequate then this agreement will be extended by the BOARD to __________ only upon
renegotiation of a bond figure satisfactory to the BOARD. In addition, said renegotiation shall take
place prior to release of any funds contained in the last phase set forth on attached Schedule A.
8. It is understood and agreed by the DEVELOPER and the BOARD that should work, at any time, be
found deficient or in any manner not in substantial compliance with the Definitive Subdivision Plans
or the applicable Rules and Regulations of the BOARD, the work shall be corrected at the expense
of the DEVELOPER whether or not said deficiency was part of the work included in a work phase
described in Schedule A attached hereto for which the BOARD previously issued a release
certificate.
All three parties hereto agree that remaining monies retained by the
BANK may be held and utilized by the BOARD for the purposes of correcting any project
deficiencies or uncompleted work, including the costs for engineering and/or legal services.
Form PG
Performance Guarantee/Tripartite Agreement
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 93
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the said parties have executed this Agreement and have
hereunto affixed their seals.
Dated: _______________
DEVELOPER:
______________________________________
BY: __________________________________
Dated: _______________
BANK:
______________________________________
BY: _________________________________
TOWN OF STOW PLANNING BOARD
Dated: ________ BY: _______________________________
BY: _______________________________
BY: _______________________________
BY: _______________________________
BY: _______________________________
Form PG
Performance Guarantee/Tripartite Agreement
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 94
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
MIDDLESEX, SS.
On this ____ day of _______________, 20__, before me, the undersigned notary public, personally appeared
____________________________________, proved to me through satisfactory evidence of identification, which was: (__)
personally known to me to have the identity claimed; or (__) examination of Massachusetts Drivers License, to be the person
whose name is signed on the preceding or attached document in my presence, and acknowledged to me that he/she signed it
voluntarily for its stated purpose.
_______________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:
____________________
==============================================================================
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
MIDDLESEX, SS.
On this ____ day of _______________, 20__, before me, the undersigned notary public, personally appeared
____________________________________, proved to me through satisfactory evidence of identification, which was: (__)
personally known to me to have the identity claimed; or (__) examination of Massachusetts Drivers License, to be the person
whose name is signed on the preceding or attached document in my presence, and acknowledged to me that he/she signed it
voluntarily for its stated purpose.
_______________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:
____________________
==============================================================================
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
MIDDLESEX, SS.
On this ____ day of _______________, 20__, before me, the undersigned notary public, personally appeared
____________________________________, proved to me through satisfactory evidence of identification, which was: (__)
personally known to me to have the identity claimed; or (__) examination of Massachusetts Drivers License, to be the person
whose name is signed on the preceding or attached document in my presence, and acknowledged to me that he/she signed it
voluntarily for its stated purpose.
_______________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:
____________________
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 95
- INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK -
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 96
APPENDIX B
11.2 Appendix B
Contains illustrations, details and charts pertaining plant species for cul-de-sac islands and
typical tree planting details.
PLANT SPECIES FOR CUL-DE-SAC ISLANDS
TYPICAL TREE PLANTING DETAIL
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 97
PLANT SPECIES FOR CUL-DE-SAC ISLANDS
I. Tall Growing Deciduous Shade Trees  Minimum of 6 feet above ground in height and caliper size 1  - 2  
at planting time. One tree per 400 sq. ft.
Acer Platanoides (Norway Maple) Acer Rubrum (Red Maple)
Philodendron Amurense (Amur Cork) Quercus Velutina (Black Oak) Larch
Quercus Palustris (Pin Oak) Zelkova Quercus Borealis (Northern Red Oak)
Zelkova Serrata (Zelkova) Larix sp. (Larch)
Gliditsia Triacanthos Inermis (Thornless Honeylocust Skyline) Platanus Acerifolia (London Plane Tree)
Tilia Cordata (European Littleleaf Linden Greenspire) Franxinu Pennsylvanica (Green Ash Marshalls Seedless)
II. Small Deciduous Ornamental Trees  Minimum of 8 feet in height and caliper size 1  1.5 at planting time. One tree per 25 sq. ft.
Cornus Kousa (Japanese Dogwood) Crataegus species (Hawthown species)
Malus Species (Crabapple species) Prunus Serrulata (Kwanzan Cherry)
Syringa Reticulata (Japanese Tree Lilac) Prunus Subhirtella (Iligan Cherry)
Pyrus Calleryana (Bradford Pear, Redspire Pear)
III. Deciduous Shrubs for Screening Refer to Tree Wardens List
Syringa Vulgaris (Common Lilac) Rosa Rugosa (Rugosa Rose)
Potentilla sp. (Potentilla) Spirea sp. (Spirea)
Forsythia sp. (Forsythia) Berberis Koreanna (Korean Bayberry)
Kerria Japonica (Kerria) Philadelphus Virginalis (Mock Orange)
Viburnum Trilobum (American Cranberry Bush)
Rhododendron P.J. M. (P.J.M Rhododendron)
IV Evergreen Shrubs for Screening
Taxus sp. (Yew) Juniperus sp. (Juniper)
Pinus Mugo (Mugo Pine) Thuja Occidentalis (American Arborvitae)
V. Groundcovers
Vinca Minor (Periwinkle) Juniperus sp. (Low Junipers)
Pachysandra Termialis (Japanese Spruce) Cotoneaster sp. (Ground Cotoneaster)
Hemerocallis (Daylilies)
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 98
--
Town of Stow Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land Page 99
Copyright International Society of Arboriculture. Used with permission.
