CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF SOMERVILLE, MASSACHUSETTS 
____________ 
CHARTER AND RELATED LEGISLATION 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
RELATED APPENDICES 
____________ 
Adopted March 31, 1988 
____________ 
Published in 1987 by Order of the Board of Aldermen 
Republished in 2002 
____________ 
 
PREFACE 
This volume is a republication of the 1988 Code as supplemented through Supplement No. 6 and further updated through Ordinance No. 2001-20, adopted December 13, 2001. 
This volume contains the Part I, Charter and related legislation; Part II, Code of Ordinances, the general ordinances; Part III, Appendices; and Part IV, Indices, Charter and Code index of the City of Somerville, Massachusetts. 
The 1987 Code is a complete recodification of all ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted by the Board of Aldermen and is the first such codification for the City of Somerville since 1963. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1963 Code, as supplemented through November 26, 1985, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Board of Aldermen. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. 
Various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included after Part II, Code of Ordinances. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the fifth section of Chapter 4 is 4-5. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 5-4 and 5-5 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 5-4.1, 5-4.2 and 5-4.3 respectively. New chapters may be added at the back of the volume preceding the appendixes and numbered consecutively; for example, if the last chapter is 15 a new chapter would be designated as Chapter 16. New articles may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and divisions may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
PART I CHARTER AND RELATED LEGISLATION 	
CHARTER 	CHA:1 
GENERAL LAWS 	CHAGL:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 	CHASA:1 
CHARTER AND RELATED LEGISLATION COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHACT:1 
PART II CODE OF ORDINANCES 	
CODE 	COD1:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CODCC:1 
ORDINANCE DISPOSITION TABLE 	CODOD:1 
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 	CODSR:1 
PART III APENDICES 	
APPENDIX 	
CITY OFFICIALS 	APPA:1 
RULES OF THE BOARD 	APPB:1 
STREET LIST 	APPC:1 
PART IV INDICES 	
CHARTER AND RELATED LEGISLATION INDEX 	CHAi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CODi:1 
 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he or she is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Jan N. Shekitka, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. The republished Code was prepared under the supervision of A. Lawton Langford, Corporate President, and Pattie F. Smith, Supplement Editor, with the able assistance of the MCC staff. 
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. William J. Donovan, City Clerk, and Mr. Kevin Crowley, Assistant City Solicitor, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on the 1988 Code. 
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. John J. Long, City Clerk, and Ms. Susan M. Callahan, City Solicitor, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this republication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LEGISLATION  
Division 1 - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Charter of the City of Somerville is printed in this part and is Chapter 240, Acts of 1899, as amended. All amendments to Chapter 240 have been inserted in their proper places, and the repealed or amended provisions removed. The official citations of all amendments are enclosed in parentheses following each amended section, in chronological order. The absence of such a citation indicates that the provision remains as originally adopted. The numbers of the sections of the Charter are the official numbers. Catchlines have been added to the sections of the Charter to facilitate usage and are enclosed by brackets. Other material in brackets has been added where necessary for purposes of clarity. 
State Law reference— City Charters, M.G.L.A. c. 43. 
 
LETTER OF INTRODUCTION 
To the Honorable Mayor and City Council: 
On April 14, 1871 the Governor of the state approved Chapter 182 of the Acts of the Legislature for 1871. This act, adopted by the voters of the town April 27, 1871, established the City of Somerville and outlined the basic laws and regulations of the new city government. 
This Charter of the City of Somerville remained in force until 1899 when at a special election held September 26th, the voters of the city accepted a revised Charter which the State Legislature authorized by Chapter 240 of the Acts of 1899. 
The Revised Charter of 1899 is still the basic law for the city. However, since that time, the State Legislature has authorized and the city has accepted several amendments to the Revised Charter. 
The accompanying copy of the Revised Charter has incorporated all authorized changes through the publication of this most recent Supplement. No changes can be made in these laws without specific authority from the State Legislature. 
An Appendix has been included which cites several additional acts of the State Legislature, as amended which, although not direct amendments to the Charter, lay down basic requirements for our city government. These acts are included here to give a more comprehensive picture of the city's basic laws as well as facilitate research and reference. 
Yours truly, 
John J. Long 
City Clerk  
TITLE 1. - MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT 
 
Sec. 1. - Incorporation. 
The inhabitants of the City of Somerville shall continue to be a municipal corporation, under the name of the City of Somerville, and as such shall be subject to all general laws relating to such corporations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.  
Sec. 2. - Form of government. 
The administration of the fiscal, prudential and municipal affairs of said city shall be vested in an executive department, to consist of the mayor, and a legislative department, to consist of a single body, to be called the city council. The executive department shall never exercise any legislative power, and the legislative department shall never exercise any executive power. 
( Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 3. - Seven wards established. 
It shall be the duty of the city council in joint convention, as soon as may be after the acceptance of this Act, to divide said city into seven wards, containing as nearly as possible and as may be consistent with well-defined limits to each ward an equal number of male voters. In order that the new wards may conform to the present representative districts, the present ward one shall constitute one ward, and the present wards two, three and four shall each be divided into two wards. Immediately after such new division of the city into wards, the city council shall divide such new wards into voting precincts, none of which shall contain more than one thousand registered male voters, and the mayor shall thereupon appoint, with the approval of the city council, election officers to serve therein. Action under this section shall not apply to the state election to be held the present year. 
( Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
TITLE 2. - ELECTIONS AND MEETINGS 
 
Sec. 4. - Elections generally. 
Except as herein otherwise provided, all elections for national, state, county, district and municipal officers, and for any other municipal purposes, shall be called and conducted according to the provisions of the General Laws of the Commonwealth; provided, however, that municipal elections shall be held in the City of Somerville, according to Chapter 281, Acts of 1932, as amended. 
(Acts 1932, Chapter 281, accepted by voters Nov. 8, 1932.)  
Sec. 5. - Date of municipal elections. 
The biennial municipal election shall take place on the Tuesday next after the first Monday of November in the year nineteen hundred and twenty-five and every second year thereafter. The municipal year shall begin on the first Monday of January in each year. 
(Special Acts 1919, Chapter 98, accepted by voters Nov. 4, 1919; Acts 1924, Chapter 123, accepted by the Board of Aldermen and approved by Mayor June 13, 1924.)  
Sec. 6. - Certain officers to be elected by ballots. 
At such municipal election the qualified voters shall give in their votes by ballot for a mayor and members of the city council and of the school committee, or for such of them as are to be elected. The person receiving the highest number of votes for any office shall be deemed and declared to be elected to such office, and whenever two or more persons are to be elected to the same office the several persons, up to and including the number required to be chosen, receiving the highest number of votes shall be deemed and declared to be elected. 
( Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 7. - Filling of vacancies. 
If there is no choice of mayor or if the person elected mayor shall refuse to accept the office or shall die before qualifying, or if a vacancy in the office shall occur five months or more prior to any regular municipal election, the city council shall immediately order a special election and the same proceedings shall be had in all respects as are provided for the election of a mayor under this charter and shall be repeated until the election of a mayor is completed. If the vacancy in the office of mayor shall occur less than five months prior to any regular municipal election, it shall be filled by the city council from amongst its members by a majority vote of all its members. 
If the full number of members in the office of councilor-at-large has not been elected, or if a vacancy occurs in the office of councilor-at-large for any cause, the city clerk shall within five calendar days notify the city council and the chairperson of the board of election commissioners of the vacancy. Within five calendar days after notification, the chairperson of the board of election commissioners or a designee shall certify, in writing, to the city clerk that the defeated candidate for the office of councilor-at-large with the next highest number of votes at the regular municipal election at which councilors-at-large were elected for the term in which the vacancy occurs shall serve as councilor-at-large. If the person is eligible and willing to serve, the city clerk shall administer the oath of office to the person within 15 calendar days after certification and the person shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. If the person who is eligible declines the office, is not eligible and willing to serve or fails to take the oath of office within the time period set forth in this section, then the person with the next highest number of votes at the election who is eligible and willing to serve shall fill the remainder of the unexpired term in the manner set forth in this section. If there is no defeated candidate eligible and willing to serve who has taken the oath of office and the vacancy occurs more than 180 days prior to any regular municipal election, the city council shall immediately order a special election to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
If the full number of members in the office of councilor elected by ward has not been elected or if a vacancy occurs in the office of councilor elected by ward for any cause more than 180 days prior to any regular municipal election, the city council shall immediately order a special election to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
If a vacancy occurs 180 days or less prior to any regular municipal election in the office of councilor-at-large, for which there is no defeated candidate eligible and willing to serve and who has taken the oath of office, or in the office of councilor elected by ward for any cause then the person elected at the next regular municipal election for the office shall fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term and the city clerk shall administer the oath of office to the person at the next meeting of the city council. 
(Special Acts 1919, Chapter 98, accepted by voters Nov. 4, 1919; Acts 1946, Chapter 167, approved March 28, 1946; Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013; Special Acts 2014, Chapter 90 , approved May 1, 2014. Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 8. - General meetings of qualified voters. 
General meetings of the citizens qualified to vote may from time to time be held, according to the right secured by the constitution of the Commonwealth, and all such meetings may, and upon the request in writing of fifty qualified voters setting forth the purposes thereof, shall be called by the city council. 
( Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 9. - Superseded. 
Editor's note— Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012 has superseded section 9 of this Charter.  
TITLE 3. - LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 10. - City council—Composition; election; terms. 
The city council shall be composed of eleven members, to be elected as follows: four councilors at large shall biennially be elected by the qualified voters of the city at large, voting in their respective wards, and one councilor shall at the same time be elected by and from the qualified voters of each ward. The members of the city council shall hold office for the two municipal years next following their election, or, if elected after the regular municipal election, for the remainder of the two municipal years, following such regular municipal election and until a majority of the new council shall be elected and qualified in their stead. 
(Special Acts 1919, Chapter 98, accepted by voters Nov. 4, 1919; Acts 1930, Chapter 50, approved Feb. 21, 1930; Acts 1934, Chapter 298, accepted biennially be elected by the qualified voters of the city at large, voting in their respective wards, and one councilor shall at the same time be elected by and from the qualified voters of each ward. The members of the board by voters Nov. 6, 1934; Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 11. - Same—Rules for proceedings; quorum; salaries. 
The city council shall make rules for its proceedings. A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The city council may, by a 2/3 vote of all its members taken by a call of the yeas and nays, establish a salary for its members. Such salary may be reduced at any time by a similar vote. 
( Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.) 
Editor's note— See M.G.L.A. ch. 39, § 6A. 
(Acts 1927, Chapter 47, accepted by voters Nov. 8, 1927; Acts 1936, Chapter 330, accepted by voters Nov. 3, 1936; Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013; Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 12. - Oath of office of mayor and councilors. 
The mayor-elect and councilors-elect shall on the first Monday of January following the regular municipal election, meet and be sworn to the faithful performance of their duties. The oath shall be administered by the city clerk, or by any justice of the peace, and shall be duly certified on the journal of the city council. At any time thereafter the oath may be administered to the mayor-elect or to any councilors-elect who was absent or who was not then elected. 
(Special Acts 1915, Chapter 218, approved March 25, 1915; Special Acts 1919, Chapter 98, accepted by voters Nov. 4, 1919; Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 13. - Organization of city council. 
On the first Monday of January in each year the city council shall meet and elect a president and a vice-president who shall hold office during the municipal year. The mayor, or in his absence the oldest in age of the members present, shall call the city council together, and shall preside until a president is elected, who shall thereafter preside over the board. The vice-president shall preside in the absence of the president. At any meeting of the board, in the absence of the president and vice-president, the oldest in age of the members present shall preside until a president pro-tempore is elected. The city clerk shall be clerk of the city council. 
(Special Acts 1919, Chapter 98, accepted by voters Nov. 4, 1919; Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 14. - Superseded. 
Editor's note— Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012 has superceded section 14 of this Charter.  
Sec. 15. - Passage of ordinances, orders and resolutions. 
Any ordinance, order or resolution of the city council may be passed through all its stages of legislation at one session; provided that no member of said council objects thereto; but if one or more members object, the measure shall be postponed for that meeting; and if when it is next brought up three or more members object to its passage at that meeting, a second postponement of at least one week shall take place. 
(Acts 1938, Chapter 104, accepted by the Board of Aldermen and approved by Mayor April 2, 1938; Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 16. - Certain ordinances, etc., to be approved by mayor; mayor's veto power. 
Every ordinance, order, resolution or vote of the city council, except such as relates to its own internal affairs, shall be presented to the mayor. If he approves thereof, he shall signify his approval by signing the same; but if not he shall return the same with his objections to the city council, which shall enter the objections of the mayor at length upon its records and proceed to reconsider said ordinance, order, resolution or vote, and if after such reconsideration two-thirds of all the members of the board vote to pass the same it shall be in force. In all such cases the vote shall be taken by yeas and nays. If such ordinance, order, resolution or vote shall not be returned within ten days after it has been presented to the mayor the same shall be in force. He may except from his approval of any ordinance, order, resolution or vote which he has the power to veto any part involving a distinct item of appropriation of expenditure, and in such case only the part so excepted shall be reconsidered in the manner and with the effect above provided. The veto power of the mayor shall not extend to elections. 
( Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 17. - Powers and duties of city council. 
(a)  The city council shall, except as is otherwise provided in this charter, have and exercise the powers and duties set forth in this section. 
(b)  The city council shall have all the powers, authorities and duties of towns, boards of aldermen, city councils and common councils of cities under the General Laws; provided, however, that all appointments required by law to be made by the mayor and aldermen shall be made by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall have all the powers, authorities and duties now held by the city of Somerville, the city council, the common council, the board of aldermen or the board of mayor and aldermen of Somerville, by special laws. 
(d)  Subject to the veto power of the mayor, as provided in this charter, the city council shall have the power, without appeal from its decision, to lay out, locate anew, alter, widen and discontinue public ways and streets and to order specific repairs or a change of grade therein; to order the construction of sidewalks and of sewers and to take real estate therefore. Any such taking shall be made under chapter 79 of the General Laws, and any person injured in the person's real estate by acts done by the council hereunder may recover damages under said chapter 79. No public way or street shall be laid out, located anew, changed as to grade or otherwise, widened or discontinued, until a public hearing has been held after notice given in accordance with the General Laws relating to public ways. Said hearing may be adjourned from time to time. 
(e)  The city council shall have the power to make ordinances and to affix penalties for the violation thereof. The penalty for the violation of any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be a fine of not more than $300 for each offense; provided, however, that when a higher penalty is permitted by the General Laws, such higher penalty shall be the maximum for each offense. 
(Acts 1938, Chapter 268, approved May 5, 1938; Acts 1973, Chapter 949, accepted March 14, 1974 by the Board of Aldermen; Acts 1988, Chapter 171; Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013; Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 18. - Appropriations for expenditures. 
On or before the thirtieth day of April in each year the city council shall appropriate the amount necessary to meet the expenditures of the city for the current municipal year, and to provide the ways and means for raising the same. It shall take care that no money be paid from the treasury unless the same is granted or appropriated, and shall require bonds with sufficient penalties and sureties from all persons entrusted with the receipt, custody and disbursement of money. All votes of city council making appropriations of money shall show the specific objects for which the appropriations are made. 
(Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013; Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 18A. - Disqualification from serving. 
An elected official who has been convicted of a state or federal felony shall, upon final conviction, be deemed to have vacated that office and shall be disqualified from serving the remainder of the term. 
(Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013.)  
Sec. 19. - Superseded. 
Editor's note— Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012 superseded section 19 of this Charter.  
TITLE 4. - EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 20. - Mayor; vested with executive powers; term of office. 
The executive powers of the city shall be vested solely in the mayor, and may be exercised by him either personally or through the several officers and boards in their respective departments, under his general supervision and control. In case of a vacancy in any office to which appointment is made by the mayor he may personally perform the duties thereof, but he shall not be entitled to receive any salary or pay attached thereto. The mayor shall hold office for the two municipal years beginning with the first Monday in January following his election, unless sooner removed, and until his successor is elected and qualified; provided, that if elected to fill an existing vacancy, he shall hold office only for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Special Acts 1919, Chapter 98, accepted by voters November 4, 1919.)  
Sec. 21. - Mayor to appoint certain officers and boards. 
The mayor may appoint, subject to confirmation by the city council, the following officers and boards; provided, however, that under section 46D of this charter, administrative orders may replace or modify the titles or assign the functions to any other city agency, unless otherwise provided, for 1 year and until the appointment and qualification of a successor: (i) a city treasurer, who shall also be the collector of taxes and in case of a vacancy, the office shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor, subject to confirmation; (ii) a city auditor, for a term of 3 years, from the date of the appointment until the qualification of a successor, and in case of a vacancy, the office shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor, subject to like confirmation; (iii) a chief of police, who shall be appointed in the manner provided by ordinance and shall have an employment agreement for a term of not more than 5 years, all other officers and members of the police department, a chief engineer and all other officers and members of the fire department; (iv) a city attorney; (v) a purchasing agent; (vi) a board of health; (vii) a board of trustees of the public library; (viii) a commissioner of public works, who shall serve for the term of the mayor; (ix) a city engineer, who may be the commissioner of public works; (x) a superintendent of the division of public buildings and grounds; (xi) a superintendent of inspectional services; (xii) a superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights; (xiii) a superintendent of water works; (xiv) 1 animal control officer of each public animal control facility in the city; (xv) the number of constables as may be deemed advisable; and (xvi) a 311 director, special police officers and all other officers and boards of the city whose election or appointment is not otherwise provided for in this charter. The executive officers shall hold their respective offices at the pleasure of the mayor and until removed by the mayor and city council in the same manner in which the officer was appointed or until the offices are otherwise vacated. Nothing in this section shall be construed to conflict with chapter 197 of the acts of 1895. 
(Acts 1934, Chapter 294, accepted by voters Nov. 6, 1934; Acts 1934, Chapter 295, accepted by voters Nov. 6, 1934; Acts 1949, Chapter 234, approved April 29, 1949; Acts 1949, Chapter 474, approved July 1, 1949; Acts 1953, Chapter 650, accepted by voters Nov. 3, 1953; Acts 1985, Chapter 486, approved November 12, 1985; Acts 1986, Chapter 368, approved August 6, 1986; Acts 2006, Chapter 183, approved July 27, 2006; Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013; Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 22. - Appointment of person to examine books and accounts. 
The mayor may at any time appoint a suitable person or persons to examine, without notice, the books and accounts of any department, officer, or employee of the city.  
Sec. 23. - Suspension and removal of officers. 
The mayor may in writing suspend any executive officer, and he shall at once report his action and his reason therefor to the city council. The suspension of any such officer shall, unless previously revoked by the mayor, be a removal at the expiration of fifteen days after said report is made, unless within that time such officer asks for a hearing before the council, which hearing shall forthwith be granted. If within one week after the conclusion of such hearing the council, by two-thirds vote, shall set aside the suspension, the officer shall thereby be reinstated; otherwise the suspension shall constitute a final dismissal from office. 
( Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 24. - Mayor may call special meetings of the city council. 
The mayor shall communicate to the city council such information and shall recommend such measures as in his judgment the interests of the city require. He may at any time call a special meeting of the city council, upon such notification as he may deem sufficient, and other special meetings of said council may be called at such times and in such manner as may be prescribed by the rules of said council. 
( Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 25. - Mayor to enforce laws, ordinances, etc.; appointment of secretary authorized. 
The mayor shall cause the laws, ordinances and orders for the government of the city to be enforced, and shall cause a record of all his official acts to be kept, and for that purpose and to aid him in his official duties he may appoint a secretary and define his duties; and, subject to the approval of the city council, shall fix the salary of the secretary. No increase in the salary of the mayor shall take effect in the calendar year in which it is voted. 
(Acts 1982, Chapter 656, approved Jan. 5, 1983; Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 26. - Mayor to have sole power to sign, execute, etc., deeds, leases, contracts, etc. 
The mayor shall have the sole power to sign, seal, execute and deliver in behalf of the city, deeds and leases of land sold or leased by the city, and other deeds, agreements, contracts, leases, indentures and assurances on behalf of the city. 
(Acts 1932, Chapter 308, approved June 7, 1932.)  
Sec. 27. - Acting mayor authorized when mayor unable to perform duties. 
In case of the inability of the mayor to perform the duties of the office, the president of the city council shall, until such inability is removed, but in no case for a period of time longer than 10 days, exercise the powers and perform the duties of mayor, under the style of acting mayor; provided, however, that the president of the city council acting as mayor shall not, unless authorized in a special instance by the city council, and then only in case of exigency requiring an immediate appointment or removal, make any permanent appointment or removal. In case of the inability of the mayor to perform the duties of the office for longer than 10 days, but prior to a vacancy occurring under section 7 of this charter, the acting mayor shall be elected by the city council from amongst its membership by a majority vote of all its members. An acting mayor chosen by majority vote of the city council shall have power to approve or disapprove an ordinance, order, resolution or vote of the city council and then, only in case of exigency requiring an immediate appointment or removal, make a permanent appointment or removal. In case of such inability on the part of the president of the city council to serve as acting mayor for the initial period of 10 days, the powers and duties shall devolve upon the vice-president of the council, and in case of such inability on the part of both the president and vice-president such powers and duties shall devolve upon the president pro tempore of the council. 
(Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013; Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
TITLE 5. - SCHOOL COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 28. - Composition; election; terms; vacancies. 
The school committee shall exercise the powers conferred and discharge the duties imposed by law upon school committees. The committee shall consist of the mayor and the president of the city council, ex officials [ex officio], neither of whom shall serve as chairman, and seven other members, elected as follows; one member shall be elected by and from the voters of each ward at each regular municipal election to serve for the term of two years next following. If a vacancy in the office of school committeeman shall occur one year or more prior to any regular municipal election, the city council shall forthwith order a special election, and the same proceedings shall be had in all respects as are hereinbefore provided for the election of such school committeeman. But, if the vacancy in the office of school committeeman shall occur less than one year prior to any regular municipal election, it shall be filled for the remainder of the term by ballot of the remaining members of the school committee, the member so elected to be a qualified voter of the ward in the representation of which on said committee the vacancy exists. 
(Acts 1904, Chapter 354, accepted by voters Nov. 8, 1904; Special Acts 1919, Chapter 98, accepted by voters Nov. 4, 1919; Acts 1930, Chapter 50, approved Feb. 21, 1930; Acts 1934, Chapter 297, accepted by voters Nov. 6, 1934; Acts 1935, Chapter 35, approved Mar. 2, 1935; Acts 1946, Chapter 167, approved Mar. 28, 1946; an act transferring the management and control of school buildings of the City of Somerville to the school committee of said city; Acts 1971, Chapter 1026, adopted by Board of Aldermen Nov. 11, 1971, Document No. 121243 not returned by the Mayor; Acts 1977, Chapter 644 was adopted by the Board of Aldermen and approved by the Mayor December 1, 1977 revoking Acts 1971, Chapter 1026 and providing for the transfer of the management and control of school buildings to the school committee; Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013; Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 29. - Meetings; organization. 
The school committee shall meet on the first Monday of January in each year and organize by the election by ballot of one of its members as chairman. The oldest in age of the members present shall preside at all meetings until a chairman is elected.  
Sec. 30. - Rules for proceedings; quorum. 
The school committee shall make rules for its proceedings. A majority of all the members of the committee shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The committee shall annually appoint a superintendent of schools, who shall also be its secretary but shall not be a member of the school committee. 
(Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013.)  
TITLE 6. - ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS 
 
Sec. 31. - City clerk. 
The city clerk shall have charge of all journals, records and documents of the city council, and attest all warrants. He shall be clerk of the city council, and shall keep a journal of all votes and proceedings. He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the city council and he shall perform all the duties and exercise all the powers assigned by law to city clerks or town clerks, so far as such laws can apply to said city. In his absence a clerk of the city council pro tempore shall be chosen, who shall be sworn to the faithful performance of his duties. 
( Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 32. - City treasurer and collector of taxes. 
The city treasurer and collector of taxes shall collect all moneys due the city. He shall have the custody of and pay out all moneys, and cause an accurate account of the same to be kept in proper bookkeeping form, and shall perform such other duties as the ordinances prescribe; he shall also perform all the duties and exercise all the powers assigned by law to city treasurers and collectors of taxes or town treasurers and collectors of taxes, so far as such laws can apply to said city. 
(Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013.)  
Sec. 33. - City auditor. 
The city auditor shall perform such duties as the ordinances prescribe.  
Sec. 34. - City attorney. 
The city attorney shall perform such duties as the ordinances prescribe. 
(Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013.)  
Sec. 35. - Superseded. 
Editor's note— Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012 superseded section 35 of this Charter.  
Sec. 36. - Board of assessors. 
(a)  Composition; term of office. The board of assessors shall consist of three members. They shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the city council. Each assessor shall serve a three-year term. Their terms shall be staggered so that only one term elapses at the end of each year. 
The chairman of the board of assessors shall serve full-time. He shall be nominated as chairman by the mayor at the time of his appointment. As chairman of the board he shall also serve as the department head in the administration of the department. 
The other two assessors shall serve part-time and constitute the other members of the board of assessors. 
(b)  Qualifications. The members of the board of assessors shall possess the following minimum qualifications before assuming their official duties: a bachelor's degree from an accredited four-year college or university with major course work in accounting, business or public administration, economics, statistics, real estate, computer science, engineering or mathematics and not less than three years of paid, full-time experience in the public or private sector where the primary task involved the assessment or appraisal of real property; provided, however, that possession of any one or more of the following certificates or memberships may be substituted for the bachelor's degree requirement: 
(1)  Certified Massachusetts Assessor (CMA); 
(2)  Certified Appraisal Evaluator (CAE); 
(3)  Designated member of Society of Real Estate Appraisers (SREA); 
(4)  Designated member of the American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers. 
The provision of this paragraph may be waived by the mayor, with the approval of a two-thirds vote of the city council taken by a call of the yeas and nays, if the mayor determines that there is no reasonable expectation that qualified persons will be able and willing to accept appointment as an assessor, but in no case shall such a waiver be made for the position of chairman of the board of assessors; provided, however, that a waiver granted pursuant to this paragraph shall be renewed annually. If such waiver is not sought by the mayor by the first regularly scheduled meeting of the city council in February, then that assessor shall cease to hold office. If the city council fail to act upon the request for waiver by the end of March, then that assessor shall cease to hold office. The waiver provided for herein shall be granted for not more than three consecutive times as to each person. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The members of the board of assessors shall exercise the powers conferred and discharge duties imposed upon the board of assessors by law. 
(d)  Compensation of members. The salary of members of the board of assessors shall be established by ordinance by the city council with the approval of the mayor. 
(e)  Quorum; voting. A majority of the full board of assessors shall constitute a quorum. Every member of the board of assessors may vote on any question coming before it. The affirmative vote of at least two assessors (a majority of the assessors present and voting) shall be necessary for the approval of any matter, including, but not limited to, statutory and discretionary tax abatements. 
(f)  Rules. The board of assessors shall, from time to time, establish, amend or alter rules for its proceedings. 
(g)  Meetings. Regular meetings of the board of assessors shall be held at a time and place fixed by rule or otherwise required by law; provided, however, that at least one meeting shall be held each month. The chairman of the board of assessors or any two members thereof may, at any time, call a special meeting by causing written notices, stating the time of holding such meeting and the subject to be acted upon, and signed by the members calling the same, to be delivered in hand to each member of the board of assessors or left at his usual dwelling place, and posted as required by law. 
(h)  Journal. A full and accurate journal of the proceedings of the board of assessors shall be kept. Every matter which comes before the board of assessors for a vote shall be included in the journal. 
(i)  Roll call votes. All final votes of the board of assessors on questions involving the abatement of taxes in the amount of one thousand dollars or more or the granting of any special tax agreement, or upon the request of one member of the board of assessors, shall be taken by a call of the yeas and nays and shall be entered upon the records. 
(j)  Filling of vacancies. If a vacancy shall occur in the office of assessors at any time, the mayor shall, subject to confirmation by the city council, appoint a qualified person to fill such vacancy for the balance of the unexpired term. 
Notwithstanding any election of assessors having occurred in November of nineteen hundred and eighty-one and in November of nineteen hundred and eighty-three, section one of this Act [subsections (a)—(j)] shall operate to dissolve the currently elected board of assessors and their terms of office and powers shall terminate on the sixtieth day after the effective date of this Act. 
The first term of each assessor appointed pursuant to section one of this Act [paragraph (a)] shall be as follows: 
(1)  The chairman shall be appointed for a full three-year term; 
(2)  The two part-time assessors shall be appointed for a term of two years and one year, respectively and thereafter each assessor shall be appointed to a three-year term or to fill an unexpired three year term. 
(Acts 1985, Chapter 23, approved April 9, 1985; Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013; Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 37. - Superseded. 
Editor's note— Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012 superseded section 37 of this Charter.  
Sec. 38. - Board of health. 
As soon after the organization of the government as practicable the mayor shall appoint, subject to confirmation by the city council, three persons, who shall constitute the board of health, to serve, two for one year, and one for two years, and each year thereafter one to serve for the term of one year, and one for the term of two years. Vacancies occurring in the board may be filled in the same manner, but only for the unexpired term. At least one member of the board shall be a doctor of medicine. Said board may make rules not inconsistent with law, to govern the action of said inspectors. The board of health shall perform such duties as are prescribed by law and ordinance. 
(Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013; Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 39. - Board of trustees of the public library. 
The board of trustees of the public library shall consist of nine members, to be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. As soon after the organization of the city government under this Charter as may be convenient, the mayor shall appoint three trustees to serve for the term of one year, three for the term of two years, and three for the term of three years, and each year thereafter the mayor shall appoint three trustees to serve for the term of three years. Vacancies occurring in the board may be filled in the same manner, but only for the unexpired term. Said trustees shall have the care and management of the public library. 
( Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 40. - Department of public works. 
There shall be a department of public works which shall be under the direction and control of the commissioner of public works. 
(Acts 1953, Chapter 650, accepted by voters Nov. 3, 1953.)  
Sec. 40A. - Powers and duties of commissioner of public works. 
The commissioner of public works shall have the direction and control of the construction, alteration, repair, maintenance and management of ways, streets, sidewalks and bridges; he shall have the powers and discharge the duties of surveyors of highways, the construction, alteration, repair and care of main drains and common sewers; the care, superintendence and management of public grounds and parks, including cemeteries; he shall make and have the custody of all plans, surveys, measurements and levels appertaining the public ways, drains, sewers, water works or lands; he shall have charge of the construction, alteration, repair, maintenance and care of public buildings except school buildings; he shall have charge, so far as the rights of the city extend, of fire alarm and police signal systems and of trolley wires, of all gas pipes and street lighting; he shall have charge of the construction, extension, alteration, repair, care and management of the water works; and shall perform such other duties as the city council may direct. 
(Acts 1953, Chapter 650, accepted by voters Nov. 3, 1953; an act transferring the management and control of school buildings of the City of Somerville to the school committee of said city; Acts 1971, Chapter 1026, adopted by Board of Aldermen Nov. 11, 1971, Document No. 121243 not returned by the Mayor; Acts 1977, Chapter 644, adopted by the Board of Aldermen Nov. 29, 1977 and approved by the Mayor Dec. 1, 1977; Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 40B. - Appointment of commissioner of public works. 
The mayor shall, subject to the approval of the city council, appoint a commissioner of public works who may also be the city engineer of said city, and shall hold office during the term of the mayor and until his successor is appointed. 
(Acts 1953, Chapter 650, accepted by voters Nov. 3, 1953; Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 40C. - Divisions within department of public works—Established. 
There shall be within the department of public works the following divisions: 
(1)  division of highways, electric lines and lights; 
(2)  division of engineering; 
(3)  division of waterworks; and 
(4)  division of buildings and grounds. 
Existing divisions may be eliminated or new divisions created as may be considered necessary by the mayor with the approval of the city council. 
Each division of the department of public works shall have the management and control of those duties as may be determined by the commissioner of public works or by the city council. 
(Acts 1953, Chapter 650, accepted by voters Nov. 3, 1953; Acts 2008, Chapter 112; Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 40D. - Same—City engineer, superintendents to control. 
There shall be a superintendent of the division of highways, electric lights and lines; a city engineer; a superintendent of the division of waterworks; a superintendent of the division of buildings and grounds; and a supervisor of school facilities and energy conservation. The city engineer and the superintendents of the various divisions shall have charge of their respective divisions under the direction of the commissioner of public works. 
The mayor shall annually appoint, subject to the confirmation of the city council, a superintendent of the division of highways, electric lights and lines; a city engineer who may also be the commissioner of public works; a superintendent of waterworks; an operations manager of waterworks; a 311 director; a superintendent of the division of buildings and grounds; and a supervisor of school facilities and energy conservation. 
(Acts 1953, Chapter 650, accepted by voters November 3, 1953; Acts 1988, Chapter 94.; Acts 2008, Chapter 112)  
Sec. 41. - Superseded. 
Editor's note— Chapter 650 of the Acts of 1953 has superseded section 41 of this Charter.  
Sec. 42. - Security required for excavations of streets and sidewalks. 
The commissioner of public works may require that no person or corporation, other than an officer or agent of the city, authorized by the city council to dig up any public street or sidewalk in said city shall begin such digging before furnishing to said commissioner security satisfactory to him to restore such street or sidewalk to its former condition. 
(Acts 1953, Chapter 650, accepted by voters Nov. 3, 1953; Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 43. - Purchasing agent to make all purchases. 
The purchasing agent shall, subject to section 46A and the General Laws, make all purchases for the respective departments. 
(Acts 1932, Chapter 308, approved June 7, 1932; Acts 1985, Chapter 486, approved November 12, 1985; Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013; Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 44. - Mayor may appoint, discharge, etc., employees. 
The mayor shall appoint, employ, and discharge, at pleasure, all subordinate officers, clerks assistants and laborers in their respective departments, and shall have the immediate direction and control of all executive and administrative business therein. They shall at all times be accountable to the mayor for the proper discharge of their duties. 
(Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013; Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 45. - Terms of appointed officers. 
All officers required by this Act or by General Law to be appointed by the mayor or by the mayor and councilors shall be appointed as soon as practicable after the mayor and a majority of the councilors have been qualified and shall, unless sooner removed, hold their respective offices for the length of time prescribed by law, or the portion thereof then remaining, beginning on the first Monday in January of the year in which they are respectively appointed and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. This section shall not apply to the appointment of election officers. 
( Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
TITLE 7. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 46. - Estimate of expenses of departments, boards. 
The heads of departments and all other officers and boards whose duties involve the expenditure of public money shall annually in the month of January or February, present to the mayor an itemized estimate of the money required for their respective departments or offices during the current financial year, who shall examine and submit the same, with his recommendation for appropriations, to the city council during the month of February or March. 
( Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 46A. - Certain contracts to be accompanied by bond; meet other requirements. 
All contracts made by a department, board or commission of the city shall comply with section 17 of chapter 30B of the General Laws. A contract required to be in writing shall not be deemed executed until signed by the mayor and the head of the department, board or commission making the contract. When contracts are required to be in writing under said section 17 of said chapter 30B, contracts for supplies, services and construction may be subject to additional signature requirements under applicable city ordinances. All contracts may be required to be accompanied by a bond with sureties, a deposit of money, certified check or other security for the faithful performance thereof, satisfactory to the procurement officer, department head or commission. Said security shall be deposited with the city treasurer. No such contract shall be altered except by written agreement of the contractor, the procurement officer or department head making the contract, with the approval of the mayor affixed thereto. 
(Acts 1932, Chapter 308, approved June 7, 1932; an act further regulating the awarding of certain contracts by the City of Somerville, Acts 1971, Chapter 972, adopted by the Board of Aldermen Dec. 21, 1971, Document No. 121276 not returned by the Mayor; Acts 1980, Chapter 217; Acts 1985, Chapter 486, approved Nov. 15, 1985; Acts 1993, Chapter 201, approved Oct. 28, 1993; Acts 2016, Chapter 340, approved Dec. 22, 2016.) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Acts 1993, Chapter 201 amended § 46A to read as set out above and repealed § 46B. The subject matter of new § 46A is the same as that of former § 46B; therefore, the editor has retained the history note of former § 46B for the new § 46A. Former § 46A required bids for certain contracts, purchases, etc. In addition to the legislation included in the history note to this section, former § 46A was also amended by Acts 1936, Chapter 183, accepted by the voters Nov. 2, 1937.  
Sec. 46B. - Superseded. 
Editor's note— Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012 superseded section 46B of this Charter.  
Sec. 46C. - City auditor to certify contract appropriations. 
No contract or order for the performance of labor or for the purchase of apparatus, supplies or materials except in cases of special emergency involving the health or safety of the people or their property, shall be awarded by the city unless and until the city auditor has certified on said contract or order that there is an unencumbered balance in the appropriation chargeable therefore sufficient to cover the cost of said labor, apparatus, supplies or materials, as the case may be. 
(Acts 1937, Chapter 353, approved May 26, 1937; an act further regulating the awarding of certain contracts by the City of Somerville, Acts 1971, Chapter 972, adopted by the Board of Aldermen Dec. 21, 1971, Document No. 121276 not returned by the Mayor; Acts 1980, Chapter 217; Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013.)  
Sec. 46D. - Organization of city agencies. 
(a)  The organization of the city into operating agencies to provide services and for the administration of the government, as described in this charter, special acts or the General Laws, shall be accomplished through an administrative order filed with the city council by the mayor. No administrative order may originate with the city council. The mayor may, subject only to express prohibitions in the General Laws or this charter, propose to reorganize, consolidate or abolish a city agency, in whole or in part, or to establish a new city agency as is deemed necessary. No function assigned by this charter to a particular city agency may be discontinued, but the function may be assigned to another city agency by administrative order. 
(b)  The mayor may prepare and submit to the city council administrative orders that establish operating divisions for the orderly, efficient or convenient conduct of the business of the city. All ordinances addressing the organization and operation of city departments, agencies, boards, commissions and offices may be modified, revised, repealed or otherwise addressed in such administrative orders. Administrative orders may provide for the combination, separation, creation or dissolution of departments, provided that all essential city functions are assigned to a department, board, commission or office. 
Administrative orders shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor that explains the benefits expected and advises the city council if the administrative order shall require amendments, insertions, revisions, repeal or otherwise of existing ordinances. 
When the mayor proposes an administrative order, the city council shall hold 1 or more public hearings on the proposal giving notice by publication in a local newspaper, which notice shall describe the scope of the proposal and the time and place at which the public hearing will be held, not less than 7 nor more than 14 days following said publication. An organization or reorganization plan shall become effective upon a 2/3 vote of the city council to approve the plan. The city council may vote only to approve or to disapprove the plan and may not vote to amend or alter it. 
(Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013; Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 47. - Officers, boards to provide information to councilors concerning discharge of duties. 
Every administrative board, through its chairman, and every officer having charge of a department, shall, at the request of the city council, appear before it and give such information as it may require in relation to any matter, act or thing connected with the discharge of the duties of such board or officer; and when so requested to appear, the officer who appears shall have the right to speak upon all matters then under consideration relating to his department. 
( Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 48. - Restrictions on appropriations. 
No sum appropriated for a specific purpose shall be expended for any other purpose unless by authority of the city council first obtained; and no expenditure shall be made and no liability incurred by or in behalf of the city until the city council has duly voted an appropriation sufficient to meet such expenditure or liability, except that after the expiration of the financial year and before the making of the regular annual appropriations liabilities payable out of a regular annual appropriation may be incurred or payments made to an amount not exceeding one-fourth of the total appropriation made for similar purposes in the preceding year. 
( Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 49. - Superseded. 
Editor's note— Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012 superseded section 49 of this Charter.  
Sec. 50. - Elected and appointed persons to receive certificate, take oath. 
Every person who is elected and every person who is appointed by the mayor or by the mayor and city council to an office shall receive a certificate of such election or appointment from the city clerk, and except as otherwise provided by law, before performing any act under his election or appointment, shall take and subscribe an oath qualifying him to enter upon his duties. A record of such oath shall be made by the city clerk. Any oath required by this act may be administered by the mayor, the city clerk, or any officer authorized by law to administer oaths. 
( Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 51. - Existing ordinances, regulations to continue in force. 
The existing ordinances and regulations of the City of Somerville, so far as they are not inconsistent with this Act, shall continue in force until amended or repealed.  
Sec. 52. - Civil Service Act to remain in force. 
Nothing in this charter shall be construed to affect the enforcement of chapter 31 of the General Laws in the city of Somerville. 
(Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013.)  
Sec. 53. - Repealer. 
All acts and parts of acts inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed, but the passage of this Act shall not affect any right accruing or accrued, or any suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding pending at the time when it shall take effect by acceptance, as herein provided, and no penalty or forfeiture previously incurred shall be affected thereby. No act which has been repealed shall be revived by the repeal of acts mentioned in this section. 
(Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013.)  
Sec. 54. - Acceptance of Charter by voters. 
This Act shall be submitted to the qualified male voters of the City of Somerville for acceptance at a special election to be called by the city council and held on the fourth Tuesday of September, in the year eighteen hundred and ninety-nine. The vote shall be taken by ballot in answer to the following question: "Shall an act passed by the General Court in the year eighteen hundred and ninety-nine, entitled 'An Act to Revise the Charter of the City of Somerville', be accepted?" 
( Acts 2018, Chapter 355 , approved Jan. 1, 2019.)  
Sec. 55. - Superseded. 
Editor's note— Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012 superseded section 55 of this Charter.  
Sec. 56. - Severability; continuance of duties. 
Where provisions of the Somerville charter conflict with city ordinances, rules, regulations, orders or special acts or acceptances of laws, the charter shall govern. All city ordinances, rules, regulations, orders and special acts not superseded by this act shall remain in force. 
All agencies of the city of Somerville shall continue to perform their duties until re-elected, reappointed or until successors to their respective positions are duly appointed or elected or until their duties have been transferred and assumed by another city agency. 
(Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved January 3, 2012.)  
Division 2 - CHARTER APPENDIX[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The acts contained herein are acts of the General Court which did not specifically amend the 1899 Charter of the city but set out basic requirements of the city government. The acts have been classified according to subject matter and have been arbitrarily renumbered for classification and indexing purposes. The official citation to each section contained in the division is enclosed in parentheses following each section. 
 
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF APPEALS 
 
Sec. 1. - Powers and duties. 
There shall be a zoning board of appeals in the city of Somerville with all the powers and duties under section 12 of chapter 40A of the General Laws. 
(Acts 1928, Chapter 49, Section 1; Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013)  
Sec. 2. - Superseded. 
Editor's note— Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012 has superseded section 2 of this Article I.  
ARTICLE II. - ASSOCIATE MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF APPEALS 
 
Sec. 1. - Appointment; vacancies. 
The City of Somerville may by ordinance provide for the appointment by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the councilors, of associate members of the board of appeals established in relation to the zoning ordinances and general building ordinances of said city under chapter 40A of the General Laws. In case of a vacancy, inability to act or interest on the part of a member of the board of appeals his place shall be taken by an associate member. 
(Acts 1928, Chapter 81, Section 1; Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013)  
Sec. 2. - Acceptance of Act and effective date. 
This Act shall take effect upon its acceptance, during the current year, by vote of the city council of said city, subject to the provisions of its Charter, otherwise it shall not take effect; but, for the purpose of such acceptance, it shall take effect upon its passage. 
(Approved March 1, 1928. Accepted by board of aldermen with approval of mayor, March 23, 1928. Acts 1928, Chapter 81, Section 2)  
ARTICLE III. - LICENSING COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 1. - Creation; powers and duties; composition; appointment; compensation. 
The City of Somerville may by ordinance establish a licensing commission and from time to time place in charge of and withdraw from said commission the issuing of such of the licenses, now or hereafter authorized by law to be issued by its city council, as the city may by ordinance determine. One member of said commission shall be appointed from each of the two leading political parties and the third member shall also be appointed from one of said parties. Said commission shall have all the powers conferred by the statutes of the Commonwealth upon the city council and the mayor in relation to such licenses as may be placed in its charge and the regulation of the subject matters thereof. The members of said commission shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council, and shall receive such compensation, if any, as the mayor and city council may determine. The powers and duties of licensing boards, mentioned in Section four of Chapter one hundred and thirty-eight of the General Laws, shall vest in said commission. 
(Acts 1923, Chapter 191, Section 1; Acts 1939, Chapter 190, Section 1)  
Sec. 2. - Vacancies. 
From time to time as a vacancy occurs in said licensing commission, as constituted on the effective date of this Act, by expiration of term or otherwise, a successor to the member whose office becomes vacant shall be so appointed that the requirement in section one of this act as to representation of the two leading political parties on said commission will be complied with as soon as may be, and thereafter said section one shall apply to the appointment of members of said commission. 
(Acts 1923, Chapter 191; Acts 1939, Chapter 190, Section 2)  
ARTICLE IV. - BOARD OF ELECTION COMMISSIONERS 
 
Sec. 1. - Superseded. 
Editor's note— Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012 has superseded section 1 of this Article IV.  
Sec. 2. - Composition; compensation. 
There shall be a board of election commissioners in the city of Somerville. The board shall consist of 4 persons, 2 of whom shall always represent each of the 2 leading political parties, as defined in section 1 of chapter 50 of the General Laws. They shall receive such compensation as the mayor and city council determine. 
(Acts 1928, Chapter 82, Section 2; Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013)  
Sec. 3. - Members; appointment, terms. 
The members of the board of election commissioners shall serve until the expiration of their respective terms and until their successors are qualified. As the terms of the several election commissioners expire, and in case a vacancy occurs in said board, the mayor shall, subject to the approval by the city council, so appoint their successors that the members of the board shall equally represent the two leading political parties as defined as aforesaid. Such appointments shall be for terms of three years beginning April first, except that any appointments to fill a vacancy shall be for the unexpired term. 
(Acts 1928, Chapter 82, Section 3; amended by Acts 1929, Chapter 178; Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013)  
Sec. 4. - Organization; record keeping. 
The board shall organize annually in the month of April by the choice of a chairman and a secretary. In case the members are unable to agree upon a chairman and a secretary, such officers shall be designated by the mayor. The secretary shall keep a full and accurate record of the proceedings of the board and shall perform such other duties as the board may require. 
(Acts 1928, Chapter 82, Section 4)  
Sec. 5. - Powers and duties. 
The board of election commissioners shall oversee the conduct of elections under state laws and regulations and this charter, except for the power and duty of fixing the days, hours and places for holding municipal elections. 
(Acts 1928, Chapter 82, Section 5; Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013)  
Sec. 6. - Appointment of assistants authorized. 
The mayor may appoint assistant election commissioners and such other assistants as the mayor deems necessary, who shall at all times equally represent the 2 leading political parties as defined in section 1 of chapter 50 of the General Laws. 
(Acts 1928, Chapter 82, Section 6; Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013)  
Sec. 7. - Annual register; notice to persons not entered. 
The board of election commissioners shall, after the first day of January in each year, prepare an annual register containing the names of all qualified voters in said city for the current year, beginning with the first day of January. The names shall be arranged by precincts and, opposite the name of each voter, shall be entered his residence on the preceding first day of January or on any subsequent day when he became a resident of said city. The board of election commissioners shall enter in the annual register every name contained in the lists, for the current year, of persons listed by the listing board, giving, as the residence of each person on the first day of January, the place at which he was listed by said board; provided, that in every case they are able to identify the name so listed as that of a person whose name was borne on the voting list of said city at the last preceding election. They shall make all inquiries and investigations necessary to identify such person, and they shall not enter in the annual register the name of a person objected to by any of the election commissioners, until such person has been duly notified and been given an opportunity to be heard by them, and shall have appeared and satisfied them of his right to have his name so entered. They shall forthwith enter in the annual register the name of every person whose qualifications as a voter have been determined by them in the current year and whose name has accordingly been entered in the general register. They shall, on or before the first Monday of August in each year, send notice in writing by mail to each voter of the preceding year whose name has not been entered in the annual register of the current year that his name has not been so entered. 
(Acts 1938, Chapter 394, Section 7)  
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012 has superseded Article V, sections 1—13, of this Charter Appendix, Division 2.  
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - Preliminary elections; date and hours. 
On the third Tuesday preceding every regular or special municipal election in the City of Somerville at which any elective municipal office is to be filled, there shall be held, except as otherwise provided in section ten, (section 14 of this article) a preliminary election for the purpose of nominating candidates therefor. The polls at every such election shall be open during such hours, not less than nine, as may be designated by the city council, and the General Laws relative to municipal elections shall apply thereto, except as is otherwise specifically provided in this Act. 
(Acts 1932, Chapter 281, Section 1, amended by Acts 1933, Chapter 16)  
Sec. 2. - Nominating procedure limited. 
Except as is otherwise provided, there shall not be printed on the official ballot to be used at any regular or special municipal election in said city the name of any person as a candidate for any office unless such person has been nominated as such at a preliminary election for nomination There shall not be printed on the official ballot for use at such preliminary election the name of any candidate for nomination at such election unless he shall have submitted, within the time limited and as provided by section three, the nomination paper therein described. 
(Acts 1932, Chapter 281, Section 2; Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013)  
Sec. 3. - Requirements for nomination. 
Any person who is qualified to vote at any regular or special election for a candidate for any elective municipal office in said city, and who is a candidate for nomination thereto, shall be entitled to have his name as such candidate printed on the official ballot to be used at a preliminary election for nomination therefor; provided, that if he is a candidate to be voted for in a single ward he is a registered voter in the ward wherein he is a candidate; and provided, further, that on or before five o'clock in the afternoon of the eighth Tuesday preceding such regular or special municipal election there shall be submitted to the board of election commissioners, hereinafter called the board, a nomination paper prepared and issued by the board, wherein the candidate sets forth in writing his candidacy, and wherein the petition is signed by voters of the city qualified to vote for a candidate for said office to the number of at least two hundred and fifty for the office of mayor, one hundred and fifty for the office of councilors at large and one hundred for the office of ward councilor and of member of the school committee, whose signatures are certified as hereinafter provided. 
(Acts 1932, Chapter 281, Section 3; amended by Acts 1936, Chapter 311; Acts 1937, Chapter 211; Acts 1943, Chapter 124)  
Sec. 4. - Form of nomination paper. 
Said nomination papers shall be in substantially the following form: 
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS 
CITY OF SOMERVILLE 
NOMINATION PAPER 
STATEMENT OF CANDIDATE 
I (_______), on oath declare that I am a citizen of the United States of America, that I have resided in the City of Somerville for at least six months, that my present residence is (number, if any) on (name of street) and ward in said city, that I am a voter therein, qualified to vote for a candidate for the office hereinafter mentioned; that I am a candidate for the office of (name of office) for (state the term) to be voted for at the preliminary election to be held on Tuesday, the day of _______, two thousand and ___, and I request that my name be printed as such candidate on the official ballot for use at said preliminary election. 
(Signed) 
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS 
Middlesex, ss/ 
Subscribed and sworn to on this _______ day of _______, two thousand and ___, before me, 
(Signed) 
Justice of the Peace 
(or Notary Public) 
(Acts 1932, Chapter 281, Section 3)  
Sec. 5. - Petition accompanying statement of candidate. 
Whereas (name of candidate) is a candidate for nomination for the office of (state the office) for (state the term), we, the undersigned, voters of the City of Somerville duly qualified to vote for a candidate for said office, do hereby request that the name of said (name of candidate) as a candidate for nomination for said office be printed on the official ballot to be used at the preliminary election to be held on Tuesday, the _______, day of _______, two thousand and ___. 
We further state that we believe him to be of good moral character and qualified to perform the duties of the office. 
Signature of 
Nominators (to be 
made in person) 	Residence 
April 1 	Ward 	Present 
Residence 
			
 
(Acts 1932, Chapter 281, Section 3; Acts 2016, Chapter 321, approved Nov. 29, 2016)  
Sec. 6. - Acceptance of nomination not required. 
No acceptance by the candidate for nomination named in the said nomination paper shall be necessary to its validity or its filing. The petition, which may be on one or more papers, need not be sworn to. 
(Acts 1932, Chapter 281, Section 3)  
Sec. 7. - Names to be certified by certain time. 
After any such nomination paper has been submitted to the board, it shall certify thereon the number of signatures which are the names of registered voters in said city qualified to sign the same. All such papers found not to contain a number of names so certified equivalent to the number required to make a nomination shall be invalid, and such papers shall be preserved by the board for one year. The board shall complete their certification on or before five o'clock in the afternoon of the seventh Tuesday preceding such regular or special municipal election, and the board, or some member thereof, shall file in their office on or before five o'clock in the afternoon of the next day all papers not found to be invalid as aforesaid. 
(Acts 1932, Chapter 281, Section 4; amended by Acts 1937, Chapter 211; Acts 1943, Chapter 124)  
Sec. 8. - Posting of qualified candidates; position on ballot to be drawn by lot; form of preliminary official ballot. 
On the first day, other than a legal holiday, following the expiration of the time for filing the above described nomination papers, the board shall post in a conspicuous place in their office the names and residences of the candidates for nomination who have duly qualified as such, as they are to appear on the official ballots to be used at the preliminary election, except as to the order of the names, which shall be drawn by lot by the chairman of the board within seven days succeeding five o'clock in the afternoon of the last day fixed for the filing of objections to nomination papers, and the board shall cause the ballots, which shall contain said names in their order as so drawn, and no others, with a designation of residence, and of the office and term of office, to be printed, and the ballots so printed shall be official and no others shall be used at the preliminary election. At any drawing for position on the ballot, each candidate shall have an opportunity to be present in person or by one representative. There shall be left at the end of the list of candidates for nomination for each office blank spaces equal in number to the number of persons to be nominated therefor, in which spaces the voter may insert the name of any person not printed on the ballot for whom he desires to vote for nomination for such office, but the name of such person shall not be printed on the official ballot to be voted for at any regular or special municipal election in said city unless such person is qualified to be nominated under the provisions of section three (sections 3 through 6 of this article). There shall be printed on such ballots such directions as aid the voter, as for example: "vote for one", "vote for two", and the like, and the ballot shall be headed substantially as follows: 
OFFICIAL PRELIMINARY BALLOT 
Candidates for nomination for the offices of (name of offices) in the City of Somerville at a preliminary election to be held on the _______ day of _______, in the year two thousand and ___. 
On the back and outside of each ballot when folded shall be printed the words "Official Ballot for Preliminary Election", followed by the designation of the ward, for which the ballot is prepared, the date of the preliminary election and a facsimile of the signatures of the members of the board. 
(Acts 1932, Chapter 281, Section 5; amended by Acts 1934, Chapter 62; Acts 1937, Chapter 211)  
Sec. 9. - Party or political designations prohibited on ballots. 
No ballot used at any preliminary election in said city shall have printed thereon any party or political designation or mark, and there shall not be appended to the name of any candidate any such party or political designation or mark, or anything showing how he was nominated or indicating his view or opinions. 
(Acts 1932, Chapter 6)  
Sec. 10. - When polling places to be announced. 
The preliminary elections and the regular municipal elections shall be held by wards and the city council shall designate on or before the eighth Tuesday preceding a regular municipal election or on or before the fourth Tuesday preceding a special municipal election, the polling places where the preliminary election and the regular municipal elections shall be held. The regularly appointed election officers shall serve at both the preliminary elections and the regular municipal elections. 
(Acts 1932, Chapter 281, Section 7)  
Sec. 11. - Counting of ballots; announcement of results. 
The election officers shall, immediately upon the closing of the polls at preliminary election, count the ballots and ascertain the number of votes cast in the several voting places for each candidate, and forthwith make return thereof upon blanks to be furnished, as in regular elections, to the board, who shall canvass said returns and shall forthwith determine the result thereof, insert the same in a newspaper published in said city and post the same in a conspicuous place in his [the board's] office. 
(Acts 1932, Chapter 281, Section 8)  
Sec. 12. - Determination of persons nominated. 
The two persons receiving at a preliminary election the highest number of votes for nomination for any office, except one to which two or more persons are to be elected at the regular or special election following, and, as to each of such offices, the several persons in number equal to twice the number so to be elected receiving at such preliminary election the highest number of votes for nomination for that office, shall, except as provided by section ten, (section 14 of this article) be the sole candidates for that office whose names may be printed on the official ballot to be used at the regular or special election at which such office is to be filled. 
(Acts 1932, chapter 281, Section 9)  
Sec. 13. - Tie votes. 
If the preliminary election results in a tie vote among candidates for nomination to any office receiving the lowest number of votes, which, but for said tie vote, would entitle a person receiving the same to have his name printed upon the official ballot for the election, all candidates participating in said tie vote shall have their names printed upon the official ballot, although in consequence there be printed thereon the names of candidates to a number exceeding twice the number to be elected. 
(Acts 1932, Chapter 281, Section 9)  
Sec. 14. - Exception to preliminary election. 
If at the expiration of the time for filing nomination papers for candidates to be voted for at any preliminary election there have not been filed more than twice as many such nomination papers, for an office as there are persons to be elected to such office, the candidates whose nomination papers have thus been filed shall be deemed to have been nominated to said office, and their names shall be printed on the official ballot to be used at the regular or special election following, and the board shall not print said names upon the ballot to be used at said preliminary election, and no other nomination to said office shall be made. If in consequence it shall appear that no names are to be printed upon the official ballot to be used at any preliminary election in any ward or wards of said city, no preliminary election shall be held in any such ward or wards. 
(Acts 1932, Chapter 281, Section 10)  
Sec. 15. - Certain election laws to apply. 
Preliminary elections in said city shall be subject to all General Laws relative to elections, so far as the same are applicable thereto, except as otherwise expressly provided in this Act. 
(Acts 1932, Chapter 281, Section 11)  
Sec. 16. - Repealer. 
So much of Chapter two hundred and forty of the Acts of eighteen hundred and ninety-nine, (the revised Charter) and acts in amendment thereof and in addition thereto, as is inconsistent herewith is hereby repealed. 
(Acts 1932, Chapter 281, Section 12)  
ARTICLE VII. - TRAFFIC COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Specific rules and regulations of the traffic commission are not printed in this volume but are on file in the traffic commission office. 
 
Sec. 1. - Established; composition; terms of appointment members. 
There is hereby established in the City of Somerville, hereinafter referred to as the city, a traffic commission, consisting of the commissioner of public works, the chief of police or his designee, the chief engineer of the fire department or his designee, the chairman of the committee on traffic and parking of the city council and one member of the general public of the city appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. The member appointed by the mayor shall serve for a term coterminous with the mayor, or until the qualification of a successor. 
(Acts 1978, Chapter 397, Section 1)  
Sec. 2. - Chairman; compensation of members. 
The commissioner of public works shall be chairman of the traffic commission. The members of the traffic commission shall receive no compensation for their services as commissioner, but shall be reimbursed by the city for any expenses actually and necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Acts 1978, Chapter 397, Section 2)  
Sec. 3. - Meetings; notice required. 
Meetings of the traffic commission shall be held on the third Tuesday of each month unless sooner necessitated for reasons of public safety, welfare or convenience, in which case a meeting may be called on motion of the chairman. Notice of meetings shall be posted according to the provisions of section twenty-three B of chapter thirty-nine of the General Laws and shall be sent to all commission members, the mayor, the city council and the planning director. All of said persons may attend commission meetings and present their views, but only commission members may vote. 
(Acts 1978, Chapter 397, Section 2)  
Sec. 4. - Appointment of certain positions. 
Upon recommendation of the traffic commission the mayor, with the approval of the city council shall have the authority to create the position of director of traffic and parking and subordinate staff positions including parking control officers. The mayor shall, with the approval of the city council, make appointments to such positions and shall fix their compensation. 
(Acts 1978, Chapter 397, Section 2)  
Sec. 5. - Traffic director; qualifications, removal. 
A member of the traffic department staff shall be a traffic engineer, possessing the qualifications required for associate or full membership in the Institute of Traffic Engineers. The position of traffic engineer shall not be subject to chapter 31 of the General Laws. The traffic director shall be appointed and may be removed in the same manner set forth for the suspension and removal of officers confirmed by the city council. 
(Acts 1978, Chapter 397, Section 2; Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013)  
Sec. 6. - Board of traffic and parking—Established; composition; terms; compensation. 
There is hereby established in the City of Somerville a board of traffic and parking, hereinafter referred to as the traffic board, consisting of three persons to be appointed as follows: one by the mayor for a term of one year, one by majority vote of the city council for a term of two years and one by vote of the first two members for a term of three years; provided, however, that if, after thirty days from the appointment of the first two members the third member has not been agreed to, such member shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. Upon the expiration of the term of a member, his successor shall be appointed for a term of three years. Members shall be eligible for reappointment. No person holding public office in said city shall be eligible for appointment. A member shall not receive any compensation for his services, but shall be reimbursed for all reasonable expenses incurred by him in carrying out his duties. The chairman of the traffic board shall be chosen by and from its membership. 
(Acts 1978, Chapter 397, Section 2A)  
Sec. 7. - Same—Functions. 
The traffic board shall carry out the functions prescribed in clause (b) of section three (section 8(b) of this article) and, in addition, shall be available to the traffic commission for advice and consultation with respect to all of its activities. 
(Acts 1978, Chapter 397, Section 2A)  
Sec. 8. - Powers and duties. 
The traffic commission shall have exclusive authority, except as otherwise provided in this Act, to take any and all of the following actions, if it determines that such actions serve the public safety, welfare or convenience. Subject to the provisions of Section two of Chapter eighty-five of the General Laws: 
(a)  The traffic commission may adopt, alter or repeal rules and regulations, in a manner consistent with the general laws as modified by this Act, relative to vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the streets of the city, and to the movement, stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on, and their exclusion from, all or any streets, ways, highways, roads and parkways under the control of the city, including rules and regulations designating any way or part thereof under such control as a through way under and subject to the provisions of Section nine of Chapter eighty-nine of the General Laws. Any rule or regulation adopted under this clause, prohibiting the parking or standing of vehicles on the whole or any part or parts of one or more streets, ways, highways, roads or parkways under the control of the city, may provide that it shall not apply in such residential areas as shall be specified, and at such times as shall be prescribed, in such rule or regulation, to any motor vehicle registered under Chapter ninety of the General Laws as principally garaged in the city and owned or used by a person residing in such area who, in the year in which such vehicle is parked or in the preceding December for such year, shall have given, by a writing executed in such form and detail as such rule or regulation shall prescribe, and filed with the chief of police, notice of intention to park in such area and shall display in a conspicuous place on such vehicle, while parked, such visible evidence of the giving of such notice as such rule or regulation shall prescribe; but neither the giving of such notice nor the issuance of visible evidence of the giving thereof shall be construed to assign any specific space to any person or vehicle. The traffic commission may, with the approval of the mayor and city council, prescribe fines for violations of rules or regulations adopted under this chapter excluding snow emergency parking violations as described in this paragraph; provided, however, that no penalty in excess of $30 shall be imposed except by ordinance. The traffic commission may, with the approval of the mayor and the city council, prescribe a schedule of fines for the following snow emergency parking violations: parking within 20 feet of an intersection, parking within the area of a fire hydrant and parking within designated fire lanes; provided, however, that no penalty in excess of $50 shall be imposed except by ordinance. A penalty imposed under this section may, if provided in the regulations imposing penalties, be increased by up to 17 per cent if paid later than 21 days after the issuance of a notice of a parking violation but before the parking clerk reports to the registrar in accordance with section 20A1/2 of chapter 90 of the General Laws and 67 per cent if paid thereafter. No adoption, alteration or repeal of a regulation shall take effect until public notice of the proposed action has been given, except with respect to such special rules or regulations as are declared by the traffic commission to be urgently required for the public safety or welfare or such as are of a temporary nature and are to be effective for a period of not more than three weeks. Public notice shall be given by publication in full of the proposed adoption, alteration or repeal not less than once in each of three successive weeks in one or more newspapers published or distributed in the city. The public notice shall include a statement of the effective date of the proposed action, which shall not be less than twenty-one days following the first of the three newspaper publications. A copy of the public notice shall be provided to the members of the city council at the time of publication. 
(b)  Upon the filing of petitions with the traffic board by not less than fifty registered voters of the city, relative to any rule or regulation proposed to be adopted, altered or repealed, and not yet in effect, the proposed action shall be suspended, and the traffic board shall hold a public hearing thereon within two weeks of the date the petitions were filed, and shall by majority vote approve or disapprove the proposed action within two weeks following the public hearing. Upon the filing of petitions with the traffic board by not less than fifty registered voters of the city, relative to any rule or regulation which has been adopted, altered or repealed for a period of at least thirty days, the traffic board shall hold a public hearing thereon within two weeks of the date the petitions were filed and shall, following such hearing, determine by majority vote whether to avoid the adoption, alteration or repeal of the rule or regulation. 
(c)  The traffic commission may erect, make and maintain, or cause to be erected, made and maintained, traffic signs, signals, markings and other devices for the control of traffic and parking in the city and for informing and warning the public as to rules and regulations adopted under this act, subject, however, to Section two of Chapter eighty-five and to Sections eight and nine of Chapter eighty-nine of the General Laws. 
(d)  The traffic commission may recommend to the city council the alteration, construction, erection, installation and maintenance of street lights. 
(e)  The traffic commission, with the approval of the mayor, may retain the services of qualified consultants when such retention is deemed necessary or advisable. 
(f)  The traffic commission may promulgate regulations that provide that any sergeant or officer of higher rank in the police department may cause to be removed to some convenient place by towing by an independent contractor any vehicle except a vehicle owned by the Commonwealth or a political subdivision thereof or by the United States or an instrumentality thereof or registered by a member of a foreign diplomatic corps or by a foreign consular officer who is not a citizen of the United States and bearing distinctive number plate otherwise conspicuously marked as so owned or registered, and except a vehicle owned by a disabled veteran or a handicapped person and bearing a distinctive number plate, which is parked or standing on any part of any street, way, highway, road or parkway if in the calendar year in which such vehicle is so removed and in the preceding calendar year, five or more notices, in the aggregate, have been affixed to said vehicle, as provided in section 20A1/2 of chapter 90 of the General Laws, and remain unpaid and the cost of such removal and of storage charges resulting therefrom, in accordance with the traffic regulations then in effect, shall be imposed upon the owner of such vehicle. Any such vehicle so removed shall be held until all charges imposed for such removal and storage following the same have been paid and due notice has been received that the fines provided in such notices affixed to said vehicle have been paid or security for the payment thereof has been deposited. The police department shall promptly mail written notice to the registered owner of any such vehicle so removed, directed to the address furnished by the registry of motor vehicles or comparable agency of the state in which said vehicle is registered, stating the date on which such vehicle was removed, the location to which such vehicle has been removed, and a statement that such vehicle shall be released by the police on the payment of all fines, storage and towing charges due. Any such vehicle so removed shall be deemed to have been abandoned and may be disposed of in accordance with Section twenty-two C of said Chapter ninety if, within thirty days of the mailing of the notice to the registered owner as provided for herein, said owner has not paid all charges imposed for such removal and storage following the same and the fines provided in such notices affixed to said vehicle or security for the payment thereof has been deposited. 
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to authorize the traffic commission to adopt, alter or repeal any rule or regulation excluding the trackless trolley vehicles or buses of a street railway or bus company from any way or part thereof in which said company has a location; or to modify or limit any power or authority of the metropolitan district commission or the departments of public works or public utilities of the Commonwealth; or to modify or limit any power or authority of the mayor, city council or of any board or head of a department with reference to the issuance of licenses or permits for the opening, using or occupying of streets and sidewalks for reasons not relating to traffic. 
(Acts 1978, Chapter 397, Section 3; Acts 2002, Chapter 285; Acts 2012, Chapter 400, approved Jan. 3, 2013)  
Sec. 9. - Enforcement. 
The planning director, the chief of police, the chief engineer of the fire department, the commissioner of public works, the city engineer, the city electrician and city solicitor shall be available to the traffic commission to advise on matters relating to their respective departments and shall be responsible for putting into effect the rules and regulations adopted by the traffic commission in so far as such rules and regulations relate to their respective departments. The traffic commission shall cooperate with the planning board and with such public carriers as may be authorized and licensed to render service within the city, on matters relating to traffic planning, and shall cooperate with the planning board on all matters that may relate to the need for, location, construction, erection and maintenance of public parking facilities or of private parking facilities for public use within the city. When it is necessary to coordinate with federal, state or other local agencies on matters of traffic movement and traffic planning, the traffic commission may serve as liaison for the city. 
(Acts 1978, Chapter 397, Section 4)  
Sec. 10. - Existing ordinances, orders, etc., to remain in effect. 
All existing orders, ordinances, rules and regulations relating to the control of vehicular traffic, including those relating to the parking of vehicles on any streets, ways, highways, roads and parkways, under the control of the city, shall remain in full force and effect until superseded by rules and regulations adopted by the traffic commission pursuant to clause (a) of section three (section 8(a) of this article), and the adoption thereof shall not effect any act done, any right accrued, any penalty incurred or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of such adoption. 
(Acts 1978, Chapter 397, Section 5)  
Secs. 11, 12. - Superseded. 
Editor's note— Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012 has superseded sections 11 and 12 of this Article VII.  
ARTICLE VIII. - MUNICIPAL HEARING OFFICER 
 
Sec. 1. - Municipal hearing officer created. 
Notwithstanding section 21D of chapter 40 of the General Laws, a person who desires to contest a violation of any ordinance of the city of Somerville alleged in a notice to appear, pursuant to violations issued by the city in accordance with said section 21D of said chapter 40 of the General Laws, shall request, in writing, a hearing before a municipal hearing officer, who shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city council, to conduct requested hearings pursuant to this act. The notice to appear shall be in the format required under said section 21D of said chapter 40, except that the third copy of the notice shall be submitted to the municipal hearing officer. The municipal hearing officer may be the same person appointed as municipal hearing officer pursuant to chapter 148A of the General Laws. 
(Acts 2008, Chapter 106, Section 1)  
Sec. 2. - Notice of code violations; payments; hearings. 
Where a notice to appear is for 1 or more code violations, the person notified to appear shall return the notice of violation by mail, personally or by an authorized person to the municipal hearing officer and shall, within 21 days, either: (a) pay, in full, the scheduled assessment by check, postal note or money order; or (b) request a hearing before the municipal hearing officer. Any amounts paid shall be payable to the city of Somerville. If the person notified to appear requests, in a timely manner, a hearing before the municipal hearing officer, the municipal hearing officer shall schedule a hearing not later than 45 days after receiving the hearing request. The municipal hearing officer shall send a hearing notice to duly notify the person notified to appear of the date, time and location of the hearing. Hearings shall be held at least twice each month, in the evening. When a hearing notice is sent, the person notified to appear shall be given an opportunity to request a rescheduled hearing date. The municipal hearing officer, so designated, shall not be an employee or officer of the department associated with the issuance of the notice of violation. The municipal hearing officer shall receive annual training in the conduct of administrative hearing procedure. The hearings and dispositions by the municipal hearing officer shall be informal and the formal rules of evidence shall not apply. In conducting the hearings, the municipal hearing officer shall find whether the violation occurred and whether it was committed by the person so notified to appear. 
(Acts 2008, Chapter 106, Section 2)  
Sec. 3. - Appeals of decisions. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the municipal hearing officer, after a hearing, may appeal to the district court pursuant to section 21D of chapter 40 of the General Laws, on a form provided by the city, and shall be entitled to a de novo hearing before a clerk magistrate of the court. The district court shall consider such appeals under a civil, as opposed to a criminal, standard. The aggrieved person shall file the appeal within 10 days after receiving notice of the decision from the municipal hearing officer who conducted the hearing. 
(Acts 2008, Chapter 106, Section 3)  
Sec. 4. - Failure to appeal or appear. 
Any person who has received a notice to appear issued in accordance with this procedure who, within the prescribed time: fails to pay the scheduled assessment; fails to request a hearing before the municipal hearing officer; or fails to appear at the time and place of the hearing shall be found responsible for the violations as stated in the notice to appear and such finding of responsibility shall be considered prima facie evidence of a finding of responsibility for the violation in any civil proceeding regarding said violation and shall be admissible as evidence in a subsequent criminal proceeding. A person who fails to appear at the scheduled hearing without good cause shall have the appeal dismissed and shall waive any further right to appeal. If the condition which caused the notice to appear to issue continues to exist, the finding of responsibility may also be used by the city of Somerville as prima facie evidence of the existence of a violation in any proceeding to suspend or revoke any license, permit or certificate issued by the city relative to the building, structure or premises pending the correction of the condition. 
(Acts 2008, Chapter 106, Section 4)  
Sec. 5. - Payments paid to general fund. 
All fines, penalties or assessments in actions under this act, shall be paid to the general fund of the city of Somerville. 
(Acts 2008, Chapter 106, Section 5)  
ARTICLE IX. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSES 
 
Sec. 1. 
Chapter 258 of the acts of 1980 is hereby repealed. 
(Acts 2012, Chapter 381, approved Jan. 2, 2013)  
Sec. 2. 
The licensing commission of the city of Somerville may grant licenses for the sale of all alcoholic beverages and licenses for the sale of wines and malt beverages under section 12 of chapter 138 of the General Laws and the number of such licenses shall be calculated under section 17 of said chapter 138. The licensing commission may grant not more than 20 licenses for the sale of all alcoholic beverages under section 15 of said chapter 138 and not more than 9 licenses for the sale of wines and malt beverages under said section 15 of said chapter 138. The transfer of a license existing on the effective date of this act or the transfer of stock in a corporation which holds such a license shall be subject to a public hearing and notice of such hearing shall be advertised as provided in said chapter 138 and held at an appropriate time to afford interested citizens an opportunity to be present. 
(a)  No other license granted under this act shall be sold or transferred by the licensee. If any such licensee terminates or fails to renew its license, the license shall revert to the licensing commission which may then grant that license to a new applicant in accordance with regulations established by the licensing commission; provided, however, that any restrictions on the transferability of licenses under this paragraph shall only apply to licenses granted on or after the effective date of chapter 449 of the acts of 2008. 
(Acts 2012, Chapter 381, approved Jan. 2, 2013)  
Sec. 3. 
Notwithstanding section 17 of chapter 138 of the General Laws, the licensing commission of the city of Somerville may grant not more than 27 additional licenses for the sale of all alcoholic beverages to be drunk on the premises or for the sale of wines and malt beverages to be drunk on the premises under section 12 of said chapter 138, to premises within the Assembly Square district, bounded by the Mystic River, the Fellsway, route 28, interstate highway route 93 and the city of Somerville, city of Boston boundary line. The licenses shall be subject to all of said chapter 138, except said section 17. The licenses assigned to the Assembly Square district shall not be sold or transferred by the licensee. If a licensee terminates or fails to renew its license under this section, the license shall revert to the licensing commission, and shall be returned physically, with all of the legal rights, privileges and restrictions pertaining thereto, and shall only be granted to a new, qualified applicant doing business within the Assembly Square district; provided, however, that the new applicant shall file with the licensing commission a letter from the department of revenue indicating that the license is in good standing with the department and that all applicable taxes have been paid. The licenses granted under this section shall be subject to all applicable ordinances of the city. 
The administrative fee charged by the city of Somerville for licenses granted under this section shall be the same as the administrative fee charged by the city for existing licenses granted for the respective category for such licenses. The licenses granted under this section shall be subject to all applicable ordinances of the city. 
(Acts 2012, Chapter 381, approved Jan. 2, 2013; Acts 2016, Chapter 142, §§ 1, 2, approved July 14, 2016)  
Sec. 4. 
(a)  Notwithstanding section 17 of chapter 138 of the General Laws or any other general or special law to the contrary, the licensing commission of the city of Somerville may grant 12 additional licenses for the sale of all alcoholic beverages to be drunk on the premises pursuant to section 12 of said chapter 138 and 6 additional licenses for the sale of wines and malt beverages to be drunk on the premises pursuant to said section 12 of said chapter 138 to operators and locations to be determined by the licensing commission in accordance with this section. The licenses shall be subject to all of said chapter 138 except said section 17. 
(b)  The licensing commission shall restrict the licenses authorized in this section as follows: 
(1)  2 licenses for the sale of all alcoholic beverages to be drunk on the premises and 1 license for the sale of wines and malt beverages to be drunk on the premises shall be restricted to entities within the Transformative Areas of the Inner Belt, Brickbottom and Boynton Yards, as those areas are shown on the map; provided, however, that for the purposes of this section and section 5 of chapter 142 of the Acts of 2016, "map" shall mean the map entitled "Somerville Proposed Liquor License Area Locations", dated June, 2016, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Somerville city clerk; and 
(2)  10 licenses for the sale of all alcoholic beverages to be drunk on the premises and 5 licenses for the sale of wines and malt beverages to be drunk on the premises shall be restricted to entities within the Enhancement Areas of Union Square, Davis Square, Ball Square, Gilman Square, Lowell Street, Northwest Somerville, Teele Square, Broadway, Magoun Square, Highland Avenue, Somerville Avenue and Beacon Street, as shown on the map. 
(c)  A license granted pursuant to this section shall be clearly marked on its face "Transformative Areas or Enhancement Areas Only". 
(d)  The licensing commission shall not approve the sale or transfer of a license granted under this section. If a licensee terminates or fails to renew a license granted under this section or if any such license is cancelled, revoked or no longer in use, it shall be returned physically, with all of the legal rights, privileges and restrictions pertaining thereto, to the licensing commission and the licensing commission may then grant the license to a new applicant at a location within the transformative areas or enhancement areas under the same conditions as specified in this section. 
(Acts 2016, Chapter 142, § 3, approved July 14, 2016)  
Sec. 5. 
(a)  Notwithstanding section 17 of chapter 138 of the General Laws or any other general or special law to the contrary, the licensing commission of the city of Somerville may grant 4 additional licenses for the sale of all alcoholic beverages to be drunk on the premises pursuant to section 12 of said chapter 138 and 1 additional license for the sale of wines and malt beverages to be drunk on the premises pursuant to said section 12 of said chapter 138. The licenses shall be subject to all of said chapter 138 except said section 17. 
(b)  Once issued, the licensing commission shall not approve the transfer of a license granted pursuant to this section to any other location but it may grant the license to a new applicant at the same location if the applicant files with the licensing commission a letter from the department of revenue and a letter from the department of unemployment assistance indicating that the license is in good standing with those departments and that all applicable taxes, fees and contributions have been paid. 
(c)  If a license granted pursuant to this section is cancelled, revoked or no longer in use, it shall be returned physically, with all legal rights, privileges and restrictions pertaining thereto, to the licensing commission and the licensing commission may then grant the license to a new applicant at the same location under the same conditions as specified in this section. 
(Acts 2016, Chapter 142, § 4, approved July 14, 2016)  
Sec. 6. 
(a)  Notwithstanding section 17 of chapter 138 of the General Laws or any other general or special law to the contrary, the licensing commission of the city of Somerville may grant 15 additional licenses for the sale of all alcoholic beverages to be drunk on the premises pursuant to section 12 of said chapter 138 and 7 additional licenses for the sale of wines and malt beverages to be drunk on the premises pursuant to said section 12 of said chapter 138, to operators and locations to be determined by the licensing commission in accordance with this section. The licenses shall be subject to all of said chapter 138 except said section 17. 
(b)  The licensing commission of the city of Somerville shall restrict the licenses authorized in this section as follows: 
(1)  5 licenses for the sale of all alcoholic beverages to be drunk on the premises and 2 licenses for the sale of wines and malt beverages to be drunk on the premises granted pursuant to this subsection shall be restricted to entities within the Transformative Areas of the Inner Belt, Brickbottom and Boynton Yards, as shown on the map; and 
(2)  10 licenses for the sale of all alcoholic beverages to be drunk on the premises and 5 licenses for the sale of wines and malt beverages to be drunk on the premises shall be restricted to entities within the Enhancement Areas of Union Square, Davis Square, Ball Square, Gilman Square, Lowell Street, Northwest Somerville, Teele Square, Broadway, Magoun Square, Highland Avenue, Somerville Avenue and Beacon Street, as shown on the map. 
(c)  A license granted pursuant to this section shall be clearly marked on its face "Transformative Areas or Enhancement Areas Only". 
(d)  The licensing commission shall not approve the sale or transfer of a license granted under this section. If a licensee terminates or fails to renew a license granted under this section or if any such license is cancelled, revoked or no longer in use, it shall be returned physically, with all of the legal rights, privileges and restrictions pertaining thereto, to the licensing commission and the licensing commission may then grant the license to a new applicant at a location within the transformative areas and enhancement areas under the same conditions as specified in this act. 
(Acts 2016, Chapter 142, § 5, approved July 14, 2016)  
Sec. 7. 
(a)  Notwithstanding section 17 of chapter 138 of the General Laws or any other general or special law to the contrary, the licensing commission of the city of Somerville may grant 4 additional licenses for the sale of all alcoholic beverages to be drunk on the premises pursuant to section 12 of said chapter 138 and 1 additional license for the sale of wines and malt beverages to be drunk on the premises pursuant to said section 12 of said chapter 138. The licenses shall be subject to all of said chapter 138 except said section 17. 
(b)  Once issued, the licensing commission shall not approve the transfer of a license granted pursuant to this section to any other location but it may grant the license to a new applicant at the same location if the applicant files with the licensing commission a letter from the department of revenue and a letter from the department of unemployment assistance indicating that the license is in good standing with those departments and that all applicable taxes, fees and contributions have been paid. 
(c)  If a license granted pursuant to this section is cancelled, revoked or no longer in use, it shall be returned physically, with all of the legal rights, privileges and restrictions pertaining thereto, to the licensing commission and the licensing commission may then grant the license to a new applicant at the same location under the same conditions as specified in this section. 
(Acts 2016, Chapter 142, § 6, approved July 14, 2016)  
Sec. 8. 
The administrative fee charged by the city of Somerville for a license granted pursuant to sections 3 to 6 of chapter 142 of the Acts of 2016, inclusive, shall be the same amount as the administrative fee charged by the city for existing licenses granted for the respective category for such licenses. A license granted pursuant to said sections 3 to 6, inclusive, shall be subject to all applicable ordinances of the city. 
(Acts 2016, Chapter 142, § 7, approved July 14, 2016)  
Sec. 9. 
Sections 1, 3, 4 and 7 of chapter 142 of the Acts of 2016 shall take effect upon their passage. 
(Acts 2016, Chapter 142, § 8, approved July 14, 2016)  
Sec. 10. 
Section 2 of chapter 142 of the Acts of 2016 shall take effect on January 1, 2019, or upon the issuance of all of the licenses authorized in section 3 of chapter 381 of the Acts of 2012, whichever occurs first. 
(Acts 2016, Chapter 142, § 9, approved July 14, 2016)  
Sec. 11. 
Section 5 of chapter 142 of the Acts of 2016 shall take effect on January 1, 2019, or upon the issuance of all of the licenses authorized in section 3 of chapter 142 of the Acts of 2016, whichever occurs first. 
(Acts 2016, Chapter 142, § 10, approved July 14, 2016)  
Sec. 12. 
Section 6 of chapter 142 of the Acts of 2016 shall take effect on January 1, 2019, or upon the issuance of all of the licenses authorized in section 4 of chapter 142 of the Acts of 2016, whichever occurs first. 
(Acts 2016, Chapter 142, § 11, approved July 14, 2016)  
Division 3 - GENERAL LAWS ADOPTED BY THE CITY[1] 
Chapter 	Section 	Remarks 
10 	38, 39 	Acts 1971, Chapter 486; authorizing the licensing of a game commonly called "Beano"; accepted by the voters November 2, 1971, and November 4, 1975. 
31 		Revised laws of 1902, Chapter 19; civil service; relative to employment of laborers; accepted December 19, 1912. 
31 	47E 	Acts 1951, Chapter 537; provides annual step-rate increases for municipal public welfare employees; accepted April 16, 1952. 
31 	49 	Acts 1911, Chapter 468; extending civil service to chiefs of police; accepted by voters November 7, 1911. 
31 	61A, 61B 	Allows the city to establish health and fitness standards to new hires to police and fire departments; approved March 8, 1991. 
32 	4(l)(o) 	Pension account; adopted October 28, 1971; approved by the mayor November 1, 1971. 
32 	7(2) 	Acts 2005, Chapter 157, re retirement allowance for veterans, accepted January 26, 2006. 
32 	9(2)(d) 	Acts 2006, Chapter 55 and Chapter 64 Section 3, granting city authority to increase the accidental death benefit for surviving children, accepted November 1, 2006. 
32 	12(2)(c) (1st paragraph) 	Affects the retirement allowance for certain retirees; accepted April 8, 1999. 
32 	20—25 	Acts 1911, Chapter 634; authorizing counties to establish retirement systems for employees; accepted by voters November 7, 1911. 
32 	20(6) 	Acts 2011, Chapter 176, Section 34; adjusting the annual stipend paid to the Retirement Board, accepted December 18, 2012. 
32 	22D 	Retirement system funding schedule, establishment; annual pension funding grant; accepted September, 1992. 
32 	26—31H 	Re retirement systems and pensions; accepted December 19, 1945. 
32 	26—31I 	Acts 1936, Chapter 318; contributory retirement systems for cities and towns, etc.; accepted December 13, 1945. 
32 	44 	Acts 1936, Chapter 223; increasing pension to retired public school janitors; accepted January 26, 1937. 
32 	45A 	Acts 1945, Chapter 708; retirement allowance of school janitors; accepted December 19, 1945. 
32 	52—55 	Acts 1912, Chapter 337; retirement of Civil War Veterans; accepted February 28, 1913. 
32 	56—60 	Acts 1920, Chapter 574; retirement of a veteran of the Civil, Spanish or World War; accepted November 13, 1930. 
32 	60A 	Acts 1930, Chapter 161; retirement rights of certain army nurses; accepted December 2, 1932. 
32 	77 	Acts 1912, Chapter 503; pensioning city laborers; accepted by voters November 5, 1912. 
32 	77A 	Allowing noncontributory laborers to elect an option as of retirement; adopted April 13, 1972; approved by the mayor April 19, 1972. 
32 	77B 	Acts 1923, Chapter 458; pension of foremen, inspectors, etc.; accepted November 17, 1925. 
32 	77C 	Acts 1936, Chapter 290, Section 2, Paragraph c; pensions of laborers, foremen, etc.; accepted June 13, 1939. 
32 	80 	Acts 1898, Chapter 267; authorizing cities to pension firemen; accepted by voters December 12, 1899; Acts 1900, Chapter 246; authorizing cities to pension firemen; accepted by voters December 11, 1900. 
32 	81A, 81B 	Acts 1946, Chapter 576; retirement of police officers and firemen; accepted October 1, 1947. 
32 	83 	Acts 1903, Chapter 428; granting police pensions in cities; accepted July 10, 1903. 
32 	83A 	Acts 1946, Chapter 576; see Sections 81A and 81B above. 
32 	84 	Acts 1901, Chapter 377; pensioning members of police departments; accepted, September 5, 1901. 
32 	85F 	Acts 1946, Chapter 576; see Sections 81A and 81B above. 
32 	85J 	Acts 1956, Chapter 374; pensions for widows of policemen and firefighters under the noncontributory retirement law; accepted October 30, 1956. 
32 	86 	Acts 1946, Chapter 576; see Sections 81A and above. 
32 	89 	Acts 1929, Chapter 308; compensation of dependents of policemen and firemen killed in performance of duty; accepted January 22, 1931. 
32 	89A 	Acts 1948, Chapter 552; increasing annuities to dependents of certain public employees; accepted February 15, 1949. 
32 	90A 	Increasing allowance of former employees retired for accidental disability; accepted April, 1989. 
32 	90B 	Waiver of pension or retirement allowance; accepted April, 1989. 
32 	90C 	Increasing allowance of former employees retired on superannuation; accepted April, 1989. 
32 	90D 	Increasing allowance of former employees retired on ordinary disability; accepted April, 1989. 
32 	103 	Acts 1997, Chapter 17; providing retirees with a cost of living adjustment, accepted May 14, 1998. 
32B 		City to pay half of cost of all city employees' health and accident insurance; accepted December 26, 1961. 
32B 	4 	Acts 1986, Chapter 705; regulating insurance for public employees; accepted by board of aldermen, July 23, 1987; approved by mayor, July 28, 1987. 
32B 	7A 	Granting city authority to pay more than fifty (50) percent of Blue Cross/Blue Shield insurance premiums; accepted by the board of aldermen November 20, 1979; approved by the mayor November 23, 1979. 
32B 	8A 	Dividends from employees' group insurance; adopted July 22, 1971; approved by the mayor July 30, 1971. 
32B 	9 	Acts 1986, Chapter 705; regulating insurance for public employees; accepted by board of aldermen, July 23, 1987; approved by mayor, July 28, 1987. 
32B 	9C 	Provides that the local government pay one-half the cost of a premium and the full amount of an additional rate for group health insurance. 
32B 	9E 	Granting city authority to pay more than fifty (50) percent of Blue Cross/Blue Shield insurance premiums for persons who are retired from the service of the city; accepted by board of aldermen January 1, 1980; approved by the mayor January 23, 1980. Acceptance clarified by board, May 28, 2009. 
32B 	9F 	Acts 1972, Chapter 763; provides for a two thousand dollar ($2,000.00) life insurance and accidental death and dismemberment insurance in lieu of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) life insurance as provided in Section 9; adopted Feb. 28, 1974; approved by the mayor March 7, 1974. Accepted as amended by Acts 1986, Chapter 705, by board of aldermen, July 23, 1987; approved by mayor, July 28, 1987. 
32B 	11A 	Allowing any city employee to purchase additional life insurance at no additional cost to the city; adopted October 28, 1971; approved by the mayor November 1, 1971. 
32B 	11B 	Authorizes the city to pay fifty (50) percent of the cost of Blue Cross/Blue Shield insurance premiums for certain retired employees not covered; adopted August 28, 1969; approved by the mayor September 3, 1969. 
32B 	11D 	Provides insurance for the widow and children of a firefighter who was killed or who died from injuries received in the performance of his duty; adopted in board of aldermen May 22, 1975; approved by the mayor June 11, 1975. 
32B 	16 	Giving municipal employees the "dual choice" option in their choice of health plans; adopted October 12, 1972; approved by the mayor October 16, 1972. 
32B 	18 	Regarding health care for retirees, accepted December 10, 2009. 
32B 	19 	Regarding health care via the Group Insurance Commission, accepted May 27, 2010. 
32B 	20 	Establishing a trust fund for other post employment benefit liabilities, accepted March 8, 2012. 
32B 	20A 	Acts 1982, Chapter 641; providing indemnification for retirement board members for damages incurred in their duties, accepted November 22, 1983. 
33 	59 	Military service on salary or vacation allowance of public employees. 
33 	67 	Acts 1930, Chapter 157; re services of employees in the organized reserve of the army or the naval reserve force; accepted July 2, 1930. 
39 	6A 	Acts 1952, Chapter 259; salaries of mayors, members of boards of aldermen; accepted by voters November 4, 1952. 
39 	23D 	Acts 2006, Chapter 79; modifying the voting requirements associated with municipal boards, committees and commissions, accepted Sept. 14, 2006. 
40 	8C 	Establishing a conservation commission; adopted January 27, 1972; approved by the mayor January 31, 1972. 
40 	8D 	Establishing and providing for the historical commission of the city; adopted October 12, 1972; approved by the mayor October 16, 1972. 
40 	8G 	Regarding mutual police aid programs; accepted October 9, 2003. 
40 	8J 	Acts 1991, Chapter 390, establishing a commission on disability, accepted June 11, 1992. 
40 	12 	Acts 1874, Chapter 214; authorizing erection and maintenance of public baths and washhouses; accepted May 10, 1907; Revised Laws of 1902, Chapter 25, Sections 20 and 21; re public baths and washhouses accepted May 10, 1907. 
40 	13 	Acts 1907, Chapter 576, Sections 102—105; re municipal buildings insurance funds; accepted June 14, 1915; Acts 1973, Chapter 613; re municipal building insurance fund; adopted March 7, 1974; approved by the mayor March 11, 1974. 
40 	21D 	Authorizes noncriminal disposition of violations of municipal ordinances, by-laws or regulations; accepted by board of aldermen July 24, 1986; approved by mayor July 28, 1986. 
40 	22A—C 	Allows city to segregate parking meter revenues in a special revenue fund; accepted October 13, 2016. 
40 	22B 	Relative to the removal of architectural barriers, etc., as amended by Ch. 420, Acts of 1987; adopted by board of aldermen March 24, 1988. 
40 	22D 	Authorizing towing of vehicles; accepted June 13, 1968. 
40 	22F 	Authorizing the fixing of reasonable fees and charges for licenses, permits, certificates and services rendered; accepted September 26, 2002. 
40 	32A 	Acts 1929, Chapter 369; publication of ordinances; accepted March 1, 1930. 
40 	42A—F 	Acts 1923, Chapter 391; re collection of water rates; accepted March 19, 1924; Acts 1936, Chapter 42; changes in law relative to water lines; accepted June 16, 1936. This act amends Chapter 391, Acts of 1923, above. 
40 	42J 	Allows certain residents to defer charges for water; accepted April 27, 1989; accepted October 13, 2016. 
40 	57 	Collection of real estate taxes, personal property taxes, and miscellaneous fees and charges; approved December 14, 1990. 
40 	81 	Acts 1980, Chapter 384; authorizes creation of energy resource commission; adopted by board of aldermen March 25, 1982; approved by mayor March 30, 1982. 
40A 	20 	Re repeating filing of petitions to the board of appeals; accepted June 5, 1956. 
41 	12 	Acts 1901, Chapter 332; re terms of office of city clerks; accepted by voters December 10, 1901. 
41 	34A 	Acts 1923, Chapter 26; changes name of overseers of the poor to the board of public welfare; accepted May 11, 1923. 
41 	48 	Acts 1905, Chapter 373; re terms of office of municipal auditors; accepted by voters December 12, 1905. 
41 	100A 	Acts 1931, Chapter 458; re operators of all publicly-owned motor vehicles; accepted October 26, 1931; Acts 1934, Chapter 291, Section 3; indemnification of public employees; accepted May 24, 1935. 
41 	100B 	Provides indemnification of retired police officers and fire fighters for certain medical expenses; accepted March 9, 1967. 
41 	100E 	Acts 1969, Chapter 413; indemnification of mayors, selectmen, etc., against certain claims and including members of school committee; adopted June 28, 1971; approved by the mayor July 1, 1971. 
41 	100G 	Acts 1971, Chapter 310; amended by Acts 1973, Chapter 200; providing for payment of funeral and burial expenses of firefighters and police officers killed in performance of duties; adopted by board of aldermen June 13, 1974; approved by the mayor June 18, 1974. 
41 	108L 	Establishes a police career incentive program; adopted by board of aldermen June 9, 1983; not signed by mayor. 
41 	110 	Re half holidays for certain employees; accepted June 14, 1946; not applicable because of acceptance of Section 33A of Chapter 149. 
41 	110A 	Acts 1947, Chapter 265; closing of public offices on Saturday; accepted June 6, 1947 and November 5, 1947. 
41 	111 	Acts 1914, Chapter 217; re vacations of laborers; accepted by voters November 3, 1914. 
43 	17A 	Acts 1952, Chapter 259; re salaries of mayors, city managers, councilors and members of boards of aldermen; accepted by voters November 4, 1952. 
43C 	11 	Ordinance establishing a department of finance in the city; accepted March 23, 2000. 
43D 		Expedited permitting for priority development sites, accepted March 27, 2008. 
44 	8A 	Acts 1939, Chapter 108; re submission to voters orders authorizing the issue of bonds, notes or certificates of indebtedness for certain purposes; accepted by voters November 23, 1939. 
44 	16A 	Acts 1957, Chapter 58; re use of facsimile counter signatures upon bonds, notes, etc.; accepted January 26, 1959. 
44 	53F½ 	Authorizing creation of water and sewer enterprise funds; accepted May 23, 2002. 
44 	53F¾ 	Establishes a Public Educational Governmental Access and Cable Related Fund; accepted June 22, 2017. 
44 	55C 	Acts 2004, Chapter 491; re creating a Municipal Affordable Housing Trust Fund; accepted March 24, 2005. 
44 	64 	Payment of bills incurred in excess of appropriations; adopted in board of aldermen April 12, 1979; approved by mayor April 18, 1979. 
44 	65 	Acts 1945, Chapter 635; re advances of vacation pay to officers and employees; accepted October 16, 1945. 
44B 	3—7 	Adopting the Community Preservation Act, accepted August 16, 2012. 
48 	4 	Revised Laws of 1902, Chapter 32, Section 12; re engineer of fire department in command of fire; accepted January 29, 1904. 
48 	36, 37 	Acts 1913, Chapter 487; re the promotion of call men in the fire department; accepted by voters December 9, 1913. 
48 	57 	Acts 1912, Chapter 546; re vacations of members of fire department; accepted by voters December 10, 1912. 
48 	57A 	Acts 1953, Chapter 640; provides a day off duty or day's pay to firemen and certain others when they are required to work on certain legal holidays; accepted May 19, 1959. 
48 	57B 	Acts 1959, Chapter 285; assures time off to state conventions of associated firefighter, etc.; accepted June 27, 1961. 
48 	57D 	Chapter 517, Acts 1962; placing fire department on five-day week pay period similar to police department; adopted September 2, 1965; approved by the mayor September 7, 1965. 
48 	57E 	Chapter 141, Acts 1965; granting additional day's pay to fire chiefs on duty on certain holidays; adopted May 12, 1966; approved by the mayor May 18, 1966. 
48 	57F 	Chapter 786, Acts 1965; additional day's pay to police chiefs on duty on holidays; adopted December 9, 1965; approved by the mayor December 13, 1965. 
48 	58 	Acts 1916, Chapter 291; re tenure of office of chiefs of fire departments; accepted by voters December 12, 1916. 
48 	58A 	Acts 1941, Chapter 638; further regulating the hours of duty of permanent members of the fire department; accepted May 19, 1942. 
48 	58D 	Acts 1968, Chapter 245; permits the granting of a forty-two-hour work week for members of the fire department; adopted June 12, 1969; approved by the mayor June 18, 1969. 
48 	59B, 59C, 59D 	Establishing a reserve fire force, accepted March 13, 2008. 
53 		Acts 1903, Chapter 454; re joint caucuses or primaries; accepted by voters November 3, 1903; see Acts 1932, Chapter 281. 
54 	11 	Acts 1911, Chapter 436; re appointment of deputy election officers; accepted July 14, 1911. 
54 	25A 	Acts 1930, Chapter 149; display of the national flag at polling places; accepted June 18, 1930. 
54 	58 	Chapter 872, Acts of 1971; providing for the funding of certain revenue anticipation notes of the city; accepted by the voters November 2, 1971. 
54 	103A 	Providing for absentee voting at regular city elections; accepted February 26, 1942. 
59 	5(56th paragraph) 	Allows a property tax abatement for certain members of the MA National Guard and Reserves; accepted November 25, 2014. 
59 	5(5B) 	Acts 1987, Chapter 499; tax exemption for veterans' organizations; accepted by board of aldermen, March 10, 1988; approved by mayor, March 18, 1988. 
59 	5C(4th paragraph) 	Defines the real property regarding cooperative corporations' real estate taxes; accepted November 13, 2014. 
59 	5C½ 	Allows an optional additional real estate tax exemption; accepted May 28, 2015. 
59 	5(17C, 37A, 41B) 	Authorizes certain property tax exemptions; adopted December 12, 1985, approved by the mayor December 17, 1985. 
59 	5(17D, 41C) 	Authorizes certain property tax exemptions; adopted by board of aldermen October 23, 1986. 
59 	5(17D) 	Authorizing certain property tax exemptions (as added by Chapter 181 of the Acts of 1995); accepted November 26, 2002. 
59 	5K 	Persons over 60; property tax liability reduced for volunteer services; accepted September 2000. 
59 	5L 	Allows a temporary property tax deferral for certain members of the MA National Guard and Reserves; accepted November 25, 2014. 
59 	5N 	Allowing earned tax abatements for veterans, accepted December 13, 2012. 
59 	59A 	Acts 1999, Chapter 158, Section 3, Providing tax abatements for the rehabilitation of contaminated properties, accepted December 13, 2007. 
60 	3C 	Acts 1987, Chapter 712, Section 3; establishes local scholarship fund; accepted by board of aldermen, January 28, 1988; approved by mayor, February 3, 1988. 
60 	23A 	Acts 1971, Chapter 956, Section 1; re fees for municipal lien certificates; accepted by board of aldermen December 21, 1982; approved by mayor December 27, 1982. 
60 	23B 	Certificate of liens; fee schedule; accepted 1987. 
60A 	9 	Allows a temporary excise tax deferral for certain members of the MA National Guard and Reserves; accepted November 25, 2014. 
64G 	3A 	Allows a 4% local excise tax on bed and breakfast establishments, hotels, motels and lodging houses; accepted October 24, 1985. 
		Allows a 6% local excise tax on bed and breakfast establishments, hotels, motels and lodging houses; accepted August 27, 2009. 
64N 	3 	Provides a local excise tax of 3% on the retail sales of marijuana for adult use; accepted May 10, 2018. 
71 	37M 	Re consolidation of administrative functions of the school committee with the city; accepted June 24, 2004. 
71 	40 	Acts 1946, Chapter 527; re equal pay for men and women teachers; accepted by voters November 4, 1947. 
74 	15—17 	Acts 1916, Chapter 185; authorizing schools of agriculture and horticulture; accepted by voters November 7, 1916. 
82 	34 	Acts 1894, Chapter 324; re the reservation of spaces in public ways; accepted August 16, 1985. 
83 	16G 	Allows certain residents to defer charges for sewer; accepted October 13, 2016. 
83 	26 	Acts 1872, Chapter 303; construction of sidewalks; accepted June 8, 1872. 
85 	11A 	Acts 1941, Chapter 710; re registration and operation of certain bicycles; accepted February 26, 1942. 
90 	17C 	Reduces the prima facie speed limit to 25 MPH; accepted October 13, 2016. 
90 	18B 	Allows the creation of safety zones with speed limits of 20 MPH; accepted October 13, 2016. 
90 	20A12—20E 	Allows the use of the "Denver Boot" and other traffic and parking regulations; accepted August 27, 1981. 
90 	20C, 20D 	Acts 1962, Chapter 786; requires visible tagging for parking violations; accepted December 19, 1962 revoked by Acts 1963, Chapter 385; Acts 1962, Chapter 786; known as Visible Tagging Law; adopted June 13, 1968; approved by the mayor June 18, 1968. 
90 	22D 	Acts 1961, Chapter 322; suspension of license for automobile law violation; reinstatement; adopted June 13, 1968; approved by the mayor June 19, 1968. 
94 	146 	Public Statutes of 1882, Chapter 58; sale of provisions and animals intended for slaughter; adopted June 13, 1882. 
94 	236 	Public Statutes of 1882, Chapter 60, Sections 32, 33 and 34; concerning superintendence of city scales; adopted October 21, 1891. 
111 	26—28 	Acts 1877, Chapter 133; establishes a board of health; accepted November 6, 1877. 
111 	126 	Acts 1890, Chapter 74; concerning privy vaults; accepted October 10, 1890. 
115 	3A 	Payment of state or military aid and soldier's relief regulations; accepted January 18, 1944. 
136 	4B 	Acts 1946, Chapter 207; re licensed operation on the Lord's Day of bowling alleys; accepted December 28, 1947. 
136 	5—8 	Acts 1909, Chapter 423; re sale of ice cream, confectionery, soda water and fruit on the Lord's Day; accepted October 6, 1913. 
136 	21, 23—25 	General Law of 1921, Chapter 136; permits certain sports and games on the Lord's Day; accepted over the mayor's veto March 28, 1929. 
138 	12 (3 rd to last paragraph only) 	Acts 1993, Chapter 481, re the addition of liqueurs and cordials to beer and wine licenses; accepted February 24, 2005. 
139 	1—3 	Re burnt and dangerous buildings; accepted March 18, 1935. 
140 	115—118 	Acts of 1845, Chapter 197; Acts of 1846, Chapter 96; Acts of 1862, Chapter 74; re stationary steam engines, etc.; accepted June 6, 1877. 
140 	115—119 	Public Statutes of 1882, Chapter 102, Sections 40—48; steam engines, furnaces and boilers; accepted March 16, 1882. 
140 	147A 	Regulation of dogs; accepted June 23, 1994. 
140 	180A—D 	Acts 1935, Chapter 378; re licensing and bonding of certain theatrical booking agents, personal agents and managers; accepted January 18, 1937. 
142 		Acts 1894, Chapter 455, Section 7; re construction and inspection of plumbing; accepted pursuant to Section 1, Chapter 453, Acts of 1895, July 22, 1896. 
143 	3, 6—12 	Public Statutes of 1882, Chapter 104, Sections 1 and 4—12; concerning unsafe buildings; adopted February 28, 1888. 
143 	3, 12 	Acts 1872, Chapter 243; prevention of fires; adopted April 21, 1873 and August 14, 1878. 
143 	3 	Acts 1894. Chapter 481, Section 11; relating to the regulation and inspection of buildings; accepted March 14, 1898. 
143 	6—12 	Re repair or removal of dangerous structures; accepted March 29, 1935. 
144 		Re tenement houses in cities; accepted December 2, 1948; Acts 1955, Chapter 116; authorizing the city to revoke its acceptance of the law applicable to tenement houses in cities; accepted July 31, 1956. 
147 	10F 	Providing for the appointment of parking control officers; adopted January 6, 1972; approved by mayor January 10, 1972. 
147 	11, 12, 13 	Establishing a reserve police force, accepted April 10, 2008. 
147 	15 	Acts 1911, Chapter 210; re vacations of members of police department; accepted November 20, 1911. 
147 	16A, 16B, 17 	Acts 1938, Chapter 426; providing one (1) day off in every six for police officers; accepted November 20, 1939. 
147 	17A 	Acts 1952, Chapter 268; providing additional day's pay or day off duty for police officers required to work on certain legal holidays; accepted May 19, 1959. 
147 	32—51 	Acts 1920, Chapter 619; establishing a state boxing commission to serve in the department of public safety; accepted March 19, 1924. 
148 	26C 	Re installing of smoke detectors in dwellings of six (6) or more units; accepted by the board of aldermen October 25, 1979; approved by the mayor October 29, 1979. 
148 	26E 	Requires smoke detectors in certain buildings used for residential purposes; accepted by the board of aldermen July 24, 1980; approved by mayor August 7, 1980. 
148 	26G 	Re sprinkler systems in all new buildings and additions; accepted by board of aldermen, May 28, 1987; approved by mayor, June 2, 1987. 
148 	26H, 26I 	Automatic sprinkler requirements; accepted March 12, 1992. 
148 	56 	Acts 1930, Chapter 399, Section 56; concerning open-air parking spaces; accepted December 2, 1932. 
149 	31 	Acts 1899, Chapter 344; making eight (8) hours a day's work for city and town employees; accepted by voters December 11, 1900; Acts 1909, chapter 514, Section 42; providing that eight (8) hours shall constitute a day's work for city employees; accepted by voters December 9, 1913. 
149 	33A 	Acts 1947, Chapter 649; authorizing a forty-hour work week for employees of certain cities and towns; accepted by board of aldermen September 12, 1947; returned by mayor March 2, 1948, signed but not dated. 
149 	33E 	Allowing employees to take a leave of absence to serve as an organ donor, accepted April 26, 2012. 
152 	69 	Acts 1927, Chapter 309, Section 12; concerning workmen's compensation; accepted November 16, 1935. 
152 	69—74 	Acts 1913, Chapter 807; re compensation to certain public employees for injuries sustained in the course of their employment; accepted by voters December 9, 1913; placing school teachers of the city under Workmens Compensation Act; adopted February 28, 1974; approved by the mayor March 7, 1974. 
159A 	1, 6, 12 	Acts 1916, Chapter 283; authorizing the licensing by cities and towns of motor vehicles carrying passengers for hire; accepted July 16, 1919. 
166 	32A 	Acts 1981, Chapter 809; allows wire inspector to do work in the city where appointed and allows an assistant inspector to inspect work; adopted by the board of aldermen March 11, 1983; approved by mayor March 14, 1983. 
180 	17B 	Acts 1956, Chapter 489; authorizing payroll deductions for contributions to community chests or united funds; accepted and effective July 11, 1957 without approval of mayor. 
180 	17G 	County and municipal employees payroll deductions for service fees to collective bargaining agencies as amended by Chapter 463, Acts of 1970; adopted September 23, 1971; automatically effective since mayor failed to return document. 
188 		Equal Educational Opportunity Grant; accepted by board of aldermen, February 12, 1987; approved by mayor, February 18, 1987. 
234 	1 	Exempts members of the fire department from serving as jurors; accepted May 14, 1925. 
234 	1 	Acts 1924, Chapter 311; enginemen and members of the fire department exempted for service as jurors; accepted May 19, 1925. 
258 	13 	Indemnity of officials; approved December 13, 1990. 
268A 	20 	Approves appointments of three members of arts council; approved July 25, 1991. 
 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is a list of the General Laws of the state, by Chapter and Section number, specifically adopted or accepted by the City of Somerville. The date of adoption or acceptance of a particular General Law is cited in the remarks column of the list. 
 
Division 4 - LIST OF ACTS AND PARTS OF ACTS AFFECTING THE CITY[1] 
Acts of 	Chapter 	Section 	Remarks 
1871 	182 		City Charter (revised 1899); adopted by voters April 27, 1871. Repealed by Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012. 
1872 	243 		Prevention of fires; see Chapter 143, Sections 3—12 of General Laws; adopted April 21, 1873 and August 14, 1878. 
1872 	303 		Construction of sidewalks; see Chapter 83, Section 26 of General Laws; accepted June 8, 1872. 
1874 	189 		Establishes a fire department for the city; accepted May 6, 1874. 
1874 	214 		Authorizing erection and maintenance of public baths and washhouses; see Chapter 40, Section 12 of General Laws; accepted May 10, 1907. 
1877 	133 		Establishes a board of health; see Chapter 111, Sections 26—28 of General Laws; accepted November 6, 1877. 
1882 	 58 		Sale of provisions and animals intended for slaughter; see Chapter 94, Section 146 of General Laws; adopted June 13, 1882. 
1882 	 60 	32—34 	Re superintendence of city scales; see Chapter 94, Section 236 of General Laws; adopted October 21, 1891. 
1882 	102 	40—48 	Re steam engines, furnaces and boilers; see Chapter 140, Sections 115—119 of General Laws; adopted March 16, 1882. 
1882 	104 	1, 4—12 	Concerning unsafe buildings; see chapter 143, Sections 3; 6—12 of General Laws; adopted February 28, 1888. 
1885 	 61 		Concerning overseers of the poor; accepted March 12, 1885. 
1890 	 74 		Concerning privy vaults; see Chapter 111, Section 126 of General Laws; accepted October 10, 1890. 
1890 	217 		Concerning water board; accepted by voters December 2, 1890. 
1891 	311 		Concerning Powder House Park; accepted June 13, 1891. 
1893 	188 		Authorizing city to lay out and maintain a public park; accepted September 15, 1893. 
1894 	324 		Re reservation of spaces in public ways; see Chapter 82, Section 34 of General Laws; accepted August 16, 1895. 
1894 	455 	7 	Concerning construction and inspection of plumbing; see Chapter 142 of General Laws; accepted pursuant to Section 1, Chapter 453, Acts of 1895, July 22, 1896. 
1894 	481 	11 	Relating to the regulation and inspection of buildings; see Chapter 143, Section 3 of General Laws; adopted and accepted March 14, 1898. 
1895 	254 		Re sewers in Somerville and Medford; accepted May 11, 1895. 
1896 	238 		Re building of sewers in Cambridge by the cities of Cambridge and Somerville; accepted May 12, 1896. 
1896 	324 		Extending time for taking land for a public park; accepted July 16, 1896. 
1897 	209 		Re appointments in the fire department; accepted July 3, 1902. 
1898 	253 		Authorizing city to acquire and lay out land for a public park; accepted May 27, 1898. 
1898 	267 		Authorizing cities to pension firemen; see Chapter 32, Section 80 of General Laws; accepted by voters December 12, 1899. 
1899 	167 		Authorizing city to take land for an almshouse; accepted April 13, 1899. 
1899 	195 		Authorizing city to lay out and maintain a parkway; accepted April 27, 1899. 
1899 	240 		Revision of City Charter; accepted by voters September 26, 1899, see Charter, Division 1 of this part. 
1899 	275 		Re building of drain in Cambridge and Somerville; accepted May 18, 1899. 
1899 	344 		Making eight hours a day's work for employees; see Chapter 149, Section 31 of General Laws; accepted by voters December 11, 1900. 
1899 	407 		Authorizing city to acquire and lay out certain land for public park; accepted June 16, 1899. 
1900 	246 		Authorizing cities to pension firemen; see Chapter 32, Section 80 of General Laws; accepted by voters December 11, 1900. 
1900 	313 		Extends time for taking land for public park; accepted May 31, 1900. 
1900 	380 		Authorizing city to acquire and lay out certain land for a public park; accepted July 13, 1900. 
Acts of 	Chapter 	Section 	Remarks 
1901 	332 		Re terms of office of city clerks; see Chapter 41, Section 12 of General Laws; accepted by voters December 10, 1901; superseded by Chapter 98, Special Acts of 1918. 
1901 	377 		Re pensioning members of police departments; see Chapter 32, Section 84 of General Laws; accepted September 5, 1901. 
1901 	514 		Authorizing city to take additional land for an almshouse; accepted July 17, 1901. 
1902 	504 		Authorizing city to take land for public park; accepted October 16, 1902. 
1902 
(Revised Laws) 	 19 		Civil service; relative to employment of laborers; see Chapter 31 of General Laws; accepted December 19, 1912. 
1902 
(Revised Laws) 	 25 	20, 21 	Re public baths, and washhouses; see Chapter 40, Section 12 of General Laws; Accepted May 10, 1907. 
1902 
(Revised Laws) 	 32 	12 	Engineer of fire department in command at fire; see Chapter 48, Section 4 of General Laws; accepted January 29, 1904. 
1903 	129 		Authorizing city to use certain land for municipal purposes; accepted July 1, 1904. 
1903 	428 		Re granting police pensions in cities; see Chapter 32, Section 83 of General Laws; accepted July 10, 1903. 
1903 	454 		Re joint caucuses or primaries; see Chapter 53 General Laws; accepted by voters, November 3, 1903; see also, Acts 1932, Chapter 281, municipal elections to be nonpartisan; see Article VI of Division 2 of this part. 
1904 	354 		Relative to school committee; accepted by voters November 8, 1904; see Charter, Section 28. 
1905 	373 		Relative to terms of office of municipal auditors; see Chapter 41, Section 48 of General Laws; accepted by voters December 12, 1905; see Charter, Section 21. 
1906 	529 		Re purification of Mystic River, Alewife Brook and adjacent watercourses; accepted September 14, 1906. 
1907 	576 	102—105 	Relating to municipal buildings insurance funds; see Chapter 40, Section 13 of General Laws; accepted June 14, 1915. 
1909 	423 		Re sale of ice cream, confectionery, soda water and fruit on the Lord's day; see Chapter 136, Sections 5—8 of General Laws; accepted October 6, 1913. 
1909 	514 	42 	Re eight hours a day's work for employees; see Chapter 149, Section 31 of General Laws; accepted by voters December 9, 1913. 
1911 	 468 		Extending civil service to chiefs of police; see Chapter 31, Section 49 of General Laws; accepted by voters November 7, 1911. 
1911 	210 		Re vacations of members of police department; see Chapter 147, Section 15 of General Laws; accepted November 20, 1911. 
1911 	436 		Re appointment of deputy election officers; see Chapter 54, Section 11 of General Laws; accepted July 14, 1911. 
1911 	634 		Authorizing counties to establish retirement systems for employees; see Chapter 32, Sections 20—25 of General Laws; accepted by voters November 7, 1911. 
1912 	447 		Re retirement of Civil War veterans; see Chapter 32, Sections 52—55 of General Laws; accepted February 28, 1913. 
1912 	453 		Re retirement of members of Somerville fire department; accepted June 24, 1912. 
1912 	503 		Re pensioning city laborers; see Chapter 32, Section 77 of General Laws; accepted by voters November 5, 1912. 
1912 	546 		Re vacations of members of fire department; see Chapter 48, Section 57 of General Laws; accepted by voters December 10, 1912. 
1913 	487 		Re promotion of call men in the fire department; see Chapter 48, Sections 36, 37 of General Laws; accepted by voters December 9, 1913. 
1913 	807 		Re compensation for injuries; see Chapter 152, Sections 69—74 of General Laws; accepted by voters December 9, 1913. 
1914 	217 		Re vacation of laborers; see Chapter 41, Section 111 of General Laws; accepted by voters November 3, 1914. 
1916 	 53 		Authorizes pension to Arthur Murley; accepted September 15, 1916. 
1916 	185 		Authorizing schools of agriculture and horticulture; see Chapter 74, Sections 15—17 of General Laws; accepted by voters November 7, 1916. 
1916 	291 		Re tenure of office of chiefs of fire departments; see Chapter 48, Section 58 of General Laws; accepted by voters December 12, 1916. 
1916 	293 		Authorizing licensing of motor vehicles carrying passengers for hire; see Chapter 159A, Sections 1, 6 and 12 of General Laws; accepted July 16, 1919. 
1917 
(Special Acts ) 	205 		Re weekly half-holiday for laborers, etc.; accepted by voters December 11, 1917. 
1918 
(Special Acts ) 	127 		Re tenure of office of city clerk; accepted May 24, 1918; see Charter, Section 14. 
1918 
(Special Acts ) 	135 		Authorizing pension of Charles C. Folsom; accepted December 13, 1918. 
1919 
(Special Acts ) 	 98 		Provides for biennial elections in city; accepted by voters November 4, 1919; see Charter, Sections 5, 7, 10, 12, 13, 14, 20 and 28. 
1920 	574 		Retirement of veterans of the Civil, Spanish, or World War; see Chapter 32, Sections 56—60 of General Laws; accepted November 13, 1930. 
1920 	619 		Establishing a state boxing commission; see Chapter 147, Sections 32—51 of General Laws; accepted March 19, 1924. 
1921 
(General Laws) 	136 		Permits certain sports and games on the Lord's Day; see Chapter 136, Sections 21, 23—25 of General Laws; accepted over mayor's veto March 28, 1929. 
1922 	 83 		Re assessing poll taxes and making certain lists; accepted March 19, 1924. 
1923 	 26 		Changes name of overseers of the poor to the board of public welfare; see Chapter 41, Section 34A of General Laws; accepted May 11, 1923. 
1923 	191 		Establishment of a licensing commission in the city; accepted May 29, 1923; see Article III of Division 2 of this part. 
1923 	391 		Re collection of water rates; see chapter 40, Section 42A—F of General Laws; accepted March 19, 1924; see also, Acts 1936, Chapter 42. 
1923 	458 		Re pension of foremen, inspectors, etc.; see Chapter 32, Section 77B of General Laws; accepted November 17, 1925. 
1924 	123 		Changes date of biennial municipal elections; accepted June 13, 1924; see Charter, Section 5. 
1924 	311 		Enginemen and member of fire department exempted for service as jurors; see Chapter 234, Section 1 of General Laws; accepted May 19, 1925. 
1927 	 47 		Establishing salary of members of board of aldermen; accepted by voters November 8, 1927; see also, Acts of 1936, Chapter 330; superseded by Chapter 39, Section 6A of General Laws; see also Charter, Section 11. 
1927 	309 	12 	Defines terms of laborers, workmen, mechanics; see Chapter 152, Section 69 of General Laws; accepted November 16, 1935. 
1928 	 49 		The board of appeals in relation to general building ordinances; accepted March 9, 1928; see Article I of Division 2 of this part. 
1928 	 81 		Provides for associate members of board of appeals; accepted March 23, 1928; see Article II of Division 2 of this part. 
1928 	82 		Establishes board of election commissioners; accepted April 13, 1928; see also, Acts of 1929, Chapter 178; see also, Article IV of division 2 of this part. 
1928 	142 		Re drivers of patrol wagons and ambulances; accepted April 28, 1928. 
1929 	 56 		Authorizes certain people to build and maintain a foot bridge over the lower level of Somerville Avenue; accepted July 3, 1929. 
1929 	178 		Amends Acts of 1928, Chapter 82; accepted April 11, 1929; see Section 3, Article IV of Division 2 of this part. 
1929 	308 		Re compensation of dependents of policemen and firemen killed in performance of duty; see Chapter 32, Section 89 of General Laws; accepted January 22, 1931. 
1929 	369 		Publication of ordinances; see chapter 40, Section 32A of General Laws; accepted March 1, 1930. 
1930 	149 		Display of the National Flag at polling places; see Chapter 54, Section 25A of General Laws; accepted June 18, 1930. 
1930 	157 		Re services of employees in the organized reserve of the army or the naval reserve force; see Chapter 33, Section 67 of General Laws; accepted July 2, 1930. 
1930 	161 		Retirement rights of certain army nurses; see Chapter 32, Section 60A of General Laws; accepted December 2, 1932. 
1930 	184 		Providing retirement allowances based on annuities and pension contributions; accepted by voters November 4, 1930. 
1930 	399 	 56 	Concerning open-air parking spaces; see Chapter 148, Section 56 of General Laws; accepted December 2, 1932. 
1931 	458 		Re operators of all publicly owned motor vehicles; see Chapter 41, Section 100A of General Laws; accepted October 26, 1931; see also, Acts 1934, Chapter 291, Section 3. 
1932 	281 		Nonpartisan municipal elections; accepted by voters November 8, 1932; see also, Acts 1934, Chapter 62; Acts 1936, Chapter 311; Acts 1937, Chapter 211; Acts 1943, Chapter 124; see also, Article VI of Division 2 of this part. 
1932 	308 		Regulates contracts made by city; accepted June 7, 1932; see Charter, Sections 46A and 46B. Repealed by Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012. 
1933 	 16 		Regulates time when the polls shall be open in the City of Somerville for preliminary elections. 
1933 	 91 		Places chief engineer of fire department under civil service; accepted by voters November 7, 1933. 
1933 	 99 		Prepayment of taxes; accepted January 25, 1934. 
1933 	222 		Re retirement allowance payable; accepted July 14, 1933. 
1933 	249 		Places soldiers' relief commissioner on civil service; accepted June 8, 1933. 
1934 	291 	  3 	Indemnification of public employees; see Chapter 41, Section 100A of General Laws; accepted May 24, 1935; see also, Acts 1931, Chapter 458. 
1934 	294 		City auditor to be appointed by mayor; accepted by voters November 6, 1934; see Charter, Section 21. 
1934 	295 		City treasurer to be appointed by mayor; accepted by voters November 6, 1934; see Charter, Section 21. 
1934 	297 		Reducing membership of school committee; accepted by voters November 6, 1934; see Charter, Section 28. 
1934 	298 		Reducing membership of board of aldermen; accepted by voters November 6, 1934; see Charter, Section 10. 
1935 	378 		Licensing and bonding of certain theatrical booking agents, personal agents and managers; see Chapter 140, Section 180A—D of General Laws; accepted January 18, 1937. 
1936 	 42 		Changes in law relative to water liens; see Chapter 40, Section 42A—F of General Laws; accepted June 16, 1936; amends Chapter 391, Acts of 1923. 
1936 	183 		Re awarding certain contracts and making certain leases; accepted by voters November 2, 1937; see Charter, Section 46A. Repealed by Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012. 
1936 	223 		Increasing pension to retired public school janitors; see Chapter 32, Section 44 of General Laws; accepted January 26, 1937. 
1936 	290 	2(c) 	Re to pensions of laborers, foremen, etc.; see Chapter 32, Section 77C of General Laws; accepted June 13, 1939. 
1936 	318 		Contributory retirement systems; see Chapter 32, Sections 26—31I of General Laws; accepted December 13, 1945. 
1936 	330 		Re salaries of members of the board of aldermen; accepted by voters November 3, 1936; see Charter, Section 11. 
1937 	388 		Re unpaid bills of 1935; accepted September 24, 1937. 
1938 	104 		Amends Section 15 of the Charter; accepted April 2, 1938. 
1938 	426 		Providing one day off in every six for police officers; see Chapter 147, Sections 16A, 16B, and 17 of General Laws; accepted November 20, 1939. 
1939 	108 		Authorizing the issue of bonds, notes or certificates of indebtedness for certain purposes; see Chapter 44, Section 8A of General Laws; accepted by the voters November 23, 1939. 
1941 	638 		Further regulating the hours of duty of the fire department; see Chapter 48, Section 58A of General Laws; accepted May 19, 1942. 
1941 	710 		Re registration and operation of bicycles; see Chapter 85, Section 11A of General Laws; accepted February 26, 1942. 
1943 	499 		Authorizing payment to city employees entering armed services; accepted September 14, 1943. 
1945 	447 		Granting vacation to employees returning from the armed services; accepted October 16, 1945. 
1945 	487 		Re annuity to widow of Patrick Brady, accepted July 30, 1945. 
1945 	635 		Re advances of vacation pay to officers and employees; see Chapter 44, Section 65 of General Laws; accepted October 16, 1945. 
1945 	708 		Re retirement allowance of school janitors; see Chapter 32, Section 45A of General Laws; accepted December 19, 1945. 
1946 	167 		Re filling vacancies in board of aldermen and school committee; approved March 28, 1946; see charter, sections 7 and 28. 
1946 	173 		Position of nurse in the public welfare department under civil service; accepted July 19, 1946. Repealed by Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012. 
1946 	207 		Licensed operation on the Lord's Day of bowling alleys; see Chapter 136, Section 4B of General Laws; accepted December 28, 1947. 
1946 	236 		Re right to build and use drain to discharge waste in Miller's River; accepted May 16, 1946. 
1946 	527 		Re equal pay for men and women teachers; see Chapter 71, Section 40 of General Laws; accepted by voters November 4, 1947. 
1946 	576 		Re retirement of police officers and firemen; see Chapter 32, Sections 81A, 81B, 83A, 85F and 86 of General Laws; accepted October 1, 1947. 
1946 	599 		Re increase of pensions to former city employees; accepted November 4, 1946. 
1947 	265 		Closing of public offices in cities and towns on Saturday; see Chapter 41, Section 110A of General Laws; accepted June 6, 1947 and November 5, 1947. 
1947 	649 		Authorizing a forty-hour week for employees; see Chapter 149, Section 33A of General Laws; accepted September 22, 1947. 
1948 	552 		Increasing annuities to dependents of certain public employees; see Chapter 32, Section 89A of General Laws; accepted February 15, 1949. 
1948 	588 		Re increase of pensions to former city employees; accepted September 27, 1948. 
1949 	116 		Re tenure of office city messenger Daniel A. Downey; accepted April 12, 1949; see Charter, Section 14. Repealed by Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012. 
1949 	233 		Re tenure of office of Charles DiCicco, investigator in the office of veterans' services department; accepted May 23, 1949. 
1949 	234 		Authorizing the Board of Assessors to be elected by the public; enacted April 29, 1949. Repealed by Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012. 
1949 	432 		Authorizing payment to Isabel M. Cheney; accepted October 4, 1949. 
1949 	474 		Re the Board of Assessors; enacted July 1, 1949. Repealed by Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012. 
1949 	636 		Re increases of pensions to certain firemen and police officers; accepted September 15, 1949. 
1949 	708 		Authorizing retirement of John J. Curtin; accepted September 15, 1949. 
1950 	218 		Tenure of office to deputy election commissioner T. Leo Galligan; accepted March 31, 1950. 
1950 	783 		Increase retirement allowances to certain persons; accepted January 8, 1951. 
1950 	820 		Increase certain pensions; accepted January 1, 1951. 
1951 	537 		Provide annual step-rate increases for municipal public welfare employees; see Chapter 31, Section 47E of General Laws; accepted April 16, 1952. 
1951 	781 		Re increase of pensions to former city employees; accepted December 14, 1954. 
1952 	259 		Re salaries of mayors, city managers, councillors and members of boards of aldermen; see Chapter 39, Section 6A and Chapter 43, Section 17A of General Laws; accepted by voters November 4, 1952; see also, Charter, Section 11. 
1952 	268 		Re day off duty, etc., for holiday work for police officers; accepted May 19, 1959; see Chapter 147, Section 17A of General Laws. 
1952 	559 		Re construction and operation of incinerators by metropolitan district commission; accepted February 3, 1953. 
1952 	624 		Re increase of pensions, retirement, allowances and annuities to former city employees; accepted May 19, 1954. 
1953 	434 		Relative to rent control; accepted July 22, 1953 
1953 	451 		Authorizing borrowing of money for construction of a stadium; accepted June 26, 1953. 
1953 	628 		Re indemnification of retired police and firefighters for certain hospital, medical and surgical expenses; adopted March 9, 1967. 
1953 	640 		Re day off duty, etc., for holiday work for firemen; see Chapter 48, Section 57A of General Laws; accepted May 19, 1959. 
1953 	650 		Establishing a department of public works; accepted by voters November 3, 1953; see Charter, Sections 21, 40—42. 
1955 	116 		Authorizing city to revoke law re tenement houses; see Chapter 144 of General Laws; accepted July 31, 1956. 
1955 	225 		Re rent control; accepted April 26, 1955. 
1955 	341 		Re certain medical expenses of John J. Curtin; accepted May 17, 1955. 
1955 	670 		Re increase of pensions, retirement allowances and annuities to former city employees; accepted March 22, 1956. 
1956 	253 		Authorizing resurfacing certain private ways; accepted May 2, 1956. 
1956 	374 		Re pensions for widows of policemen and firefighters under the noncontributory retirement law; see Chapter 32, Section 85J of General Laws; accepted October 30, 1956. 
1956 	401 		Extending to certain civil defense volunteers indemnification of damages; accepted February 16, 1959. 
1956 	489 		Authorizing payroll deductions on account of contributions to community chests or united funds; see Chapter 180, Section 17B of the General Laws; accepted without approval of mayor July 11, 1957. 
1956 	495 		Re council for the aging; accepted November 14, 1961. 
1956 	697 		Re pensions of Cornelius P. Canavan; accepted October 16, 1956. 
1957 	 57 		Authorizing payment to the widow of Daniel A. O'Donoghue; accepted May 17, 1957. 
1957 	 58 		Re the use of facsimile counter signatures upon bonds, notes, etc.; see Chapter 44, Section 16A of General Laws; accepted January 26, 1959. 
1957 	361 		Re council for the aging; accepted November 14, 1961. 
1957 	406 		Relative to the establishment of a council for the aging; accepted November 14, 1961. 
1957 	427 		Increasing pension of retired police officers and firefighters; accepted without approval of mayor February 7, 1958. 
1959 	285 		Assures time off to state conventions of associated firefighter, etc.; see Chapter 48, Section 57B of General Laws; accepted June 27, 1961. 
1960 	239 		Increasing noncontributory pensions of certain school janitors and laborers; accepted October 9, 1961. 
1960 	396 		Validates the appointment of Thomas J. Foster as a firefighter; accepted June 1, 1960. 
1960 	561 		Authorizing collective bargaining agreements; accepted November 16, 1960. 
1961 	111 		Re increase of pension and retirement allowance of certain former employees; accepted October 9, 1961. 
1961 	163 		Re tenure of office for George E. Mitchell, deputy election commissioner; accepted March 16, 1961. 
1961 	322 		Accepting Section 22D of Chapter 40 of General Laws authorizing towing of vehicles; adopted June 13, 1968. 
1961 	381 		Re paving of private ways; accepted September 19, 1961. 
1961 	469 		Re tenure of office for Bernard J. Lonergan, deputy election commissioner; accepted March 16, 1961. 
1961 	490 		Relative to the retirement of certain war veterans in the public service; accepted September 14, 1965. 
1962 	606 		Relative to the extension of certain benefits to veterans under the retirement law; accepted September 14, 1965. 
1962 	646 		Re increase of pension and retirement allowances of certain former public employees; accepted June 24, 1963. 
1962 	786 		Requires visible tagging for parking violations; see Chapter 90, Sections 20C, 20D of the General Laws; accepted December 19, 1962, and June 13, 1968. 
1963 	385 		Revoked acceptance of Visible Tagging Law; see Acts 1962, Chapter 786; accepted May 28, 1963. 
1963 	847 		Authorized the city to appropriate money for the payment of, and to pay, certain unpaid bills; accepted December 26, 1963. 
1964 	 34 		Re tenure of office for Caesar P. Grillone, incumbent of the office of city physician; accepted March 12, 1964. Repealed by Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012. 
1964 	734 		Increasing compensation of the members of the board of assessors of the city; accepted March 14, 1968. 
1965 	277, 278 		Re increase of noncontributory pension paid to certain former policemen and firefighters; accepted June 13, 1968. 
1967 	147 		Authorizing city to pay a certain annuity to Marion S. Collins; accepted April 27, 1967. 
1967 	330 		Re grant pension to school janitors and laborers equal to seventy-two percent of annual compensation; accepted October 26, 1967. 
1967 	400 		Re increasing retirement allowance of police and firemen who retire under Veterans Retirement Act; accepted October 26, 1967. 
1968 	245 		Accepting Chapter 48, Section 58D, of the General Laws which permits the granting of a forty-two-hour work week for members of the fire department; accepted June 12, 1969. 
1968 	338 		Re increasing retirement allowance of certain city or town employees who retire under Veterans Retirement Act; accepted September 12, 1968. 
1969 	413 		Accepting Chapter 41, Section 100E, of the General Laws entitled "Indemnification of Mayors, Selectmen, etc. against Certain Claims and including Members of Somerville School Committee in Chapter 100E"; accepted June 28, 1971. 
1969 	856 		Re use of insurance proceeds from fire loss at Western Jr. High School to reduce current tax rate; accepted September 5, 1969. 
1970 	 61 		Re salary increases to the members of the fire department retroactively to June 1, 1970; accepted March 11, 1971. 
1970 	 62 		Re salary increase to the members of the police department retroactively to June 1, 1970; accepted March 11, 1971. 
1970 	463 		Re Chapter 180, Section 17G of General Laws; county and municipal employees payroll deductions for service fees to collective bargaining agencies; accepted September 23, 1971. 
1970 	842 		Enables certain cities and towns to control rents and evictions; accepted December 1, 1970; rescinded, and reaccepted January 10, 1972. 
1971 	486 		Re licensing of game commonly known and called "Beano"; accepted by voters November 2, 1971. 
1971 	872 		Re funding of certain revenue anticipation notes; accepted by the voters, November 2, 1971. 
1971 	972 		Re further regulating the awarding of certain contracts by the city; accepted December 21, 1971; unsigned and not returned by mayor; see Charter, Sections 46A—C. Repealed by Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012. 
1971 	1026 		Re transferring the management and control of school buildings to the school committee; accepted November 11, 1971; unsigned and not returned by mayor; revoked by Chapter 644 of the Acts of 1977 see Charter, Sections 28, 40A and 40A.1. 
1972 	617 		Re appropriation of money for the payment of and to pay certain unpaid bills; accepted July 20, 1972. 
1972 	763 		Re Chapter 32B, Section 9F of General Laws providing two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) life insurance and accidental death and dismemberment insurance in lieu of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) life insurance as provided in Section 9; accepted February 28, 1974. 
1973 	376 		Regarding use of Lincoln Park for state purposes; acceptance by city not required. 
1973 	616 		Re Chapter 40, Section 13 of General Laws; municipal building insurance fund; accepted March 7, 1974. 
1973 	686 		Re retirement of district chief Polcari, a firefighter, at full salary; accepted September 13, 1973. 
1973 	949 		Re increasing the penalties for violations of a city ordinance in the city; accepted March 14, 1974; see Charter, Section 17. 
1974 	793 		CATV 
1974 	804 		Municipal incinerator 
1976 	 37 		Re control of rents and evictions in the city; adopted by board of aldermen April 1, 1976; approved by the mayor April 2, 1976. 
1977 	618 		Providing tenure to Leland J. Figgins, to the position of clerk of committees to age seventy; the act was passed by the General Court October 11, 1977, and became effective the same date. It was unnecessary that this act be accepted by the city. 
1977 	644 		Re transferring the management and control of school buildings to the school committee; simultaneously rescinded Chapter 1026 of the Acts of 1971; adopted November 29, 1977 by board of aldermen. Approved by the mayor December 1, 1977; see Charter, Sections 28, 40A, 40A.1, and 40A.2. 
1977 	833 		Providing tenure to David F. O'Brien, as city physician to age seventy; the act was passed by the General Court December 12, 1977, and became effective the same date. It was unnecessary that this act be accepted by the city. 
1977 	956 		Enables treasurer to adopt a new schedule of municipal lien fees; adopted by the board of aldermen December 21, 1982 and by the mayor on December 27, 1982. 
1978 	192 		Relating to the payment of funeral and burial expenses of police officers and firefighters killed in the performance of official duties; accepted by resolution February 22, 1979 by the board of aldermen, and approved by the mayor February 27, 1979. 
1978 	364 		Compensation of city treasurers, accountants or auditors for service rendered with the retirement system; adopted by resolution February 22, 1979, and approved by the mayor February 27, 1979. 
1978 	397 		Establishing a traffic commission; accepted by resolution July 27, 1978, and approved by the mayor July 31, 1978; see Article VII of Division 2 of this part. 
1978 	404 		Providing tenure to William J. Joyce, as city messenger, to age seventy, upon appointment to the office; by resolution William J. Joyce on July 27, 1978 was appointed by the board of aldermen as city messenger, and also adopted the act. 
1978 	576 		Authorizing granting of limited real estate tax abatements for certain improvements to real estate; adopted by resolution on February 22, 1979 by the board of aldermen and approved by the mayor on February 27, 1979. 
1980 	217 		Authorizing an increased amount for which contracts with cities and towns may be invited; adopted by board of aldermen July 24, 1980, approved by mayor September 3, 1980. 
1980 	258 		Limiting alcoholic beverages licenses to be drunk on the premises to seventy-five; limiting alcoholic beverages licenses to be drunk off the premises to twenty; limiting wine and malt beverage licenses to nine. 
1980 	348 		Amending Chapter 40 of the General Laws by adding new Section 81, authorizing creation of an energy resources commission. 
1980 	468 		Providing for repayment of the overpayment of special education monies by the Commonwealth for fiscal year 1980 in equal installments over a five-year period of time. 
1981 	121 		Amending Section 3A, Chapter 468, Acts of 1980, to extend its provisions to fiscal year 1981. 
1981 	351 	20, 20a 	Authorizes the city to collect parking fines; accepted by the board of aldermen August 27, 1981 and approved by the mayor September 10, 1981. 
1981 	487 		Authorizes the city to pay to Bernard J. Lonergan such allowance as authorized by Section 101 of Chapter 32 of the General Laws as if he is the widow of a deceased former employee. 
1981 	612 		Authorizing the city to convert from a calendar to a fiscal year cycle for the purpose of reporting its overlay deficit. 
1981 	809 		Chapter 166 of the General Laws is amended by adding Section 32A allowing inspector of wires to do work in the city where appointed and to appoint assistants to inspect work; adopted by board of aldermen March 11, 1983 and approved by mayor March 14, 1983. 
1982 	123 	1 	Authorizing Ronald Hodgdon to take a civil service examination for police officer notwithstanding the maximum age requirement. 
1982 	354 		Authorizing the city to raise $4,100,000.00 overlay reserve, in three (3) installments; $2,900,000.00 in fiscal year 1982; $600,000.00 in fiscal years 1983 and 1984, less any fiscal overlay deficits raised in these years; effective July 20, 1982. 
1982 	370 		Providing financial assistance up to ninety percent of construction cost of additional renovation and remodeling of facilities for academic, vocational and technical programs; city to pay not less than fifty nor more than sixty-five percent of interest cost; effective July 26, 1982. 
1982 	597 		Authorizing the issuance of distinctive number plates to former prisoners of war; adopted by board of aldermen on October 13, 1983 and by mayor on October 18, 1983. 
1982 	656 		Authorizing the salaries of the mayor and board of assessors to be set by ordinance; approved by board of aldermen January 5, 1983; see Charter, Section 25. 
1983 	75 		Authorizing the city to establish a handicapped commission for the purpose of coordinating or carrying out programs designed to meet the problems of the handicapped citizens of the community. 
1983 	135 		Amending Chapter 258, Acts of 1980 to authorize granting of two additional liquor licenses in Assembly Square; approved by November 18, 1983. 
1983 	505 		Authorizing the city to sell certain parcel of land at corner of Lincoln and Perkins; approved by board of aldermen November 18, 1983. 
1984 	 30 		Designating Prospect St. Bridge as the Vietnam Veterans' Memorial Bridge. 
1984 	213 		Authorizing the city to borrow up to $6,000,000.00 for the purpose of making certain repayments of overpayments to the Boston Edison Company. 
1984 	477 		Amending Chapter 40 of the General Laws by adding a new Section 4h, concerning purchases from other governmental bodies; adopted by the board of aldermen March 28, 1984 and by the mayor April 1, 1984. 
1985 	 23 		Election and composition of board of assessors; approved April 9, 1985; see Charter, Section 36. 
1985 	216 		Authorizing the city to contract with others for the operation of the municipal incinerator; approved June 27, 1985. 
1985 	218 		Amending Chapter 37 of General Laws relative to condominium conversion; adopted by board of aldermen and mayor June 27, 1985. 
1985 	255 		Authorizing Robert Swift to take next firefighter exam notwithstanding his age; acceptance by city not required. 
1985 	486 		Providing for the appointment of a purchasing agent in the city; see Charter, Sections 21 and 43. Repealed by Chapter 400 of the Acts of 2012. 
1985 	493 		Re leaves of absences for certain school personnel elected to public office; see Chapter 71, Section 41A of the General Laws; acceptance by city not required. 
1985 	188 	13 	Establishing a professional development grant program for the purpose of supplementing teacher compensation; adopted December 12, 1985; approved by mayor December 17, 1985. 
1985 	724 		Designating a certain bridge in the city as the Mary C. Roderick Bridge; acceptance by city not required. 
1985 	769 		Authorizing the city to lease land and buildings of the former Western Junior High School for periods not to exceed twenty years; acceptance by city not required. 
1986 	 77 		Provides for property tax exemption in the city; effective June 10, 1986. 
1986 	 78 		Provides for property tax exemption in the city; effective June 10, 1986. 
1986 	228 		Provides for conveyance of certain land in the city for the construction of a bridge; effective July 15, 1986. 
1986 	291 		Authorizes the conveyance of certain park land in the city; effective July 21, 1986. 
1986 	368 		Repealed under Chapter 184 of the Acts of 2006. 
1986 	369 		Re the jurisdiction of the police department; effective August 5, 1986. 
1986 	490 		Authorizes the city to convey a certain parcel of park land for housing purposes; effective October 29, 1986. 
1987 	 47 	1, 2 	Provides for conveyance of certain land in the city for construction of a parking lot; effective May 11, 1987. 
1987 	 62 		Designating a certain bridge in the city as the Elmer Bumpus Memorial Bridge; effective May 11, 1987. 
1987 	180 	1, 2 	Certifying Robert F. Kelleher for transfer from position as Registry of Motor Vehicles Examiner to police officer; effective June 29, 1987. 
1987 	306 		Authorizing an increase in fees for certificates of liens. Adopted by board of aldermen March 10, 1988; approved by mayor, March 31, 1988. 
1987 	499 	1, 2 	Amending Chapter 59, Section 5 of the General Laws by adding clause 5B; providing for exemption of veterans' organizations from certain taxes; adopted by board of aldermen March 10, 1988; approved by mayor, March 18, 1988. 
1987 	697 		Local options on retirement; adopted by board of aldermen March 24, 1988; approved by mayor, March 30, 1988. 
1987 	712 	3 	Amending Chapter 60, Section 3 of the General Laws by adding Section 3C; authorizing establishment of local scholarship fund; adopted by board of aldermen January 28, 1988; approved by mayor, February 3, 1988. 
1988 	 94 	1—3 	Home rule petition amending Sections 4, 5 of c. 650 of the Acts of 1953, renaming the division of buildings as the division of buildings and grounds and adding the division and superintendent of inspectional services; see Charter, Sections 40C, 40D. 
1988 	171 		Increasing the penalties for violations of ordinances in the City of Somerville. 
1989 	355 		City Clerk's term. 
1989 	653 	40 	Allows communities to tax in current fiscal year new construction and improvements built between January 1 and June 30; accepted April 12, 1990. 
1990 	254 		Service of municipal employees after age 70; adopted by board of aldermen August 22, 1991. 
1990 	291 		Re Enchanced 911; accepted September 26, 1991. 
1990 	479 		Third Harbor Tunnel funding. 
1991 	31 		Borrowing money for renovation of City Hall. 
1991 	227 		Abolishing city messenger position. 
1991 	390 		Municipal Commissions on Disability; adopted by board of aldermen June 7, 1992. 
1991 	463 		Decreasing number of alcoholic beverages. 
1992 	171 		Funding schedule of the retirement system. 
1992 	278 		Naming a ball field after Frank Oliveto, Jr. 
1992 	364 		Conveyance of land for bridge construction. 
1993 	71 	83 	Relative to an early retirement incentive program in the school department; accepted June 23, 1994. 
1993 	183 		Acquisition of land. 
1993 	277 		Naming a bridge after William Joyce. 
1993 	288 		Elimination of [subdivision] control. 
1994 	235 		Relative to the rights of certain fire fighters and police officers, adopted March 23, 1995. 
1996 	71 	3 	Regarding military service credit for retirement purposes; accepted August 14, 2003. 
1996 	252 		Authorizing municipal charges liens. 
1997 	118 		Authorizing use of land for educational facility. 
1998 	435 		Retiring Sean J. Canty, Somerville Police Officer. 
1999 	23 		Allowing an extension for the submission of the annual budget. 
2000 	5 		Increasing the number of licenses for the sale of wine and malt beverages. 
2000 	257 		Authorizing residential tax exemption from 20% to 30%. 
2000 	303 		Renaming the Cedar Street Bridge as the Alderman Peter G. Piro Bridge. 
2001 	203 	19 	Regarding the date of issuance of tax bills; accepted January 10, 2002. 
2002 	116 		Regarding an early retirement incentive; accepted May 23, 2002. 
2002 	116 		Regarding military service credit for retirement purposes; accepted August 14, 2003. 
2002 	262 		Regarding the disposition of certain state-owned property in the city; enacted August 10, 2002. 
2002 	285 		Authorizing an increase in parking fines; enacted August 21, 2002. 
2003 	46 	116 	Regarding early retirement incentive program; accepted August 7, 2003. 
2003 	95 		Authoring the issuance of certain general obligation bonds with level debt service. 
2004 	300 		Designating land at Draw 7 Park as the Patrick Sullivan Fishing Hole. 
2004 	316 		Placing Health Inspectors under the supervision of the Division of Inspectional Services. 
2004 	317 		Transferring School Custodians to the Department of Public Works. 
2004 	327 		Relative to public safety and gang loitering. 
2005 	157 	2 	Re retirement allowance for veterans; see Chapter 32, Section 7(2) of General Laws; accepted January 26, 2006. 
2005 	159 		Establishing a Project Mitigation Contribution or Linkage Program for Affordable Housing. 
2006 	183 		Authorizes the Mayor to appoint the Chief of Police pursuant to ordinance, and exempts the Chief of Police from MGL Chapter 31. 
2006 	184 		Authorizes the Mayor to appoint as special police officers retired Somerville police officers and current Somerville Housing Authority police officers, and repeals Chapter 368 of the Acts of 1986. 
2008 	106 		Establishing a municipal hearing process for code violations. 
2008 	112 		Amending Sections 40C and 40D of the City Charter regarding divisions in the Department of Public Works. 
2008 	180 		Allowing the city to impose increased fees for services performed by employees in off-duty work details. 
2008 	193 		Deleting Section 2 of Chapter 316 of the Acts of 2004, eliminating the sunset clause to reorganize health inspectors. 
2008 	267 		Authorizing the Commissioner of Capital Asset Mgmt. and Maintenance to grant easements and convey land re: Assembly Sq. 
2008 	270 		Authorizing the Commissioner of Capital Asset Mgmt. and Maintenance to grant easements re: Capen Court. 
2008 	449 		Amending Chapter 258 of the Acts of 1980, assigning 10 liquor licenses for Assembly Sq. and restoring the state formula for determining the number of licenses. 
2010 	245 		Authorizing the Commissioner of Capital Asset Mgmt. and Maintenance to convey land at 485 Mystic Valley Pkwy. a/k/a 149 Capen St. to the Somerville Housing Authority. 
2010 	379 		Exempting the Deputy Chief of Police from MGL Chapter 31. 
2012 	21 	1—3 	Authorizing the city to incur debt to maintain state property leased to or otherwise under the control of the city. 
2012 	381 		Increasing the number of liquor licenses allowed citywide by ten and the number allowed in Assembly Square by two (to 12). 
2012 	400 	1—62 	Amending the City Charter to include various updates and an administrative code. 
2013 	16 		Authorizing the city to posthumously appoint Sean A. Collier as a police officer. 
2013 	180 		Authorizing the retirement board to retire police officer Mario Oliveira. 
2014 	90 		Defining the way the offices of mayor and alderman are filled under certain circumstances. 
2014 	285 		Increasing the residential exemption for residential real property from 30 percent to 35 percent. 
2016 	142 	1—11 	Amends liquor license regulations. 
2016 	199 		Establishing the Somerville Municipal Job Creation and Retention Trust. 
2016 	321 	1 	Amending petition accompanying statement of candidate. 
2016 	340 	1 	Amending certain contracts to be accompanied by bond; meet other requirements. 
2017 	21 		Authorizing Somerville to borrow funds to pay certain costs associated with the Green Line Extension. 
2018 	92 	1 	Increasing the maximum age to be eligible for appointment as a Special Police Officer. 
2018 	196 	1—3 	Authorizing the Division of Capital Asset Management and Maintenance to convey certain land to the Housing Authority. 
2018 	197 	1 	Authorizing the Housing Authority to reconstruct the state funded Clarendon Hill public housing project. 
2018 	298 	1 	Authorizing an exemption for certain owner-occupied residential properties for water and sewer charges and rates. 
2018 	355 	1—50 	Amending the City Charter to create a City Council. 
2018 	364 	1 	Increasing the membership of the Redevelopment Authority to 7. 
2018 	410 	1—3 	Eliminating the political party requirement for Election Commissioners and Licensing Commissioners. 
 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is a list of the principal acts of the General Court affecting the City of Somerville. Many of these acts require acceptance by the voters of the city or the governing body to become effective, while others require no such acceptance but are effective upon passage. Those acts specifically accepted by the voters or the governing body are cited as such in the remarks column of the list. Those acts effective upon passage by the General Court cite the effective date of the Act or that acceptance by the city is not required in the remarks column of the list. 
 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Citation and effect of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Ordinances, City of Somerville, Massachusetts," and may be so cited. So far as their provisions are the same in effect as those of previously existing ordinances they shall be construed as continuations of such ordinances, but, subject to the limitation and the provisions of section 1-2, all ordinances of the city of a general and permanent nature in force on the date of the last ordinance included in this Code are hereby repealed except for those ordinances not affected by this repeal as provided in section 1-10. This repeal, however, shall not apply to or affect any ordinance accepting or adopting the provisions of any statute of the commonwealth. 
(Code 1963, § 1-1)  
Sec. 1-2. - Prospective effect of Code, repeal and revival of ordinances and rights and powers of officers. 
(a)  This Code of Ordinances and the foregoing repeal of all ordinances heretofore in force shall not affect any act done, any right accrued, any penalty or liability incurred, any pending suit, prosecution, or proceeding, or, unless otherwise therein provided, the tenure of office of any person holding office at the time when these ordinances take effect. 
(b)  Said repeal or the repeal hereafter of any other ordinance shall not have the effect of reviving any ordinance heretofore repealed or suspended. 
(c)  An officer to whom is assigned under these ordinances substantially the same duties as were assigned to an officer under the same or another designation under existing ordinances shall be regarded as the same officer with the same rights and powers as heretofore. 
(Code 1963, § 1-2)  
Sec. 1-3. - Repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of any ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1963, § 1-9)  
Sec. 1-4. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances enacted, the following interpretations shall be observed unless such construction or interpretation shall be manifestly inconsistent with the evident intent of the city council or the qualified voters, or repugnant to the context or to the evident purport of any ordinance: 
Board of aldermen. The words "board of aldermen" shall mean the board of aldermen of the City of Somerville, Massachusetts. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-01 , adopted Jan. 24, 2019, pursuant to C355, Acts of 2018, amended the entire Code of Ordinances as follows: change the name of the "Board of Aldermen" to the "City Council", and "Aldermen" to "Councilor" and variants thereof. 
Charter. The words "Charter," "City Charter" or "the Charter" shall be deemed to mean and refer to the Charter of the City of Somerville, Massachusetts, being Chapter 240 of the Acts of 1899 as amended. 
City. The words "the city" shall mean the City of Somerville, in the County of Middlesex and Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
Code. Unless clearly indicated otherwise, the term "Code" or "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances of the City of Somerville, Massachusetts as cited in section 1-1. 
Commonwealth. The terms "commonwealth" or "state" shall mean the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
Computation of time. The time in which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day and if the last day is a Sunday or a legal holiday that shall be excluded. 
County. The word "county" shall mean the County of Middlesex, Massachusetts. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, or granting some right to him or her as such official, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty, or it shall grant to them such right, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to trusts, associations, firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1999-6, § 1, adopted Jan. 27, 2001 amended the entire Code of Ordinances to implement gender neutral language by replacing the words "he", "him", and "his" as they appear in the Code with "he or she", "him or her", and "his or her", respectively. 
General laws. The words "General Laws" shall mean the Massachusetts General Laws annotated as amended. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or persons. 
Mayor. The word "mayor" shall mean the mayor of the City of Somerville, Massachusetts. 
M.G.L.A. "M.G.L.A." shall mean Massachusetts General Laws annotated as amended. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. Words importing the singular shall include the plural and words importing the plural shall include the singular. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Public grounds. The words "public grounds" shall include the parks and all public lands owned by the city, and those parts of public places which do not form travelled parts of streets or highways. 
Statute references. Whenever reference is made to the general laws this shall mean the Massachusetts General Laws annotated and may be cited as M.G.L.A. 
Tenant or occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Ways, streets, highways. The words "ways," "streets" and "highways" shall be construed as including boulevards, avenues, courts, lanes, alleys, squares, places and sidewalks, and each of these words includes every other of them. 
Writing or written. The words "writing" or "written" shall include printing. 
(Code 1963, § 1-6) 
State Law reference— Rules for construction of statutes, M.G.L.A. c. 4, § 6.  
Sec. 1-5. - Custody of Code. 
A copy of this Code together with the zoning ordinance of the city shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other forms as the city clerk may consider most expedient. He or she shall keep the building code in a separate book. It shall be the express duty of the city clerk, or someone authorized by him or her, to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the city council. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same and shall be considered the official Code of Ordinances of Somerville. 
(Code 1963, § 1-4) 
Charter reference— City clerk, § 31.  
Sec. 1-6. - Publication of new ordinances. 
Every ordinance shall, except when otherwise provided, be published by inserting the same once in some newspaper published in the city. This section and section 1-5 are directory only, and a failure to comply with the same shall not affect the validity of any ordinance. 
(Code 1963, § 1-5) 
State Law reference— Publication of ordinances, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 32A.  
Sec. 1-7. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1963, § 1-7)  
Sec. 1-8. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of the Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-9. - References and editor's notes. 
The references and editor's notes appearing throughout the Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to assist the users of the Code.  
Sec. 1-10. - Ordinances and actions not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)  Any ordinance accepting or adopting the provisions of any statute of the commonwealth; 
(3)  Any right or franchise, permit or other right granted by any ordinance; 
(4)  Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions and setting salaries or fringe benefits of the mayor, councilors, city officers, employees, or members of any city boards, commissions or agencies; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, alley or other public way in the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades in the city; 
(7)  Any personnel policies and regulations; 
(8)  Any land use, zoning or rezoning ordinance; 
(9)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory from the city or redefining the boundaries; 
(10)  Any appropriation ordinance or any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; 
(11)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(13)  Any ordinance establishing the official plat of the city, the zoning map or any amendments thereof not included herein; 
(14)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic and parking regulations for specific streets and locations; 
(15)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
(16)  Any ordinance adopting or setting out a building code; 
(17)  Any ordinance setting fees for licenses and permits; 
(18)  Any ordinance setting rates for taxicabs; 
(19)  Any administrative ordinance or resolution of the city council; 
(20)  Any ordinance establishing or designating bus stops, taxicab stands and service areas; 
(21)  Any ordinance or regulation pertaining to water and sewer rates; 
(22)  Any ordinance adopted after December 29, 1986; 
and all such provisions shall continue in force and effect as if fully set forth in this Code.  
Sec. 1-11. - Penalties and violations. 
(a)  Any person who violates a provision of this Code or of any ordinance of the city, whether included in the Code or any hereafter enacted, whereby any act or thing is enjoined or prohibited or required, shall, unless other provision is expressly made, be liable to a penalty of $300.00 for each offense; provided, however, that whenever a higher penalty is permitted under the General Laws of Massachusetts, such higher penalty shall be the maximum penalty for each offense; and provided further, that nothing in these provisions shall be deemed to limit the use of other lawful methods of abating violations of this section including, but not limited to, application for equitable relief from a court of law. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. In order to determine the number of offenses under this section, each offense for the property in the same calendar year shall be counted, except that snow removal violations shall be counted from October 1 through May 1 of the following year. 
(b)  Whoever violates any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city, the violation of which is subject to a specific penalty, may also be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in the General Laws, Chapter 40, Section 21D. The noncriminal method of disposition may also be used for violations of any rule or regulation of any municipal officer, board or department which is subject to a specific penalty. 
Without intending to limit the generality of the foregoing, it is the intention of this subsection that the following ordinances and sections of ordinances are to be included within the scope of noncriminal disposition for violations of ordinances according to the General Laws, Chapter 40, Section 21D. The specific penalties, as listed here, shall apply in such cases. Except for enforcement of the building code, fire code, sanitary code, and zoning ordinances, police officers shall be considered to be enforcing persons in all cases of this subsection, except as otherwise provided by state statute, in addition to the municipal personnel listed, if any, for each subsection: 
Offense 	Fine 	Enforcing Personnel 
Feeding or Baiting Animals (Sec. 3-3) 	$25.00 	Police; animal control; commissioner of public works; inspectional services 
Dog Violations (Sec. 3-38) 	$50.00 1 	Police; animal control; commissioner of public works; inspectional services 
Non-Domesticated Animals (Sec. 3-39) 	1st offense: $100.00 
2nd offense: $200.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Police; inspectional services 
Storage of Combustibles (Sec. 5-4) 	$100.00 	Police; fire 
Compliance with Orders of Fire Officers (Sec. 5-9) 	$100.00 	Police; fire 
Obstruction of Fire Prevention Bureau Personnel (Sec. 5-10) 	$100.00 	Police; fire 
Indoor Pyrotechnic Displays (Sec. 5-11) 	$300.00 	Police; fire 
Inspection of Buildings by Fire Department (Sec. 5-38) 	$100.00 	Police; fire 
Failure to Comply with Order to Correct Fire Violation (Sec. 5-80) 	$100.00 	Police; fire 
False Fire Alarms (Sec. 5-98) 	1st or 2nd offense: oral warning 
3rd offense: written warning 
4th & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Police; fire 
Smoking in Parks (Sec. 6-3) 	$100.00 	Police; health department; inspectional services 
Biotechnology Research (Sec. 6-68) 	$1,000.00 	Police, biosafety committee, health inspectors 
Posting of Name and Address of Owner or Agent (Sec. 7-1) 	1st offense: Warning 
2nd offense: $100.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Inspectional services 
Demolition Review (Sec. 7-27) 	$300.00. No building permit issued for two years after the date of unauthorized demolition 	Police; historic preservation commission; inspectional services 
Historic Preservation (Sec. 7-27, 7-28) 	$100.00 	Police; inspectional services 
Condominium Conversion (Sec. 7-76) 	$200.00 	Police, condominium review board 
Condominium Review Board (Sec. 7-76) 	$100.00 	Police; inspectional services 
University Accountability (Sec. 7-155) 	1st and subsequent offense: $300.00 	Inspectional services 
Operating Hours (Sec. 8-7) 	1st offense: Written warning 
2nd & subsequent offenses: $300.00 	Police, inspectional services 
Booth for Sale of Goods (Sec. 8-8) 	$25.00 	Police; commissioner of public works; inspectional services 
Plastic Bags Regulations (Sec. 8-11) 	$50.00 	Police; health inspectors 
Electric Motors (Sec. 8-13) 	$25.00 	Police; commissioner of public works; inspectional services 
Carnivals, Concerts, Circuses & Other Entertainment & Amusement (Sec. 8-14) 	$100.00 	Police; inspectional services 
Amusement Devices, Video Games, Pinball Machines (Sec. 8-15) 	$100.00 	Police; inspectional services 
Junk Dealers & Junk Shop (Sec. 8-63, Sec. 8-72) 	$100.00 	Police; commissioner of public works; inspectional services 
Hawkers & Peddlers (Sec. 8-86) 	$20.00 2 
False or insufficient weight or measure: 
1st offense: $75.00 
2nd offense: $187.50 
3rd offense: $375.00 3 	Police; commissioner of public works; inspectional services 
Transient Vendor (Sec. 8-99) 	$50.00 4 	Police; commissioner of public works; inspectional services 
Open Air Vending (Sec. 8-114) 	$25.00 	Police; commissioner of public works; inspectional services 
Street Performers (Sec. 8-124) 	1st offense: $100.00 
2nd offense: $200.00 
3rd offense: $300.00 	Police 
Door-to-Door Solicitors & Canvassers (Sec. 8-152) 	1st offense: $100.00 
2nd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Police 
Garages (Sec. 8-169) 	1st offense: Warning 
2nd offense: $100.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Police; commissioner of public works; inspectional services 
Bottle Redemption Centers (Sec. 8-204) 	$100.00 	Police; health inspectors, inspectional services 
Plastic Bag Recycling (Sec. 8-303) 	1st offense: $100.00 
2nd offense: $200.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Inspectional services division 
Fortune Tellers (Sec. 8-350) 	1st offense: $100.00 
2nd offense: $200.00 
3rd & subsequentoffense: $300.00 	Inspectional services division 
Mobile Food Vendors (Sec. 8-369) 	1st offense: $100.00 
2nd offense: $200.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Police; inspectional services 
Consumption, Possession, Sale of Alcoholic Beverages in Certain Public Areas (Sec. 9-1) 	$100.00 	Police 
Sale of Non-Alcoholic Beer or Wine to persons under 21 (Sec. 9-2) 	$300.00 	Police 
Marijuana in public places and businesses (Sec. 9-3) 	$300.00 	Police 
Disorderly Conduct in city council chamber (Sec. 9-16) 	$50.00 5 	Police 
Signs in city council chamber (Sec. 9-17) 	$25.00 	Police 
Trash and Litter Upon Sidewalks (Sec. 9-54) 	1st offense: $50.00 
2nd offense: $100.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Police; commissioner of public works; health inspectors 
Trash Outside of Places of Business (Sec. 9-55) 	1st offense: $50.00 
2nd offense: $100.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Police; commissioner of public works; inspectional services; health inspectors 
Vegetation and Wood on Private Property (Sec. 9-56 (a)) 	1st offense: warning for first ongoing incident 
2nd offense: $35.00 per day for second ongoing incident 
3rd and subsequent offense: $300.00 per day for third and subsequent ongoing incident 	Police; commissioner of public works; inspectional services; health inspectors 
Vegetation and Wood on Private Property (Sec. 9-56 (b), (c), and (d)) 	1st offense: warning for first ongoing incident 
2nd offense: $35.00 per day for second ongoing incident 
3rd and subsequent offense: $50.00 per day for third and subsequent ongoing incident 	Police; commissioner of public works; inspectional services; health inspectors 
Repairing and Storing Motor Vehicles on Public and Private Property (Sec. 9-57) 	1st offense: $100.00 
2nd offense: $200.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Police; commissioner of public works; inspectional services; health inspectors 
Graffiti Removal (Sec. 9-67) 	$100.00 	Police; inspectional services 
Peeping and stalking (Sec. 9-72) 	1st offense: $100.00 
2nd & subsequent offense: $100.00 	Police 
Use of Fireworks (Sec. 9-88) 	1st offense: $50.00 
2nd offense: $150.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Police 
Selling and Storing Fireworks (Sec. 9-89) 	1st offense: $50.00 
2nd offense: $100.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Police 
Abandoned refrigerators (Sec. 9-90) 	$100.00 	Police; inspectional services, health inspectors 
Abandoned motor vehicles (Sec. 9-91) 	$100.00 	Police; fire 
Sale of spray paint, indelible markers (Sec. 9-93) 	$50.00 	Police 
Vaporized Liquor (Sec. 9-95) 	$300.00 	Police 
Nuisance Control (Section 9-97) 	1st offense: $100.00 
2nd offense within 1 year: $200.00 
3rd or subsequent offense within 1 year: $300.00 	Police 
Expanded Polystyrene Ban (Sec. 9-104) 	1st offense: Warning 
2nd offense within 1 year: $100.00 
3rd subsequent offense within 1 year: $300.00 	Health inspectors, 
Inspectional services division 
Plastic Bags in a Retail Establishment (Sec. 9-105.3) 	1st offense: Warning 
2nd offense: $50.00 
3rd and subsequent offense: $100.00 	Inspectional services 
Noise - Construction (Sec. 9-116(3)) 	1 st offense: $100.00 
2 nd and subsequent offense: $300.00 	Police; inspectional services 
Noise (Sec. 9-118) 	1st offense: Warning 
2nd offense: $100.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Police; inspectional services 
Building Code (Sec. 9-131) 	1st offense: Warning 
2nd and subsequent offense: $300.00 	Inspectional services 
Fire Code (Sec. 9-132) 	1st offense: Warning 
2nd and subsequent offense: $300.00 	Fire 
Sanitary Code (Sec. 9-133) 	1st offense: Warning 
2nd and subsequent offense: $300.00 	Health inspectors 
Avoidable Alarms (Sec. 10-36) 	a. Third false alarm and any subsequent avoidable alarm: $300.00 for commercial properties. 
b. Third false alarm and any subsequent avoidable alarm: $100.00 for residential properties. 	Police 
Avoidable Alarms (Sec. 10-36) 	3rd & subsequent offense: $300.00, after two or more avoidable alarms within a calendar year 	Police 
Burglar Alarms Regulations (Sec. 10-42) 	$300.00 	Police 
Household Trash & Rubbish (Sec. 11-31) 	1st offense: $50.00 
2nd offense: $100.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Police; commissioner of public works; inspectional services; health inspectors 
Paving and Driveway Permit (Sec. 11-33(b)) 	$300.00 	City engineer; inspectional services 
Paving Contractor (Sec. 11-33(c)) 	$300.00 	City engineer; inspectional services 
Commercial Trash (Sec. 11-34) 	$65.00 per day for first ongoing incident 
$125.00 per day for second ongoing incident 
$300.00 per day for subsequent ongoing incident 	Police; commissioner of public works; inspectional services; health inspectors 
Trash & Rubbish for dwellings with seven or more units (Sec. 11-35) 	$50.00 	Police 
Grease Container (Sec. 11-36) 	$100.00 	Police, inspectional services 
Disinfection of Refuse Vehicles (Sec. 11-37) 	$100.00 	Police, inspectional services 
Rodent Control (Sec. 11-38) 	1st offense: $50.00 
2nd offense: $100.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Inspectional services; board of health 
Removal of Litter from a Retail Parking Area (Sec. 11-39) 	$100.00 	Police, inspectional services 
Mandatory Recycling - Residential Dwellings: Separation of Recyclable Materials; Collection of Recyclable Materials; Recycling Plans (Sec. 11-40(c), (d)(1)a—c., (e)) 	1st offense: Warning 
2nd offense: $100.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Police; commissioner of public works; inspectional services; health inspectors 
Mandatory Recycling - Residential Dwellings Over Six Units; Commercial and Nonprofit Establishments: Separation of Recyclable Materials; Collection of Recyclable Materials; Recycling Plans (Sec. 11-40(c), (d)(2), (e)) 	1st offense: Warning 
2nd offense: $125.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Police; commissioner of public works; inspectional services; health inspectors 
Mandatory Recycling - Collection by Unauthorized Persons (Sec. 11-40(d)(1)d.) 	1st offense: Warning 
2nd offense: $100.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Police; commissioner of public works; inspectional services; health inspectors 
Street Numbering (Sec. 11-109) 	$25.00 	Police; commissioner of public works; inspectional services 
Vacant Property Notification (Sec. 11-111) 	$100.00 	Police, inspectional services 
Pipes, sewer, conduit, poles or other structures on, above, or under streets (Sec. 11-142) 	$100.00 	Police 
Stormwater Runoff (Sec. 11-145) 	$300.00 	City engineer; inspectional services 
Sidewalk Snow and Ice Removal (Sec. 12-8) - Residential dwelling (as defined in Sec. 11-31(b)(23)) — single-, two-, and three-family dwelling 	1st offense: $50.00 
2nd offense: $100.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $200.00 	DPW Commissioner, inspectional services, traffic and parking 
Sidewalk Snow and Ice Removal (Sec. 12-8) - Residential dwelling (as defined in Sec. 11-31(b)(23)) - four or more dwelling units; commercial establishment (as defined in Sec. 11-31(b)(7)) 	1st offense: $150.00 
2nd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	DPW commissioner; inspectional services; traffic and parking 
Snow or Ice Generally Prohibited from Being Placed in Street (Sec. 12-9) - Residential dwelling (as defined in Sec. 11-31(b)(23)) - single-, two- and three-family dwelling 	1st offense: $50.00 
2nd offense: $100.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $200.00 	DPW commissioner; inspectional services; traffic and parking 
Snow or Ice Generally Prohibited from Being Placed in Street (Sec. 12-9) - Residential dwelling (as defined in Sec. 11-31(b)(23)) - four or more dwelling units; commercial establishment (as defined in Sec. 11-31(b)(7)). 	1st offense: $150.00 
2nd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	DPW commissioner; inspectional services; traffic and parking 
Projections Over Street/Sidewalk (Sec. 12-14, 12-15) 	$50.00 	Police; commissioner of public works; inspectional services 
Awnings (Sec. 12-16) 	$50.00 	Police; commissioner of public works; inspectional services 
Obstacles in streets or sidewalks overnight (Sec. 12-18) 	$100.00 	Police; commissioner of public works 
Parking Lot Sweeping Hours (Sec. 12-20.1). 	1st offense: $100.00 
2nd offense: $200.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Inspectional services division, police 
Any Violation of the Ordinance Regulating Billboard and Other Forms of Alcohol Advertising (Sec. 12-25) 	1st offense: Warning 
2nd offense: $100.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $150.00 	Inspectional services division 
Activities on Certain Public Property (Sec. 12-46) 	1st offense: $50.00 
2nd offense: $100.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $200.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Construction Dumpsters (Sec. 12-77) 	1st offense: Warning 
2nd offense: $200.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Police, inspectional services 
Shopping Carts (Sec. 12-89) 	$100.00 per day 	Police; inspectional services 
Shopping Cart Violations (Sec. 12-99) 	$100.00 	Police, inspectional services 
Vulnerable Road Users (Sec. 12-122) 	1st offense: $100.00 
2nd offense: $200.00 
3rd & subsequent offense: $300.00 	Fleet division and SPD 
Taxicab (Sec. 13-6) 	$300.00 	Police; commissioner of public works; inspectional services 
Livery (Sec. 13-96) 	$300.00 	Police 
Pay to Play and Campaign Contributions (Sec. 15-75) 	1st offense: Warning 
2nd offense: $100.00 
3rd and subsequent offense within 1 year: $300.00 	Ethics commission; auditor 
Zoning Ordinances 	1st offense: Warning 
2nd offense: $100.00 
3rd offense: $300.00 
(SZO § 3.1.8) 	Inspectional services 
Bicycle Law (G.L. c. 85, §§ 11A, 11B, 11C) 	$20.00 6 	Police 
Antilittering (Sec. 12-3, G. L. c. 270, §§ 16, 16A) 	$50.00 	Police; health inspectors 
BOARD OF HEALTH REGULATIONS 
Editor's note— The Board of Health sets the "BOARD OF HEALTH REGULATIONS" offenses. 
Body Art 	$250.00 	Police; health inspectors; inspectional services 
Removal or Transportation of Garbage 	$50.00 	Health inspectors 
Sale of Tobacco Products to Minors 	1st offense: $100.00 or training 
2nd Offense: $200.00 
3rd & subsequent offenses: $300.00 and, for 3rd violation in 1 year: 30 days suspension of license; for 3rd violation in 2 years: 2 weeks suspension of license 
4th and subsequent violations: 3 months suspension of license 	Health inspectors 
Sale of Tobacco Without a Valid License 	1st offense: $500.00 
2nd offense: $500.00 and 1 year revocation of license 	Health inspectors 
Other Youth Access 	$50.00 	Health inspectors 
Smoking 	Fines Issued to Establishments: 
1st offense: $100.00 
2nd offense: $200.00 
3rd & subsequent offenses: $300.00 
Egregious violations may result in suspension of license 
Fines Issued to Smokers: 
$100.00 per violation 	Police; health inspectors 
TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS 
The Traffic Commission sets the "TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS" offenses, with certain 
exceptions (per c. 285 of the Acts of 2002). 
Handicapped Parking 	$200.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Hydrant 	$50.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Crosswalk 	$50.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Fire Lane 	$50.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Street Sweeping Parking Violation 	$50.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Parking Within Ten Feet of a Hydrant During a Snow Emergency 	$100.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Parking Within 20 Feet of an Intersection During a Snow Emergency 	$100.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Obstruction of a Snow Plow during a Snow Emergency 	$100.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Unattached Trailer 	$40.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Traffic Island/Safety Zone 	$30.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Taxi Stand 	$30.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Restricted Zone 	$30.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Permit Parking 	$50.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Wrong Direction 	$30.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Overtime Parking 	$25.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Over 48 Hours 	$30.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Over One Foot From Curb 	$30.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
On Sidewalk 	$30.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Obstruct/Two Foot Driveway 	$30.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
No Stop Zone 	$30.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Parking Meter 	$30.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Loading Zone 	$30.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Leave Ten Foot Passage 	$40.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
High School Concourse 	$25.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Double Parking 	$50.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Construction Zone 	$30.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Commercial Overnight 	$40.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Bus Stop 	$100.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
20 Foot Intersection 	$40.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
RMV Surcharge 	$40.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Invalid or Expired Registration Plate 	$50.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
Invalid or Expired Inspection Sticker 	$50.00 	Police; traffic and parking 
 
Editor's note— 
1 Per M.G.L. c. 140, § 173, fine for dog-fouling can not be more than $50.00. 
2 M.G.L. c. 101, § 17 - fine not to exceed $20.00. 
3 M.G.L. c. 94, § 177. 
4 Not more than $50.00 for operating without a license or filing a false application. M.G.L. c. 101, § 9. 
5 Fine can be no more than $50.00 per M.G.L. c. 272, § 40. 
6 Per M.G.L. c. 85, §§ 11A, 11B, 11C, fines cannot exceed $20.00 and all fines collected shall be used by the respective cities and towns for the development and implementation of bicycle programs. 
(c)  Failure to make payment of any fines for the violations listed in section 1-11(b) may result in the revocation, suspension or denial of any local license or permit, including renewals and transfers, pursuant to section 8-3 of the Code of Ordinances and/or a municipal charges lien being placed on the violator's property located within the city pursuant to the authority and provisions of Chapter 252 of the Acts of 1996. 
(Code 1963, §§ 1—13; Ord. No. 1987-3, § 2, 2-26-87; Ord. No. 1990-6, 3-22-90; Ord. No. 1990-17, 12-13-90; Ord. No. 1995-1, 2-9-95; Ord. No. 1995-3, 2-23-95; Ord. No. 1995-9, 10-12-95; Ord. No. 1998-3, 3-26-98; Ord. No. 2002-3, 4-25-2002; Ord. No. 2003-03, 3-27-2003; Ord. No. 2003-06, 5-22-2003; Ord. No. 2003-07, 5-22-2003; Ord. No. 2003-12, 7-10-2003; Ord. No. 2003-13, 9-11-2003; Ord. No. 2003-14, 9-11-2003; Ord. No. 2004-01, 2-12-2004; Ord. No. 2004-03, 2-12-2004; Ord. No. 2005-11, 7-14-2005; Ord. No. 2005-13, 7-14-2005; Ord. No. 2006-03, 1-12-2006; Ord. No. 2006-09, § A, 4-11-2006; Amend. of BOH Reg., 7-10-2006; Ord. No. 2006-12, 9-28-2006; Ord. No. 2006-16, 12-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-03, 3-8-2007; Ord. No. 2007-07, 5-10-2007; Ord. No. 2007-10, 5-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-04, 3-27-2008; Ord. No. 2008-06, § 2, 4-24-2008; Ord. No. 2008-12, 7-10-2008; Ord. No. 2009-01, 1-22-2009; Ord. No. 2009-05, 5-14-2009; Ord. No. 2009-10, 6-11-2009; Ord. No. 2009-15, § C, 11-12-2009; Ord. No. 2010-01, 1-14-2010; Ord. No. 2010-02, 1-14-2010; Ord. No. 2010-04, 2-11-2010; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 11-9-2010; Ord. No. 2011-03, § 2, 3-10-2011; Ord. No. 2011-05, 6-23-2011; Ord. No. 2011-06, 6-23-2011; Ord. No. 2011-07, 10-13-2011; Ord. No. 2011-08, § 2, 10-13-2011; Ord. No. 2012-02, 4-12-2012; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 3, 4-12-2012; Ord. No. 2012-08, 10-25-2012; Ord. No. 2013-01, 4-11-2013; Ord. No. 2013-03, 5-23-2013; Ord. No. 2014-01, 4-24-2014 ; Ord. No. 2014-12, §§ A, B, 12-11-2014 ; Ord. No. 2015-01 , § IV, 1-22-2015; Ord. No. 2015-03 , § A, 3-26-2015; Ord. No. 2015-06 , 11-24-2015; Ord. No. 2016-05 , 4-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-07 , 5-26-2016; Ord. No. 2016-12 , 7-14-2016; Ord. No. 2017-03 , 4-27-2017; Ord. No. 2017-05 , 5-11-2017; Ord. No. 2017-13 , 11-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-06 , 4-12-2018; Ord. No. 2018-14 , 9-13-2018) 
Charter reference— Power of city council to set penalties for violation of ordinances, § 17(4). 
Cross reference— Complaints about dogs, § 3-31 et seq.; household trash and rubbish collection, § 11-31; snow and ice on sidewalks, § 12-8. 
State Law reference— Penalty authorized, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 21.  
Sec. 1-12. - Persons liable for penalties and violations. 
When an act is prohibited by an ordinance, not only the persons actually doing the prohibited act but also the employers and all other persons concerned therein, shall be liable to the penalty prescribed therefor. 
(Code 1963, § 1-11)  
Sec. 1-13. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which may amend, repeal or in any way affect the same may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _______ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Somerville, Massachusetts, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions should then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code, is to be added, the following language should be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City Somerville, Massachusetts, is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered _______, which said section reads as follows: …." The new section should be then set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1963, § 1-8)  
Sec. 1-14. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, any portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-15. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of these ordinances are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of these ordinances shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of these ordinances, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in these ordinances of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1963, § 1-10)  
Sec. 1-16. - Power to license. 
When in an ordinance anything is prohibited from being done without the license or permission of a certain officer, officers, or board; such officer, officers, or board shall have the power to license or permit things to be done. 
(Code 1963, § 1-12)  
Sec. 1-17. - Fine and penalty collection. 
All fines and penalties recovered for the violation of any ordinance or any order of the city council shall enure to the use of the city and be paid into the city treasury, unless it be otherwise directed by the laws of the commonwealth or the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 1-14)  
Sec. 1-18. - Notices of general meetings. 
Notices of general meetings of the citizens qualified to vote, when called by the city council under Section 8 of Chapter 240 of the Acts of the General Court for the year 1899, shall be given by the city clerk by publishing a copy thereof in one or more newspapers published in the city, and by posting a like copy in a conspicuous place in his or her office, such publications and posting to be at least three days before the time of such meeting. Said notices shall state the time, place and purposes of the meeting. 
(Code 1963, § 1-16) 
Charter reference— General meetings of qualified voters, § 8.  
Sec. 1-19. - City seal. 
The following shall be the device of the seal of this city: 
 
A representation of the Old Powder House with the present flag of the United States of America unfurled within a circle, within same circle inscription "Town 1842—1872 City Honorably Purchased from the Pawtuckets 1639"; outer circle "Somerville, Mass., Municipal Freedom Gives National Strength"; the whole to be arranged according to the impression of seal printed herein. 
(Code 1963, § 1-15) 
State Law reference— Municipal seals, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 47; unauthorized use of city seal, M.G.L.A. c. 268, § 35.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— At the city's instruction, Divs. 6A—10 has been renumbered Divs. 6—11. Also at the city's instruction § 2-296 and §§ 2-306—2-309 have been renumbered as § 2-310, and §§ 2-314—2-317, respectively. 
Charter reference— Legislative department, Title 3; executive department, Title 4; power and duties of administrative officers, Title 6. 
Cross reference— Emergency management, Ch. 4; fire department organization, § 5-31 et seq.; health, Ch. 6; police, Ch. 10; public works, Ch. 11; veterans' aid and pensions, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Powers and duties of cities and towns, M.G.L.A. c. 40. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Equal opportunity policy. 
It shall be the policy of the city to afford to every person equal access to opportunity, including without limitation, employment, educational and recreational opportunity. No officer or employee of the city shall deny to any person access to opportunity as aforementioned. 
(Code 1963, § 3-8A)  
Sec. 2-2. - Affirmative action program. 
An affirmative action program is hereby established within and for the city government. Said program shall be located within the human services department and shall be headed by an affirmative action officer who shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation of the city council, and shall be specially suited by education, training and experience to hold said position. The affirmative action officer shall prepare and submit a plan to the mayor, and the city council, which shall outline the steps to be taken to bring the city in compliance with applicable federal and state law, rules and regulations as they relate to affirmative action hiring. 
(Code 1963, § 3-8A) 
Cross reference— Office of affirmative action, § 2-330.  
Sec. 2-3. - City-owned vehicles. 
(a)  There shall be inscribed on the front doors of all cars and trucks and other city-owned vehicles, the name of the respective department in charge of said vehicles and the words "City of Somerville" by painting same thereon, in letters of contrasting color, said letters to be no less than two inches in height. Police inspectors' cars are not to be subject to these provisions. 
(b)  When the head of any department fails to have this inscription on any car or truck or other vehicle owned by the city he or she may be summoned before the city council. 
(c)  All city-owned vehicles shall be placed in their respective garages at the end of an ordinary business day, with the exception of those vehicles that are on emergency work. Police inspectors' cars are not subject to these provisions. 
(Code 1963, § 3-28)  
Sec. 2-4. - Hours of operation of city offices. 
The offices at city hall shall be open each week, Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, from 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Thursday from 8:30 a.m. to 7:30 p.m., and Friday from 8:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., legal holidays excepted; or such other days and times as agreed upon by the mayor and collective bargaining units and subject to approval by the city council. The offices of all other departments located outside of city hall, except those subject to jurisdiction of school committee or the board of trustees of the public library, shall be open each week, Monday through Friday, legal holidays excepted, from 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. or such other days and times as agreed upon by the mayor and collective bargaining units and subject to approval by the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 3-29; Ord. No. 2000-7, 10-10-2000)  
Sec. 2-5. - Handicapped-accessibility of city offices. 
All city buildings and offices located therein under the direct control of the mayor and city council shall be accessible to physically handicapped individuals. 
(Code 1963, § 3-29)  
Sec. 2-6. - The Trust Act. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Civil immigration detainer request means a non-mandatory request issued by an authorized federal immigration officer under Section 287.7 of Title 8 of the Code of Federal Regulations to a local law enforcement official to maintain custody of an individual for a period not to exceed 48 hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, and advise the authorized federal immigration officer prior to the release of that individual. 
(2)  Convicted means a state of having been proved guilty in a judicial proceeding, unless the conviction has been expunged or vacated pursuant to applicable law. 
(3)  Eligible for release from custody means that the individual may be released from custody because any of the following conditions has occurred: 
a.  All criminal charges against the individual have been dropped or dismissed; 
b.  The individual has been acquitted of all criminal charges filed against him or her; 
c.  The individual has served all the time required for his or her sentence; 
d.  The individual has posted a bond, or has been released on his or her own recognizance; 
e.  The individual has been referred to pretrial diversion services; 
f.  The individual is otherwise eligible for release under state or local law. 
(4)  Law enforcement official means any City of Somerville department, or officer or employee of a City of Somerville department, authorized to enforce criminal statutes, regulations, or local ordinances; operate jails or maintain custody of individuals in jails; and operate juvenile detention facilities or maintain custody of individuals in juvenile detention facilities. 
(b)  Detainment. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(2), a law enforcement official shall not detain an individual on the basis of a civil immigration detainer request after that individual becomes eligible for release from custody. 
(2)  Law enforcement officials may continue to detain an individual in response to a civil immigration detainer request for up to 48 hours after that individual becomes eligible for release from custody, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, if the individual meets any of the following criteria: 
a.  ICE has a criminal warrant for the individual; 
b.  The individual has ever been convicted of a violent crime as defined in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 140, Section 121; 
c.  In the past ten years, the individual has been convicted of a felony as defined in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 274, Section 1; 
d.  The individual is a current registrant on the Massachusetts Sex Offender Registry; 
e.  The individual is identified in the federal government's consolidated terrorist watchlist. 
(3)  Law enforcement officials shall make good faith efforts to seek federal reimbursement for all costs incurred in continuing to detain an individual pursuant to this section. 
(c)  Reporting. Beginning no later than December 31, 2015, and no later than December 31 of each subsequent year, the Somerville Police Chief shall submit a report to the Clerk of the City of Somerville, and the clerk shall forward the report to the Mayor of the City of Somerville and shall docket the report and include the docket on the agenda of the next-occurring meeting of the Somerville City Council. The report shall include the following information for the preceding 12-month period: 
(1)  A statistical breakdown of the total number of civil immigration detainer requests lodged with the city's law enforcement officials, organized by the reason(s) given for the request; 
(2)  A statistical breakdown of the total number of individuals that city law enforcement officials detained pursuant to subsection (b)(2), organized by the reason(s) supporting the detention; 
(3)  The total number of individuals transferred to ICE custody; and 
(4)  A statistical breakdown of the total cost reimbursements received from the federal government pursuant to subsection (b)(3), organized by individual case. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07, §§ 1—3, 10-23-2014)  
Sec. 2-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Chapter 227 of the Acts of 1991 abolished the city messenger position; hence, § 2-7, which pertained to the assistant city messenger, was deleted at the editor's discretion. Former provisions of § 2-7 were derived from Code 1963, § 4-22.  
Sec. 2-8. - Voter registration accessibility. 
(a)  Purpose. The ability for all citizens to participate in elections is a fundamental civil right and a central principle of our democracy. The purpose of this ordinance is to increase access to voter registration by making voter registration forms publicly available at additional city departments and buildings within the City of Somerville. 
(b)  Availability of voter registration forms. 
(1)  The Somerville Public Library shall make voter registration forms available in conspicuous locations at all branch libraries. 
(2)  The traffic and parking department shall make voter registration forms available in a conspicuous location in the public lobby of the department. 
(3)  Somerville City Hall shall make voter registration forms available in a conspicuous location in the public lobby of the building. 
( Ord. No. 2018-15 , 9-13-2018)  
Secs. 2-9—2-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Oath of office of mayor, § 12; ordinances to be approved by mayor, mayor's veto power, § 16; executive department, Title 4. 
Cross reference— Mayors of the city, App. A. 
 
Sec. 2-21. - Executive powers. 
The executive powers of the city shall be vested solely in the mayor, and may be exercised by him or her either personally or through the several officers and boards in their respective departments under his or her general supervision and control. 
(Code 1963, § 2-1) 
Charter reference— Executive powers vested in mayor, § 20.  
Sec. 2-22. - Assistants and expenses. 
The mayor may in the discharge of the duties of his or her office, incur expenses for subordinates and other employees. He or she may appoint one or more secretaries or assistant secretaries to aid him or her in his or her official duties and may define and assign the various duties of said secretaries. Any of said secretaries, or assistant secretaries may be removed at any time, at the pleasure of the mayor; and he or she may fix the salaries of said secretaries or assistant secretaries, subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 2-1)  
Sec. 2-23. - Capital improvements budget. 
(a)  The mayor shall annually submit to the city council, together with the budget submitted by him or her as required by Chapter 44, Section 32 of the General Laws a suggested five-year program of capital improvements to be undertaken by the city, the first year of said period being the current year of the submission thereof, together with the estimated costs of carrying out such program. The estimated cost of the projects to be undertaken or continued during the first year of said period, and to be paid out of appropriations, shall be included in the budget for the then current year. 
(b)  The proposed capital outlay program shall specify the proposed projects in an expenditure schedule and shall be accompanied by a financial program which shall clearly outline any bond issues relating thereto, as well as the amount of money proposed to be made available for the program from the annual tax levy. 
(c)  The planning board, redevelopment authority and the several department heads of the city government shall cooperate with and assist the mayor in the preparation, development and implementation of said capital outlay program. 
(d)  As used in this section the terms "capital improvement," "capital outlay" and "project" shall mean: 
(1)  Any physical betterment or improvement and any preliminary studies and surveys related thereto; 
(2)  The acquisition of property of a permanent nature; 
(3)  The purchase of furnishings or equipment for any betterment or improvement when first erected or acquired; and 
(4)  The purchase of equipment for the maintenance and operation of any department of the city government. 
(Code 1963, § 2-1A) 
Cross reference— Bonds, § 2-351 et seq.  
Sec. 2-24. - Appointment of department heads and members of boards. 
(a)  The mayor shall appoint heads of departments and members of municipal boards and fill vacancies therein in the manner provided by law. 
(b)  All appointments by the mayor or by the mayor and councilors shall terminate on the first Monday in January or at the time their respective successors are appointed and qualified unless prescribed otherwise by statute or ordinance. 
(c)  The mayor shall, in the municipal year in which the term of the incumbent expires, appoint, with the approval of the city council, the following officers, to serve for the terms hereinafter specified: 
(1)  A clerk of committees, annually; 
(2)  One or more assistants to the clerk of committees, annually; 
(3)  The members of the recreation and youth commission, five each year to serve for two years; any vacancy shall be filled by appointment for the balance of the unexpired term. 
(4)  The members of the licensing commission; three shall be residents of this city; one member of said commission shall be appointed from each of two leading political parties and the third member shall also be appointed from one of said parties. There shall be appointed yearly one member to serve for the period of three years; 
(5)  The five members of the planning board; one to be appointed each year on June 15 for a five-year term; and two associate members, who shall be appointed to a five-year term; 
(6)  The five members of the board of appeals; one to be appointed each year for a term of five years; 
(7)  Reserved; 
(8)  Four members of the housing authority on June 8 as the terms of the incumbents expire according to state statute; 
(9)  Four members of the redevelopment authority on September 13 as the terms of the incumbents expire according to state statute; 
(10)  Officers to act as weighers, measurers, surveyors, or inspectors of certain articles, each for a term of one year, who shall exercise the powers and perform the duties provided by the statutes and ordinances relating to the weighing, measuring, surveying or inspecting of such articles, shall be sworn to a faithful performance of their duties, shall be paid the fees established by law, and shall receive no compensation from the city. 
(Code 1963, § 2-3; Ord. No. 2003-02, 3-27-2003; Ord. No. 2003-10, 6-26-2003; Ord. No. 2007-08, 5-10-2007) 
Charter reference— Mayor to appoint certain officers and boards, § 21; appointment of board of public welfare, § 37; appointment of board of health, § 38; appointment of board of trustees of the public library, § 39; appointment of commissioner of public works, § 40B; appointment of city engineer and superintendents of divisions of department of public works, § 40D.  
Secs. 2-25—2-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CITY COUNCIL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Legislative department, Title 3; conflicts of interest, § 49. 
Cross reference— Rules of the city council, App. B. 
 
Sec. 2-41. - Councilors salary adjustments. 
No increase or reduction in the salary of the members of the city council shall take effect during the year in which such increase or reduction is voted. 
(Code 1963, § 4-57) 
State Law reference— Increases and decreases in municipal salaries, M.G.L.A. c. 39, § 6A.  
Sec. 2-42. - Councilors salary further adjustments. 
No change in the salaries of the members of the city council shall be made between the election of a new city council and the qualification of the new city council. 
(Code 1963, § 4-58)  
Sec. 2-43. - Councilors salaries subject to state law. 
The provisions of sections 2-41 and 2-42 shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 42, 43, and 44 of Chapter 43 of the General Laws. 
(Code 1963, § 4-59)  
Sec. 2-44. - Public hearing notice given by city clerk. 
Whenever any petition is filed with the city clerk on which a hearing before the city council is required, he or she shall cause notice to be given of such hearing to be held at the next convenient regular meeting of the board. 
(Code 1963, § 3-30)  
Sec. 2-45. - Public hearing notice paid by petitioner. 
Before a notice of a hearing before the city council is given, the petitioner shall deposit with the city clerk a sum of money sufficient to pay the expense of such notice. 
(Code 1963, § 3-31)  
Sec. 2-46. - Public hearing publication requirements. 
In such case where it is provided by law or by ordinance that notice of a hearing before the city council shall be given by publication, such notice shall be published in a weekly newspaper published in the city, if any, or in a daily newspaper published in the city, if any. 
(Code 1963, § 3-32)  
Sec. 2-47. - Budget review by councilors and school committee in joint session. 
(a)  The president of the city council shall call a joint meeting of the city council and school committee prior to the commencement of the budget process to review the financial condition of the city, revenue and expenditure forecasts, and other relevant information prepared by the finance director in order to develop a coordinated budget. 
(b)  The superintendent of schools and the finance director shall be present at any such meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2000-10, 4-25-2000)  
Secs. 2-48—2-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Mayor to appoint certain officers, § 21; suspension and removal of certain officers, § 23; administrative officers' powers and duties, Title 6; officers to provide information to councilors concerning discharge of duties, § 47; conflicts of interest, § 49; elected and appointed persons to receive certificate, take oath, § 50. 
Cross reference— City physician qualifications, § 6-36 et seq.; city engineer duties, § 11-141. 
State Law reference— Officers and employees of cities, M.G.L.A. c. 41. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-61. - Bonds of certain officers held by mayor. 
The bonds of the city clerk, the assistant city clerk, and the city treasurer and collector of taxes shall be deposited with the mayor for the time being, for safekeeping, by whom the same shall be transferred to his or her successor in office. 
(Code 1963, § 2-8) 
State Law reference— Bond of city clerk, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 13A; bond of treasurer, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 35.  
Sec. 2-62. - Salaries of officers. 
The city council shall annually appropriate a definite sum of money for the salary of each of the officers of the city, which sum shall be in full compensation for all services required of him or her as such officer. 
(Code 1963, § 3-1) 
Cross reference— Salary schedule of ranges for non-union city positions, § 2-321 et seq.  
Sec. 2-63. - Fees paid to officers. 
All fees for services as witnesses or otherwise, in criminal cases and in cases in which the city is a party, which may be allowed to or received by any member of the police department or other officer of the city who receives a salary for his or her official services, shall be paid over to the city; provided, however, that police officers on duty at night and police officers doing extra duty shall be allowed to retain such witness fees as may be paid them for attendance in criminal cases at the superior court. 
(Code 1963, § 3-2) 
Cross reference— Bonds, § 2-351 et seq.  
Sec. 2-64. - Removal of officers by city council. 
The method of procedure in the removal of officers who are removable by the city council shall be as described in this section. The petition, order or other paper asking for such removal, or containing charges against any officer, shall be referred to a special committee of five councilors; the committee shall give a hearing forthwith to all parties interested, and shall make its report to the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 3-3) 
Charter reference— Suspension and removal of officers, § 23.  
Secs. 2-65—2-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY AUDITOR[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— City auditor generally, § 33; city auditor to certify contract appropriations, § 46C. 
Cross reference— Bonds, § 2-351 et seq. 
State Law reference— Auditors generally, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 48 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-81. - City auditor duties. 
The city auditor shall keep suitable books wherein he or she shall record the date and amount of every account and claim against the city as finally allowed, designating the fund or appropriation from which the same shall be paid. He or she shall credit each city account with its appropriation for the financial year, and charge against the same the expenditures, as they shall from time to time be certified by him or her. Whenever an appropriation for any account is exhausted, he or she shall immediately give notice thereof to the mayor and city council, and he or she shall not certify any claim or account chargeable against any appropriation, until the city council shall provide the means of paying the same. 
(Code 1963, § 4-5)  
Sec. 2-82. - Payrolls and warrants. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, before money is paid out of the city treasury, a payroll therefor in writing, with detailed accounts specifying the amounts to be paid, and the persons to whom the payment is due, together with a proper classification of said expenditure, shall be approved and delivered to the auditor by the board or officer incurring the expenditure. In case of any error or informality, the auditor shall make note of the fact, and return the account with the objections, to the officer or board presenting the same. 
(b)  When the auditor has any doubt concerning the propriety or correctness of any payroll or account, he or she may refuse to certify, in whole or in part, any payroll or account on the ground that it is unlawful, unreasonable, or fraudulent, or on other grounds, and in any case he or she shall state in writing, to the mayor, his or her reasons for the refusal. The auditor may require any person presenting for settlement an account against the city to answer as to any facts relative to the justness of such account. 
(c)  The auditor may require every officer of the city who purchases, or supervises the purchase of materials or supplies to certify under oath that the same are necessary and that such purchase is made without collusion and at the fair market price. He or she may require every foreman, superintendent or other officer who approves a payroll to certify under oath the accuracy of the payroll. When the payrolls and accounts due from the city for supplies furnished and services rendered shall have been examined and recorded by the auditor, he or she shall, if found correct and approved as hereinbefore provided, draw a warrant upon the city treasurer for the payment of the same; but such warrant shall be valid only when signed by the mayor. 
(Code 1963, § 4-6)  
Sec. 2-83. - Bonds, notes and annual reports. 
The auditor shall countersign all the bonds, notes, and certificates of indebtedness issued for loans to the city, authorized by the city council. He or she shall report to the city council, during the month of January in each year, the expenditures and receipts during the preceding financial year, giving in detail the appropriations and expenditures, and the receipts from each source of income. He or she shall include in said report a statement of the funded debt and temporary loans, and the rates of interest thereon, and shall exhibit all the liabilities and assets, as shown on the books in his or her office at the close of the financial year. He or she shall also make a monthly report to the mayor and to the city council and to every board and officer having charge of the expenditure of money, of the expenditures of each department for the past month, and of the amount of each appropriation remaining unexpended. 
(Code 1963, § 4-7)  
Sec. 2-84. - Report of funded debt payments required to be raised by taxation. 
The auditor annually in January and February shall certify to the mayor and the board of alder men the amounts needed for the payment of funded debt required to be raised by taxation during the current year and to the board of assessors of taxes the amounts to be raised by taxation. 
(Code 1963, § 4-8) 
Cross reference— Payment of bonds, § 2-352.  
Sec. 2-85. - Maintenance of accounts. 
(a)  All accounts rendered to or kept in the departments of the city shall be subject to the inspection and revision of the auditor, and shall be rendered and kept in such form as he or she shall prescribe. As far as in the judgment of the auditor is practicable all accounts of the city shall be kept in accordance with the classifications of the division of accounts of the commonwealth. 
(b)  The word "account" as used in this section shall mean any claim against the city, except bonds, coupons, notes and scrip. 
(Code 1963, §§ 4-9, 4-10)  
Sec. 2-86. - Late charges for municipal collections. 
(a)  Except as provided in G.L. c. 59, § 57, as from time to time amended, for the payment of real estate taxes, personal property taxes, betterment assessments or apportionment thereof, and water rate or annual sewer use charges added to such taxes, all municipal charges and bills shall be due and payable within 30 days of the date of mailing by the city treasurer and any other city official empowered to do so. If such a bill or charge remains unpaid after said due date, interest shall accrue at a rate equal to the rate of interest on tax bills under the provisions of G.L. c. 59, § 57, as from time to time amended. Notwithstanding the foregoing, persons or entities that have incurred such late charges may pursue any appellate remedies that they may otherwise have lawfully available to them. 
(b)  If said bill or charge shall remain unpaid, the city shall calculate the bill or charge, along with the interest provided for in section (a) imposed thereon, into the total amount due for such bill or charge, when utilizing the procedures provided for by chapter 252 of the Acts of 1996. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, 5-14-2009)  
Secs. 2-87—2-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— City clerk generally, § 31. 
State Law reference— City clerks generally, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 12 et seq.; appointment and term of city clerk, M.G.L.A. c. 43, § 18. 
 
Sec. 2-101. - City clerk duties for city council. 
The city clerk shall be the clerk of the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 4-16)  
Sec. 2-102. - General meetings. 
The city clerk shall attend all general meetings of the citizens which may be called by the city council, shall open every meeting by reading the notice thereof, shall preside until a moderator is chosen, and shall keep in a separate book a record of its proceedings. 
(Code 1963, § 4-17)  
Sec. 2-103. - Fees and monies collected. 
The city clerk shall pay over to the city treasurer, monthly, all moneys and fees received by him or her, unless otherwise provided by law, accompanied by a statement of the purpose for which they were received, taking the treasurer's receipt therefor. 
(Code 1963, § 4-18) 
Cross reference— Bonds, § 2-351 et seq.  
Sec. 2-104. - City clerk bond. 
The city clerk shall, before entering upon the duties of his or her office, give a bond or bonds with a surety company authorized to transact business in the commonwealth as surety, in a form approved by the commissioner of corporations and taxation and in such sum, not less than the amount established by said commissioner, as shall be fixed by the mayor and councilors, conditioned faithfully to account for all fees received by him or her for licenses and duplicates thereof for which he or she is required by law to account, and for the payment over in accordance with law of all such fees, less such sums, if any, as he or she is allowed by law to retain therefrom. Such bonds shall be approved and accepted by the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 4-19) 
State Law reference— Bond of city clerk, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 13A.  
Sec. 2-105. - Assistant city clerk. 
The city clerk shall, with the approval of the city council, appoint, and he or she may with such approval remove at pleasure, an assistant city clerk, who shall under his or her direction or in his or her absence, have the powers and perform the duties of the city clerk. The assistant city clerk shall give a bond, with sureties satisfactory to the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 4-20) 
State Law reference— Assistant city clerk, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 18.  
Secs. 2-106—2-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CITY SOLICITOR[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference— City solicitor generally, § 34. 
Cross reference— Legal assistance for director of personnel, § 2-331. 
 
Sec. 2-121. - City solicitor qualifications and duties. 
The city solicitor shall be an attorney and a counsellor-at-law of the courts of the commonwealth and shall not hold any other office created by the city council during the period for which he or she is elected. He or she alone shall act as the legal adviser and solicitor of the city, except in special cases in which the city council may authorize or require the employment of other counsel. 
(Code 1963, § 4-27)  
Sec. 2-122. - City solicitor general duties. 
The city solicitor shall examine all titles to property purchased by the city; draft all bonds, deeds, contracts and other legal instruments of whatsoever nature, which may be required by any ordinance or order of the city council, or by any committee thereof, or by any board or officer of the city to which the city or agents may be a party, and which by law, usage or agreement the city is to be at the expense of drawing; examine and report upon all orders which shall be submitted to him or her for his or her opinion; prosecute all actions in behalf of the city or any officer thereof, and defend all actions brought against the city in any court or other tribunal; appear as counsel in any other action which may involve the rights and interests of the city and defend any of the officers of the city in actions brought against them for the performance of any official duty when any right, privilege, ordinance act or direction of the city may be brought in question; appear as counsel before committees of the legislature whenever the interest of the city may be affected; furnish the mayor, the city council or any member or committee thereof, and any board or officer of the city who may need the same in the discharge of official duty, his or her legal opinion upon any subject touching the duties of their respective offices; but whenever the opinion is required to be in writing, the question submitted for his or her consideration shall also be stated in writing; and in all matters do every professional act incident to the office which may be required of him or her in behalf of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 4-28; Ord. No. 1983-12, 12-22-1983)  
Sec. 2-123. - Prosecution of legal proceedings. 
The city solicitor may, with the approval of the city treasurer, begin and prosecute legal proceedings for the collection of claims due the city. He or she may, with the approval of the mayor, begin and prosecute such other legal proceedings as in his or her judgment the interests of the city may require, and shall make report thereof without delay to the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 4-29)  
Sec. 2-124. - Settlement of claims against the city. 
The head of a department may, with the written approval of the mayor and the city solicitor, make settlements of claims for damages against the city. The expense so incurred shall not exceed $5,000.00 on any one claim and may be paid by the city treasurer in anticipation of the monthly payroll. 
(Code 1963, § 4-30; Ord. No. 2000-13, 4-25-2000) 
Cross reference— Bonds, § 2-351 et seq.  
Sec. 2-125. - Settlement of claims for the city. 
The mayor may with the approval of the head of a department and the city solicitor make settlement of claims in favor of the city and sign, seal and deliver in the name and behalf of the city releases for not more than $10,000.00 on any one claim. 
(Code 1963, § 4-31; Ord. No. 2000-14, 4-25-2000) 
Cross reference— Similar provisions, § 2-357.  
Sec. 2-126. - Payment for legal services. 
No money shall be paid from the treasury for any legal advice or services, except as expressly authorized by this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1963, § 4-32)  
Sec. 2-127. - Inspector of claims. 
The mayor may appoint a member of the police department to be an inspector of claims, whose duty shall be to assist the city solicitor in securing evidence, summoning witnesses and otherwise, in the trial of cases in which the city is interested. 
(Code 1963, § 4-33) 
Editor's note— The provisions of the ordinance authorizing additional compensation for the police officer acting as inspector of claims is not printed herein but is on file in the city clerk's office. The full provisions of Ord. No. 1983-12 stating the "city solicitor shall work not less than 30 hours per week and any assistant city solicitor shall work not less than 20 hours per week" are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Cross reference— Police department, Ch. 10.  
Secs. 2-128—2-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CLERK OF COMMITTEES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Councilors salary adjustments, § 2-41 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-141. - Clerk of committees duties. 
The clerk of committees shall hold his or her office for one year and until another shall be appointed and qualified in his or her stead, and may be removed and his or her place for the unexpired term filled, at the pleasure of the mayor and councilors. He or she shall act as a clerk of committees of the city council, shall make a proper record in books kept for the purpose of all their proceedings and transactions, keep a calendar of all meetings of said committees, and notify the members thereof. He or she shall perform such other duties and services in making estimates and computations, drawing orders and reports, and rendering assistance, as said committees shall require and shall perform such other duties as may from time to time be required by order of the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 4-34)  
Secs. 2-142—2-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - TREASURER AND COLLECTOR OF TAXES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference— City treasurer and collector of taxes generally, § 32. 
Cross reference— Audits of books and accounts, § 2-356. 
State Law reference— Treasurers and collectors of taxes, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 35 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-151. - City treasurer duties. 
The city treasurer, except as in these ordinances or by law otherwise provided, shall collect and receive all water rates, debts and other demands due the city, and his or her receipt shall be deemed the only valid and sufficient discharge of any such debt or demand; provided that the right of the city clerk to receive money in the performance of his or her duties shall not be hereby affected. The city treasurer, whenever an account is delivered to him or her for collection, as hereinbefore provided, shall forthwith demand payment to the same, and if any such account remains unpaid after three months, he or she may proceed to collect the same by legal process; or he or she may do so at any time within three months, if in his or her judgment and in that of the city solicitor, the interests of the city so require. 
(Code 1963, § 3-25)  
Sec. 2-152. - Bonds held by city treasurer. 
Except for the city officers mentioned in section 2-61, all the bonds of other city officers required by the city council, and all deeds, agreements, and other legal instruments, shall be kept in the custody of the city treasurer. 
(Code 1963, § 3-26)  
Sec. 2-153. - Records of receipts and payments. 
The city treasurer shall keep an accurate account of all receipts and payments on behalf of the city and other money transactions in his or her office. The financial year shall end on the thirty-first day of December. 
(Code 1963, § 4-47)  
Sec. 2-154. - City treasurer bond. 
(a)  The city treasurer shall annually give a bond in such form and for such sum as may be required by law with surety satisfactory to the city council, the form to be approved by the city solicitor. He or she shall not enter upon the duties of said office or be entitled to hold said office until such bond has been accepted by said board and if his or her bond has not been so accepted within 30 days after his or her election such election shall be null and void. 
(b)  In case of the death or insolvency of any of the sureties on any bond so given, or if, from any other cause, said bond shall, in the opinion of the city council, become insufficient for the purposes for which it was given, the city treasurer and collector of taxes shall immediately give a new bond, with sufficient surety, as hereinbefore provided; and if such new bond is not given and accepted within 20 days after notice to him or her, it shall be sufficient cause for removal from office. 
(Code 1963, § 4-48) 
State Law reference— Bond of treasurer, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 35.  
Sec. 2-155. - Security of funds and records and additional duties. 
The city treasurer shall cause all books, papers, vouchers and documents under his or her care, together with all money not deposited in national banks or in savings bank or trust companies organized under the laws of the state, when not in use, to be kept in the safe and vault located in his or her office. He or she shall render such other services and furnish such other information respecting the accounts, finances and payments of the city, as either the city council or any committee thereof may from time to time require. 
(Code 1963, § 4-49)  
Sec. 2-156. - Bonds and bond reports. 
After any issue of bonds, the city treasurer shall report to the city council at the first meeting thereof a transcript of his or her register of the same, setting forth the number, amount, time of maturity, number of coupons, amount of each, rate of interest, and purpose of issue of each bond so registered. Registered bonds of the city may be issued by the city treasurer in the manner provided by law in exchange for any bonds of the city now or hereafter outstanding. 
(Code 1963, § 4-50)  
Sec. 2-157. - Collector of taxes report of real estate sold. 
The collector of taxes shall make each year a complete and systematic list of all real estate which he or she has sold or caused to be sold during the year for nonpayment of taxes and assessments, and said list shall be kept in his or her office for public reference. 
(Code 1963, § 4-51)  
Sec. 2-158. - Abatements for environmental cleanups (brownfields). 
The tax collector may enter into an agreement between the city and any eligible person (as defined in M.G.L.A. c. 21E, § 2) regarding the abatement of outstanding interest, penalties, and payment of real estate tax obligations on said sites or portions of sites. However, said sites or portions of sites must be zoned for commercial or industrial use. 
Such agreement, for the purpose of continuing environmental cleanup and redevelopment, shall include, the amount outstanding, the per cent of interest to accrue if determined applicable by the parties, the description of quantifiable monthly payments, the inception date of such payments, the date of the final payment, late penalties, and any other contractual obligations arranged between the parties. 
A Brownfields Abatement Agreement ["agreement"] shall be negotiated by the tax collector or his/her designee. The agreement must be approved by the city's chief financial officer and the city solicitor as to legality. 
Copies of each such agreement shall be signed by the tax collector and by the owner of the property in question, notarized, attested to by the city clerk, and provided to the department of environmental protection, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, the commission, the city council and the owners of the property in question. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, 12-13-2007)  
Secs. 2-159—2-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - SEALER OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Weighers, measurers and surveyors of commodities, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 85 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-171. - Appointment of chief sealer and deputies. 
The mayor may appoint a chief sealer and as many deputies as needed to administer the requirements of Chapter 98 of the General Laws. 
(Code 1963, § 4-52)  
Sec. 2-172. - Chief sealer of weights and measures duties. 
The chief sealer shall have direction of the deputy sealers, shall keep records showing the work done and the fees earned in the weights and measures department, and shall pay over to the city treasurer all fees received by him or her or the deputy sealers, who shall perform the work respectively assigned to them by the sealer and shall pay over to him or her all fees received by them. He or she shall make an annual report of all activities to the mayor. 
(Code 1963, § 4-53)  
Sec. 2-173. - Appointment of weighers. 
The mayor shall annually appoint, subject to confirmation by the city council, a sworn weigher or weighers to weigh hay and other articles according to law. They shall be removable at the pleasure of the mayor and councilors. 
(Code 1963, § 4-54)  
Sec. 2-174. - Weighers duties. 
The weigher shall deliver to the driver or owner of every load weighed a certificate under his or her hand, specifying the name of the owner or driver of the load, his or her place of residence, the name of the article weighed, the weight and tare of the load, the amount of fees received and the date when the certificate is given. He or she shall keep a true account of all articles weighed by him or her, and record the same in a book kept for the purpose and furnished by the city clerk, which shall at all times be open for public inspection, and when filled be delivered to the city clerk. The record shall contain the same particulars that are required to be stated in the certificate described in this section. 
(Code 1963, § 4-55)  
Secs. 2-175—2-185. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AGENCIES[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Charter reference— Mayor to appoint certain boards, § 21; board of assessors, § 36; board of public welfare, § 37; board of health, § 38; board of trustees of the public library, § 39; administrative boards may appoint, discharge, etc., employees, § 44. 
Cross reference— Civil defense department, § 4-1; emergency management advisory council, § 4-7; board of health membership, § 6-16 et seq.; biosafety committee, § 6-60; RDNA permits, § 6-61; AIDS commission, § 6-81 et seq.; historic preservation commission, § 7-19; fair housing commission, §§ 7-46—7-48; condominium review board, § 7-68; licenses for nonprofit organizations, § 8-91; board of appeals, Pt. I, Div. 2, Art. I; licensing commission, Pt. I, Div. 2, Art. III; board of election commissioners, Pt. I, Div. 2, Art. IV; listing board, Pt. I, Div. 2, Art. V.; traffic commission, Pt. I., Div. 2, Art. VII. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-186—2-195. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF ASSESSORS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Charter reference— Assessors, § 36. 
State Law reference— Assessors, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 24 et seq. 
 
Secs. 2-196—2-205. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF ELECTION COMMISSIONERS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference— Board of election commissioners, Pt. I, Div. 2, Art. IV. 
 
Secs. 2-206—2-215. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - LICENSING COMMISSION[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference— Licensing commission, Pt. I, Div. 2, Art. IV; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 8. 
 
Sec. 2-216. - Licensing commission. 
A licensing commission is hereby established under the provisions of Chapter 191 of the Acts of 1923. 
(Code 1963, § 4-36)  
Sec. 2-217. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-08, § A, adopted Jan. 26, 2006, repealed § 2-217, which pertained to garage licenses for one to two automobiles and derived from Code 1963, § 4-37.  
Sec. 2-218. - Innholder and common victualler licenses. 
(a)  In addition to the powers mentioned in said Chapter 191 of the Acts of 1923, the licensing commission shall have in charge, the issuing of licenses for an innholder or common victualler subject to the provisions of ordinances heretofore or hereafter passed to said licenses. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application for an innholders' or common victuallers' license or an application for transfer of ownership or change of location of such license, the licensing commission shall, at least three weeks prior to any decision respecting said applications, forward copies of said applications to the city council, the local residences of each member of the board, and the chief of police. Copies of agendas for each licensing commission meeting, where said applications are to be considered, shall be forwarded to the above persons at least one week prior to said meeting. 
(c)  Upon receipt of an application for an innholders' or common victuallers' license, or an application for transfer of ownership or change of location of such license, the commission shall close the agenda on the Thursday next preceding the Monday at which the licensing commission is to take action on said license, transfer of ownership or change of location and forward copies of agenda to the local residence of each member of the city council and the chief of police no later than Tuesday preceding the Monday at which the licensing commission is to take action. 
(Code 1963, § 4-38)  
Sec. 2-219. - Liquor and entertainment licenses. 
(a)  In no case shall a liquor or entertainment license be granted, or the hours of operation of either license be increased, until after a notice of the application for such license or increase in hours for such license shall have been published in at least one local newspaper and a public hearing shall have been held not less than ten days after the notice's appearance, at which all interested persons shall have been allowed an opportunity to give testimony. A roll-back of hours may be ordered by the licensing commission pursuant to Chapter 138, Section 2 of the General Laws. 
(b)  The licensing commission shall cause the city council to be officially notified of the date, time and place where the public hearing aforesaid shall be held. 
(c)  Upon receipt of an application to grant a liquor or entertainment license or an application to transfer such license from one location to another or an application to transfer a license from an individual, corporation or partnership to another qualified to receive such a license, the licensing commission, at least three weeks prior to any decision respecting said licenses or transfers shall forward copies of applications to the city council, to the local residences of each board member, and to the chief of police. Copies of the agendas for each licensing commission meeting, where applications, transfers of ownership or location, or changes in hours are to be considered, shall be forwarded to the above persons at least one week prior to said meetings. 
(Code 1963, § 4-39; Ord. No. 1990-9, 7-12-90; Ord. No. 2010-09, 10-14-2010; Ord. No. 2012-12, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 2017-10 , 7-13-2017) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 8.  
Sec. 2-220. - Liquor and entertainment licenses. 
(a)  The licensing commission shall not authorize or grant any entertainment or liquor license until it shall have been determined that the premises for which such license is requested conforms in all respects to the state building code and the building zone ordinance of the city. 
(b)  The licensing commission shall request a written report from the superintendent of the building division which shall indicate whether any violations of the aforementioned building code or building zone ordinance exist prior to its taking action on any petition for a license. If any violation is found to exist, then the licensing commission shall not authorize or grant the license. 
(Code 1963, § 4-39A) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 8.  
Sec. 2-221. - Adult use marijuana licenses. 
(a)  Definitions. An adult-use marijuana establishment shall be considered to be one of the following (The following definitions are as defined by 935 CMR 500: Adult Use of Marijuana, as amended.): 
Marijuana establishment means a marijuana cultivator, craft marijuana cooperative, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer, independent testing laboratory, marijuana research facility, marijuana transporter, or any other type of licensed marijuana-related business, except a medical marijuana treatment center. 
Independent testing laboratory means a laboratory that is licensed by the commission and is: 
(a)  accredited to the International Organization for Standardization 17025 (ISO/IEC 17025:2017) by a third-party accrediting body that is a signatory to the International Laboratory Accreditation Accrediting Cooperation mutual recognition arrangement or that is otherwise approved by the commission; 
(b)  independent financially from any medical marijuana treatment center (registered marijuana dispensary), marijuana establishment or licensee for which it conducts a test; and 
(c)  qualified to test cannabis or marijuana in compliance with 935 CMR 500.160 and M.G.L. c. 94C, § 34. 
Marijuana cultivator means an entity licensed to cultivate, process and package marijuana, and to transfer marijuana to other marijuana establishments, but not to consumers. 
Craft marijuana cooperative means a marijuana cultivator comprised of residents of the commonwealth and organized as a limited liability company, limited liability partnership, or cooperative corporation under the laws of the commonwealth. A cooperative is licensed to cultivate, obtain, manufacture, process, package and brand cannabis or marijuana products to transport marijuana to marijuana establishments, but not to consumers. 
Marijuana product manufacturer means an entity licensed to obtain, manufacture, process and package cannabis or marijuana products and to transfer these products to other marijuana establishments, but not to consumers. 
Marijuana research facility means an entity licensed to engage in research projects by the commission. A marijuana research facility may cultivate, purchase or otherwise acquire marijuana for the purpose of conducting research regarding marijuana products. A research facility may be an academic institution, nonprofit corporation or domestic corporation or entity authorized to do business in the commonwealth. Any research involving humans must be authorized by an institutional review board. A research facility may not sell marijuana cultivated under its research license. All research regarding marijuana must be conducted by individuals 21 years of age or older. 
Marijuana retailer means an entity licensed to purchase and transport cannabis or marijuana product from marijuana establishments and to sell or otherwise transfer this product to marijuana establishments and to consumers. Retailers are prohibited from delivering cannabis or marijuana products to consumers; and from offering cannabis or marijuana products for the purposes of on-site social consumption on the premises of a marijuana establishment. 
Marijuana transporter means an entity, not otherwise licensed by the commission, that is licensed to purchase, obtain, and possess cannabis or marijuana product solely for the purpose of transporting, temporary storage, sale and distribution to marijuana establishments, but not to consumers. Marijuana transporters may be an existing licensee transporter or third party transporter. 
Microbusiness means a co-located marijuana establishment that can be either a tier 1 marijuana cultivator or product manufacturer or both, in compliance with the operating procedures for each license. A microbusiness that is a marijuana product manufacturer may purchase no more than 2,000 pounds of marijuana per year from other marijuana establishments. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  License required. Any persons or entity seeking to operate any type of adult-use marijuana establishment, except for a marijuana transporter, shall require a local license from the licensing commission. The number of such available licenses for marijuana retailers shall be no less than 20 percent of the number of liquor licenses issued in the city, pursuant to G.L. c. 138, § 15 (commonly known as package stores). Applicants shall provide any other information required by the licensing commission. There shall be a temporary cap of no more than 12 adult marijuana retail establishments, which cap shall expire after 24 months. This cap may be lifted or modified at any time, or extended, through amendment of this section. 
(2)  Priority applications. The licensing commission shall consider an application for licensure from only a priority applicant within two years from the date of passage of this ordinance, unless an applicant is seeking a non-retail license. For marijuana retailer licenses, there are two groups of priority applicants that are known as group A and group B. During the two year priority period, the licensing commission shall only issue a license to an applicant in group B if, after issuance, there will be an equal or greater number of currently active licenses held by entities that were licensed as applicants from group A. Two years after the date of passage of this ordinance the licensing commission shall continue to prioritize priority applicants, but may consider a marijuana retailer application from a non-priority applicant. At no time shall the licensing commission issue more marijuana retailer licenses to non-priority applicants than are currently valid and issued to priority applicants. In order to be considered a priority applicant in group A, the persons(s) or entity applying must meet at least one of the following criteria: 
i.  An economic empowerment applicant certified by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Cannabis Control Commission (CCC), or separately certified by the Somerville Licensing Commission to meet the criteria specified in 935 CMR 500.101(1)(e)2.a—f; 
ii.  Owned by a Somerville resident(s) or entities with a majority (at least 50 percent) of its ownership made up of Somerville residents; or, 
iii.  Cooperatively owned entities. 
A registered marijuana dispensary currently operating within the City of Somerville that will continue selling medicinal products shall be considered a priority applicant in group B. 
(c)  Application requirements. An applicant in any category of marijuana establishment shall file, in a form and manner specified by the licensing commission, an application for licensure as a marijuana establishment. The application shall consist of the same three packets as required by the CCC pursuant to 935 CMR 500.101: an application of intent packet; a background check packet; and a management and operations profile packet. The applicant may file individual packets separately or as a whole. Particular types of marijuana establishments that require additional specific requirements to be submitted to the CCC pursuant to 935 CMR 500.101 shall also be submitted to the licensing commission. The application will not be considered to be complete until the licensing commission determines that each individual packet is complete and notifies the applicant that each packet is complete. 
(d)  Evaluation criteria. The licensing commission shall grant licenses with the goal of ensuring that the needs of the commonwealth are met with regard to access, quality, and community safety. Applications shall be evaluated based on the applicant's: 
(1)  Demonstrated compliance with the laws and regulations of the Commonwealth and the City of Somerville; 
(2)  Consistency to community values outlined in SomerVision; and, 
(3)  Thoroughness of response to the application requirements. 
The licensing commission shall consider all of the following factors in its evaluation of applicants: 
(4)  A commitment to help monitor health impacts to the neighborhood and on the local youth population; 
(5)  Inclusion of an inventory of or manufactures locally/regionally grown products; 
(6)  Employment of local residents and offers competitive wages and benefits to employees; 
(7)  Use of sustainable green/renewable energy practices; 
(8)  The criminal records of the persons or owners of entities (except for marijuana-related infractions); and 
(9)  Quality of relationship with the community. 
The licensing commission shall also consider the recommendation of the Economic Development Division of OSPCD and the Health and Human Services Department on each application that is submitted. 
(e)  Fees. The licensing commission may establish fees for such licenses. 
(f)  Inspections. The City of Somerville Health and Human Services Department shall conduct inspections to ensure compliance with state and local regulations. 
(g)  Conditions. Licenses for marijuana establishments issued by the licensing commission shall only be valid so long as each entity signs a community host agreement with the City of Somerville, receives a final license from the CCC within six months after receiving the license from the licensing commission, and the final license from the CCC remains valid and current. The licensing commission may impose additional reasonable restrictions and conditions as to the operation under the license. 
(h)  Transferability of license. Any license granted under this ordinance shall be a personal privilege and shall not be assignable or transferable. 
(i)  Revocation. The licensing commission may modify, suspend or revoke any license for just cause, after reasonable notice and a hearing. 
(j)  Enforcement. The provisions of this ordinance may be enforced by the director of health and human services and superintendent of inspectional services, by noncriminal disposition pursuant to G. L. c. 40, § 21D. Each day on which a violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person, firm, corporation, association or other entity violating any provision of this article may be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. 
(k)  Expiration of license. Unless otherwise specified by the licensing commission, each license shall expire five years after the issuing of such license. A license issued under this ordinance may be renewed by the licensing commission. 
(l)  Severability. The provisions of this article are severable, and if any part of this article should be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the remainder of the article and the remainder of the article shall stay in full force and effect. 
( Ord. No. 2018-18 , 11-8-2018)  
Secs. 2-222—2-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PLANNING BOARD[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference— Planning boards, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 81A et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-231. - Planning board. 
The planning board shall consist of five members and two associate members. Associate members may be utilized, pursuant to Section 9 of Chapter 40A of the General Laws, when the planning board has been designated as a special permit granting authority, in accordance with the Zoning Ordinances of the City of Somerville. The chairman of the planning board may designate an associate member to sit on the board for the purposes of acting on an application in the absence, inability to act, or conflict of interest, on the part of any member of the planning board or in the event of a vacancy on the board. 
(Code 1963, § 4-40; Ord. No. 2007-08, 5-10-2007) 
Cross reference— Appointment of department heads and members of boards and commissions, § 2-24.  
Sec. 2-232. - Planning board meetings. 
The planning board shall annually, as soon as practicable after February 1 of each year, elect from among its own number a chairman and a clerk. 
(Code 1963, § 4-41)  
Sec. 2-233. - Planning board duties. 
The planning board shall have all of the powers and duties granted to planning boards by Sections 81C through 81J of Chapter 41 of the General Laws. 
(Code 1963, § 4-42; Ord. No. 1992-2, 2-27-92)  
Sec. 2-234. - Planning board assistants. 
The planning board, subject to appropriation and subject to the approval of the mayor, may employ such technical and other assistants as may be necessary to perform its duties. 
(Code 1963, § 4-43)  
Sec. 2-235. - Planning board expenditure of funds. 
In the expenditure of funds appropriated for the use of the planning board, the board shall be subject to all the provisions of the city Charter. 
(Code 1963, § 4-44) 
Charter reference— Estimate of expenses of boards, § 46; restrictions on appropriations, § 48. 
Cross reference— Bonds, § 2-351 et seq.  
Sec. 2-236. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-237. - Human rights policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city, including its employees, agents and officials, to protect and promote the constitutional, civil and human rights of all people within the city. Further, the city asserts that: 
All people have certain inalienable rights, including the rights to life, liberty, property, the pursuit of happiness and equal justice under the laws of the United States, the commonwealth and the city. 
No person in our city shall have these rights constrained, reduced, ignored or violated; all people in our city shall be protected in the exercise of these human and civil rights. 
No person in our city shall be unlawfully discriminated against in matters of housing, employment, education, contracts, purchasing or public accommodations, on the basis of: age, ancestry, citizenship, color, disability, economic status, ethnicity, family/marital status, gender, military status, national origin, race, religion, sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, or source of income. 
The human rights commission shall work toward mutual respect and understanding among all individuals and groups in the city through improving the quality of public discourse and eliminating unlawful discrimination. 
(Ord. No. 1993-1, 1-28-93; Ord. No. 2014-04 , 5-22-14)  
Sec. 2-238. - Human rights commission. 
(a)  There shall be in the city a commission known as the Somerville human rights commission, hereinafter called the "commission," which shall consist of 12 members appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council, to serve without compensation. 
(b)  The original commissioners shall be appointed from a list developed by the mayor's task force on racism and violence through an application process which shall include advertisements in three local newspapers in no fewer than three languages. 
(c)  The commissioners shall serve a term of three years; however, of the members first appointed to the commission four shall be appointed to a term of one year, four shall be appointed a term of two years, and four shall be appointed to a term of three years. Subsequent members of the commission shall be appointed to a term of three years by the mayor and approved by the city council. The commission may provide recommendations for subsequent members. If the vacancy occurs prior to the expiration of the member's term, an appointment shall be made for the remainder of the term. 
(d)  If any commissioner has more than six excused absences from meetings of the commission during a calendar year or if any commissioner has more than three unexcused absences (absences without prior notice to the commission) from meetings of the commission during a calendar year, the position held by said commissioner shall be automatically vacated upon certification to the mayor by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1993,-1, 1-28-93; Ord. No. 1993-5, 5-13-93; Ord. No. 1994-15, 6-23-94)  
Sec. 2-239. - Human rights commissioner qualifications. 
(a)  The commission at all times shall strive to be representative of all socioeconomic and racial segments of the city as well as different neighborhoods. 
(b)  Commissioners must be residents of the city at the time of their appointment and throughout their tenure. 
(c)  Commissioners shall be classified as special municipal employees for the purposes of M.G.L.A. c. 268A. 
(Ord. No. 1993-1, 1-28-93)  
Sec. 2-240. - Human rights commission chairpersons and bylaws. 
(a)  The members of the commission shall annually elect two co-chairpersons from among its members who shall not hold that office for more than three consecutive terms. The commission may elect other officers with the permission of the mayor. 
(b)  Subject to the approval of the mayor, the commission shall adopt a set of rules for its administration which are consistent with the laws for the commonwealth and ordinances of the city. 
(c)  A majority of members currently serving on the commission shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting business. 
(Ord. No. 1993-1, 1-28-93; Ord. No. 1994-15, 6-23-94; Ord. No. 2019-05 , 2-14-2019)  
Sec. 2-241. - Human rights commission executive director. 
(a)  There shall be an executive director who shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council with the advice of the commission. 
(b)  The prospective director of the commission shall have experience in the advancement of equality for all and the ability to work cooperatively with people of various socioeconomic backgrounds and of every race, color, national origin, age and sexual orientation. 
(Ord. No. 1993-1, 1-28-93)  
Sec. 2-242. - Human rights commission functions. 
(a)  The first function of the commission shall be to improve the life of the city by enlisting community-based groups in educational programs and campaigns to increase mutual self-respect, harmonious intergroup relations, and the peaceful enjoyment of life in our diverse community. 
(b)  The second function of the commission shall be to respond to complaints by persons in the city who believe that their human or civil rights, as defined by existing local, state and federal law, have been violated in Somerville. 
(c)  The third function of the commission shall be to initiate investigations into circumstances which appear to the commission to unlawfully discriminate against any of the people of the city. 
(d)  The fourth function shall be to work with municipal government departments, the school department, commissions and boards, to increase compliance with appropriate local, state and federal laws and to raise the level of awareness and sensitivity to human rights issues in municipal business with the public through workforce-wide required training programs. 
(Ord. No. 1993-1, 1-28-93)  
Sec. 2-243. - Human rights commission duties. 
The powers and duties of the commission shall include the following: 
(1)  To obtain information and documents, request staff support and other help as necessary from other city departments, including the school department. 
(2)  To publish reports and other documents. 
(3)  To initiate investigations into the existence of unlawful discrimination in the city which may deny or tend to deny equal access or opportunity in matters of housing (except as covered by the Somerville Fair Housing Ordinance, sections 7-41 through 7-48), employment, education, contracts, purchasing or public accommodations, on the basis of: age, ancestry, citizenship, color, disability, economic status, ethnicity, family/marital status, gender, military status, national origin, race, religion, sexual orientation or source of income; and in connection therewith to hold administrative hearings. 
(4)  In order to properly conduct its investigations the commission shall have the power to: 
a.  Summons witnesses (pursuant to M.G.L.A. c. 233, § 8); 
b.  Administer oaths; 
c.  Serve written interrogatories; 
d.  Reserved. 
e.  Take testimony under oath; 
f.  Require the production of evidence; 
g.  Publish findings; 
h.  Insert complaints and resolutions into municipal personnel files, consistent with the several collective bargaining agreements; and 
i.  Recommend actions to the mayor. 
(5)  To attempt by negotiation to resolve all complaints that come before it and recommend to all appropriate governmental agencies, federal, state or local, such action as it feels will resolve such complaint. 
(6)  To refer complaints, when appropriate, to the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination, or other agency, for resolution. 
(7)  To create committees and task forces for the carrying out of the purposes of the commission. 
(8)  To raise funds for the use of the commission and to accept money, gifts and services for its exclusive use and expend or use the same. 
(9)  To publish as a public document its bylaws, policies, and practices for both internal functions and external activities, excluding those documents which are confidential under federal, state or municipal law. 
(10)  To publish its rules of procedure for the conduct of its investigations, hearings, and negotiations. These rules shall ensure the due process rights to all persons and/or entities involved in an investigation. At any hearing before the commission, or any committee thereof, a witness shall have the right to be advised and represented by counsel. 
(11)  To publish an annual report of the state of human rights in the city drawn from its own resources as well as records of other city departments. 
(12)  To render to the mayor and the city council a full written report of its activities and its recommendations, not less than once a year. 
(13)  To expend, with approval of the mayor, such funds as are appropriated for the aforementioned purposes. The commission shall annually prepare an operating budget in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 1993-1, 1-28-93)  
Sec. 2-244. - Human rights commission records. 
All commission records shall be public except those that are necessary to ensure privacy rights under other local, state or federal laws, and those records which must be kept confidential in compliance with the rules of evidence. 
(Ord. No. 1993-1, 1-28-93)  
Sec. 2-245. - Human rights commission advisory council. 
(a)  The commission shall establish an advisory council which shall provide general advice and counsel to the commission, as well as assistance in carrying out the policies of the commission. 
(b)  The advisory council shall be appointed by the members of the commission after a public process seeking as a wide a representation of the population of the city as possible. 
(c)  The advisory council shall be composed of no fewer than nine an no more than 21 members. These members shall include representation from the business community, social service agencies, ethnic agencies, law enforcement agencies, clergy, labor, high school student governments, and other organizations and groups which have an interest in human and civil rights. The city council, school committee, public safety commission, fair housing commission, disabilities commission, women's commission, and gay and lesbian liaison advisory group shall be invited to designate a representative to the advisory council. The membership of the advisory council shall include persons from as many of the ethnic communities in the city as possible. 
(d)  The advisory council shall annually elect a chairperson who shall present regular reports to the commission. 
(e)  The advisory council shall perform other functions as delegated by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1993-1, 1-28-93)  
DIVISION 7. - RECREATION AND YOUTH COMMISSION[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Cross reference— Playing on high school grounds, § 12-46 et seq. 
State Law reference— Board of park commissioners, M.G.L.A. c. 45, § 1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-246. - Recreation and youth commission. 
There shall be established in Somerville a recreation and youth commission. The director of the recreation and youth commission shall be in charge of the commission. The commission shall be composed of ten citizens of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 4-45; Ord. No. 2003-09, 6-26-2003)  
Sec. 2-247. - Recreation and youth commission appointments and assistants. 
The director of the recreation and youth commission shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. Prior to confirmation by the city council, the board shall hold a public hearing and invite input from the recreation and youth commission. The members of the recreation and youth commission shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the city council, five in each year to serve for two years and until the appointment and qualification of their successors. Any vacancy shall be filled by appointment for the balance of the unexpired term. 
The director of the commission, subject to appropriation and to the approval of the mayor, may employ and discharge, at pleasure, such clerks and assistants as may be necessary to perform his or her powers and duties. 
(Code 1963, § 4-46; Ord. No. 2003-09, 6-26-2003; Ord. No. 2015-08 , §§ 1, 2, 12-10-2015) 
Cross reference— Appointment of department heads and members of boards and commissions, § 2-24.  
Secs. 2-248—2-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - COUNCIL FOR AGING PERSONS[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
State Law reference— Council on aging authorized, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 8B. 
 
Sec. 2-261. - Council on aging. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aging persons shall be construed to mean persons who are 60 years of age or older. 
Council shall be construed to mean the council for aging persons. 
Term shall be defined as constituting the period of time an appointee shall serve on the council for the aging, commencing with the approval of the appointee by the city council and the mayor, and terminating as provided in this division. 
(Code 1963, § 4-60) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-4.  
Sec. 2-262. - Council on aging composition. 
(a)  The council shall consist of 11 persons including the chairperson, appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. 
(b)  Appointees of the council may have working knowledge of, and or have been active participants with public and or private charitable, benevolent, philanthropic institutions and organizations in the city. 
(c)  Of the 11 members of the council, six members shall consist of aging persons. 
(Code 1963, § 4-61)  
Sec. 2-263. - Council on aging terms. 
Of the original appointees to the council for aging persons, the chairperson of the council shall serve for a period of three years and the remaining appointees shall serve the following original terms from the initiation of the ordinance from which this division derives: four members for one year; three members for two years; three members for three years. Upon the termination of the original terms of appointment, the chairperson and all subsequent member appointees shall serve for a term of three years. 
(Code 1963, § 4-60)  
Sec. 2-264. - Council on aging purposes. 
The purposes of the council for aging persons are as follows: 
(1)  Propose and assist in the adoption of legislation concerning the health, housing, welfare and education of aging persons; 
(2)  Evaluate, coordinate, promote and encourage new and existing services and activities intended to enhance or improve the quality of life of older persons in the city; 
(3)  Survey resources available to the elderly of the city and act as an information and referral source regarding services, benefits, activities, and programs available to them; 
(4)  Act in an advisory capacity to the mayor on all matters pertaining to the welfare of elder citizens of the city; 
(5)  Be the primary public advocate for elderly residents of the city; 
(6)  The council shall be guided in its organizational structure, administration, planning and programming, by the manual entitled Design for Action for Councils on Aging, 1967, published by the state commission on aging; 
(7)  The council will provide the city council with an annual report of the activities and accomplishments during each calendar year. 
(Code 1963, § 4-62)  
Sec. 2-265. - Council on aging duties. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the council to: 
(1)  Identify the total needs of the city's elderly population, collecting facts and statistics and conducting special studies as necessary to accomplish this end; 
(2)  Evaluate and coordinate all public and private programs and services for the elderly in the city; 
(3)  Participate in the planning and development of all services and programs funded by federal and state grants and monies, and in the determination of the recipients of such funds; 
(4)  Develop services and programs as required in order to meet needs not being addressed or encourage their development; 
(5)  Advise the mayor, other city officials and public agencies of the city on matters affecting the elderly, particularly through regularly scheduled meetings and conferences; 
(6)  Educate the community and enlist its support to meet the needs of the elderly; 
(7)  Be aware of state and federal legislation concerning the elderly, particularly that pertaining to available funds and programs, and take such actions as are indicated to assure beneficial results for the elderly of the city; 
(8)  Submit an annual report to the mayor and the city council on its activities of the prior year, including a record of attendance and remaining length of term of each member; 
(9)  Cooperate with the state department of elder affairs and the area agency on aging; 
(10)  Perform any other function prescribed under law. 
(Code 1963, § 4-63)  
Secs. 2-266—2-275. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - MUNICIPAL COMPENSATION ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-276. - Municipal compensation advisory board. 
There is hereby created a municipal compensation advisory board, to consist of five members, three of whom shall be appointed by the mayor and two of whom shall be appointed by the president of the city council, to serve for terms coterminous with that of the mayor. 
(Code 1963, § 3-1A)  
Sec. 2-277. - Municipal compensation advisory board duties. 
The municipal compensation advisory board shall continuously study the adequacy of the compensation and expense allowances of all municipal elected officials, all officials appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the city council, and any other officials or employees of the city excluded by law from collective bargaining. 
(Code 1963, § 3-1A)  
Sec. 2-278. - Municipal compensation advisory board composition. 
The members of the municipal compensation advisory board shall serve without compensation, but may be allowed expenses with the approval of the mayor, subject to appropriation. 
(Code 1963, § 3-1A)  
Sec. 2-279. - Municipal compensation advisory board reports. 
Each even-numbered year, by the third week of November, the municipal compensation advisory board shall report to the mayor and city council its recommendations and findings relative to compensation and allowances for those under its jurisdiction. A copy of said report shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be a public record. 
(Code 1963, § 3-1A)  
Secs. 2-280, 2-281. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - COMMISSION FOR WOMEN[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1988-3, §§ 1—7, adopted Mar. 10, 1988, not being specifically amendatory of the Code, has been included at the editor's discretion as §§ 2-282—2-287, comprising a new Div. 10 to Ch. 2, Art. V. 
 
Sec. 2-282. - Commission for women. 
(a)  There will be a Somerville Commission for Women. 
(b)  It shall be the function of the commission to: 
(1)  Act as a centralizing force in the city and the community which will deal with all women's issues, providing information, referral, guidance and coordination, and offering and providing technical assistance to other public agencies and private persons, organizations and institutions engaged in activities and programs intended to eliminate prejudice and discrimination against women because of their status as women or as a minority woman. 
(2)  Take such action as the commission considers appropriate to insure the equal status of women of every race, creed, color, national origin, age and sexual preference. 
(Ord. No. 1988-3, §§ 1, 2, 3-10-88)  
Sec. 2-283. - Commission for women composition. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of 15 members, all of whom shall be appointed initially by the mayor and confirmed by the city council to serve for the following terms: 
(1)  Five members shall serve for a one-year term. 
(2)  Five members shall serve for a two-year term. 
(3)  Five members shall serve for a three-year term. 
After the initial terms all commissioners shall be appointed for a term of three years. 
(b)  If any commissioner misses three unexcused meetings of the commission during a calendar year, that position of said commissioner shall be automatically vacated upon certification to the mayor by the commission. 
(c)  After the initial appointments, subsequent members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council from recommendations provided by the commission. The commission shall consult with recognized groups working for the equal status of women to obtain names of qualified candidates. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled not later than 30 days after the vacancy occurs; and if a vacancy occurs prior to the expiration of the member's term, an appointment shall be made for the remainder of the term. 
(d)  The commission at all times [shall] be representative of all socioeconomic and racial segments of the city as well as different neighborhoods and also have members who are resource people as well as women with needs. 
(e)  A majority of members currently serving on the commission shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting business. 
(Ord. No. 1988-3, § 4, 3-10-88; Ord. No. 2019-04 , 2-14-2019)  
Sec. 2-284. - Commission for women qualifications. 
(a)  All prospective commissioners shall have belief in and support the equal status of women in society and implementation of the aims of the Equal Rights Amendment. 
(b)  Commissioners must be residents of the city at the time of appointment. 
(Ord. No. 1988-3, § 6, 3-10-88)  
Sec. 2-285. - Commission for women chairperson and bylaws. 
The members of the commission shall elect up to two co-chairpersons from among its members, and shall adopt by-laws for the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1988-3, § 5, 3-10-88; Ord. No. 2019-04 , 2-14-2019)  
Sec. 2-286. - Commission for women executive director. 
(a)  There shall be an executive director of the commission whose selection and length of employment shall be determined by the mayor and the city council with the advice of the commission. 
(b)  The prospective executive director of the commission shall have demonstrated administrative expertise, a background of direct participation in women's advancement, and the ability to work cooperatively with women of various socioeconomic backgrounds and of every race, color, national origin, age, and sexual preference. 
(c)  The executive director shall have adequate staff assistance. 
(Ord. No. 1988-3, § 7, 3-10-88)  
Sec. 2-287. - Commission for women duties. 
The powers and duties of the commission shall include the following: 
(1)  To insure the equal status of women in educational, economic, political, health, legal and social spheres. 
(2)  To design and implement programs that promote equality for all women in the city. 
(3)  To develop recommendations and recommend policy to all departments, divisions and agencies of the city, including the mayor and the city council. 
(4)  To coordinate activities of all departments and divisions of the city government on issues affecting women. 
(5)  To initiate and coordinate and monitor the enactment of legislation which promotes the equal status of women on the city, state and federal levels, and to assure that appropriate regulations are adopted and enforced pursuant to such legislation. 
(6)  To investigate, within the limitations of available resources, incidents of discrimination against women. 
(7)  To appear and speak for and act on behalf of individual women and groups of women confronted with incidents of discrimination, within the limitations of available resources. 
(8)  To obtain from city departments, divisions, and agencies, information necessary to carry out the functions, purposes, programs, and activities of the commission. 
(9)  To initiate public exhibits and media events in city hall, city libraries, and other city-owned property as well as in other locations within and without the city. 
(10)  To raise funds for the use of the commission and to accept money, gifts and services for its exclusive use and expend or use the same, and subject to appropriation or to receipt of such money, gifts, and services, employ clerical and technical assistants or consultants; and to be consulted by and make recommendations to the mayor with regard to the employment of the executive director. 
(11)  To be a member of the National Association of Commissions on Women. 
(12)  To recruit and recommend prospective commissioners for subsequent appointment by the mayor. 
(13)  To appoint task forces to assist the commission in it[s] operations. 
(14)  Such other powers and duties as may be agreed on by the mayor and the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1988-3, § 3, 3-10-88)  
Secs. 2-288—2-299. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - BICYCLE ADVISORY COMMITTEE[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note— At the city's instruction, Div. 11, §§ 2-291—2-294, Youth Development Center Commission was deleted. These provisions were derived from Ord. No. 1996-4, §§ 1—4, adopted Apr. 11, 1996. Div. 11 was redesignated as the Bicycle Advisory Committee. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-02, adopted Feb. 8, 2001 pertained to bicycle advisory committee and these provisions were designated as §§ 2-288—2-291. At the city's instruction these provisions were redesignated as §§ 2-300—2-303. 
 
Sec. 2-300. - Bicycle advisory committee membership. 
Members of the committee must take an active interest in Somerville bicycling issues. The committee shall have no fewer than 13 members. Members will include no fewer than seven community representatives who either live or work in Somerville and take an active interest in bicycling issues in Somerville. The committee shall solicit applications for membership and submit their recommendations to the mayor who shall appoint members for two years, their term renewable at the discretion of the mayor. The remaining six members shall be the mayor, president of the city council, commissioner of public works, director of traffic and parking, executive director of the office of housing and community development, and chief of police, or their designees. Any vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the mayor for the balance of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 2001-02, 2-8-2001)  
Sec. 2-301. - Bicycle advisory committee officers. 
The officers of the committee shall be a chairperson, vice-chair and secretary. The chairperson shall be responsible for setting the agenda, for facilitating meetings, for organizing a committee work program and subcommittees, and for signing committee correspondence. The vice-chair shall assist the chair in his/her duties and fill in for the chairperson in his/her absence. The secretary shall be responsible for meeting minutes and attendance records. Officers will be elected for a one-year term. Elections will take place in March of each year unless otherwise decided by the committee. 
(Ord. No. 2001-02, 2-8-2001)  
Sec. 2-302. - Bicycle advisory committee compensation. 
The members of the bicycle advisory committee shall serve without compensation, but may be allowed expenses with the approval of the mayor and subject to appropriation by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2001-02, 2-8-2001)  
Sec. 2-303. - Bicycle advisory committee duties. 
The duties of the bicycle advisory commission are to: 
(1)  Seek to include accommodations for bicycling in road resurfacing and other construction projects; 
(2)  Seek to increase the availability and safety of recreational bikeways in the city; 
(3)  Evaluate and seek to improve existing bicycle parking and create new facilities where appropriate; 
(4)  Provide education to both bicyclists and motorists to promote safety; and 
(5)  Develop a long range master plan designating priority routes for bicycling; 
(6)  Publish reports and other documents; 
(7)  Render to the mayor and the city council a report of its activities and recommendations, not less than once a year. 
(Ord. No. 2001-02, 2-8-2001)  
DIVISION 12. - COMMISSION ON ENERGY USE AND CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
Sec. 2-304. - Establishment; function. 
(a)  There will be a commission on energy use and climate change, hereinafter called the "commission." 
(b)  It will be the function of the commission to: 
(1)  Act as a centralizing force in the city and the community which will address issues of climate change and sustainable environmental policy, providing information, referral, guidance, advocacy and coordination, and offering and providing technical assistance to other public agencies, organizations and institutions engaged in activities intended to reduce the city's greenhouse gas emissions and contribute to local, regional, national, and international efforts to protect the earth's climate. 
(2)  Take such action as the commission deems appropriate to assist the city in taking all necessary steps to effectively control the release of greenhouse gases within the city and ensure the energy efficiency of municipal operations to protect the climate. 
(3)  Take such action as the commission deems appropriate to assist the city in implementing cost-effective measures such as energy conservation, the adoption of "clean energy" standards and "smart growth" policies, as a component of urban development plans. 
(4)  Take such action as the commission deems appropriate to assist the city in advocating and promoting transportation strategies that give people incentives to reduce car use. 
(Ord. No. 2001-19, 11-20-2001)  
Sec. 2-305. - Membership; appointment; term; removal. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of seven members and one associate member, six of whom shall be appointed initially by the mayor and confirmed by the city council to serve for the following terms: 
(1)  Two members shall serve for a one-year term. 
(2)  Two members shall serve for a two-year term. 
(3)  Two members shall serve for a three-year term. 
(4)  One member shall serve ex-officio. 
(5)  One associate member shall serve for a one-year term. 
After the initial terms all commissioners shall be appointed for a term of three years. 
(b)  If any commissioner is inexcusably absent for three meetings of the commission during a calendar year, that position of said commissioner shall be automatically vacated upon certification to the mayor by the commission. 
(c)  After the initial appointments, subsequent members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council with recommendations provided by the commission. If a vacancy occurs prior to the expiration of the member's term, an appointment shall be made to serve for the remainder of that term. 
(d)  The commission at all times shall strive to be representative of all socioeconomic segments, religious creeds, national origins, sexes, sexual orientations and racial segments of the city as well as different neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 2001-19, 11-20-2001)  
Sec. 2-306. - Environmental coordinator to serve ex-officio. 
(a)  The city's environmental coordinator shall serve as an ex-officio member of the commission whose selection and shall coincide with his or her length of employment. The environmental coordinator shall be a voting member. 
(b)  The city's environmental coordinator shall be the custodian of all records for the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2001-19, 11-20-2001; Ord. No. 2002-1, 3-14-2002)  
Sec. 2-307. - Qualifications of commissioners. 
(a)  All prospective commissioners shall have knowledge of and/or expertise in one or more of the following areas: energy management, energy conservation, transportation, architecture and contracting, environmental education, and/or urban planning. 
(b)  Commissioners must be residents of the city. 
(c)  Members of the commission shall be classified as special municipal employees for the purposes of M.G.L. c. 268A. 
(d)  The appointed associate member will not vote on commission decisions. The appointed associate member shall be designated by the chairperson to sit in the place of any member incapacitated by personal interest, inability to act, or absence. 
(e)  No member of the commission shall receive compensation for service on the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2001-19, 11-20-2001)  
Sec. 2-308. - Election of chairperson; by-laws. 
The members of the commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members, and shall adopt by-laws for the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2001-19, 11-20-2001)  
Sec. 2-309. - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the commission shall be the following: 
(1)  To seek to work with the municipal government departments, commissions, and boards, to increase energy efficiency and conservation by the city; 
(2)  To design and implement community education programs that promote environmental advocacy, awareness and reductions in greenhouse gas emissions in the city; 
(3)  To recommend transportation strategies as a component of urban development plans; 
(4)  To recommend local greenhouse gas reduction targets; 
(5)  To recommend an action plan to achieve set greenhouse gas reduction target goals, and to monitor its progress; 
(6)  To work in collaboration with any public organization or group to further the city's goal of local greenhouse gas emissions reduction and energy efficiency and conservation; 
(7)  To recommend initiatives to the mayor and the city council to ensure the energy efficiency of municipal operations and promote energy conservation and green power use within the city; and 
(8)  Submit an annual report to the mayor and the city council on its activities of the prior year, including a record of attendance and remaining length of term of each member. 
(Ord. No. 2001-19, 11-20-2001)  
DIVISION 13. - MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-309.1. - Multicultural affairs commission membership and terms. 
There is hereby established in the office of the mayor a board known as the multicultural affairs commission, consisting of a representative of the mayor's office appointed by the mayor for a term of two years, two members of the city council chosen by the president of the board for a term of two years, and 14 persons broadly representative of the social, economic and cultural interests of the community, appointed by the mayor, with the approval of city council, for four-year terms. The chair of the commission will be chosen by the appointed members. However, of the original appointment three shall be appointed for one-year terms, three shall be appointed for two-year terms, three shall be appointed for three-year terms and five shall be appointed for four-years terms. If a vacancy occurs prior to the expiration of the member's term, an appointment shall be made for the remainder of the term. A member of the commission may be removed for cause by the mayor but only after opportunity has been afforded for a public hearing before the mayor within ten days after written charges have been given such member by the mayor and a copy filed with the clerk of the city council. Such member shall be heard in person or by counsel. Action of the mayor shall be final unless not later than the second meeting of city council thereafter, city council shall disapprove such removal by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members elected thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, 2-10-2005; Ord. No. 2005-14, 9-22-2005)  
Sec. 2-309.2. - Multicultural affairs commission duties. 
(a)  The commission shall promote amicable relations among the racial and cultural and other groups within the community; take appropriate steps to deal with conditions which strain relationships; aid in the coordination of the activities of private organizations concerned with these relationships; assemble, analyze and disseminate authentic and factual data relating to interracial and other intergroup relationships. It shall have power to publish and distribute at public expense such factual material, as it shall deem necessary or desirable. 
(b)  The commission shall coordinate its efforts to achieve its duties with those efforts of the Human Rights Commission to carry out the duties set forth in sections 2-237 to 2-245 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Somerville. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, 2-10-2005)  
Sec. 2-309.3. - Executive director. 
The commission shall nominate and the mayor shall appoint an executive director who shall serve until removed by the mayor with the concurrence of a majority of the commission. Upon nomination of the executive director, the commission shall appoint as its staff such technical and office personnel and assistants as it may deem necessary within the appropriation made available for such purpose. All such appointments, except one assistant and one secretary to the executive director, shall be made in conformity with the provisions of the Code of Ordinances and the Charter of the City of Somerville. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, 2-10-2005)  
Sec. 2-309.4. - Duties of executive director. 
Under the direction of the commission the executive director shall supervise and control the staff. The director shall: 
(1)  Serve as secretary of the commission and of any advisory committee or subcommittee, which may be created. 
(2)  Maintain contacts with all groups throughout the community which are concerned with interracial and other intergroup understanding, report to the commission regarding the activities of these groups, be a source of accurate and reliable data on the acute problems in the field of interracial and other intergroup understanding and join one or more of these groups as a member if he so chooses, with the approval of the commission; any expense of membership is to be charged against the commission's budget. 
(3)  Implement the decisions of the commission and on the advice of the commission shall work in cooperation with the directors of all departments of the city government in the improvement of services to eliminate whatever sources of interracial friction may exist; work to remove inequalities which may be related to minority group or other status on such important problems as housing, recreation, education, law enforcement, vocational guidance and related matters; conduct such educational activities, institutes, meetings and prepare such reading materials as will lead to better public relations. 
(4)  Cooperate with the human rights commission in those instances when their duties are concurrent. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, 2-10-2005)  
DIVISION 14. - VETERANS COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-309.5. - Veterans commission on monuments, memorials and dedications. 
There is hereby established, pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 41, Section 105, a veterans commission on monuments, memorials and dedications. The commission shall consist of the mayor or his designee, and five members appointed by the mayor, three of whom shall be veterans and two of whom shall not be veterans; two shall be appointed for one year, two for two years and one for three years, and as the term of each member expires a successor shall be appointed for three years. Any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner for the unexpired term. The commissioner of public works or his designee shall serve the commission in an advisory role. 
It shall be the responsibility of the commission to maintain the custody and care of all monuments, memorials and dedications in the city for the purpose of properly commemorating the services and sacrifices of the soldiers, sailors, marines and airmen who have served the country in war, or persons who have served the commonwealth in time of war; to accept gifts or bequests and any appropriations of money made for said purpose, and to expend such funds only for such purpose. 
The commission shall have charge and control of the construction of any such monument, memorial or dedication and shall have custody and care thereof after its construction. 
In the case of dedications of streets and squares, the several streets and squares in the city shall retain the names by which they are now known, and all streets and squares hereafter to be laid out shall be named by the commission. No street or square shall hereafter be named for any person then living, except by unanimous vote of the members of the commission present and voting on the proposed name. The commission may, by a two-thirds vote of the whole commission, dedicate a public street or square in the city, provided that no deed or contractual restriction prohibits such dedication; and provided further, that whenever the commission intends to make such dedication it shall, before final action thereon, appoint a time and place for hearing all persons interested therein, and direct that notices of such hearing and of its intention to make such dedication shall be given to all owners of land adjoining such street or square in the manner required in the laying out of streets. 
Municipal buildings, municipal parks and all other municipal property in the city shall retain the names by which they are now known, and all buildings, parks, property and any other part thereof hereafter to be named, shall be named by the commission, except that no name shall be given to the city hall or high school. The concourse shall be named Anthony Fedele Way, and the field at the Capuano School shall be named James F. McCarthy Field. The land at 59 Otis St., previously known as Otis Playground, is renamed Deanna Cremin Park as of October 13, 2016. No building, park, property or part thereof shall hereafter be named for any person then living except by unanimous vote of the members of the commission present and voting on the proposed name. The commission may, by a two-thirds vote of the whole commission, dedicate any municipal building, park or property in the city provided that no deed or contractual restriction prohibits such dedication; and provided further, that whenever the commission intends to make such dedication it shall, before final action thereon, appoint a time and place for hearing all persons interested. 
The commission is authorized, in its discretion, to make any of the above-noted dedications or commemorations to veterans as well as non-veterans. 
The commission shall utilize the following criteria when determining whether an individual shall be honored: 
(1)  An individual must have made a valuable and substantive contribution to the city in an official, civic, or social capacity, which sets them apart from normal civic participation in the affairs of the city. Examples of such contributions include as follows: 
a.  Service in public office, in either an elected or appointed capacity; 
b.  Service as a leader of an active organization of the community, which contributes to the social well-being and fabric of their neighborhood or the city; 
c.  Meritorious and distinguished service as an employee of the city; and/or 
d.  Having performed a heroic or distinguished act completely without regard for personal safety or well-being. 
(2)  The individual must be (or have been) a resident of the ward in which the dedication will be made. 
(3)  Requestors must cover all associated costs of the purchase and installation of the memorial. 
(4)  Each intersection will have only one dedication designated. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, 1-26-2006; Ord. No. 2007-06, 4-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-13, 9-20-2007; Ord. No. 2008-14, 9-9-2008; Ord. No. 2016-14 , 10-13-2016)  
DIVISION 15. - MUNICIPAL ATHLETIC FACILITIES COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-309.6. - Municipal athletic facilities commission. 
(a)  There is hereby established a Somerville Municipal Athletic Facilities Commission. 
(b)  The powers, duties and responsibility of the commission shall include the following: 
(1)  Devise and direct policy initiatives relative to the implementation of the management and operations agreement entered into by the State Department of Conservation and Recreation ("DCR") and the city, dated September 8, 2006, and any successor agreements ("agreement") to operate, manage, maintain and staff the Dilboy Memorial Stadium, as defined in the agreement and any other facility designated by the mayor with the approval of the city council; and 
(2)  Devise policies relative to the management, funding, control, issuance of permits, authorization of concessions, and leasing or permitting of the Dilboy Memorial Stadium and any other facility designated by the mayor with the approval of the city council, and create cost structures for such activities, for the purpose of school, civic and professional or semi-professional athletics, recreation, play sports and physical education. 
In all cases, the primary use of the Dilboy Memorial Stadium and any other facility designated by the mayor shall be for interscholastic sports programs at Somerville High School. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, 4-12-2007)  
Sec. 2-309.7. - Commission composition. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of five members, serving in terms coterminous with that of the mayor. The terms of the members shall be for one, two or three years and so arranged that the terms of approximately one third of the members will expire each year, and their successors shall be appointed for terms of three years each. The commission members shall be appointed as follows: five members appointed by the mayor; approved by the city council. 
(b)  The members of the commission shall elect a chairperson and secretary from among its members, and may adopt bylaws for the commission. 
(c)  The members of the commission shall serve without compensation, but may be allowed expenses with the approval of the mayor, subject to appropriation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, 4-12-2007)  
Sec. 2-309.8. - Somerville Municipal Athletic Facilities Commission revolving fund. 
The commission will establish and maintain a revolving account and/or enterprise fund, pursuant to the agreement, subject to the provisions of state statute, and such account shall be used solely for the purpose of offsetting municipal operating costs of the Dilboy Memorial Stadium and any other facility designated by the mayor with the approval of the city council. A line item budget shall be submitted to the board at the time of the board's approval of the revolving account. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, 4-12-2007)  
DIVISION 16. - COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-309.9. - Community preservation committee. 
(a)  There is hereby established a community preservation committee ("committee"), consisting of nine voting members pursuant to MGL Chapter 44B. The composition of the committee, the appointment authority and the term of office for the committee members shall be as follows: 
(1)  One member of the planning board as designated by the board for a term of three years; 
(2)  One member of the conservation commission as designated by the commission for a term of three years; 
(3)  One member of the historical commission as designated by the commission for a term of three years; 
(4)  One member of the parks and open space department as designated by the mayor for a term of three years; 
(5)  One member of the housing authority as designated by the housing authority for a term of three years; and 
(6)  Four members of the general public not city employees or currently holding elected or appointed positions, for a term of three years, as appointed by the mayor, subject to city council approval. 
(b)  No member shall serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to stagger the terms of the members, the initial appointments of the housing authority member, the planning board member and one member of the general public appointed by the mayor shall be for two years; and the initial appointments of the parks and open space department member and two members of the general public appointed by the mayor shall be for one year. 
(c)  Any vacancy on the community preservation committee shall be filled by the commission, authority, board or mayor that designated the member who creates the vacancy by designating another member for the unexpired term. A vacancy in any of the members appointed under subsection 2-309.9(a)(6) shall be filled by the mayor, subject to city council approval. 
(d)  Should any of the commissions, boards, or authorities who have appointment authority under this chapter be no longer in existence for whatever reason, then any other commission, board or authority performing substantially the same duties as those with appointment authority under this chapter shall have the authority to appoint a member of the committee as provided herein. In the event that there is no such commission, board, or authority then the mayor shall have the authority, subject to city council approval, to appoint to the committee a person acting in the capacity of, or performing like duties of the commission, board or authority in question. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, 4-11-2013)  
Sec. 2-309.10. - Announcement of open general public positions. 
For the four members of the general public, there shall be a public announcement of the open positions, with at least a three-week period for submittal of an application to the mayor. The names and a brief summary describing each candidate's qualifications shall be posted on the city website for at least two weeks before the mayor makes an appointment. The four members of the general public should include citizens who have demonstrated interest in open space, recreation, historic preservation, and affordable housing. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, 4-11-2013)  
Sec. 2-309.11. - Election of chairperson. 
The committee shall annually elect one of its members to serve as chairperson and may elect such other officers, adopt procedural rules and regulations and establish any subcommittees as it deems appropriate. A committee member may serve as chairperson for no more than two consecutive years. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, 4-11-2013)  
Sec. 2-309.12. - Duties. 
In the event that the committee initially proposes that a project be funded by the Community Preservation Act and that the initial proposal is rejected or reduced by the city council, the committee shall be given one opportunity to respond to such actions by the city council and/or to adjust the scope and terms of any proposed project prior to a final decision by the city council as to the allocation of Community Preservation Act funds for the given year. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, 4-11-2013)  
ARTICLE VI. - EMPLOYEES[20] 
Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Charter reference— Certain employees transferred to school committee, § 40A.1; certain collective bargaining agreements to remain in effect, § 40A.2; administrative boards and officers may appoint, discharge, etc., employees, § 44. 
Cross reference— Fire department organization, § 5-31 et seq.; police, Ch. 10; department of public works divisions, § 11-3. 
State Law reference— Power of city to regulate working conditions of employees, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 21A. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-310. - Residency requirement. 
(a)  Every person first employed by the city on or after July 1, 1978 shall, within six months, become a resident of the city and shall not cease to be a resident of the city during his or her employment by the city. 
(b)  The term "employee" as used in this section shall mean any person performing services for or holding an office, position or employment in any city department or agency, whether by election or appointment, contract of hire or engagement, whether serving with or without compensation, on a full, regular, part-time, intermittent or consultant basis. 
(c)  Upon taking employment with the city, and annually on February 1 thereafter, every person subject to this section shall file with his or her department head, or like officer, a certificate signed under the pains and penalties of perjury, stating his or her name, and place of residence. Upon receipt of a certificate indicating a place of residence not within the city or if no such certificate is filed, the department head or like officer shall forthwith arrange a hearing to be held within 30 days before the department head to show reason why said employee is no longer a legal resident. The department head shall notify the individual in writing two weeks in advance of said hearing. 
(d)  If the finding of the hearing is that the individual is no longer a legal resident, that person shall cease to be employed by the city, and the department head or like officer shall give notice of his or her action to the city clerk, who shall transmit the same to the city council, the mayor, and the city auditor. 
(e)  No person so stricken from a payroll shall be reemployed by the city for a period of one year following the cessation of his or her employment. 
(f)  To the extent permitted by Chapter 31 of the General Laws, every examination held to establish a civil service list for employment by the city shall be restricted to city residents. 
(g)  If this section shall be deemed to be in conflict with a provision of any general or special law, the provision of that general or special law shall govern, and shall not defeat the application of this section with respect to any position not governed by that law. 
(h)  If the mayor, with the approval of the city council determines it to be in the best interest of the city to do so, the provisions of this section may be waived with respect to a particular person or position, and such waiver shall not act to defeat the application of this section to every other person or position. 
(i)  The provisions hereof are severable, and the action of any court of competent jurisdiction in declaring any part or portion hereof invalid, shall not act to defeat any remaining part or portion hereof, and any such action declaring this section invalid with respect to any position or person shall not be held to apply to any other person or position. 
(j)  In construing this section, residence shall be the actual principal residence of the individual, where he or she normally eats and sleeps and maintains his or her normal personal and household effects. This section shall be deemed to affect both civil service and noncivil service employees of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 3-33) 
Cross reference— Residency requirements, § 5-48.  
Sec. 2-311. - Holding other city office or position. 
No former mayor, former councilors or former or current school committee member shall hold 1) an appointed city office, 2) appointed city employment, or 3) a contract with the city, compensated from the city treasury, until no less than 12 months have passed following the date on which said service as mayor, councilors or school committee member has terminated. This provision shall not prevent a city officer or other city employee who has been elected mayor, councilors or school committee member, and vacated a position in order to so serve, from returning to the same office or other position of city employment held at the time the position was vacated, but no such person shall be guaranteed said position, nor be eligible for any other municipal position until no less than 12 months have passed following the termination of service as an elected official. 
( Ord. No. 2014-11, 12-11-2014 , renumbered from § 15-15 per Amend. of 7-20-15; Ord. No. 2018-17 , 10-11-2018)  
Sec. 2-312. - Anti-nepotism. 
(a)  Definitions. Whenever used in this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
City shall mean any department, office, division, board, commission, or other instrumentality of the city, but shall exclude the school department. 
Cohabitant shall mean a person regularly residing with an adult of the same or opposite sex, if the parties hold themselves out as a couple. 
Elected official shall mean the mayor and members of the city council. 
Full-time position shall mean any position eligible for health insurance. 
Immediate family member shall mean the spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, child, grandparent, grandchild, cohabitant, guardian, step-mother, step-father, step-brother, step-sister, half-brother, half-sister, child or step-child, uncle, aunt, nephew, niece or any person having the same relationship with the spouse of the mayor or member of the city council. 
(b)  Nepotism prohibited. Unless otherwise required by law, immediate family members of elected officials shall not be appointed to any position, or employed by the city in a full time position during the term of the elected official. 
This section shall not apply to positions subject to civil service law for which a test is administered resulting in the generation of a certified list of qualified candidates from which the employee is hired. 
Furthermore, this section shall not apply to any employee hired before the passage of this ordinance, nor to the continued employment of individuals in positions with the city where the immediate family member is elected after the date of the employee's start of employment with the city, nor to the continued employment of individuals with the city who become an immediate family member of the mayor or a member of the city council. 
Anyone hired by the city as an employee after the passage of this ordinance shall complete an affidavit certifying compliance with this ordinance, prior to commencing employment as a condition of employment. 
(c)  Voting on matters involving immediate family members. Unless otherwise required by law, no member of the city council shall vote on any matter involving a department or for a bond appropriating money to a department where an immediate family member of that member is employed in that department. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04 , 5-14-15)  
Sec. 2-313. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BENEFITS[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-12, adopted Aug. 9, 2007, deleted in their entirety and replaced the former Div. 2, §§ 2-314—2-317, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1963, §§ 3-4—3-6, 3-8. 
 
Sec. 2-314. - Vacation leave for employees with up to five years of continuous service. 
Excepting employees of the school department and those employees otherwise provided for by the Code of Ordinances or by an employment agreement, all employees of the city who have been regularly so employed for a period of up to five years shall be entitled to a vacation of 20 working days, or four calendar weeks, whichever is the greater, but in no instance to exceed four weeks, each year, without loss of pay. The time for such vacation in each instance shall be subject to the approval of the respective department head who shall arrange the annual vacation schedule of the department personnel in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience in the conduct of the public service. 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, 8-9-2007) 
Cross reference— Vacation leave, § 5-41.  
Sec. 2-315. - Vacation leave for employees with five to ten years of continuous service. 
Excepting employees of the school department and those employees otherwise provided for by the Code of Ordinances or by an employment agreement, all employees of the city who have been regularly so employed for a period of five to ten years shall be entitled to a vacation of 25 working days, or five calendar weeks, whichever is the greater, but in no instance to exceed five weeks, each year, without loss of pay. The time for such vacation in each instance shall be subject to the approval of the respective department head who shall arrange the annual vacation schedule of the department personnel in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience in the conduct of the public service. 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, 8-9-2007)  
Sec. 2-316. - Vacation leave for employees with ten to twenty years of continuous service. 
Excepting employees of the school department and those employees otherwise provided for by the Code of Ordinances or by an employment agreement, all employees of the city who have been regularly so employed for a period of ten to 20 years shall be entitled to a vacation of 30 working days, or six calendar weeks, whichever is the greater, but in no instance to exceed six weeks, each year, without loss of pay. The time for such vacation in each instance shall be subject to the approval of the respective department head who shall arrange the annual vacation schedule of the department personnel in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience in the conduct of the public service. 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, 8-9-2007)  
Sec. 2-317. - Vacation leave for employees with twenty or more years of continuous service. 
Excepting employees of the school department and those employees otherwise provided for by the Code of Ordinances or by an employment agreement, all employees of the city who have been regularly so employed for a period of 20 or more years shall be entitled to a vacation of 35 working days, or seven calendar weeks, whichever is the greater, but in no instance to exceed seven weeks, each year, without loss of pay. The time for such vacation in each instance shall be subject to the approval of the respective department head who shall arrange the annual vacation schedule of the department personnel in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience in the conduct of the public service. 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, 8-9-2007)  
Sec. 2-318. - Sick leave. 
Excepting employees of the school department and those employees otherwise provided for by the Code of Ordinances or by an employment agreement, all employees of the city, upon completion of 90 days of continuous service to the city, absent from duty on account of sickness shall be entitled to full pay for a period not exceeding 20 working days in any one year, provided, however, that heads of departments, with the approval of the mayor, may grant such extension in time as may be deemed necessary. Such period of sick leave shall be cumulative from year to year. 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, 8-9-2007) 
Cross reference— Sick leave, § 5-43, 10-7.  
Sec. 2-319. - Bereavement leave. 
Employees shall be granted a leave of absence with pay in the event of a death in the immediate family. "Immediate family" shall consist of father, mother, brother, sister, spouse/partner, child, spouse's/partner's father or mother, spouse's/partner's son or daughter, grandparent and grandchild and other member of the employee's household. Such leave of absence may extend from the time the employee receives notification of the death to the first workday following the day of the funeral or memorial service, not exceeding a period of five days. 
In the event the funeral or memorial service of an aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, spouse's/partner's brother or sister or spouse's/partner's grandparent or grandchild occurs on a work day, the employee shall be granted leave with pay to attend the funeral or memorial service. In extenuating circumstances, department heads may grant up to three days of leave with the approval of the personnel department. 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, 8-9-2007) 
Cross reference— Funeral leave, § 5-46, 10-9.  
Sec. 2-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SALARY SCHEDULE OF RANGES FOR NON-UNION CITY POSITIONS[22] 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Cross reference— Salaries of officers, § 2-62. 
 
Sec. 2-321. - Non-union city positions. 
There is hereby established a salary schedule of ranges for non-union city positions for which the duties and responsibilities are of a managerial and/or confidential nature. The schedule of salary ranges for non-union city personnel was determined by the municipal compensation advisory board. It is the intent of this division that the maximum salary range shall be recognized as a ceiling rate for the positions under the classification. The minimum salary range shall be a reference point and not recognized as a minimum floor rate for positions under the classification. The mayor shall determine individual salaries based upon employee merit policies determined by the personnel department. When a proposed salary increase for an existing city employee exceeds five percent during a fiscal year (including initial salary adjustments) such salary increase shall be approved by a two-thirds quantum of vote of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 1, 10-26-2006)  
Sec. 2-322. - Salary ranges established. 
Pursuant to the 2016 study of the municipal compensation advisory board, effective July 1, 2016, there is hereby established the following categories and associated salaries for non-union positions identified as NU1—N14 and grade steps 1—16. This scale shall be updated every 2 years to maintain viability of the scale. Effective July 1, 2018 the scale has been updated to add a 17th step at the end of the scale. 
Grade 
Step 	NU1 	NU2 	NU3 	NU4 	NU5 	NU6 	NU7 
1 (Min) 	$140,000.00 	$130,000.00 	$120,000.00 	$110,000.00 	$100,000.00 	$90,000.00 	$85,000.00 
2 	142,800.00 	132,600.00 	122,400.00 	112,200.00 	102,000.00 	91,800.00 	86,700.00 
3 	145,656.00 	135,252.00 	124,848.00 	114,444.00 	104,040.00 	93,636.00 	88,434.00 
4 	148,569.12 	137,957.04 	127,344.96 	116,732.88 	106,120.80 	95,508.72 	90,202.68 
5 	151,540.50 	140,716.18 	129,891.86 	119,067.54 	108,243.22 	97,418.89 	92,006.73 
6 	154,571.31 	143,530.50 	132,489.70 	121,448.89 	110,408.08 	99,367.27 	93,846.87 
7 	157,662.74 	146,401.11 	135,139.49 	123,877.87 	112,616.24 	101,354.62 	95,723.81 
8 	160,815.99 	149,329.14 	137,842.28 	126,355.42 	114,868.57 	103,381.71 	97,638.28 
9 	164,032.31 	152,315.72 	140,599.13 	128,882.53 	117,165.94 	105,449.34 	99,591.05 
10 	167,312.96 	155,362.03 	143,411.11 	131,460.18 	119,509.26 	107,558.33 	101,582.87 
11 	170,659.22 	158,469.27 	146,279.33 	134,089.39 	121,899.44 	109,709.50 	103,614.53 
12 	174,072.40 	161,638.66 	149,204.92 	136,771.17 	124,337.43 	111,903.69 	105,686.82 
13 	177,553.85 	164,871.43 	152,189.02 	139,506.60 	126,824.18 	114,141.76 	107,800.55 
14 	181,104.93 	168,168.86 	155,232.80 	142,296.73 	129,360.66 	116,424.60 	109,956.56 
15 	184,727.03 	171,532.24 	158,337.45 	145,142.66 	131,947.88 	118,753.09 	112,155.69 
16 	188,421.57 	174,962.88 	161,504.20 	148,045.52 	134,586.83 	121,128.15 	114,398.81 
17 (Max) 	192,190.00 	178,462.14 	164,734.28 	151,006.43 	137,278.57 	123,550.71 	116,686.78 
 
  
Grade 
Step 	NU8 	NU9 	NU10 	NU11 	NU12 	NU13 	NU14 
1 (Min) 	$80,000.00 	$75,000.00 	$65,000.00 	$60,000.00 	$50,000.00 	$45,000.00 	$40,000.00 
2 	81,600.00 	76,500.00 	66,300.00 	61,200.00 	51,000.00 	45,900.00 	40,800.00 
3 	83,232.00 	78,030.00 	67,626.00 	62,424.00 	52,020.00 	46,818.00 	41,616.00 
4 	84,896.64 	79,590.60 	68,978.52 	63,672.48 	53,060.40 	47,754.36 	42,448.32 
5 	86,594.57 	81,182.41 	70,358.09 	64,945.93 	54,121.61 	48,709.45 	43,297.29 
6 	88,326.46 	82,806.06 	71,765.25 	66,244.85 	55,204.04 	49,683.64 	44,163.23 
7 	90,092.99 	84,462.18 	73,200.56 	67,569.75 	56,308.12 	50,677.31 	45,046.50 
8 	91,894.85 	86,151.43 	74,664.57 	68,921.14 	57,434.28 	51,690.86 	45,947.43 
9 	93,732.75 	87,874.45 	76,157.86 	70,299.56 	58,582.97 	52,724.67 	46,866.38 
10 	95,607.41 	89,631.94 	77,681.02 	71,705.55 	59,754.63 	53,779.17 	47,803.70 
11 	97,519.55 	91,424.58 	79,234.64 	73,139.67 	60,949.72 	54,854.75 	48,759.78 
12 	99,469.94 	93,253.07 	80,819.33 	74,602.46 	62,168.72 	55,951.84 	49,734.97 
13 	101,459.34 	95,118.13 	82,435.72 	76,094.51 	63,412.09 	57,070.88 	50,729.67 
14 	103,488.53 	97,020.50 	84,084.43 	77,616.40 	64,680.33 	58,212.30 	51,744.27 
15 	105,558.30 	98,960.91 	85,766.12 	79,168.73 	65,973.94 	59,376.54 	52,779.15 
16 	107,669.47 	100,940.13 	87,481.44 	80,752.10 	67,293.42 	60,564.08 	53,834.73 
17 (Max) 	109,822.86 	102,958.93 	89,231.07 	82,367.14 	68,639.29 	61,775.36 	54,911.43 
 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 2, 10-26-2006; Ord. No. 2008-13, 7-17-2008; Ord. No. 2012-07, 10-25-2012; Ord. No. 2015-02 , 2-12-2015; Ord. No. 2016-09 , 6-23-2016; Ord. No. 2017-08 , 6-22-2017; Ord. No. 2018-12 , 6-28-2018)  
Sec. 2-323. - Salary ranges. 
The city council shall annually appropriate a sum of money sufficient to pay the salaries of the several officers of the city in accordance with the salary range determined by the municipal compensation advisory board, as amended: 
Elected City Officials       Salary 
Mayor ..... $180,000.00 
President of the city council ..... 45,000.00 
Councilors ..... 40,000.00 
School committee chair ..... 17,500.00 
School committee ..... 15,000.00 
Non-elected City Positions       Category 
City solicitor ..... NU01 
Executive director of SPCD ..... NU01 
Finance director/city auditor ..... NU02 
Chief information officer ..... NU02 
Director of personnel ..... NU02 
Director of communications ..... NU02 
Director of capital projects ..... NU03 
Commissioner of DPW ..... NU03 
Chief of staff ..... NU03 
Director of inspectional services ..... NU03 
Director of traffic and parking ..... NU03 
Chief assessor and chairman board of assessors ..... NU04 
Director of operations DPW ..... NU04 
Director of engineering ..... NU04 
Director of intergovernmental affairs ..... NU04 
Director of health and human services ..... NU04 
Deputy city solicitor ..... NU04 
Director of libraries ..... NU04 
Director of SomerStat ..... NU04 
Treasurer/collector ..... NU04 
Director of water and sewer ..... NU04 
Deputy city auditor/assistant finance director ..... NU05 
City clerk ..... NU05 
Director of constituent services ..... NU05 
Superintendent of fleet management ..... NU05 
Superintendent of highways/lights and lines ..... NU05 
Superintendent of B&G ..... NU05 
Deputy director of IT ..... NU05 
Assistant city solicitor ..... NU05 
Chief labor counsel ..... NU05 
Director of planning and zoning ..... NU05 
Director of transportation and infrastructure ..... NU05 
Director of housing ..... NU05 
Director of economic development ..... NU05 
Director of the office of housing stability ..... NU05 
Director of purchasing ..... NU05 
Director of parks and recreation ..... NU05 
Director of OSE ..... NU05 
Director of arts council ..... NU06 
Director of finance and administration ..... NU06 
Assistant director of engineering ..... NU06 
School nurse leader ..... NU06 
Payroll director ..... NU06 
Deputy director of personnel ..... NU06 
Senior IT specialist ..... NU06 
Deputy director of communications ..... NU06 
Preventive maintenance manager ..... NU07 
Project manager ..... NU07 
Chairman of elections ..... NU07 
Director of human services ..... NU07 
Network manager ..... NU07 
Deputy director of libraries ..... NU07 
Senior planner of zoning ..... NU07 
Senior planner ..... NU07 
Senior planner of landscape ..... NU07 
Economic development specialist ..... NU07 
Senior economic development planner ..... NU07 
Senior planner of transportation and infrastructure ..... NU07 
Urban revitalization specialist ..... NU07 
Budget manager ..... NU07 
Commercial assessor ..... NU08 
Director of council on aging ..... NU08 
GIS coordinator ..... NU08 
Grants development manager ..... NU08 
Deputy director of ISD ..... NU08 
Deputy director of the office of housing stability ..... NU08 
Assistant director of housing/housing counsel ..... NU08 
Benefits manager ..... NU08 
Senior crime analyst ..... NU08 
Director of parks and recreation operations ..... NU08 
Construction project manager ..... NU08 
Community Preservation Act manager ..... NU08 
Principal analyst ..... NU08 
Multimedia designer and web developer ..... NU08 
Director of veterans' services ..... NU08 
Field operations manager ..... NU08 
Manager of residential assessments ..... NU09 
Public information officer ..... NU09 
Lead executive administrative assistant ..... NU09 
Legislative liaison ..... NU09 
Director of prevention services ..... NU09 
Manager of diversity equity and inclusion ..... NU09 
Clinical youth specialist ..... NU09 
Director of Shape-Up Somerville ..... NU09 
Zoning review planner ..... NU09 
Housing grants manager ..... NU09 
Planner of historic preservation ..... NU09 
Economic development assistant ..... NU09 
Transportation analyst ..... NU09 
Planner/urban forestry and landscape ..... NU09 
GLX project liaison ..... NU09 
Streetscape and public space planner ..... NU09 
Zoning case review planner ..... NU09 
Economic development assistant ..... NU09 
Senior accountant ..... NU09 
Lead program manager ..... NU09 
Manager of employment safety and training ..... NU09 
Financial analyst ..... NU09 
Community outreach and harm reduction director ..... NU09 
Assistant director of purchasing ..... NU09 
SomerStat analyst ..... NU09 
Sustainability coordinator ..... NU09 
Environmental coordinator ..... NU09 
Accountant/business analyst ..... NU09 
Parking clerk/director of operations ..... NU09 
Director of city cable operations ..... NU09 
Assistant tax collector ..... NU09 
Tax title attorney ..... NU09 
Water engineer ..... NU09 
Cultural director ..... NU10 
Internal auditor ..... NU10 
Call center manager ..... NU10 
Construction public information officer ..... NU10 
Executive administrative assistant ..... NU10 
Procurement analyst ..... NU10 
Construction procurement manager ..... NU10 
Accountant ..... NU10 
Assessor analyst ..... NU10 
Sales/personal prop analyst ..... NU10 
Construction liaison and compliance manager ..... NU10 
IT specialist/public safety ..... NU10 
Benefits specialist ..... NU10 
Programmer ..... NU10 
Accounting analyst ..... NU11 
Community engagement specialist—Haitian Creole ..... NU11 
Community engagement specialist—Portuguese ..... NU11 
Community engagement specialist—Spanish ..... NU11 
Community engagement specialist ..... NU11 
Geriatric social worker ..... NU11 
Social worker ..... NU11 
Data analyst ..... NU11 
Grant writer ..... NU11 
Director of tobacco control ..... NU11 
Director of SomerPromise ..... NU11 
Community services manager ..... NU11 
Social worker/family services ..... NU11 
Out of school time coordinator ..... NU11 
ISD paralegal ..... NU11 
Paralegal/legal assistant ..... NU11 
Program compliance officer ..... NU11 
Sustainable neighborhoods program coordinator ..... NU11 
Housing rehab program manager ..... NU11 
Housing counselor and case manager ..... NU11 
Assistant recreation facilities manager ..... NU11 
Facilities manager of ice rink ..... NU11 
Water systems analyst ..... NU11 
Special events manager ..... NU11 
Project assistant ..... NU11 
Archivist ..... NU11 
Program director ..... NU11 
Legal administrative assistant ..... NU11 
Housing programs coordinator ..... NU11 
Inclusionary housing specialist ..... NU11 
Housing rehab program manager ..... NU11 
Lead program coordinator ..... NU11 
HR generalist ..... NU11 
Payroll coordinator ..... NU11 
Talent acquisition manager ..... NU11 
Clinical coordinator ..... NU11 
Crime analyst ..... NU11 
IT communications specialist ..... NU11 
Youth arts coordinator ..... NU11 
Senior program director ..... NU11 
Grants analyst ..... NU12 
Arts coordinator and office manager ..... NU12 
Administrative assistant ..... NU12 
Health and wellness coordinator ..... NU12 
Housing intake specialist ..... NU12 
Program coordinator ..... NU12 
Outreach coordinator ..... NU12 
Shape-Up-Somerville coordinator ..... NU12 
Coordinator—SomerPromise ..... NU12 
Administrative assistant ZBA ..... NU12 
Program specialist ..... NU12 
Director of historic preservation ..... NU12 
Victim witness advocate ..... NU12 
Program coordinator ..... NU12 
Customer service representative ..... NU13 
Center director ..... NU13 
Program analyst ..... NU13 
Records clerk ..... NU13 
Hearing officer ..... NU13 
Tax title administrative assistant ..... NU13 
Kitchen manager ..... NU13 
Health assistant ..... NU14 
Facilities laborer ice rink ..... NU14 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 3, 10-26-2006; Ord. No. 2006-15, § 3, 11-21-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, 5-10-2007; Ord. No. 2008-13, 7-17-2008; Ord. No. 2012-07, 10-25-2012; Ord. No. 2012-09, 11-8-2012; Ord. No. 2016-09 , 6-23-2016; Ord. No. 2017-08 , 6-22-2017; Ord. No. 2018-12 , 6-28-2018)  
Sec. 2-324. - Stipends of the boards and commissions. 
Position:     Salary:  
Board of Assessors       $9,107.40 
Board of Health       3,600.00 
Condominium Review Board       3,600.00 
Election Commission       3,600.00 
Licensing Commission       3,600.00 
Planning Board       5,607.49 
Redevelopment Authority       3,600.00 
Zoning Board of Appeals       5,607.49 
Zoning Board of Appeals Alternate       2,803.80 
(Ord. No. 2012-13, 12-18-2012)  
Sec. 2-325. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PERSONNEL PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 2-326. - Personnel program. 
It is the purpose of this article to establish a comprehensive personnel program in the city. The system of personnel administration established herein shall be consistent with the following merit principles: 
(1)  Selection and advancement shall be made on the basis of ability, knowledge, and skills; 
(2)  Compensation shall be established on an equitable basis; 
(3)  Training and development opportunities shall be provided as needed to assure high-quality performance by all employees; 
(4)  Retention of employees shall be on the basis of their performance. A reasonable effort shall be made to assist employees in improving work performance; and if, following such effort, inadequate performance cannot be corrected, separation shall occur; 
(5)  Fair treatment of applicants and employees shall occur in all aspects of personnel administration without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, political affiliation, age, or handicap and with proper regard for their privacy and constitutional rights. 
(Code 1963, § 4-65)  
Sec. 2-327. - Personnel department. 
There is hereby established in the city government a department of personnel, hereinafter referred to as the "department." 
(Code 1963, § 4-65)  
Sec. 2-328. - Director of personnel. 
The personnel department shall be headed by a director of personnel hereinafter referred to as the "director" who shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the confirmation of the city council, for a term of two years. The director shall be specially fitted by education, training and experience to perform the duties and assume the responsibilities of his or her office. He or she shall devote his or her entire time to said duties and responsibilities and his or her compensation shall be fixed by the city council. He or she shall employ such technical, professional and other assistants as the mayor and the city council shall from time to time authorize. The director of personnel shall be a noncivil service position. 
(Code 1963, § 4-65)  
Sec. 2-329. - Director of personnel duties. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the director of personnel to: 
(1)  Develop and direct a comprehensive personnel program for the city; 
(2)  Formulate and issue personnel policies, procedures and directives sufficient to implement the personnel program; 
(3)  Explain and advise municipal employees and other interested parties on provisions of the civil service law and rules, as they pertain to the personnel program; 
(4)  Review department requests for raw personnel and make recommendations to the mayor and city council on same; 
(5)  Provide advice and technical assistance to department heads and elected and appointed supervisory officials on all personnel matters, including position classification, wage and salary administration, recruitment and placement, employee relations, performance evaluation, disciplinary actions, employee grievances, training and development and the interpretation and administration of collective bargaining agreements; 
(6)  Establish and administer a position classification plan for the classification of all positions, other than those filled by popular election, into groups and classes doing substantially equal responsibilities so that equal compensation for equal work will be guaranteed. Such classification plan shall set forth, for each class of positions, the official class title, a statement of duties, authority and responsibilities included in the class, the qualifications that are necessary or desirable for the satisfactory performance of the duties of the class and the normal or usual line of promotion. Whenever a new position is established, or the duties of an existing position are so changed that in effect a new position is created, the director shall allocate such new or changed position to its appropriate group subject to the approval of the mayor. The director, from time to time shall review all work of all positions subject to the classification plan. Such reviews shall be scheduled as to cover all such positions at intervals of not more than three years; 
(7)  Develop and administer a recruitment and placement program designed to fill vacant positions with the best qualified persons; 
(8)  Ensure that the civil service law and rules are adhered to in all personnel transactions; 
(9)  Determine before any person shall be hired, reinstated, promoted or transferred that: 
a.  There is an existing vacancy or that a new position has been created; 
b.  The wages or salary that is proposed to be paid is in accordance with the terms of the appropriate collective bargaining agreement in force, or law or ordinance; 
c.  There is compliance with the civil service law and rules; 
d.  The proposed transaction has received the approval of the appointing authority; 
(10)  Develop and implement a performance evaluation program designed to provide for the periodic evaluation, in writing, by appropriate supervisory personnel of the job performance of all employees, except elected officials; 
(11)  Prepare and implement training and employee development programs to meet the needs of the various departments; 
(12)  Formulate, subject to approval by the mayor and the city council, rules and regulations governing, with respect to all employees except elected officials and employees covered by collective bargaining agreements, hours of work, payment of compensation, holiday pay, payment of overtime and other premium or extra compensation, annual leave, sick leave, other leave with pay, leave without pay, workmen's compensation and pay for personal injury sustained in the line of duty, payment for and attendance at educational courses, seminars, conferences, uniform allowances and group health and life insurance; 
(13)  Provide assistance to individual employees on all personnel matters; 
(14)  Process all personnel actions and maintain personnel records of all employees, including elected officials; 
(15)  Develop, in consultation with appropriate officials and department heads, standardized forms and records to be used in the personnel program; 
(16)  Supervise the registration of eligible persons for labor service positions; 
(17)  Establish and administer an accident prevention and physical examination program for all prospective and current employees; 
(18)  Review and appraise the effectiveness of each element of the personnel program on a periodic basis and make reports and recommendations to the mayor and the city council concerning methods of promoting the efficiency and effectiveness of same; 
(19)  Recommend to the mayor and the city council the enactment of such ordinances as are considered necessary to implement and administer the personnel program; 
(20)  Perform such other duties and assume such other responsibilities as may be prescribed by law or ordinance from time to time; 
(21)  Oversee and administer all employee benefit programs; 
(22)  Participate in, advise on, and administer collective bargaining agreements. 
(Code 1963, § 4-65)  
Sec. 2-330. - Office of affirmative action. 
There shall be within the department of personnel an office of affirmative action to be headed by an affirmative action officer who shall be appointed by the director and shall serve at his or her pleasure. Said affirmative action officer shall be responsible for developing and implementing an affirmative action plan for the recruitment and placement of qualified minority, female and handicapped applicants for employment into appropriate positions within the several city departments. For the purpose of this section, the director may also serve as the affirmative action officer. 
(Code 1963, § 4-66) 
Cross reference— Affirmative action program, § 2-2.  
Sec. 2-331. - Legal assistance for director of personnel. 
The city solicitor shall advise and assist the director of personnel in the processing and final disposition of all claims for workmen's compensation; in the interpretation and administration of collective bargaining agreements and in any other legal matters pertaining to said department. 
(Code 1963, § 4-67) 
Cross reference— City solicitor qualifications and duties, § 2-121.  
Sec. 2-332. - Applicant selection. 
(a)  The director of personnel may utilize any one or a combination of the following selection procedures which in his or her professional judgment will best determine the fitness and ability of the applicants for entry-level and promotional positions: 
(1)  A written examination; 
(2)  A structured oral examination; 
(3)  A practical or performance test; 
(4)  A formal evaluation of education and experience; 
(5)  A structured interview; 
(6)  A formal evaluation of past performance; 
(7)  A physical test of strength, ability or dexterity; 
(8)  A preemployment physical and or psychological examination; 
(9)  Any other appropriate means of fitness evaluation. 
(b)  The director of personnel, after consultation with the department head and the appointing authority, may determine in each instance what procedure or combination of procedures shall be used and the relative weight assigned to each part of the examination. The director shall also assure that all selection procedures are job related and that they emphasize, to the maximum extent possible, validity, reliability and objectivity.  
Sec. 2-333. - Physical examination requirement. 
Before any individual is hired or employed on a permanent, full-time basis, he or she shall satisfactorily pass a preemployment physical examination to be administered without charge to the individual by a physician designated by the city. Said physicians shall certify as to the applicant's physical fitness to perform the duties of the position to which such applicant seeks employment. If the director deems such action necessary to the protection of the city, he or she may require any applicant for temporary appointive employment by the city who is to be employed for 30 days or more, to be certified by a physician designated by the city, as to his or her physical fitness to do the work required by the city. 
Cross reference— Health, Ch. 6.  
Sec. 2-334. - Labor relations and civil service. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit any rights of employees pursuant to Chapter 150E of the General Laws specifically including but not limited to a grievance procedure culminating in final and binding arbitration, as provided in Section 8 of Chapter 150E of the General Laws. Nothing in this article shall be construed to conflict with Chapter 31 of the General Laws.  
Sec. 2-335. - School committee exemption. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the school committee of the city or to any of its employees unless said school committee shall, by majority vote, request such application. 
(Code 1963, § 4-68) 
Charter reference— School committee generally, Title 5.  
Secs. 2-336—2-350. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - FINANCE[23] 
Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Charter reference— Appropriations for expenditures, § 18; appointment of person to examine books and accounts, § 22; estimate of expenses, § 46; restrictions on appropriations, § 48. 
Cross reference— Capital improvement budget, § 2-23; fees paid to officers, § 2-63; city auditor duties, § 2-81 et seq.; fees and monies collected, § 2-103; settlement of claims against the city, § 2-124; settlement of claims for the city, § 2-125, city treasurer duties, § 2-151 et seq.; planning board expenditure of funds, § 2-235. 
State Law reference— Municipal finance generally, M.G.L.A. c. 44. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-351. - Bonds. 
All bonds issued by the city shall be signed by the city treasurer and countersigned by the mayor and the city auditor, and shall bear the seal of the city. Said bonds shall be disposed of under the direction of the mayor in such manner as may best promote the interests of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 2-4)  
Sec. 2-352. - Payment of bonds. 
Instead of establishing a sinking fund for the payment of the indebtedness of the city, the city council shall provide for the payment of such indebtedness by such annual proportionate payments as will extinguish the same within the time prescribed by law, and the amount required thereby shall be assessed by the assessors of the city in each year thereafter, until the debt shall be extinguished, in the same manner as other taxes are assessed. 
(Code 1963, § 3-21) 
Cross reference— Report of funded debt payments required to be raised by taxation, § 2-84.  
Sec. 2-353. - Authentication of temporary loans and bonds. 
(a)  Every note for temporary loans shall be signed by the city treasurer and countersigned by the mayor and the city auditor. 
(b)  Every note for temporary loans and every bond of the city hereafter issued shall bear the authenticating certificate of a trust company or national bank doing business in this commonwealth; and without such certificate, shall not be valid. 
(Code 1963, §§ 2-5, 3-22)  
Sec. 2-354. - Bonds with personal sureties. 
No bond given for the protection of the city, with personal surety or sureties shall be accepted or approved until each surety has made and subscribed a statement under oath that he or she is worth an amount exceeding the amount of such bond over and above all liabilities and indebtedness, and the statement so made shall designate sufficient property, real or personal, to cover the requirement of the bond and shall be kept on file with the bond in connection with which said statement is made. 
(Code 1963, § 3-27)  
Sec. 2-355. - Responsible employer ordinance. 
(a)  The city council hereby finds and determines that the failure of certain construction firms awarded contracts funded by the city to include and enforce provisions requiring compliance with state laws governing the payment of prevailing wages, the provision of workers compensation coverage, and the proper classification of individuals as employees and not as independent contractors, as well as provisions concerning health insurance coverage and state-certified apprenticeship programs, is injurious to the life, health and happiness of individuals employed by such firms and is deleterious to the quality of life in the city where most of such individuals reside. 
(b)  Every contract awarded by the city under G. L. c. 149, § 44A (2) where the amount of the contract is more than $100,000.00, and any subcontract awarded in connection with any such general contract where the amount of such subcontract is more than $25,000.00, shall be deemed to incorporate by reference the provisions of sub-parts (1) through (5) of this subsection together with the provisions of subsections (c), (d) and (e) of this section. 
(1)  The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder shall comply with the requirements of G. L. c. 149 concerning the payment of prevailing wage rates to their employees; 
(2)  The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must maintain and participate in a bona fide apprentice training program as defined by G. L. c. 23, §§ 11H & 11I for each apprenticeable trade or occupation represented in its workforce that is approved by the division of apprentice training of the department of labor and workforce development of the Commonwealth and must abide by the apprentice to journeymen ratio for each trade prescribed therein in the performance of the contract; 
(3)  The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must offer, at its expense, hospitalization and medical benefits for all individuals employed on the project or coverage which is comparable to the hospitalization and medical benefits provided by the health and welfare plans in the applicable craft recognized by G. L. c. 149, § 26, in establishing minimum wage rates. All such plans shall meet or exceed state requirements for such plans. 
(4)  The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must maintain appropriate industrial accident insurance coverage in accordance with G. L. c. 152 for all individuals employed on the project; 
(5)  The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must properly classify individuals employed on the project as employees rather than independent contractors and comply with all laws concerning workers' compensation insurance coverage, unemployment taxes, Social Security taxes and income taxes as respects all such employees. 
(c)  All bidders and all subcontractors under such bidders who are awarded, or otherwise obtain, contracts from the city on projects governed by G. L. c. 149, § 44A(2), shall comply with the obligations described in sub-parts (1) through (5) of subsection (b) of this section for the entire duration of their work on the project, and an officer of each such bidder or subcontractor under the bidder shall certify under oath and in writing on a weekly basis that they are in compliance with these obligations. 
(d)  Any bidder or subcontractor under the bidder who fails to comply with any of the obligations described in sub-parts (1) through (5) of subsection (b) of this section for any period of time, or fails to comply with the weekly certification obligations described in subsection (c) of this subsection shall be subject to any or all of the following sanctions: 
(1)  Temporary suspension of work on the project until compliance is obtained; or, 
(2)  Withholding by the city of payment due under the contract until compliance is obtained; or, 
(3)  Permanent removal from any further work on the project; or, 
(4)  Recovery by the city from the general contractor of 1/10 of one percent of the general contract or $1,000.00, whichever sum is greater, in the nature of liquidated damages assessed for each week that the general contractor is in non-compliance or, if a subcontractor is in non-compliance, the recovery by the city from the general contractor as a back charge against the subcontractor of 1/10 of one percent of the subcontract price, or $400.00, whichever sum is greater, in the nature of liquidated damages assessed for each week that the subcontractor is in non-compliance. 
(e)  In addition to these sanctions a general bidder or contractor shall be equally liable for any violation of the obligations described in sub-parts (l) through (5) of subsection (b) of this section committed by any of its subcontractors or sub bidders, excepting only those violations which arise from work performed by subcontractors with subcontracts governed by G. L. c. 149, § 44F. Any contractor or subcontractor who has been determined to have violated any of the provisions of subsections (b) or (c) of this section shall be barred from performing any work on any future contracts awarded by the city for six months for the first violation, three years for the second violation, and permanently for a third violation. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to construction projects for which the low general bid was less than $100,000.00, or to work performed pursuant to subcontracts governed by G. L. 149, § 44F where the bid for such subcontract was less than $25,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, 6-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-356. - Audits of books and accounts. 
The mayor shall as often as he or she may deem expedient, employ a certified public accountant to examine and audit the books and accounts of the city treasurer and collector of taxes, comparing them and verifying them with the books, accounts, papers, vouchers and documents of the city auditor, city treasurer, city clerk, and of any committee, board or officer of the city. Said examination shall include a verification of cash balance, founded upon actual proof, as shown by the books and accounts; and a full report of the examination shall at once be made to the city council. The committee on finance shall have full power and authority to require the city auditor to examine the books and accounts of the city treasurer and collector of taxes whenever it may deem expedient, and to report in full to the city council the result of such examination. 
(Code 1963, § 2-7) 
Cross reference— City treasurer duties, § 2-151 et seq.  
Sec. 2-357. - Settlement of claims for the city. 
The mayor may with the approval of the head of department and the city solicitor make settlements of claims in favor of the city and sign, seal and deliver in the name and behalf of the city release for not more than $10,000.00 on any one claim. 
(Code 1963, § 2-9; Ord. No. 2000-15, 4-25-2000) 
Cross reference— Similar provisions, § 2-125.  
Sec. 2-358. - Annual audits of books and accounts. 
The accounts and records of the city shall be audited annually by the state department of corporations and taxation, division of accounts. 
(Code 1963, § 3-9)  
Sec. 2-359. - Attendance at conventions or conferences before the annual appropriation order. 
During the period after the expiration of any fiscal year and before the regular appropriations have been made by the city council, the city officials who are authorized to make expenditures in carrying on the work of the several departments entrusted to them, are hereby forbidden to attend any convention or conference at the expense of the city, without first obtaining approval of the city council for the incurring of said expense. 
(Code 1963, § 3-10)  
Sec. 2-360. - Transfers and supplemental appropriations. 
After the annual order of appropriation has been passed, no subsequent expenditures shall be authorized for any object, unless provisions for the same shall be made either by special transfer from some of the appropriations contained in said annual order, by appropriation from available cash surplus or by loans on funded debt account; provided that, if, after a veto by the mayor of any item or sum named in said annual order of appropriations, the board fails to pass said item or sum over said veto, the board may, subject to the approval of the mayor, add the sum so vetoed, or a part thereof, to any of the items which have not been vetoed; and provided, also, that any unappropriated funds in the city treasury may be appropriated at any time after the passage of the annual order of appropriations. 
(Code 1963, § 3-11)  
Sec. 2-361. - Warrants. 
All warrants for the payment of any sums by the treasurer must be drawn by the city auditor and approved by the mayor. The mayor shall not, after the passage of the annual order of appropriations, approve a warrant for the payment of any sum from any account until he or she has ascertained that there is a sufficient sum standing to the credit of such account. 
(Code 1963, § 2-6)  
Sec. 2-362. - Warrant timing. 
The city treasurer shall receive the warrants authorizing the payment of bills on or before the twelfth day of each month, and on the fifteenth day of each month, or if said fifteenth day shall be Sunday or a holiday, then on the first secular day following, be prepared to pay the same. He or she may pay any bond, note or interest which may mature, upon receipt of a warrant therefor approved by the city auditor and the mayor. 
(Code 1963, § 3-13)  
Sec. 2-363. - Exception to warrant timing. 
Any account may be paid by the city treasurer in anticipation of the regular payroll upon a proper warrant therefor approved by the auditor and the mayor. 
(Code 1963, § 3-14)  
Sec. 2-364. - Payrolls and payments. 
(a)  All boards and officers charged with the expenditure of money shall, on or before the third day of each month approve their respective payrolls and the bills belonging thereto, and present them to the city auditor. 
(b)  Said boards and officers shall include in their respective payrolls all bills necessarily incurred for the actual running expenses of their several departments, together with all sums made payable by special orders of the city council, judgments of the courts, and legislative enactments; but for no other purpose except by order of said board. 
(Code 1963, § 3-12)  
Sec. 2-365. - Biweekly payrolls. 
The payrolls of all employees required by law to be paid bi-weekly shall be made up to the end of every other calendar week and sent, within 48 hours thereafter, to the city auditor, who shall, if the payrolls are correct, approve and send the same within 24 hours of the receipt thereof by him or her to the mayor. The mayor, if satisfied of their correctness, shall sign a warrant drawn by the city auditor for the city treasurer to pay the amounts thereof, and the city treasurer may thereupon pay the same. 
(Code 1963, § 3-15; Ord. No. 1991-2, 2-14-91)  
Sec. 2-366. - Payrolls for school teachers. 
School teachers' salaries shall be paid in 21 payments during the school year September to June, each payment to be one twenty-first of the annual salary. The secretary of the school committee shall submit to the city auditor, on alternate Wednesdays, a payroll providing for the payment to each school teacher of one twenty-first of the annual salary of each teacher. After such payroll has been examined and approved by the city auditor, he or she shall forthwith sign a warrant, drawn upon the city treasurer, to pay the amount thereof. The warrant shall be submitted to the mayor, who shall, if satisfied of the correctness of the payroll and warrant, approve the warrant. The city treasurer shall pay to each teacher the amount of salary due according to each payroll on the Tuesday after the submission of the payroll to the city auditor. The first payroll is to be payable the first Tuesday after the opening of schools in September, and the twenty-first payment shall be due within seven calendar days of the teachers' last workday. 
(Code 1963, § 3-16)  
Sec. 2-367. - Payrolls for contracts. 
Payrolls for money to be paid on account of contracts for work begun, but not completed, shall pass through the same course as herein provided for the monthly payrolls, except that the provisions in regard to time shall not apply thereto. 
(Code 1963, § 3-17)  
Sec. 2-368. - Payments of court judgments. 
The city treasurer may, with the approval of the city solicitor, on warrants drawn by the city auditor and approved by the mayor, pay all judgments of the courts in anticipation of the payrolls. 
(Code 1963, § 3-18)  
Sec. 2-369. - Contracts for services, supplies and construction. 
(a)  Every contract for services and supplies, as defined by Chapter 30B, of the General Laws, shall be governed by Chapter 30B of the General Laws as amended. In addition all such contracts shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Unless authorized by a majority of the city council, the procurement officer or any other department shall not solicit or award a contract for a term exceeding three years, including renewals, extensions, or option contracts. This subsection shall apply to all contracts, including contracts that are otherwise exempt from this section and the provisions of Chapter 30B of the General Laws. 
(3)  All contracts, made by any department, board, or commission of the city, where the amount is $10,000.00 or more, shall be in writing, and no such contract required to be in writing shall be deemed to have been executed until the approval of the mayor, procurement officer, auditor, and department, board or commission making the contract has been affixed thereto. Payments, for any item or service, shall not be made until after the execution of such contract. This section shall apply to all contracts, including contracts that are otherwise exempt from this section and the provisions of Chapter 30B of the General Laws. 
(4)  All contracts, including contracts that are otherwise exempt from this section and the provisions of Chapter 30B of the General Laws, may be required to be accompanied by a bond with sureties, a deposit of money, certified check or other security for the faithful performance thereof, satisfactory to the procurement officer or department head and deposited with the city treasurer. No such contract shall be altered except by written agreement of the contractor, the procurement officer or department head making the contract with the approval of the mayor affixed thereto. 
(5)  Any contractor who has been found by a court of competent jurisdiction to have performed substandard work which do not comply with the terms of the contract shall not be eligible to bid or be awarded a contract for a period of six years from the date of the filing of such court. 
(b)  Every contract for construction as defined by Chapter 149, Section 44A of the General Laws and Chapter 30, Section 39M of the General Laws shall be governed by Chapter 149, Section 44A-I of the General Laws and Chapter 30, Sections 39A—P and 40 of the General Laws as amended. In addition to the aforementioned, every contract for construction shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  All contracts, made by any department, board, or commission of the city, where the amount is $10,000.00 or more, shall be in writing, and no such contract required to be in writing shall be deemed to have been executed until the approval of the mayor, procurement officer, auditor, and department, board or commission making the contract has been affixed thereto. Payments, for any work or materials, shall not be made until after the execution of such contract. This section shall apply to all contracts, including contracts that are otherwise exempt from this section. 
(3)  No such contract shall be altered except by written agreement of the contractor, the procurement officer or department head making the contract with the approval of the mayor affixed thereto. 
(4)  Any contractor who has been found by a court of competent jurisdiction to have performed substandard work which did not comply with the terms of the contract shall not be eligible to bid or be awarded a contract for a period of six years from the date of the filing of such court. 
(Code 1963, § 3-19; Ord. No. 1991-7, § 1, 3-28-91; Ord. No. 1993-4, 3-11-93; Ord. No. 2005-01, 2-10-2005; Ord. No. 2015-07 , §§ A., B., 12-10-2015) 
Charter reference— Certain contracts to be accompanied by bond, meet other requirements, § 46A.  
Sec. 2-370. - Custody of contracts. 
All contracts shall be kept in the custody of the city auditor. 
(Code 1963, § 3-20) 
Charter reference— City auditor to certify contract appropriation, § 46C.  
Sec. 2-371. - Water and sewer income and expenses. 
The income received by the city from the waterworks shall be credited to revenue for the current year and the estimated amount to be received shall be used to reduce the amount to be raised by taxes. Sums necessary to meet the expenses of the department and to pay the metropolitan water district assessment be appropriated in the annual budget. 
(Code 1963, § 3-23) 
Cross reference— Interference with water system, § 11-121 et seq.  
Sec. 2-372. - Accounts receivable. 
The several boards and officers of the city shall, as often as practicable, deliver to the city auditor for collection all accounts against persons indebted to the city, together with certified statements of the same. The city auditor, after making a record of the same, shall deliver said accounts and statements to the city treasurer for collection, and no board or officer, except the city treasurer, shall receive payment of any such account. 
(Code 1963, § 3-24)  
Sec. 2-373. - Revolving funds. 
(a)  Purpose. This section establishes and authorizes revolving funds for use by city departments, boards, committees, agencies or officers in connection with the operation of programs or activities that generate fees, charges or other receipts to support all or some of the expenses of those programs or activities. These revolving funds are established under and governed by General Laws Chapter 44, § 53E½. 
(b)  Expenditure limitations. A department or agency head, board, committee or officer may incur liabilities against and spend monies from a revolving fund established and authorized by this section without appropriation subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are paid from the fund shall also be paid from the fund. 
(2)  No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of the fund. 
(3)  The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount authorized by the city council on or before July 1 of that fiscal year, or any increased amount of that authorization that is later approved during that fiscal year by the mayor and the city council. 
(c)  Interest. Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this section shall be credited to the general fund. 
(d)  Procedures and reports. Except as provided in General Laws Chapter 44, § 53E½ and this section, the laws, Charter provisions, ordinances, rules, regulations, policies or procedures that govern the receipt and custody of city monies and the expenditure and payment of city funds shall apply to the use of a revolving fund established and authorized by this section. The city auditor shall include a statement on the collections credited to each fund, the encumbrances and expenditures charged to the fund and the balance available for expenditure in the regular report the city auditor provides the department, board, committee, agency or officer on appropriations made for its use. 
(e)  Authorized revolving funds. The table establishes: 
(1)  Each revolving fund authorized for use by a city department, board, committee, agency or officer; 
(2)  The department or agency head, board, committee or officer authorized to spend from each fund; 
(3)  The fees, charges and other monies charged and received by the department, board, committee, agency or officer in connection with the program or activity for which the fund is established that shall be credited to each fund by the city auditor; 
(4)  The expenses of the program or activity for which each fund may be used; 
(5)  The fiscal years each fund shall operate under this section. 
Revolving 
Fund 	Department, Board, 
Committee, Agency 
or Officer 
Authorized to 
Spend from Fund 	Fees, Charges or 
other Receipts 
Credited to Fund 	Program or Activity 
Expenses Payable from Fund 	Fiscal Years 
Special events 	DPW commissioner 	Special event fees charged to vendors, private concerns and users 	Payment for labor and equipment used for preparation and cleanup costs related to special events held in public areas. Such payments include: employee salaries, wages and benefits, custodial costs, utilities, ordinary maintenance and supplies. 	Fiscal year 2018 and subsequent years 
Mobile farmer's market 	HHS director 	Funds generated from the sale of culturally different fresh produce to the ethnically diverse population of Somerville 	Purchase of various culturally appropriate fresh produce and fruits for Somerville mobile farmer's market 	Fiscal year 2018 and subsequent years 
Council on aging 	Council on aging director 	Fees and charges received from seniors for participating in various senior citizens programs 	The funds collected are used to cover the costs associated with various senior center activities such as monthly dances, various trips, social and cultural events and the mayor's annual senior citizen picnic 	Fiscal year 2018 and subsequent years 
Planning and zoning 	Planning director 	Fees paid by applicants for notifications and public hearing expenses 	Payments for advertising costs for notifications and public hearings and postage for required mailings for the zoning board of appeals and planning zone 	Fiscal year 2018 and subsequent years 
Somertime revolving 	Recreation superintendent 	Deposits for tuition, tuition fees and the cost of extra t-shirts. Late fees for parental pick up after closing hours 	Expenses required to enable the program to be sustainable are: salaries, food and refreshments, program supplies, t-shirts, field trips admission fees and transportation 	Fiscal year 2018 and subsequent years 
Dedication sign 	Traffic and parking director 	Fees received from private parties to sponsor various dedication signs 	Payments to manufacture and install various dedication signs throughout the city 	Fiscal year 2018 and subsequent years 
Community Gardens 	OSPCD—Transportation and Infrastructure 	Plot fees collected from residents for space at one of the local gardens 	Stipend for the Citywide Garden Coordinator. Supplies and equipment for safe maintenance and operation of the gardens. Expenses for attendance at in-state conferences or shows related to gardening 	Fiscal year 2019 and subsequent years 
 
(Ord. No. 2017-09 , 6-22-2017; Ord. No. 2018-11 , 6-28-2018)  
Sec. 2-374. - Real property license agreements not to exceed three years. 
Unless authorized by a majority of the city council, the city shall not enter into a license agreement with respect to real property exceeding three years, including renewals, extensions, or options. 
( Ord. No. 2018-16, , 9-27-2018)  
Secs. 2-375—2-380. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING[24] 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
Charter reference— Mayor to appoint purchasing agent, § 21; purchasing agent to make all purchases, § 43. 
State Law reference— Purchasing department, purchasing agent, duties and salaries, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 103. 
 
Sec. 2-381. - Purchasing department. 
There is hereby established in the city government a department of purchasing under the direction of a purchasing agent. 
(Code 1963, § 4-69)  
Sec. 2-382. - Purchasing agent. 
The purchasing agent shall be responsible to the mayor for the entire purchasing program. The purchasing agent shall be specially fitted by education, training, and experience to perform the duties and assume the responsibilities of his or her office. He or she shall devote his or her entire time to said duties and responsibilities. The position of purchasing agent shall be exempt from civil service. 
(Code 1963, § 4-69)  
Sec. 2-383. - Purchasing agent duties. 
The purchasing agent shall have the following responsibilities in addition to any others designated by the mayor: 
(1)  Upon requisition in writing signed by the head of any department, and subject to the General Laws and the provisions contained in sections 46A and 46C of the Charter, purchase all materials, apparatus, and other supplies required by such departments, except books for the library. The purchasing agent shall purchase all supplies for the school department except textbooks and educational supplies, in accordance with instructions given him or her by the school department. The purchasing agent shall purchase contractual services needed by departments including the repair and maintenance of office equipment, rentals of machinery, equipment, furniture, and all similar contractual services. Contractual services shall not be construed to mean the hiring of department personnel. 
(2)  Discourage collusive or restrictive bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases. 
(3)  Assist the designer selection board in the process of prequalification and selection of designers and contractors in accordance with the General Laws. 
(4)  Determine the qualifications of bidders and disqualify irresponsible bidders from awards of contracts by the city. 
(5)  Prepare, adopt, promulgate, and enforce written specifications and all standard commodities. 
(6)  Inspect or supervise inspection of deliveries of supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services to determine conformance with specifications set forth in order or contract. 
(7)  Maintain a perpetual inventory of all items with their monetary value. 
(8)  Determine and inventory all surplus materials and arrange for sale or reassignment to other city departments. Dispose of or sell all obsolete items. 
(9)  Administer the minority business enterprise program. 
(10)  Establish, and amend when necessary, all rules and regulations authorized by this division. 
(11)  Prescribe and maintain forms necessary to the operation of this division. 
(Code 1963, § 4-70; Ord. No. 1993-3, 3-11-93; Ord. No. 2005-01, 2-10-2005)  
Sec. 2-384. - Purchase requisitions. 
All departments shall submit purchase requisitions to the purchasing department. The purchasing agent shall communicate with the requesting department before deviating substantially from the original request. All approved purchase requisitions submitted by any department, board or commission of the city, where the amount is $500.00 or more, shall be converted into a written purchase order and no such purchase order shall be deemed to have been executed until the approval of the procurement officer and auditor has been affixed to a purchase order. 
(Code 1963, § 4-71; Ord. No. 2015-07 , § A, 12-10-2015)  
Secs. 2-385—2-396. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-11, adopted Aug. 26, 2004, deleted § 2-385, which pertained to disposal of surplus goods and derived from Ord. No. 1990-21, adopted Dec. 13, 1990.  
DIVISION 3. - LIVING WAGE ORDINANCE[25] 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1999-1, adopted May 19, 1999 pertained to the living wage ordinance and these provisions were designated as §§ 2-390—2-396. For purposes of classification and to facilitate indexing and reference the editor has redesignated §§ 2-390—2-396 as §§ 2-397—2-403. 
 
Sec. 2-397. - Living wage ordinance. 
(a)  Somerville Living Wage Ordinance. This division shall be known as the "Somerville Living Wage Ordinance." The purpose of this division is to insure that employees of the city and employees of city contractors and subcontractors earn an hourly wage that is sufficient for a family of four to live at or above the federal poverty level. 
(Ord. No. 1999-1, 5-19-99)  
Sec. 2-398. - Definitions. 
Unless another meaning is clearly apparent from the context, the following words as used in this division shall have the following meanings: 
Applicable department means the personnel department for employees of the city, the purchasing department for covered employers who contract or subcontract with the city, and the school department for employees, contractors and subcontractors of the school department. 
Covered employee means a person employed by the city, or a covered employer other than the city and who directly expends his or her time on the service contract or subcontract with the city. 
Covered employer means the city, and anyone who has been awarded a service contract or subcontract with the city after the effective date [July 1, 1999] of the ordinance. 
Living wage has the meaning stated in section 2-399(b) below. 
Person means one or more of the following or their agents, employees, servants, representatives, and legal representatives; individuals, corporations, partnerships, joint ventures, associations, labor organizations, educational institutions, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries, and all other entities recognized at law by this commonwealth. 
Service contract means a contract for services awarded to a vendor by the city for no less than the following amounts: (i) $50,000.00 for contracts commencing in fiscal year 2000 and 2001, (ii) $30,000.00 for contracts commencing in fiscal year 2002 and 2003, and (iii) $10,000.00 for contracts commencing in fiscal year 2004 and thereafter. Any bids opened prior to the effective date [July 1, 1999] of this division shall not be subject to this division. "Service contract" shall not include any cooperative contracts under which the city is only one of several municipalities entering into a collaborative contract for services with a single service provider. "Service contract" shall not include contracts in which the city enters into a contract for the insurance of city owned property, including, but not limited to, real property, automobiles, machinery, equipment, computers, and art work; property loaned to or maintained by the city; or liability insurance of any kind. 
Services means the furnishing of labor, time, or effort by a contractor, not involving the furnishing of a specific end product other than reports. 
(Ord. No. 1999-1, 5-19-99; Ord. No. 2001-10, 6-28-2001; Ord. No. 2019-07 , 4-11-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-07, adopted April 11, 2019, related to youth programs shall take effect July 1, 2020.  
Sec. 2-399. - Living wage. 
(a)  Applicability. Covered employers shall pay no less than the living wage to their covered employees. 
(b)  Amount of wage. The living wage shall be $15.00 per hour upon implementation of this section. Each year thereafter, commencing on July 1, 2019, the amount of the living wage shall be upwardly adjusted each year upon issuance of the Annual Update of the United States Department of Health and Human Services poverty income guidelines, either (i) to the sum equal to the United States poverty income guidelines as established by the United States Department of Health and Human Services for a family of four based on an hourly wage paid for 40 hours of work per week, 50 weeks a year, or (ii) in proportion to the increase, if any, at the immediately preceding December 31 over the year earlier level of the annual average consumer price index for all Urban Consumers (CPI—U) Boston-Lawrence-Salem, MA-NH, as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, United States Department of Labor applied to the then existing living wage, whichever produces the higher level. The living wage shall be calculated to reflect the compounded increase in the above-referenced CPI since the inception of this section. 
(c)  Living wage posting of notice. Each covered employer shall post a notice, to be furnished by the applicable department, informing employees of the protections and obligations provided for in this division, and that for assistance and information, including copies of the ordinance, employees should contact the applicable department. Such notice shall be posted by the covered employer in each location where services are performed by covered employees in a conspicuous place where notices to employees are customarily posted. 
(d)  Living wage reporting; maintenance of payroll records. Each covered employer shall maintain payrolls for all covered employees and basic records relating thereto and shall preserve them for a period of three years. The records shall contain the name and address of each employee, the number of hours worked, the gross wages, a copy of the social security returns, and evidence of payment thereof and such other data as may be required by the applicable department from time to time. 
(e)  Applicable department duties. The applicable department shall cause investigations to be made as may be necessary to determine whether there has been compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(f)  Covered employer to cooperate. The covered employer shall submit payroll records on request. Upon receipt by the city of information of possible noncompliance with the provisions of this division, the covered employer shall permit city representatives from the applicable department to observe work being performed upon the work site, to interview employees and to examine the books and records relating to the payrolls being investigated to determine payment of wages. 
(g)  Reduction of nonwage benefits prohibited. No covered employer shall fund wage increases required by the ordinance, or otherwise respond to the provisions of this division, by reducing the health insurance benefits of any of its employees. 
(Ord. No. 1999-1, 5-19-99; Ord. No. 2009-09, 6-11-2009; Ord. No. 2009-13, 6-25-2009; Ord. No. 2019-07 , 4-11-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-07, adopted April 11, 2019, related to youth programs shall take effect July 1, 2020.  
Sec. 2-400. - Bidding procedures. 
(a)  The city will award the contract to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder paying the required wage, provided that the bid does not exceed the funds available. If all bids from responsive and responsible bidders paying the required wage exceed the funds available for the contract, the purchasing agent shall reject all bids. If all bids have been rejected or if no responses are received to an invitation for bids or proposals, the mayor may request an exception pursuant to section 2-401. 
(b)  Any service contract that is subject to the provisions of this division (and not exempted under section 2-401) shall include a certification that the bidder will pay no less than the living wage to all of its covered employees who directly expend their time on the service contract. 
(Ord. No. 1999-1, 5-19-99)  
Sec. 2-401. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Exceptions. An exception to the requirements of this division, may be granted prior to issuing or reissuing an invitation for bids or proposals. An exception may be granted by the city council upon the request of the mayor or by the school committee where services are to be provided under the school department's budget. 
(b)  Grounds for granting exceptions. 
(1)  General exception. Exceptions shall be granted where application of this division to a particular contract or employment relationship is found by the city solicitor to violate a specific state or federal statutory, regulatory or constitutional provision or provisions, and the city council approves the exception on that basis. 
(2)  Specific exception. The mayor may apply for a specific exception where payment of the living wage by a covered employer will (i) substantially curtail the services provided by the covered employer, (ii) have an adverse financial impact on the city, or (iii) is not in the best interests of the city. 
(c)  Contents of general exception requests. All general exception requests shall include the following: 
(1)  The nature of the contract or employment relationship to which this division applies; 
(2)  The conflicting statutory, regulatory or constitutional provision or provisions that makes compliance with this division unlawful, and a copy of each such provision; and 
(3)  A factual explication and legal analysis of how compliance with this division would violate the cited provision or provisions, and the legal consequences that would attach if the violation were to occur. 
(d)  Contents of specific exception requests. All specific exception requests shall include the following: 
(1)  The nature of the contract or employment relationship to which this division applies; 
(2)  A detailed explanation of why payment of the living wage will substantially curtail the services provided by the covered employer; 
(3)  A detailed explanation of why payment of the living wage will have an adverse financial impact on the city; 
(4)  A detailed explanation of why payment of the living wage is not in the best interests of the city; and 
(5)  A statement of proposed wages below the living wage. 
(e)  City council or school committee review and approval of exception requests. The city council or the school committee, where applicable under section 2-401(a), shall consider exception requests along with supporting documentation and analysis, and shall hold a public hearing to consider the views of the public before approving any specific exception. For a specific exception, the city council or school committee shall offer an opportunity to be heard to employees of the covered employer. The city council or school committee may approve and grant all or part of a request and may limit the duration of any exception to one year. 
(f)  Terms of exceptions. If an employer has more than one contract with the city which is subject to this division, and if the city council or school committee agrees to an exception with respect to one contract, it need not find that this division is inapplicable to the employer with respect to another contract. 
(Ord. No. 1999-1, 5-19-99)  
Sec. 2-402. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement powers. If necessary for the enforcement of this division, the city solicitor may issue subpoenas, compel the attendance and testimony of witnesses and production of books, papers, records and documents relating to payroll records necessary for hearings, investigations, and proceedings. In the event of failure to obey a subpoena, the city may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an order requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records and documents. 
(b)  Grievance procedures and nondiscrimination. An employee who believes that he or she is a covered employee and that his or her employer is not complying with requirements of this division applicable to the employer has the right to file a complaint with the applicable department. Complaints of alleged violations may also be filed by concerned citizens or by request of the city council. Complaints of alleged violations may be made at any time and shall be investigated promptly by the applicable department. Statements written or oral, made by an employee, shall be treated as confidential and shall not be disclosed to the covered employer without the consent of the employee. 
(c)  Investigations. The applicable department shall investigate the complaint, and may, in conjunction with the city solicitor, and in accordance with the powers herein granted, require the production by the employer of such evidence as required. 
(d)  Retaliation and discrimination barred. A covered employer shall not discharge, reduce the compensation or otherwise discriminate against any employee for making a complaint to the city, otherwise asserting his or her rights under this division, participating in any of its proceedings or using any civil remedies to enforce his or her rights under the ordinance. The city shall investigate allegations of retaliation or discrimination, and may, in conjunction with the city solicitor, and in accordance with the powers herein granted, require the production by the employer of such evidence as required. 
(Ord. No. 1999-1, 5-19-99)  
Sec. 2-403. - Remedies. 
(a)  In the event that the city shall determine, after notice and hearing, that any covered employer has failed to pay the living wage rate or has otherwise violated the provisions of this division. 
(1)  The city may order any or all of the following penalties and relief: 
a.  Fines in the sum of $500.00 for each week for each employee found to have not been paid in accordance with this division; and 
b.  Suspension of ongoing contract and subcontract payments. 
(2)  If the covered employer has failed to pay the living wage, the city shall terminate all service contracts with the covered employer unless appropriate relief, including restitution to each affected covered employee, is made within a specified time. 
(3)  If the covered employer has discharged, reduced the compensation or otherwise discriminated against any covered employee for making a complaint to the city, otherwise asserting his or her rights under this division, participating in any of its proceedings or using any civil remedies to enforce his or her rights under the ordinance, the city shall terminate all service contracts with the covered employer unless appropriate relief, including restitution to each affected covered employee and reinstatement of each discharged covered employee, is made within a specified time. 
(b)  A vendor's prior record of compliance with this division shall be a factor to be considered in determining bidder responsibility when awarding bids. 
(c)  This division shall not be construed to limit an employee's right to bring a common law cause of action for wrongful termination or wage restitution. 
(d)  Remedies herein nonexclusive. No remedy set forth in this division is intended to be exclusive or a prerequisite for asserting a claim for relief to enforce the right granted under this division in a court of law. 
(Ord. No. 1999-1, 5-19-99)  
Secs. 2-404—2-420. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - FINANCE DEPARTMENT[26] 

Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-1, adopted Mar. 23, 2000 pertained to establishing a department of finance and these provisions were designated as §§ 2-175—2-182. In order to preserve Code format the editor has redesignated these provisions as §§ 2-421—2-428. 
 
Sec. 2-421. - Finance department. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of any ordinance, rule or regulation to the contrary, there is hereby established in the city a department of finance. The department of finance is established pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 43C, and Section 11. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, 3-23-2000)  
Sec. 2-422. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Annual operating budget means a statement of the amounts recommended for expenditure, for the city for next fiscal year. This statement shall include, ordinary maintenance, salaries and wages of officers, officials and employees and proposed expenditures for other than ordinary maintenance. 
Annual capital budget means an annual statement of the estimated expenditures for, and revenue from, any capital project by the city for the next fiscal year. This statement shall include, though not be limited to, the following expenditures: any physical betterment or improvement to city owned property and any preliminary studies and surveys related thereto; acquisition of property of a permanent nature, purchase of furnishings or equipment for any betterment or when first erected or acquired; and purchase of equipment for the maintenance and operation of any department of the city government. It shall be accompanied by a financial program which shall clearly outline any bond issues relating thereto, as well as the amount of money proposed to be made available for the project from the annual tax levy. 
City agency means any board, commission, committee, trust, department or office of city government, whether elected, appointed or otherwise constituted, regardless of its sources of funding. 
Financial obligations means all expenditures and debts of the city as well as the management and investment of city funds. 
Financial services means all disbursement of funds for the payment of debts and expenditures of the city, collection of all revenue due the city, and the investment and maintenance of all city funds, and the maintenance of all city financial information. 
Five-year capital improvement program means a five-year proposal for capital projects as defined by the definition of "annual capital budget" above, that the city may undertake, including, but not limited to, the estimated cost of the project; the estimated cost of any future capital projects or capital projects that will continue during the first year of the program, which the city will finance out of appropriations; identification of any bond issues related to the current or proposed capital projects; and any anticipated revenue related to the capital program. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, 3-23-2000)  
Sec. 2-423. - Finance department duties. 
The department shall include the present functions and statutory duties of the assessing, auditing, treasury/collecting and purchasing departments. Said departments shall become divisions of the department of finance. Said functions shall include, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Coordination of all financial services and activities of the city and as allowed by law with the school department; 
(2)  Maintenance of all account records and other financial statements for the city; 
(3)  Payment of all financial obligations on behalf of the city; 
(4)  Investment of city funds and management of debt; 
(5)  Receipt of all fines due the city from any source; 
(6)  Maintenance of a system of property valuation; 
(7)  Rendering advice, assistance guidance and recommendations to all city agencies in any financial or fiscal affairs; 
(8)  Monitoring throughout the fiscal year the expenditure of funds by city agencies; 
(9)  Supervision of all purchases of goods and services, and maintenance of a full and complete inventory of city property; and 
(10)  Such other activities as may be assigned by the mayor or by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, 3-23-2000)  
Sec. 2-424. - Finance director. 
Said department shall be managed by a finance director who shall be responsible to and appointed by the mayor, subject to approval of the city council for a term of three years. Said director shall be a person especially fitted by education, training and experience to perform the duties of the position. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, 3-23-2000)  
Sec. 2-425. - Finance director ex-officio as auditor or treasurer/collector. 
The director shall exercise administrative control and direction of the department. The director may serve, ex-officio, as the auditor or treasurer/collector; provided, however, that no director shall serve, ex-officio, as both auditor and treasurer/collector. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, 3-23-2000)  
Sec. 2-426. - Finance director duties. 
The director shall be responsible for the effective operation and the coordination of operations within the department, including the assessing, auditing, treasury, collection and purchasing functions. Said director shall exercise the responsibilities of the position in accordance with policies adopted by the mayor and accordance with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and in accordance with generally accepted governmental financial practices. Said director shall be cognizant of the statutory responsibilities and practices of all of the officers within said department and shall consult with such officers to ensure that these duties and responsibilities are properly exercised and discharged. Said director shall make recommendations to the mayor concerning the appointment of the auditor, chief assessor, purchasing agent and treasurer/collector. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, 3-23-2000)  
Sec. 2-427. - Finance director additional duties. 
In addition to supervising and directing the effective functioning of the divisions of assessing, auditing, treasury/collecting and purchasing, the director shall have the following specific powers and duties: 
(1)  To compile and submit an annual operating budget and an annual capital budget to the mayor. The director shall receive all requests made for the expenditure of city funds from every city agency and shall assemble all such requests into a form deemed to be best suited to show a complete financial plan for all city funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(2)  The finance director shall, no later than 120 days following the first organizational meeting of the city, submit to the mayor and the a five-year capital improvements program. 
(3)  The finance director shall, no later than 60 days following the first organizational meeting of the city, submit to the mayor and the city council, a five-year financial forecast of the city's revenue, expenditures and debt. 
(4)  To set policies and procedures for the collection of all revenues due and owing to the city. 
(5)  To disburse, as city government operations may require, all funds and sign all checks pursuant to warrants signed by the mayor and city auditor, to insure the efficient operation of government. 
(6)  To communicate financial matters affecting city government to the mayor and to the city council on a monthly basis. 
(7)  To coordinate and act as the city's chief contact with the state department of revenue pertaining to all financial matters. 
(8)  To coordinate and manage all financial information received from the board of assessors to forecast future financial growth and anticipated revenues, and advise the mayor and city council accordingly. 
(9)  To create and implement written policies and procedures, and be responsible for the collection and deposit of all monies received by various city agencies. 
(10)  To maintain the fullest cooperation with the city council, through its finance committee, and to furnish information to said finance committee within 14 working days of its written request or such other period of time as mutually agreed upon. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, 3-23-2000; Ord. No. 2002-5, §§ 1, 2, 6-13-2002)  
Sec. 2-428. - Ordinance amends contrary provisions. 
As provided by Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 43C, Section 3, the establishment of a department of finance in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 43C, Section 11, is deemed to be an amendment to any contrary provisions of the City of Somerville Charter and the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, 3-23-2000)  
Chapter 3 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health, Ch. 6. 
State Law reference— Animal pounds generally, M.G.L.A. c. 49, § 22 et seq.; animals M.G.L.A. c. 129; cruelty to animals, M.G.L.A. c. 272, § 77 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Fastening animals to trees. 
No person shall fasten or tie a horse or any other animal to a tree in a street or other public place, or allow a horse or other animal to stand or remain so near any such tree that it may be gnawed or otherwise injured by such a horse or other animal. 
(Code 1963, § 12-18) 
Cross reference— Protection of trees, § 9-51.  
Sec. 3-2. - Frightening horses. 
No person shall, by any noise, gesture, words, or other means, wantonly and designedly frighten a horse in any street or other public place. 
(Code 1963, § 12-19)  
Sec. 3-3. - Feeding or baiting animals. 
(a)  No person shall feed or bait any animal in any street or other place except in accordance with a permit from the superintendent of highways that may be revoked at any time. 
(b)  The feeding of birds is hereby prohibited in or on all sidewalks, streets, parks, or other public property. 
(c)  Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be fined in accordance with section 1-11(b). 
(Code 1963, § 12-20; Ord. No. 2002-2, 4-25-2002; Ord. No. 2007-14, 11-20-2007)  
Sec. 3-4. - Animals at-large. 
(a)  No person shall allow any domestic fowl, swine, goat, sheep, ox, cow, horse, or other grazing animal, owned by him or her or in his or her charge or control, to go at-large or to graze in or upon any of the streets, parks, commons, public grounds or lands of the city. 
(b)  No person shall allow any dog owned by him or her, or in his or her charge or control, to swim in a pond in any of the parks or public grounds of the city, or to trample upon or injure any flower bed, flower, shrub or other property of the city, in any of such parks or public grounds. 
(c)  No sheep, swine or meat cattle shall be driven in or over any street or bridge in droves of more than 25 animals each, or at less intervals than 30 minutes between any two droves, or except in charge of at least two competent persons. 
(Code 1963, § 12-21) 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit grazing in streets, M.G.L.A. c. 85, § 10; strays generally, M.G.L.A. c. 134.  
Secs. 3-5—3-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Dogs in outdoor seating areas of restaurants, § 6-24. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate dogs, M.G.L.A. c. 140, § 173. 
 
Sec. 3-31. - Complaints about dogs. 
If any person shall make a complaint in writing to the chief of police or officer designated by him or her, that any dog owned or harbored within the city is a nuisance by reason of vicious disposition, excessive barking or other disturbance, the chief or police or officer designated by him or her shall investigate such complaint, which may include an examination on oath of the complainant, and may order such dog to be restrained or muzzled. Official complaint forms shall be furnished said complainant by the chief of police. 
(Code 1963, § 13-1; Ord. No. 1994-14, 6-23-94)  
Sec. 3-32. - Restraint or muzzling of dogs. 
The chief of police or officer designated by him or her may restrain or order to be restrained or muzzled any dog for any of the following: 
(1)  Being found at-large or unmuzzled, as the case may be, while an order of the chief of police or officer designated by him or her for the restraint or muzzling of such dog is in effect; 
(2)  Being found in a school, schoolyard, church, the grounds of a church, or public recreational area; 
(3)  Having bitten or otherwise injured any person; 
(4)  Having killed, maimed, or otherwise caused damage to any other domesticated animal; 
(5)  Having caused damage to real or personal property owned by an individual other than the person owning or harboring said dog; 
(6)  Chasing any vehicle upon any public way or on any way to which the public has a right of access. 
(Code 1963, § 13-2; Ord. No. 1994-14, 6-23-94)  
Sec. 3-33. - Disturbance of the peace by dogs. 
No person shall own or harbor within the city any dog which, by barking, biting, howling, or harassing any person, or in any other manner, disturbs the quiet of any person. 
(Code 1963, § 13-3; Ord. No. 1994-14, 6-23-94) 
State Law reference— Barking dogs, M.G.L.A. c. 140, § 157.  
Sec. 3-34. - Dogs at-large. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog to permit any such animal to run loose or be at-large within the corporate limits of the city. All dogs found any place other than on the premises of the owner or custodian, or any specifically posted off-leash area which is designated as an off-leash recreational area, dog park or dog run, and in accordance with posted rules therein, shall be deemed to be running loose or to be at-large within the meaning of this section, except such dogs that may be under control by means of a chain or leash, not longer than six feet or those that may be in any vehicle or boat, while so therein, which shall be deemed to be under personal control of owner or custodian thereof. 
(Code 1963, § 13-4; Ord. No. 1994-14, 6-23-94; Ord. No. 2005-08, 6-9-2005)  
Sec. 3-35. - Capture and confinement of dogs. 
(a)  Any dog found to be at-large in violation of section 3-34 shall be caught and confined by the dog officer who shall notify forthwith the licensed owner of such dog that unless within ten days, the owner or other person having interest therein shall claim possession and pay all charges for confinement and care, the animal will be destroyed or sold to any person offering to pay the charges. 
(b)  In the event that the dog is neither claimed nor sold within the time provided, the dog may be destroyed or sold to any person upon the payment of all charges of impounding and confinement. In no case shall a dog be sold or delivered to any person or organization intending to use said dog for vivisection purposes. 
(c)  Return of the dog to the licensed owner or custodian shall be dependent on the following: 
(1)  Admission of ownership or custody; 
(2)  Assumption of responsibility; 
(3)  Payment of all charges for confinement and care. 
(Code 1963, § 13-5; Ord. No. 1994-14, 6-23-94)  
Sec. 3-36. - Charges for confinement of dogs. 
A dog officer having custody of a dog confined under section 3-35 shall be allowed the sum of $15.00 per day for each day of confinement for the care of such dog, payable as provided in section 3-35. 
(Code 1963, § 13-6; Ord. No. 1994-14, 6-23-94)  
Sec. 3-37. - Confinement of dogs during oestrus cycle. 
If the dog officer determines that a dog in her oestrus cycle, even when confined to the property of the owner or keeper, is attracting other dogs to the area, which condition causes disturbances on, or damage to neighboring property or public areas, he or she may impound the dog for the duration of the oestrus cycle, releasing it thereafter to the owner or keeper, upon payment of pound fees, or the dog officer may require the owner or keeper, to place and keep such dog, while in such cycle, in a kennel or to remove it from the area, so that the nuisance is abated. 
(Code 1963, § 13-7; Ord. No. 1994-14, 6-23-94)  
Sec. 3-38. - Fines and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall neglect or refuse to comply with an order issued under section 3-31 or 3-32, or who shall be in violation of section 3-33 shall be liable to a penalty in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person who shall be in violation of section 3-34 shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. 
(c)  Any person who does not properly curb his or her dog shall be subject to a fine of in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. 
(d)  Any person who shall be in violation of section 3-37 shall be liable to a penalty in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. 
(e)  Any person found in violation of any part of this chapter, or ordered to restrain or dispose of his/her dog under Section 157 of Chapter 140 of the General Laws of Massachusetts, by the animal control officer, the chief of police or a court, may have, with good cause, his/her permit or license to own, keep, harbor, or have custody of animals revoked and no new permit or license shall be issued. 
(Code 1963, § 13-8; Ord. No. 1994-14, 6-23-94; Ord. No. 1997-4, 5-8-97; Ord. No. 2005-11, §§ 1, 2, 7-14-2005; Ord. No. 2006-09, §§ B, C, 4-11-2006)  
ARTICLE III. - NON-DOMESTICATED ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 3-39. - Display of non-domesticated animals. 
(a)  No living non-domesticated animals shall be displayed for public entertainment or amusement in circuses, carnivals or other similar entities on property owned by the City of Somerville, on city-owned property under lease, or on private property. As used in this paragraph, "displayed" shall include, but is not limited to, animal acts and performances, animal rides and competitive animal races. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to domestic animals including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, horses, donkeys and farm animals, except that no domestic animal shall be used in competitive animal races. 
(c)  This article shall not apply to exhibits deemed educational by the Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. 
(d)  Violations of this article are subject to penalties in accordance with section 1-11(b) of the Code of Ordinances. Each consecutive day that a violation exists shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, 1-14-2010)  
Chapter 4 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 5; health, Ch. 6; police, Ch. 10. 
State Law reference— Civil defense generally, M.G.L.A. c. 33 App., § 13-1 et seq.; local organizations, M.G.L.A. c. 33 App., § 13-13 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Civil defense department. 
There shall be a department of civil defense to be under the direction of a director of civil defense to be appointed by the mayor. The department may also be referred to as the emergency management agency. 
(Code 1963, § 5-1; Ord. No. 1986-6, 9-11-86)  
Sec. 4-2. - Civil defense duties. 
It shall be the function of the emergency management agency to carry out the duties prescribed by Acts of 1950, Chapter 639 and any acts in amendment of or in addition to such Chapter 639 and such other functions and duties as may be set forth herein or established by ordinance from time to time not inconsistent with the laws of the commonwealth, namely, to prepare for and carry out all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces other than the National Guard are primarily responsible, for the purpose of minimizing and repairing injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by attack, sabotage or other hostile action or by fire, flood, earthquake or other natural causes. Said functions shall include specifically, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, firefighting and police services, medical and health services, warning services, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons of defense, emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions. 
(Code 1963, § 5-2; Ord. No. 1986-6, 9-11-86)  
Sec. 4-3. - Director of emergency management. 
The director of emergency management shall be appointed by and shall serve during the pleasure of the mayor. Subject to general control of the mayor, he or she shall have the direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the emergency management agency. He or she shall receive such salary as shall from time to time be determined by the mayor, subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 5-3; Ord. No. 1986-6, 9-11-86)  
Sec. 4-4. - Director of emergency management duties. 
In the event of a disaster, as more particularly defined in Section 1 of Acts of 1950, Chapter 639, the city acting through the director of emergency management shall have the power to enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat such disaster to protect the health and safety of persons and property and to provide emergency assistance to the victims of such disaster. Further, in the event of such disaster, the director of emergency management is authorized to exercise all the powers set forth in said Chapter 639 pertaining to the performance of public works, making of contracts, incurring obligations, employment of temporary workers, rental or equipment and purchasing of supplies. Such action taken in time of disaster shall not require the approval of the mayor. 
(Code 1963, § 5-5; Ord. No. 1986-6, 9-11-86)  
Sec. 4-5. - Appointment of employees. 
For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter the director of emergency management, with the approval of the mayor, may within the limits of amounts appropriated therefor, appoint and employ such clerks, experts and other employees as may be necessary. Such appointments shall be in accordance with Chapter 639, Acts of 1950, as amended. 
(Code 1963, § 5-4; Ord. No. 1986-6, 9-11-86)  
Sec. 4-6. - Aid to other municipalities. 
(a)  The chief of police with the approval of the director of emergency management and of the mayor is authorized to send to the aid of any other city or town in the event of disaster such equipment and personnel of his or her department as in the judgment of the chief of police shall be advisable for the suppression of riot or other form of violence in such other city or town in the event of a request therefor from the mayor or city manager of such city or selectmen of such town. 
(b)  The head of any department of the city with the approval of the director of emergency management and the mayor, is authorized to send to the aid of any other city or town in the event of disaster such equipment and personnel of his or her department, as in the judgment of such department head shall be advisable, to assist in recovery from the effects of such disaster in the event of a request therefor from the mayor or city manager of such city or selectmen of such town. 
(Code 1963, §§ 5-6, 5-7; Ord. No. 1986-6, 9-11-86)  
Sec. 4-7. - Emergency management advisory council. 
There is hereby created an unpaid emergency management advisory council, the members of which shall be appointed by the mayor. The emergency management council shall consist of experts on all matters affecting emergency management and the director of emergency management. The mayor shall appoint the chairman of such emergency management council to serve during his or her pleasure. Said emergency management council shall be in the executive branch of the government and shall serve under the mayor and shall be subject to his or her supervision and control. Said emergency management council shall advise the mayor and director on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(Code 1963, § 5-8)  
Sec. 4-8. - Gifts, grants or loans for emergency management. 
In accordance with the authority referred to in Section 15 of Acts of 1950, Chapter 639, the city shall accept gifts, grants or loans of services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds for the purposes of emergency management from the federal government or any agency or officer thereof or from any person. The acceptance of such gifts, grants or loans shall be subject to the terms of the offer and the rules and regulations, if any, of the agency or person making such offer. Acceptance of such gifts, grants or loans on behalf of the city shall be made by the director of emergency management subject to the approval of the mayor. Appropriate records shall be kept by the director of all matters relating to such gifts, grants or loans. 
(Code 1963, § 5-9; Ord. No. 1986-6, 9-11-86)  
Sec. 4-9. - Executive orders and directives of the governor. 
Upon the promulgation of executive orders or general regulations by the governor of the commonwealth, or upon a directive by the governor to the mayor or to the director of emergency management or other municipal department officer or employee of the city to carry out the provisions of any such executive order, regulation or directive, the director of emergency management is hereby authorized and directed to take all necessary steps to carry out such executive order, regulation or directive in spite of any municipal ordinance or procedure which may in whole or in part conflict with such executive order, regulation or directive. All such actions shall be taken and such executive orders or regulations shall be carried out for the purpose of meeting conditions arising from emergencies or disasters without delay caused by observance of ordinances or procedures customary in periods of normal life. 
(Code 1963, § 5-10; Ord. No. 1986-6, § 9-11-86)  
Sec. 4-10. - Filing executive orders and directives of the governor. 
Upon the receipt of any executive order, general regulation or directive from the governor under the powers conferred upon him or her by Acts of 1950, Chapter 639, the director of emergency management or the office or employee of the city receiving such order, regulation or directive shall cause copies thereof with all due diligence to be filed with the city clerk, the city auditor, the mayor, the city solicitor, the director of emergency management and the department affected thereby. 
(Code 1963, § 5-11; Ord. No. 1986-6, 9-11-86)  
Sec. 4-11. - Aid from other municipalities. 
In carrying out the purposes of emergency management, the city shall use the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of the departments, officers and agents of the commonwealth and of the political subdivisions of the commonwealth to the maximum extent practicable and all officers, departments, agents and employees of the city shall to the fullest extent practicable cooperate and extend their services to the commonwealth and other emergency management organizations of the commonwealth upon request to the end that so far as municipal action by the city is concerned the spirit and purposes of said Chapter 639 shall be carried out to the fullest extent. 
(Code 1963, § 5-12; Ord. No. 1986-6, 9-11-86)  
Sec. 4-12. - Expiration of civil defense department. 
This chapter of the Code shall become of no effect when Acts of 1950, Chapter 639, shall, by action of the legislature, become inoperative or upon the expiration of any time limit for the operation of said Chapter 639 now or hereafter imposed by the legislature. Any part of this chapter shall become inoperative when any section or provision of said Chapter 639 upon which such part depends for its validity shall become inoperative by act of the legislature or by the expiration of any time limit now or hereafter imposed by the legislature. 
(Code 1963, § 5-13; Ord. No. 1986-6, 9-11-86)  
Chapter 5 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Establishment of fire limits, § 19. 
Cross reference— Emergency management, Ch. 4; housing, Ch. 7; hazardous material transport for commercial vehicles, § 8-5; hazardous material transport for trains, § 8-6; skyrockets, § 9-87; fireworks and guns, § 9-88; selling or storing fireworks, § 9-89; demolition of buildings, § 11-105. 
State Law reference— Fires, fire department and fire districts generally, M.G.L.A. c. 48; fire prevention generally, M.G.L.A. c. 148. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Burning in public places. 
No person shall set fire to leaves or other material in any street or other public place. 
(Code 1963, § 12-39) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 12.  
Sec. 5-2. - Burning in private places. 
No person shall set fire in the open air to leaves or any other material in any dumping place or on private land or elsewhere, without the approval in writing of the chief engineer of the fire department. 
(Code 1963, § 12-40)  
Sec. 5-3. - Disposal of combustibles. 
No person shall without a permit from the city council put and allow to remain or cause to be put and allowed on any dump, wood or wood shavings or rubber or cloth or paper or cardboard or other combustible matter. 
(Code 1963, § 12-58)  
Sec. 5-4. - Storage of combustibles. 
The chief engineer of the fire department shall cause all places where shavings and other combustible materials or explosive compounds or detonators, or other articles, goods or merchandise liable to cause fire are placed or kept, to be examined, and when he or she deems that any of such things are so placed or kept as to be liable to cause fire, he or she shall order the tenant or occupant of the place where they are so placed or kept to remove them; and if such tenant or occupant neglects or refuses so to do, the chief engineer shall cause the same to be removed at the expense of such tenant or occupant, who shall, in addition, be liable to a penalty in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Code 1963, § 6-17)  
Sec. 5-5. - Storage of combustibles in containers. 
All gasoline, oil and other inflammable or dangerous materials must be drained or removed from containers, including tanks on automobiles and such tanks or containers shall be vented when use of such has been discontinued or allowed to stand idle for a long time. 
(Code 1963, § 12-69.1)  
Sec. 5-6. - Heat and smoke detectors. 
The chief engineer shall require that every apartment house containing six or more dwelling units, hotels, boarding or lodging houses, or family hotels be equipped with an automatic smoke or heat detector in each dwelling unit and each hallway floor, in compliance with the provisions of Section 26C of Chapter 148 of the General Laws; provided, however, that an owner of an apartment house, hotel, boarding or lodging house as set forth in this section shall have three years from the date that an order or other directive issued by the chief engineer seeking the installation of approved smoke detectors in accordance with said Section 26C is received by such owner. 
(Code 1963, § 6-18A)  
Sec. 5-7. - Fire alarm signal boxes. 
No person shall open any of the signal boxes connected with the fire alarm telegraph except in case of fire, or interfere in any way with said boxes by breaking, cutting, injuring or defacing the same, or tamper or meddle with said boxes or any part thereof; nor shall any person interfere with the poles by which the wires of the fire alarm telegraph are supported, by breaking, cutting, injuring or defacing them, or by posting placards or bills upon them, or in any other manner. 
(Code 1963, § 12-38) 
Cross reference— Graffiti and damage to public property, § 9-47; burglar alarms and security alarm systems, § 10-31 et seq.  
Sec. 5-8. - Demolition and fire details. 
Where any contractor is doing demolition work in the city, and where said work is taking place within 100 feet of a dwelling unit or other building, and where the safety, health and welfare of the general public is concerned, said contractor shall produce at his or her own expense sufficient fire detail furnished by the fire department. 
Where any contractor is doing demolition work in the city, and where said work its taking place in excess of 100 feet from a dwelling unit or other building, and where the safety, health and welfare of the general public is concerned, the chief engineer of the fire department shall determine if a fire detail is required. If required, said contractor shall produce at his or her own expense sufficient fire detail furnished by the fire department. 
(Code 1963, § 6-18C; Ord. No. 2001-6, 4-19-2001) 
Cross reference— Demolition of buildings at fires, § 5-36; demolition review ordinance, § 7-28; demolition of buildings, § 11-105.  
Sec. 5-9. - Compliance with orders of fire officers. 
All persons not members of the fire department are hereby enjoined and required to obey the orders and directions of the officer in command at any fire, and to render their services if ordered so to do by him or her. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be liable to a fine in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Code 1963, § 6-20)  
Sec. 5-10. - Obstruction of fire prevention bureau personnel. 
Any person that fails to cooperate fully in carrying out the provisions of this chapter or in any way obstructs the chief of fire prevention or any member of the fire prevention bureau in the performance of his or her duties shall be liable to the fine prescribed in section 1-11. 
(Code 1963, § 6-19) 
Cross reference— Disorderly conduct in city council chamber, § 9-16 et seq.  
Sec. 5-11. - Prohibition of indoor pyrotechnic displays. 
(a)  A person, firm, corporation, association or other entity may not use any indoor pyrotechnic material, as defined by 527 CMR 2.03, in the City of Somerville. 
(b)  A person, firm, corporation, association or other entity is not eligible to apply for or obtain any permit for the use of any indoor pyrotechnic display pursuant to G. L. c. 148, § 39A or other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation. 
(c)  The fire department and police department are the enforcing personnel for this section, by a non-criminal disposition, pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws c. 40, § 21D. 
(d)  Any person, firm, corporation, association or other entity violating this section shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. 
(e)  Each violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(f)  All fines assessed under this chapter shall be payable to the City of Somerville. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit the use of other lawful methods of abating violations of this section, including, but not limited to, application for equitable relief from a court of law. 
(Ord. No. 2003-03, 3-27-2003; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 3, 7-14-2005)  
Secs. 5-12—5-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Residency requirement, § 2-310 et seq.; transfers to fire department, § 10-2. 
State Law reference— Provisions relating to fire departments in cities, M.G.L.A. c. 48, § 44A et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-31. - Fire department organization. 
(a)  The fire department shall consist of a chief engineer, and not more than the following: seven deputy chiefs, four district chiefs, ten captains, 31 lieutenants, a fire apparatus superintendent, and as many other officers and members as the city shall from time to time determine; provided, however, that all appointments and promotions must be submitted by the mayor and subject to approval by the city council. The chief shall devote his or her full time to the position. 
(b)  Each engine company shall consist of not more than 20 men/women and shall be organized as follows: one captain, three lieutenants, and 16 firefighters. 
(c)  Each ladder company shall consist of not more than 20 men/women and shall be organized as follows: one captain, three lieutenants, and 16 firefighters. 
(Code 1963, § 6-1; Ord. No. 1988-10, 6-23-88; Ord. No. 1997-3, 5-6-97)  
Sec. 5-32. - Fire department salaries. 
The salary of the chief engineer of the fire department is hereby fixed at twice maximum salary of a private, as such latter salary may be from time to time set. The salaries of all other officers and members of the fire department shall be those established from time to time by agreement pursuant to collective bargaining or in the absence of such agreement, shall be those established by the most recently expired collective bargaining agreement. 
(Code 1963, § 6-2)  
Sec. 5-33. - Chief engineer duties. 
(a)  Generally. The chief engineer shall be held responsible to the mayor for the discipline, good order and proper conduct of the officers and men constituting the department and for the good condition of all houses, reservoirs, engines, hoses, hose carriages, hooks and ladders, trucks, and all apparatus and furniture connected with the department. He or she shall have the superintendence and control of the engine and hose houses and other buildings used for the department, of the furniture therein, and of the engines and apparatus, and other property appertaining to the department; and shall make regulations for the proper government of the department, and for the extinguishing of fires, subject to the approval of the mayor. 
(b)  Aid to other cities. The chief engineer or whoever exercises the power of the chief engineer is authorized in his or her discretion from time to time, to extend the aid of the fire department in extinguishing fire in another city, town or fire district. 
(c)  Testing of fire hydrants. In furtherance of his or her duties as aforesaid, the chief engineer shall cause each fire hydrant within the city to be tested annually by members of the department and shall report the results of each test to the mayor and the superintendent of the division of waterworks, including his or her recommendations for the correction of any deficiencies discovered by any such test. Upon receipt of any such report or deficiencies, the superintendent shall forthwith cause such deficiencies to be corrected and shall report his or her actions to the mayor and the chief engineer. 
(Code 1963, § 6-3) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to provide aid to other cities, towns and fire districts, M.G.L.A. c. 48, § 59A.  
Sec. 5-34. - Fire wards. 
The chief engineer and deputy chief engineer shall also be fire wards of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 6-4)  
Sec. 5-35. - Control and command at fires. 
The chief engineer shall have the sole and absolute control and command over all members of the department and all other persons present at fires, and shall take prompt measures to arrange the engines and other apparatus in the most advantageous manner, and issue such orders as he or she may deem necessary. In case of the absence of the chief engineer at a fire, the deputy chief, and if he or she is not present the district chief or in his or her absence the officer designated to act in that capacity shall during such absence, have and exercise all the power and authority of the chief engineer, and shall perform the duties of his or her office; and if no engineer or chief be present, the captain who first arrives with his or her apparatus at a fire shall exercise such authority until the arrival of a superior officer, and until the arrival of one of said officers such authority is to be exercised by the lieutenant who first arrives with his or her apparatus. 
(Code 1963, § 6-5)  
Sec. 5-36. - Demolition of buildings at fires. 
Whenever it shall be determined at any fire, by the officer in command to be necessary to pull down or demolish any building in order to prevent the spreading of fire, the same shall be done by his or her order, in accordance with the law. 
(Code 1963, § 6-6) 
Cross reference— Demolition and fire details; § 5-8; demolition review ordinance, § 7-28; demolition of buildings, § 11-105.  
Sec. 5-37. - Control of fire alarm signal boxes. 
The chief engineer shall determine to whom shall be entrusted the keys of the signal boxes connected with the fire alarm telegraph, and shall prepare rules, in accordance with which alarms of fire shall be given. The location of signal boxes, gongs and other instruments connected with the fire alarm system shall be subject to his or her approval. 
(Code 1963, § 6-21) 
Cross reference— Burglar alarms and security alarm systems, § 10-31 et seq.  
Sec. 5-38. - Inspection of buildings. 
It shall be the duty of the chief engineer to take cognizance of every building in which any steam engine shall be used, and of all buildings in the city in process of erection or alteration, and to make a record of such thereof as, in his or her judgment, may from any cause, in case of fire, be dangerous, and report the same to the mayor forthwith; and whenever, in his or her opinion, any chimney, hearth, oven, stove, stove-pipe, fireframe, or other fixture, or any explosive or inflammable fluid or material, or whatever else may give just cause of alarm, should be altered, repaired or removed, he or she shall forthwith notify and direct the owner, tenant or occupant of the premises upon which the same is situated to alter, repair or remove the same, as he or she shall direct. And in case such owner, tenant or occupant shall refuse or neglect so to do, he or she shall cause the same to be removed, altered or repaired at the expense of such owner, tenant or occupant, who shall also be liable to a penalty in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Code 1963, § 6-18) 
Cross reference— Inspection of buildings, § 11-103.  
Sec. 5-39. - Records and reports. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the chief engineer to keep, or cause to be kept, fair and exact rolls of the respective companies, specifying the name, date of birth, occupation and residence, and the date of the admission and discharge of each member of the department, and to keep an accurate account of all property belonging to the department. 
(b)  The chief engineer shall, at the close of each month, make to the city council a detailed report of all losses and accidents by fire that may have occurred within the city, with all ascertainable causes thereof, and of the number of buildings and description of property destroyed or injured, the amount of insurance thereon, and the names of the owners. 
(Code 1963, § 6-7)  
Sec. 5-40. - Duty hours. 
(a)  The hours of duty of all members of the fire department shall be those established from time to time by agreement pursuant to collective bargaining, or in the absence of such agreement, shall be those established by the most recently expired collective bargaining agreement. 
(b)  The officer having charge of the firefighting force shall have full authority to summon and keep on duty any or all members of the firefighting force while the conflagration continues. 
(Code 1963, § 6-8)  
Sec. 5-41. - Vacation leave. 
Vacation shall be granted to members of the fire department to such extent, and upon such terms and conditions, as shall be established from time to time by agreement pursuant to collective bargaining, or in the absence of such agreement, shall be granted as established by the most recently expired collective bargaining agreement. 
(Code 1963, § 6-9) 
Cross reference— Vacation leave, §§ 2-314—2-317.  
Sec. 5-42. - Injury leave. 
(a)  Injury leave shall be granted to members of the fire department to such extent, and upon such terms and conditions, as shall be established from time to time by agreement pursuant to collective bargaining, or in the absence of such agreement, shall be as established by the most recently expired collective bargaining agreement. 
(b)  A substitute in the fire department incapacitated on account of injury caused while in the performance of duty in said department, and such injury being certified to by the city physician, shall receive pay equal to that paid to a member of the department during his or her first year, for a period not exceeding 60 days provided however that the chief engineer of the fire department, with the approval of the city physician and mayor, may grant such extension of time as may be deemed necessary. 
(Code 1963, § 6-10) 
Cross reference— Injury leave, § 10-6.  
Sec. 5-43. - Sick leave. 
(a)  Members of the fire department absent from duty on account of sickness, and such sickness being certified to by the city physician, shall be entitled to full pay for not more than 20-days' absence on any one occasion; provided, however, that the chief engineer of the fire department, with the approval of the city physician and mayor, may grant such extension of time as may be deemed necessary. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section the maximum number of sick leave days for which any member of the department shall be charged for any one calendar week, Sunday through Saturday, shall be five. 
(Code 1963, § 6-11) 
Cross reference— Sick leave, §§ 2-318, 10-7.  
Sec. 5-44. - Exceptions to injury or sick leave. 
No pay will be allowed under section 5-42 or 5-43 if the sickness or injury is feigned, simulated, exaggerated, or arises from carelessness, improper or vicious conduct, excessive indulgence of appetite or other bad habits, or from improper practices, or if the sick or injured person shall fraudulently by concealment, false statement, or otherwise seek to deceive or mislead the attending physician or surgeon in relation to his or her case, or if he or she refuses or neglects to conform to the instructions of the attending physician or surgeon. 
(Code 1963, § 6-12)  
Sec. 5-45. - Medical panel for fire fighters and police officers. 
Pursuant to Section 100, Chapter 41 of the General Laws, a panel is hereby set up consisting of the mayor, the city solicitor or a person designated in writing by the city solicitor to act for him or her and such physician as the mayor shall in writing appoint, to determine whether it is appropriate under the circumstances for the city to indemnify a firefighter or police officer, or someone in his or her behalf, for such hospital or medical expenses as enumerated in said General Law. 
(Code 1963, § 4-64) 
Cross reference— Police, Ch. 10; board of health membership, § 6-16 et seq.  
Sec. 5-46. - Funeral leave. 
Funeral leave for members of the fire department shall be granted to such extent, and upon such terms and conditions, as shall be established from time to time by agreement pursuant to collective bargaining, or in the absence of such agreement, shall be as established by the most recently expired collective bargaining agreement. 
(Code 1963, § 6-13) 
Cross reference— Bereavement leave, § 2-319. 
Cross reference— Funeral leave, § 10-9.  
Sec. 5-47. - Agreement to be signed by fire fighters. 
Every member of the fire department shall sign the following agreement, to be deposited with the chief engineer: 
"I, _______ having been appointed a member of the Somerville fire department, hereby agree to abide by the ordinances of the city, the orders of the mayor, and the regulations of the chief engineer"; 
and no member shall be entitled to any compensation until he or she has signed the same, and unless he or she signs within ten days from his or her appointment, he or she shall be deemed to have declined such appointment. 
(Code 1963, § 6-14)  
Sec. 5-48. - Residency requirements. 
Residence requirements for members of the fire department shall be those established from time to time by agreement pursuant to collective bargaining, or in the absence of such agreement, shall be as established by the most recently expired collective bargaining agreement. 
(Code 1963, § 6-15) 
Cross reference— Residency requirement, § 2-310.  
Sec. 5-49. - Badges. 
Every member of the fire department shall wear at all fires such badge as the chief engineer shall prescribe; and no person without such badge shall, except by permission of the officer in charge, enter within the lines formed at any fire. 
(Code 1963, § 6-16)  
Sec. 5-50. - Clothing allowance. 
A clothing allowance shall be paid to each member of the fire department in such sum and upon such terms and conditions as shall be established from time to time by agreement pursuant to collective bargaining, or in the absence of such agreement, shall be as established by the most recently expired collective bargaining agreement. 
(Code 1963, § 6-22) 
Cross reference— Clothing allowance, § 10-14.  
Sec. 5-51. - Work shifts. 
(a)  Whereas the members of the fire department work a 42-hour workweek, the workweek shall be divided into two work shifts; a day work shift and a night work shift. 
(b)  The day work shift shall begin at 8:00 a.m., on any said day, and end at 6:00 p.m. of the same day. 
(c)  The night work shift shall begin at 6:00 p.m., on any said day, and end at 8:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the chief engineer of the fire department to assign as many officers and men to each work shift that he or she deems necessary for the proper protection of the lives and property of the citizens of the city. 
(e)  In order to enhance the safety of the citizens of the city and protection of their property, and in order to preserve and protect the health and safety of the officers and members of the fire department, no fire company in the city shall at any time have fewer than three men assigned to it. When there are not sufficient men on duty at a given station to satisfy the aforesaid requirement, the chief engineer shall have the power to reassign men on duty at other stations in order to satisfy the minimum manpower requirement. 
(Code 1963, § 6-23)  
Secs. 5-52—5-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION 
 
Sec. 5-76. - Fire prevention bureau. 
There is hereby created within the fire department a bureau of fire prevention which shall be headed by a deputy chief for fire prevention. The fire prevention bureau shall enforce all laws, orders, and ordinances related to the following: 
(1)  Inspection of potential fire hazards; 
(2)  Abatement of existing fire hazards; 
(3)  Storage and use of explosives and flammables; 
(4)  Control of the means and adequacy of exits in case of fire from factories, schools, hotels, lodging houses, hospitals, churches, halls, theatres, and all other places where numbers of persons meet, work, live or congregate; 
(5)  Educational fire prevention programs; 
(6)  Regulation of the installation and maintenance of automatic and fire extinguishing equipment. 
(Code 1963, § 6-16A)  
Sec. 5-77. - Fire prevention bureau organization. 
The bureau of fire prevention shall consist of a deputy chief, who shall be its head, two other officers, one private and a clerk. No member of the regular firefighting force shall be eligible for assignment to the bureau unless and until he or she shall have passed a written examination prepared and administered by the chief for fire prevention. All members of the bureau shall be required to take any and all educational courses or practical courses of instruction which the chief of the fire prevention from time to time shall direct. The members of the bureau may return to the regular firefighting force at any time; and they shall be entitled to take any promotional examination for which they may be eligible. 
(Code 1963, § 6-16A)  
Sec. 5-78. - Inspections. 
(a)  The chief for fire prevention or any member of the bureau authorized by him or her, shall have the authority to enter any building, structure or premises within the city for the purposes of making inspections or investigations at reasonable hours; provided, however, that the authority conferred by this section shall not apply to the entry of a private residence unless written notice is served on the occupant thereof. Such written notice shall contain a statement of the time that the inspection will be made and its purpose. 
(b)  Inspections and investigations authorized by this section shall be for the purpose of reporting and correcting fire hazards, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Disrepair; 
(2)  Age and dilapidated condition; 
(3)  Faulty and unapproved construction; 
(4)  Inadequate fire escapes or lack of egress; 
(5)  Inadequate fire alarm or sprinkler protection; 
(6)  Regulation of the maintenance of fire escapes; 
(7)  Materials and buildings especially susceptible to fire; 
(8)  Conditions endangering other property or occupants thereof. 
(c)  The chief for fire prevention shall cause all buildings, structures and premises to be inspected as often as he or she shall determine necessary to the enforcement of this section. He or she shall further cause to be inspected not less than twice a year, all hazardous manufacturing processes, storage or installations of gases, chemicals, oils, explosives, and flammable materials. 
(Code 1963, § 6-16A) 
Cross reference— Inspection of buildings, § 11-103.  
Sec. 5-79. - Initial staff. 
All personnel assigned to the duties of fire prevention prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives shall thereafter remain within the bureau of fire prevention and shall not be deprived of any rights or privileges as a consequence thereof; provided, however, that any firefighter may voluntarily transfer out of said bureau at any time. 
(Code 1963, § 6-18B)  
Sec. 5-80. - Violations. 
(a)  Where violations of the provisions of this division or of other applicable laws, orders or ordinances relating to fire safety are found to exist, the chief of fire prevention shall serve a written order to correct the violations upon the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for such violations. Said order shall be served by hand or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known and usual place of address of the violator. The order shall specify a time limit for correcting the violations, which shall be not more than 60 days. In cases of extreme emergency, the inspector shall have the power to require compliance immediately upon service of the order. 
(b)  Any person who shall fail to comply with an order to correct a violation shall be liable to the fine prescribed in section 1-11 and each day that such violation continues to exist. 
(Code 1963, § 6-16A)  
Secs. 5-81—5-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONNECTION OF PRIVATE FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS TO CITY FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1990-11, adopted Nov. 8, 1990, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—7 as Ch. 5, Art. III, §§ 5-91—5-97, was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 5-91. - Private fire alarm systems. 
Private fire alarm systems ("interior systems") may be connected to the Somerville fire alarm system (the "municipal system") after obtaining prior written approval from the superintendent of electric lines and lights. Detailed plans of the interior fire alarm system must be submitted to the superintendent of electric lines and lights and the fire prevention bureau of the fire department, and must be approved by them. The fee for direct connection to the municipal system shall be $400.00 per installation and $400.00 per calendar year (or part thereof, prorated monthly) thereafter, payable on or before January 2 of each year (or upon installation in the middle of a calendar year). Fees shall be payable at the office of the superintendent of electric lines and lights. 
(Ord. No. 1990-11, § 1, 11-8-90; Ord. No. 2002-12, 11-14-2002)  
Sec. 5-92. - Installation and maintenance. 
(a)  All wires and other material necessary for connection to the property shall be supplied and installed by the owner. The point of service connection shall be determined by the superintendent of electric lines and lights. 
(b)  The owner shall maintain all wires and other equipment on said property. If defects in material or installation develop in any part of the interior system, the superintendent of electric lines and lights, after notifying the owner, may disconnect any or all of the interior system from the municipal system until necessary repairs are made. Wiring from the point of service connection shall be maintained by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 1990-11, § 2, 11-8-90)  
Sec. 5-93. - Disconnection. 
(a)  If any person requests that his or her private fire alarm system be disconnected for the purpose of testing or maintenance of the alarm system, the charge shall be as follows: 
(1)  Between 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, no charge. 
(2)  Between 3:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day, Monday through Friday, one and one-half times the salary of any employee(s) performing the work for the period between disconnection and reconnection of the system, in no event less than the salary(s) for a four-hour period. 
(3)  Any time on Saturday, one and one-half times the salary of any employee(s) performing the work for the period between disconnection and reconnection of the system, in no event less than the salary(s) for a four-hour period. 
(4)  Any time on Sunday, twice the salary of any employee(s) performing the work for the period between disconnection and reconnection of the system, in no event less than the salary(s) for a four-hour period. 
(5)  Any time on a holiday, as designated by the applicable state, local or county government, two and one-half the salary of any employee(s) performing the work for the time between disconnection and reconnection of the system, in no event less than the salary(s) for a four-hour period. 
(b)  All requests for disconnecting the alarm system for the purpose of testing or maintenance must be made at least 48 hours in advance. Failure to do so will result in a charge of $50.00; except that up to two disconnections within a five-day period, if required for emergency repairs, shall be exempt from such charge. 
(Ord. No. 1990-11, § 3, 11-8-90; Ord. No. 2002-15, 12-12-2002)  
Sec. 5-94. - Superintendent of lights and lines to develop regulations. 
The superintendent of electric lines and lights may promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary for implementation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1990-11, § 4, 11-8-90)  
Sec. 5-95. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-02, adopted Apr. 23, 2009, repealed § 5-95, which pertained to exemption for churches and hospitals and derived from Ord. No. 1990-11, § 5, adopted Nov. 8, 1990.  
Sec. 5-96. - Emergency contacts. 
The owner shall be required to supply the fire alarm division of the department of public works division of electric lines and lights with a list of three names and telephone numbers of persons authorized to assume responsibility for said property. The owner shall ensure that this is accurate and up-to-date. 
(Ord. No. 1990-11, § 6, 11-8-90)  
Sec. 5-97. - Quarterly tests. 
The owner shall ensure that a complete and satisfactory test of the system is done on a quarterly basis as required by applicable fire code laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1990-11, § 7, 11-8-90)  
Sec. 5-98. - False alarms. 
(a)  "Nuisance alarm activation" shall mean any activation of an automatic fire alarm system (AFAS) to which the fire department responds caused by mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or lack of proper maintenance, or any alarm activated by a cause that cannot be determined. Alarms caused by the failure of maintenance personnel to properly disable the system prior to starting work shall be included as a nuisance alarm. A series of such activations attributable to the same cause and occurring under circumstances attributable to the same cause and occurring under circumstances beyond the control of the responsible alarm user shall be deemed a single "nuisance alarm activation." 
(b)  Any user of an alarm system which transmits a fourth or subsequent nuisance alarm activation signal in a calendar year shall be assessed a fine in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. Each day after any such nuisance alarm activation shall be considered a new violation. An alarm system user shall be assessed said fine until he or she can demonstrate to the fire chief that the causes of the nuisance alarm activation have been remedied. 
(c)  No fine shall be assessed and no warning given in the following circumstances: (1) Where the AFAS was activated by an actual fire; (2) Where the AFAS was activated by smoke from a source such as burning food or an overheated motor or overheated electrical appliance or other equipment; (3) where someone, with reasonable cause, activates a manual pull station. 
(d)  The city, at its election, may institute civil or criminal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2003-14, 9-11-2003; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 4, 7-14-2005)  
Chapter 6 - HEALTH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; animals, Ch. 3; medical panel for fire fighters and police officers, § 5-45; pasteurization of milk and cream, § 8-9; placing trash in public trash containers, § 9-53; medical examinations of persons arrested under the influence of drugs, § 10-5; collection of ashes and offal, § 11-30; household trash and rubbish collection, § 11-31; passengers with contagious diseases, § 13-14. 
State Law reference— Health generally, M.G.L.A. c. 111; crimes against public health, M.G.L.A. c. 270. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 6-1, 6-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-11, §§ 5, 6, adopted July 14, 2005, deleted §§ 6-1, 6-2, which pertained to cigarettes, tobacco and smoking products; smoking in restaurants, respectively and derived from Code 1963, § 12-83. Section 6-2 bore no history note.  
Sec. 6-3. - Smoking in parks. 
(a)  Definitions: 
Monument: A memorial stone or a building erected in remembrance of a person or event, which term shall include, but not be limited to, such monuments in publicly owned cemeteries. 
Playground: Land used for and equipped with facilities for recreation. 
Public park: Any outdoor fields, or reservations to which the public is invited and permitted. This includes, but is not limited to any public park adjacent to any public school or city operated building in the city. 
Scheduled: City sponsored or reserved through permitting or licensing with the city. 
Smoking: Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted tobacco product in any manner or in any form. 
Tobacco product: Any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to: cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, or electronic cigarettes, electronic cigars, electronic pipes, electronic hookah, or other similar products, regardless of nicotine content, that rely on vaporization or aerosolization. "Tobacco product" includes any component or part of a tobacco product. "Tobacco product" does not include any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration either as a tobacco use cessation product or for other medical purposes and which is being marketed and sold or prescribed solely for the approved purpose. 
(b)  Conduct prohibited. 
(1)  Smoking tobacco products by any person shall be unlawful within 50 feet of any person who participates, attends, assembles, or congregates at any scheduled athletic event, scheduled artistic event, scheduled special event, scheduled performance, scheduled festival, scheduled musical event, or scheduled concert in a public park under the control of the city. 
(2)  Smoking tobacco products by any person shall be unlawful within 50 feet of any monument or memorial located on public property under the control of the city. 
(3)  Smoking tobacco products by any person shall be unlawful in, and within 50 feet of, all school grounds, playgrounds, public parks, and tot-lots located on public property under the control of the city. 
(4)  Enforcement and penalties: Noncriminal disposition. The specific penalty for each violation of this section shall be as set forth in section 1-11(b) of this Code. Any fines imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall inure to the city. For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be enforcing officers: Police officers; the health department and inspectional services department or their designees. 
(Ord. No. 2003-06, 5-22-2003; Ord. No. 2007-07, 5-10-2007; Ord. No. 2017-13 , 11-9-2017)  
Secs. 6-4—6-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF HEALTH[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Mayor to appoint board of health, § 21; board of health generally, § 38. 
Cross reference— Medical panel for fire fighters and police officers, § 5-45. 
State Law reference— City and town boards of health generally, M.G.L.A. c. 111, § 26 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-16. - Board of health membership. 
No member of the city council shall be eligible to an appointment to the board of health. 
(Code 1963, § 4-11)  
Sec. 6-17. - Director of the board of health. 
There shall be a director of the board of health, who shall hold office for a term of one year from July first of the year of appointment and until another shall be appointed and qualified in his or her place. Said director shall be appointed by the mayor upon recommendation by the board of health, by a majority vote, subject to confirmation by the city council, and may be removed, prior to expiration of his or her term, for cause by the board of health. A vacancy shall be filled in like manner to an appointment. 
(Code 1963, § 4-11A; Ord. No. 1988-14, 8-25-88)  
Sec. 6-18. - Director of the board of health duties. 
The director of the board of health shall devote full time to his or her position, and shall have the immediate direction and control of all executive and administrative business within the board of health, subject to the direction of the board of health, together with such other duties and responsibilities as may from time to time be assigned to him or her by the board of health. 
(Code 1963, § 4-11A)  
Sec. 6-19. - Director of the board of health qualifications and term. 
(a)  The minimum qualifications for appointment to the position of director of the board of health shall be established and published by the board of health; provided, however, that no person shall be recommended or appointed to said position who does not meet all the following criteria: 
(1)  Holds a bachelor's degree; 
(2)  Has had post graduate work of at least one academic year equivalent to a master's degree in health or another of the health related sciences or in administration, or holds a master's degree, or doctorate in one of such subject areas. 
(b)  The initial term of office for the position of director of the board of health shall be concurrent with the annual fiscal year and shall encompass and extend for a period of three years. 
(Code 1963, § 4-11A)  
Sec. 6-20. - Annual report. 
The board of health shall annually, in the month of January, make a report to the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 4-12)  
Sec. 6-21. - Contagious diseases. 
The board of health shall provide medical attendance at hospitals for smallpox and other contagious diseases. 
(Code 1963, § 4-13)  
Sec. 6-22. - Assistance from other departments. 
The board of health may call upon the police department and other officers of the city to aid in the performance of its duties. 
(Code 1963, § 4-14)  
Sec. 6-23. - X-ray exams for those handling food. 
Every person now engaged in the processing, preparing, serving or handling of food shall have a chest X-ray examination and submit evidence of such X-ray to the board of health within one month and once every three years thereafter. 
(Code 1963, § 4-15)  
Sec. 6-24. - Dogs in outdoor seating areas of restaurants. 
The board of health is authorized to enact regulations governing the ability of restaurants with outdoor seating to allow dogs to accompany owners in the outdoor seating area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , 2-25-2016)  
Secs. 6-25—6-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CITY PHYSICIAN[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Mayor to appoint city physician, § 21; city physician generally, § 35. 
Cross reference— Bonds of certain officers held by mayor, § 2-61 et seq. 
State Law reference— Appointment of physician in certain towns, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 106A. 
 
Sec. 6-36. - City physician qualifications. 
The city physician shall be a graduate of a legally incorporated medical school. 
(Code 1963, § 4-23)  
Sec. 6-37. - City physician duties. 
The city physician shall render all professional services that may be required of him or her by the police department; examine candidates for appointment to any positions in the service of the city where a physical examination is required, as well as the condition of all officers absent from duty and cases of injury for which the city may become liable. He or she shall make a report to the city council annually, in the month of January, and in general perform all the duties and render all the services incumbent upon him or her by the laws of the commonwealth or the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 4-24)  
Sec. 6-38. - Assistant city physician. 
The city physician may delegate to an assistant, who shall be under his or her supervision and whose appointment shall be subject to the approval of the mayor, such part of his or her duties as may seem best for the efficient administration of his or her office, without any additional salary for himself or herself or such assistant. 
(Code 1963, § 4-25)  
Sec. 6-39. - Payment for medicine and prescriptions. 
The city physician shall not require any person as may have been under his or her care as city physician to pay for medicine prescribed by him or her. 
(Code 1963, § 4-26)  
Secs. 6-40—6-55. - Reserved  
ARTICLE IV. - BIOTECHNOLOGY RESEARCH[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Art. IV, §§ 6-56—6-69, was repealed by Ord. No. 1994-4, adopted Feb. 24, 1994. The article related to recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid research and was derived from Ord. No. 1981-12, §§ 1—11, 14. Ord. No. 1994-4 also added new §§ 6-56—6-70. 
 
Sec. 6-56. - Biotechnology ordinance. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Somerville Biotechnology Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1994-4, 2-24-94)  
Sec. 6-57. - Biotechnology ordinance purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article and the policy of the city to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city, through the regulation of all recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid (RDNA) research and all biological material therapies or diagnostics use, within the city's borders and to promote the development of clean and pollution-free industry. 
(Ord. No. 1994-4, 2-24-94)  
Sec. 6-58. - Biotechnology ordinance applicable to RDNA research. 
This article shall apply to all institutions in the city which use RDNA technology. This article shall require that all RDNA research and use be done only in strict conformity with the guidelines, hereinafter defined, as well as with all such other health regulations as the director of the board of health may from time to time promulgate. However, should a conflict arise between this article and the guidelines, this article shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 1994-4, 2-24-94)  
Sec. 6-59. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Guidelines are defined as: 
(1)  National Institutes of Health (NIH) Guidelines for Research Involving Recombinant DNA Molecules as published in the Federal Register of May 7, 1986. 
(2)  Except as limited by paragraph (3), below, any amendments, revisions or substitutions enacted subsequent to the above-referenced guidelines, including, but not limited to: Notices of Action under NIH Guidelines for Research Involving RDNA Molecules on August 24, 1987; July 29, 1988; October 26, 1988; March 13, 1989; March 1, 1990; September 12, 1990; July 18, 1991; October 15, 1991; November 21, 1991; January 28, 1992; and April 22, 1992. 
(3)  Amendments to (1) and (2), above, which are adopted by the NIH and approved by the Somerville Biosafety Committee (hereinafter "SBC"). Amendments not acted upon by the SBC within 60 days shall be deemed to be constructively approved. In the event that the NIH shall discontinue or abolish its guidelines, those guidelines in effect at the time of such discontinuance shall remain in effect in Somerville unless discontinued by a majority vote of the SBC. 
Institution: A single individual, group of individuals, association, organization, corporation, educational institution, or medical facility conducting RDNA research, RDNA development, RDNA production, or biological material therapies or diagnostics. 
Recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid (RDNA) and molecules and organisms and viruses containing RDNA: As defined in the NIH Guidelines promulgated in the Federal Register on May 7, 1986, and such amendments thereto unless otherwise disapproved by the Somerville Biosafety Committee. Biological materials therapies or diagnostics include, but are not limited to, living cell therapy. 
(Ord. No. 1994-4, 2-24-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-4.  
Sec. 6-60. - Biosafety committee. 
(a)  Establishment: A Somerville Biosafety Committee (SBC) shall be established for the purpose of overseeing the establishment and conduct of all RDNA research or use and biological material therapies or diagnostics, in the city. 
(b)  Composition; terms of members; vacancies: The SBC shall be composed of the environmental protection officer, the director of the board of health or his/her designee, a representative from the fire department, a member of the planning department and the office of housing and community development ("OHCD"), an expert in the biotechnology field from the academic community, and two members representative of the citizenry of Somerville, all so appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. The membership should be broad-based and as representative as possible. The members appointed by the mayor shall serve for a three-year term. Of the original appointees to the SBC, the expert from the academic community shall serve for two years and the two members representative of the citizenry of Somerville shall serve one for three years and one for four years as the mayor shall so decide. Any person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the unexpired term of that vacancy. 
(c)  Professional assistance authorized; costs: The SBC, environmental protection officer, and the director of the board of health are empowered to jointly retain competent professional assistance in carrying out their duties under this article. 
(d)  Responsibilities. Specific responsibilities of the SBC shall include: 
(1)  Establishing policies, procedures, and criteria to aid in the implementation of this article. 
(2)  Reviewing reports, applications, and recommendations by the institutional biosafety committees (IBC), and all other relevant documents. 
(3)  Conducting site visits to proposed and permitted facilities. 
(4)  Reviewing manuals and worker training programs, approving health-safety programs and contingency plans, and monitoring the procedures required by this article. 
(5)  Establishing procedures for individuals reporting violations of this article, the guidelines or any health regulations to the SBC. 
(6)  Providing assistance to institutions during the permitting process. 
(7)  Approving all amendments to the guidelines before implementation. 
(Ord. No. 1994-4, 2-24-94)  
Sec. 6-61. - RDNA permits. 
All institutions proposing to employ RDNA technology must obtain a permit from the SBC and shall comply with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Somerville. The institution shall submit an application for a permit to the SBC containing the following information: 
(a)  A statement by the institution that it shall comply with the provisions of this article, the NIH guidelines and all federal and state laws. 
(b)  A written agreement that reasonable inspections of facilities and pertinent records by the SBC shall be allowed. 
(c)  A health and safety manual which contains all procedures relevant to use of RDNA at all levels of containment in use at the particular facility. 
(d)  A plan for waste disposal in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws. 
(e)  A training program of safeguards and procedures for personnel using RDNA. 
(f)  An emergency response contingency plan which addresses containment during fire or other emergencies, and the education/safeguarding of first responders such as fire fighters. 
(g)  An appropriate medical and environmental surveillance program in accordance with the guidelines. 
A permit to employ RDNA technology shall be issued to the applicant if all of the above information is completed and complies with current technical standards. The SBC may establish fees for the issuance of permits, if necessary to cover professional assistance or other costs incurred. 
(Ord. No. 1994-4, 2-24-94)  
Sec. 6-62. - Institutional biosafety committee. 
The institutional biosafety committee ("IBC") shall be established in accordance with the guidelines. The IBC shall be the final arbiter within an institution with regard to the implementation of this article and the guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1994-4, 2-24-94)  
Sec. 6-63. - Institutional biosafety committee reports. 
All minutes of IBC meetings shall be forwarded to the director of the board of health and the SBC. Copies of all reports submitted to outside regulatory agencies, including but not limited to NIH, shall be submitted to the SBC in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 1994-4, 2-24-94)  
Sec. 6-64. - RDNA accident, illness and violation reports. 
The permit-holder shall report, within eight hours, to the SBC any significant problems with or violations of the guidelines or this article and any significant RDNA-related accidents or illnesses. 
The permit-holder shall demonstrate how emergency measures complied with the contingency plan. The permit-holder shall also provide the SBC, within 14 days, a written report describing how emergency measures complied with the contingency plan, and what actions shall be taken to correct the problem or violation and prevent the problem or violation from recurring. 
(Ord. No. 1994-4, 2-24-94)  
Sec. 6-65. - Rodent and insect control. 
Effective rodent and insect control programs shall be in place on premises where RDNA use takes place. 
(Ord. No. 1994-4, 2-24-94)  
Sec. 6-66. - BL4 containment. 
RDNA use requiring containment defined by the guidelines as "BL4" shall not be permitted in Somerville. 
(Ord. No. 1994-4, 2-24-94)  
Sec. 6-67. - Emergency procedure. 
(a)  Any accidental release which represents a potential hazard to employees or the public shall be reported to the SBC, board of health and the fire department immediately, and in no case more than 24 hours after the permit holder knew or should have known about any such release. 
(b)  The mayor may, in his or her discretion, if satisfied that a dangerous condition exists relating to any RDNA research, declare an emergency and take action as he or his or her designee deems necessary to remedy the emergency. 
(Ord. No. 1994-4, 2-24-94)  
Sec. 6-68. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any institution which violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  Once a permit has been issued, it may be revoked, suspended, or modified by the SBC upon determination by the SBC, after due notice and hearing, that the permit-holder has materially failed to comply with this article, the terms of the permit, or the guidelines. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the above, the SBC, upon a determination that any violation constitutes an immediate and severe threat to the public health and safety, may order the immediate closure of any premises or laboratory engaging in or contributing to such threat, without prior notice and hearing, but with subsequent notice and hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1994-4, 2-24-94; Ord. No. 2006-09, § D, 4-11-2006)  
Sec. 6-69. - Permit procedure. 
(a)  Applications for a permit under this article shall be made to the SBC on a form provided for that purpose, accompanied by the required fee, if any. When an application has been received in a completed form, as designated herein, a copy shall be forwarded to the city clerk by the SBC. The stamp of the city clerk shall designate the date of filing. Copies of the completed application shall be distributed to those boards and departments as determined by the SBC, which shall include, but not be limited to, the board of health, the environmental officer, OHCD, inspectional services division, the fire department and the planning board. 
(b)  The SBC shall meet to discuss the application within 45 days after the filing of such application with the city clerk and shall take final action on a completed application within 60 days after such completed application has been submitted. If no action is taken within the time permitted, the permit is deemed denied. 
(Ord. No. 1994-4, 2-24-94)  
Sec. 6-70. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1994-4, 2-24-94)  
Secs. 6-71—6-80. - Reserved  
ARTICLE V. - AIDS COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1990-12, adopted Nov. 14, 1990, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—7 as Ch. 6, Art. V, §§ 6-81—6-87, was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 6-81. - AIDS commission. 
There is hereby established a Somerville AIDS Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1990-12, § 1, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 6-82. - AIDS commission purpose. 
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is a potentially life-threatening condition caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). AIDS and HIV infection represent an international epidemic. It challenges our society medically, politically, economically, culturally and spiritually. People of all sexual orientations, races, cultures, ages, genders and linguistic groups are affected. There is serious concern regarding the growing impact of the epidemic on the community and City of Somerville and all of its residents. 
It shall be the function of the AIDS commission to: 
(1)  Raise and sustain the community's awareness about the extent and impact of the HIV/AIDS epidemic on Somerville's diverse racial, age, gender, sexual orientation and linguistic populations. 
(2)  Mobilize, involve and lead the community in confronting and responding to the epidemic. 
(3)  Evaluate the full implications of HIV/AIDS on the city. 
(4)  Recommend and/or develop policies, strategies and programs which respond to the needs of the community, such as: 
a.  Prevention of further HIV infection among city residents. 
b.  Provision for the medical and social needs of those affected by HIV disease. 
c.  Education of people at risk, service providers and the general public. 
d.  Protection against discrimination based on HIV/AIDS status, or perception of risk due to behavior or membership in any group or community. 
(Ord. No. 1990-12, § 2, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 6-83. - AIDS commission duties. 
The powers and duties of the AIDS commission shall be: 
(1)  To assess the current and projected impact of the HIV/AIDS epidemic on the city and all of its residents. 
(2)  To assess the current and projected needs of the city and its residents regarding HIV/AIDS services, education, prevention and other resources. 
(3)  To design, recommend and/or implement public and private programs, resources and services which respond to the needs identified. 
(4)  To develop recommendations and propose policies to all departments, divisions and agencies of the city, including the mayor and city council, as well as to public and private agencies. 
(5)  To coordinate HIV/AIDS-related activities of all departments, divisions and agencies of the city, as well as public and private agencies. 
(6)  To obtain from city departments, divisions and agencies, as well as public and private agencies, information necessary to carry out the activities of the commission. 
(7)  To initiate, coordinate and monitor the enactment of city, state and federal legislation which ensure adequate HIV-related programs, resources and services and which prevent HIV-related discrimination. 
(8)  To promote involvement of the city's populations in the community's response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic. 
(9)  To promote equal access for all people with HIV infection to public and private programs, resources and services. 
(10)  To advocate on behalf of individuals or groups confronted with discrimination based on HIV/AIDS status or perception of risk for HIV infection. 
(11)  To raise funds for the use of the commission; to accept, pursuant to Chapter 44, Section 53A of the General Laws, money, gifts and services for its exclusive use and expend or use the same; and, subject to appropriation or to receipt of such money, gifts, and services, employ clerical and technical assistants or consultants; to be consulted by and make recommendations to the mayor with regard to the employment of staff members; and to enter into contracts appropriate to the carrying on of its work. 
(12)  To conduct public programs and media events in City Hall, city libraries, and on other city-owned property as well as in other locations within and without the city. 
(13)  To hold membership in relevant state and national organizations. 
(14)  To recruit and recommend prospective commissioners for subsequent appointment by the mayor. 
(15)  To create and adopt bylaws which govern the activities of the commission. 
(16)  To promote involvement of the private sector in responding to the HIV/AIDS epidemic. 
(17)  To reevaluate the ever changing nature and challenges proposed by the epidemic and respond appropriately. 
The commission shall have, in addition to the powers, authority and duties granted to it by this article, such other powers, authority and duties as may be delegated or assigned to it from time to time by vote of the city council, with approval of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 1990-12, § 3, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 6-84. - AIDS commission membership. 
(a)  Membership. The AIDS commission shall consist of no less than 13 and no more than 21 members. 
(b)  Appointment. Members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. The mayor shall consider recommendations for appointment provided by the commission. 
(c)  Initial appointments. Staggered positions shall be created initially, such that one-third of the positions shall be vacated each year. To this end, there shall be seven one-year terms, seven two-year terms and seven three-year terms created retroactively to June 1, 1989. 
(d)  Terms. After the initial appointments, subsequent appointments to the commission shall be for three years. If a vacancy occurs prior to the expiration of a member's term, an appointment shall be made for the remainder of the term. 
(e)  Composition. The membership of the commission shall at all times be representative of the city's diversity, which includes but is not limited to people infected with HIV, racial and linguistic minorities, gay and bisexual people, health and human service providers, educators, clergy and representatives of the business community. Membership will include whenever possible at least one representative from each of the following city departments: health, human services, youth, schools, police and fire. 
(f)  Compensation. No commissioner shall receive compensation for his or her service on the commission but shall be reimbursed, subject to availability of funds, for his or her actual expenses reasonably and necessarily incurred in performance of his or her official duties. 
(g)  Conflict of interest. If any commission member or alternate is employed or to be employed by the city or to have directly or indirectly a financial interest in any contract with the city, except those employees specifically designated in subsection (e), the classification of "special municipal employee" should be obtained from the city council; and all other requirements as set forth under Chapter 268A of the General Laws shall be met. 
(Ord. No. 1990-12, § 4, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 6-85. - AIDS commission qualifications. 
At the time of appointment, commissioners must either be residents of the city or employed in the city in positions which serve the city. If a commissioner loses this status during his or her appointment, the position of said commissioner shall be automatically vacated upon certification to the mayor by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1990-12, § 5, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 6-86. - AIDS commission staff qualifications. 
(a)  Prospective staff of the commission shall have the demonstrated ability to work cooperatively with members of diverse populations, as described in section 6-84(e). 
(b)  Prospective staff shall have demonstrated qualifications appropriate for the position being filled. 
(Ord. No. 1990-12, § 6, 11-14-90)  
Sec. 6-87. - Recordkeeping. 
(a)  Record keeping and rules. The commission shall keep a permanent record of its resolutions, transactions and determinations, and may adopt and amend such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this article and prescribe such forms as it shall deem desirable and necessary for the regulations of its affairs and the conduct of its business. The commission shall file a copy of any such rules and regulations with the city clerk. 
(b)  Confidentiality of records. All commission records shall be public except those that are necessary to ensure privacy rights under other local, state or federal laws and those records that must be kept confidential in compliance with laws and rules of evidence. 
(Ord. No. 1990-12, § 7, 11-14-90)  
Chapter 7 - HOUSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 5; public works, Ch. 11; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 12. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Posting of name and address of owner or agent. 
(a)  An owner of a dwelling which is rented for residential use, who does not reside therein and who does not employ a manager or agent for such dwelling who resides therein, shall post and maintain or cause to be posted and maintained on such dwelling adjacent to the mailboxes for such dwelling or elsewhere in the interior of such dwelling in a location on the entry level visible to the residents and reasonably likely to be readily accessed by the residents a notice, constructed of durable material, not less than 20 square inches in size, bearing his or her name, address and telephone number. If the owner is a realty trust or partnership, the name, address and telephone number of the managing trustee or partner shall be posted. If the owner is a corporation, the name, address and telephone number of the president of the corporation shall be posted. 
Where the owner employs a manager or agent who does not reside in such dwelling, such manager or agent's name, address and telephone number shall also be included in the notice. 
All notices pursuant to this section shall include a statement, on a form prescribed by the city, that a tenant who believes that there is a health code, building code, fire code, or sanitary code violation may arrange for a code inspection by contacting the City of Somerville Constituent Service Department. Such notice shall provide the phone number and address for the City of Somerville Constituent Service Department. 
(b)  Enforcement. The penalty for violation of any provision of this section shall be in accordance with section 1-11(b) of the Somerville Code of Ordinances. Each day on which a violation exists shall be deemed a separate violation. There shall be at least seven days between violations issued for offenses in violation of the provisions of this section. The provisions of this section may be enforced in accordance with the noncriminal disposition process of M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D, provided that this section shall not preclude the City of Somerville from proceeding to restrain a violation by injunction. The superintendent of ISD may promulgate written rules and regulations necessary to implement and enforce the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Effective date of section. This section shall take effect 60 days from the date of passage. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03 , 4-27-2017)  
Secs. 7-2—7-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC DISTRICTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The official map designating the historic districts in the City of Somerville is not printed in this article but is on file in the office of the city clerk. It is created by Ord. No. 1985-2, 3-7-85; Ord. No. 1989-6, 10-26-89; Ord. No. 2003-01, 2-27-03; Ord. No. 2010-03, 1-28-2010; Ord. No. 2010-07, 6-10-2010; Ord. No. 2010-08, 7-8-2010; Ord. No. 2010-13, 12-16-2010; Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-16-2010; Ord. No. 2011-04, 3-24-2011; Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-13-2011. 
State Law reference— Historic districts, M.G.L.A. c. 40C. 
 
Sec. 7-16. - Historic preservation and historic district policy. 
It is hereby declared a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement, preservation and use of historical resources or value is a public necessity and is required in the interest of education, prosperity, safety and welfare of the people. The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Protect, enhance and preserve cultural and historical resources, including those districts which represent or reflect elements of the city's cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history; 
(2)  Safeguard the city's historical and cultural heritage by improving historical and cultural resources and by creating historic districts; 
(3)  Foster wider public awareness of and pride in the accomplishments of the past; 
(4)  Encourage private efforts of citizens of the city in support of such purposes; 
(5)  Promote the use of historic districts as a stimulus to local business and industry; 
(6)  Enhance the city's image to residents, visitors and tourists and make the city a more attractive and desirable place in which to live and work. 
(Code 1963, § 18-1)  
Sec. 7-17. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Altered includes the words "rebuilt," "reconstructed," "restored," "removed" and "demolished" and the phrases "changed in exterior color" and "any alteration to exterior physical appearance or exterior architectural feature visible from a public way." 
Building means a combination of materials forming a shelter for persons, animals or property. 
Commission means the historic preservation commission created under this article. 
Constructed includes the words "built," "erected," "installed," "enlarged" and "moved," 
Exterior architectural feature means such portion of the exterior of a building or structure as is open to view from a public street, public way, public park or public body of water, including but not limited to the architectural style and general arrangement and setting thereof; the kind, color and texture of exterior building materials, the color of paint or other materials applied to exterior surfaces and the type and style of windows, doors, lights, signs and other appurtenant exterior fixtures. 
Historic district is an area designated in accordance with section 7-18 that contains one or more parcels or lots of land, or one or more buildings or structures on one or more parcels or lots of land. 
Person aggrieved means the applicant, an owner of adjoining property, an owner of property within the same historic district as property within 100 feet of said property lines and any charitable corporation in which one of its purposes is the preservation of historic structures or districts. 
Structure means a combination of materials other than a building, including a sign, fence, wall, hitching post, terrace, walk or driveway. 
(Code 1963, § 18-2) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-4.  
Sec. 7-18. - Historic districts. 
The city may, by ordinance adopted by two-thirds vote of the city council, establish historic districts subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Process. Prior to the establishment of any historic district in the city, an investigation and report on the historical and architectural significance of the buildings, structures or sites to be included in the proposed historic district or districts shall be made by an historic district study committee or by an historic district commission, as provided in this section. The buildings, structures or sites to be included in the proposed historic district may consist of one or more parcels or lots of land, or one or more buildings or structures on one or more parcels or lots of land. The study committee or the commission shall transmit copies of the report to the planning board, and to the state historical commission for their respective consideration and recommendations. Not less than 60 days after such transmittal the study committee or commission shall hold a public hearing on the report after due notice given at least 14 days prior to the date thereof, which shall include a written notice given by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the owners as they appear on the most recent real estate tax list of the board of assessors of all properties to be included in such district or districts. The committee shall submit a final report with its recommendations, a map of the proposed district or districts and a draft of a proposed ordinance to the city council. 
(2)  Formation of historic district study committee. An historic district study committee may be established in the city by vote of the city council for the purpose of making an investigation of the desirability of establishing an historic district or districts therein. The study committee shall consist of not less than three nor more than seven members appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council including: one member from two nominees submitted by the Somerville Historical Society or, in the absence thereof by the Society for the Preservation of New England Antiquities; one member from two nominees submitted by the local chapter of the American Institute of Architects; and one member from two nominees of the board of realtors, if any, covering the area. If, within 30 days after submission of a written request for nominees to any of the organizations herein named, no such nominations have been made, the appointing body may proceed to appoint the study committee without nominations by such organization. 
SOMERVILLE HISTORIC DISTRICTS 
Address 	Street 	Local 
Register 	Year 
Approved 	State 
Register 	National 
Register 
12 	Adams Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
15 	Adams Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
55-63 	Adams Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
37 	Albion Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
6 	Aldersey Street 	Yes 	2003 	Yes 	No 
8 	Aldersey Street 	Yes 	2003 	Yes 	No 
12 	Aldersey Street 	Yes 	2003 	Yes 	No 
14 	Aldersey Street 	Yes 	2003 	Yes 	No 
16 	Aldersey Street 	Yes 	2003 	Yes 	No 
18 	Aldersey Street 	Yes 	2003 	Yes 	No 
9-11 	Aldersey Street 	Yes 	2003 	Yes 	No 
17-19A 	Aldersey Street 	Yes 	2003 	Yes 	Yes 
1 	Arlington Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
10 	Arlington Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
36 	Atherton Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
40 	Atherton Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
47 	Atherton Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
48 	Atherton Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
53 	Atherton Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	Yes 
54 	Atherton Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
58 	Atherton Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
60 	Atherton Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
61 	Atherton Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
25-35 	Atherton Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
44-46 	Atherton Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
55-57 	Atherton Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
65-67 	Atherton Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
28 	Beacon Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
30 	Beacon Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
32 	Beacon Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
33 	Beacon Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
34 	Beacon Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
36 	Beacon Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
94 	Beacon Street 	Yes 	2017 	Yes 	No 
101 	Beacon Street 	Yes 	2017 	Yes 	No 
102 	Beacon Street 	Yes 	2017 	Yes 	No 
245 	Beacon Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
2 	Benton Road 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
3 	Benton Road 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
12 	Benton Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
18 	Benton Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
81 	Benton Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
85 	Benton Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
2 	Bigelow Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
17 	Bonner Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
65 	Boston Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
83 	Boston Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
91 	Boston Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
17 	Bow Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
26 	Bow Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
30 	Bow Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
33 	Bow Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
34 	Bow Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
36 	Bow Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
42 	Bow Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
46 	Bow Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
50 	Bow Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
56 	Bow Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
38-40 	Bow Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
39-49 	Bow Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
58-68 	Bow Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
9 	Brastow Avenue 	Yes 	2011 	Yes 	No 
257 	Broadway 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
333 	Broadway 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
392 	Broadway 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
394 	Broadway 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
396 	Broadway 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
398 	Broadway 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
400 	Broadway 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
404 	Broadway 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
419 	Broadway 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
438 	Broadway 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
838 	Broadway 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
1170 	Broadway 	Yes 	2011 	Yes 	No 
359-361 	Broadway 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
363-365 	Broadway 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
7 	Campbell Park 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
13 	Campbell Park 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
15 	Campbell Park 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
19 	Campbell Park 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
3-5 	Campbell Park 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
9-11 	Campbell Park 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
15 	Central Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
34 	Central Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
36 	Central Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
40 	Central Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
58 	Central Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
137 	Central Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
139 	Central Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
141 	Central Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
143 	Central Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
145 	Central Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
158 	Central Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
170 	Central Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
178 	Central Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
192 	Central Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
194 	Central Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
196 	Central Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
198 	Central Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
200 	Central Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
8 	Cherry Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
36 	Cherry Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
20 	Chester Street 	Yes 	1985, 1989 	Yes 	Yes 
23 	Chester Street 	Yes 	1985, 1989 	Yes 	Yes 
24 	Chester Street 	Yes 	1985, 1989 	Yes 	Yes 
27 	Chester Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
7 	Clarendon Avenue 	Yes 	10/2011 	Yes 	No 
11 	Clark Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
25 	Clyde Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
40 	College Avenue 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
88 	College Avenue 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
21 	College Hill Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
27 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
41 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
45 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
47 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
50 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
53 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
55 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
56 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
57 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
58 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
59 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
61 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
63 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
67 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
68 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
69 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
70 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
73 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
76 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
78 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
75-77 	Columbus Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
23 	Craigie Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
59 	Cross Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
108 	Cross Street 	No 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
8 	Cross Street East 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
10 	Cross Street East 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
12 	Cross Street East 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
14 	Cross Street East 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
16 	Cross Street East 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
62 	Dane Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
64 	Dane Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
65 	Dane Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
66 	Dane Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
72R 	Dane Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
21 	Dartmouth Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
49-55 	Davis Square 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
30 	Day Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
34 	Day Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
25 	Elm Place 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
21-23 	Elm Place 	Yes 	2011 	Yes 	Yes 
22-24 	Elm Place 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
81 	Eustis Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
14 	Everett Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
13-15 	Fairmount Avenue 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
14 	Flint Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
22 	Flint Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
11-13 	Flint Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
15-17 	Flint Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
15-17 	Flint Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
67 	Florence Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
30 	Forest Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
47 	Franklin Street 	Yes 	2011 	Yes 	No 
74 	Franklin Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
80 	Franklin Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
20 	George Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
20 	George Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
14 	Hall Avenue 	Yes 	1994 	Yes 	No 
15 	Hall Avenue 	Yes 	1994 	Yes 	No 
1 	Harvard Place 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
3 	Harvard Place 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
9 	Harvard Place 	x 	1985 	x 	x 
10 	Harvard Place 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	Yes 
11 	Harvard Place 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
14 	Harvard Place 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
11 	Harvard Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
12 	Harvard Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	Yes 
18 	Harvard Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
20 	Harvard Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
22 	Harvard Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
35 	Harvard Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
37 	Harvard Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
38 	Harvard Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
40 	Harvard Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
7-9 	Harvard Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
14-16 	Harvard Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
10 	Henderson Street 	Yes 	2011 	Yes 	No 
13 	Henderson Street 	Yes 	2011 	Yes 	No 
28 	Highland Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
52 	Highland Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
66 	Highland Avenue 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
76 	Highland Avenue 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
79 	Highland Avenue 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
93 	Highland Avenue 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
125 	Highland Avenue 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
191 	Highland Avenue 	No 	- 		No 
130 	Highland Avenue 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
137 	Highland Avenue 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
140 	Highland Avenue 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
343 	Highland Avenue 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
117-119 	Highland Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
13-19 	Highland Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
48-50 	Highland Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
16 	Hinckley Street 	Yes 	2011 	Yes 	No 
80 	Hinckley Street 	Yes 	2011 	Yes 	No 
53 	Hudson Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
6 	Kent Court 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
44 	Kidder Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
45 	Laurel Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
16-18 	Laurel Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
20 	Lincoln Avenue 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
12-14 	Lincoln Avenue 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
16 	Lincoln Street 	Yes 	2011 	Yes 	No 
11 	Linden Avenue 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
60 	Linden Avenue 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
48 	Line Street 	Yes 	2017 	Yes 	No 
302 	Lowell Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
342 	Lowell Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
52 	Main Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
27 	Maple Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
7 	Mardell Circle 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
27 	Meacham Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
38 	Meacham Road 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
42 	Meacham Road 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
44 	Meacham Road 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
45 	Meacham Road 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
46 	Meacham Road 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
47 	Meacham Road 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
48 	Meacham Road 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
51 	Meacham Road 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
54 	Meacham Road 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
56 	Meacham Road 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
57 	Meacham Road 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
58 	Meacham Road 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
62 	Meacham Road 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
64 	Meacham Road 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
39-41 	Meacham Road 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
53-55 	Meacham Road 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
53-55 	Meacham Road 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
371 	Medford Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
399 	Medford Street 	Yes 	2011 	Yes 	No 
399A 	Medford Street 	Yes 	2011 	Yes 	No 
3 	Monmouth Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
9 	Monmouth Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
10 	Monmouth Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
23 	Monmouth Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
25 	Monmouth Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
31 	Monmouth Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
33 	Monmouth Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
53 	Moore Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
140 	Morrison Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
142 	Morrison Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
144 	Morrison Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
146 	Morrison Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
148 	Morrison Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
197 	Morrison Avenue 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
204 	Morrison Avenue 	Yes 	2014 	Yes 	No 
221 	Morrison Avenue 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
222 	Morrison Avenue 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
10 	Mossland Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
8 	Mt. Pleasant Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
8 	Mt. Vernon Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
12 	Mt. Vernon Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
16 	Mt. Vernon Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
17 	Mt. Vernon Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
18 	Mt. Vernon Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
20 	Mt. Vernon Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
29 	Mt. Vernon Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
46 	Mt. Vernon Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
47 	Mt. Vernon Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
64 	Mt. Vernon Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
68 	Mt. Vernon Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
74 	Mt. Vernon Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
12R 	Mt. Vernon Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
22-24 	Mt. Vernon Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
0 	Munroe Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
15 	Munroe Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
82 	Munroe Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
88 	Munroe Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
97 	Munroe Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
39 	Myrtle Street 	Yes 	2011 	Yes 	No 
37-39 	Myrtle Street 	Yes 	2011 	Yes 	No 
53-55 	Myrtle Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
485 	Mystic Valley Pkwy 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
67 	Oak Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
97 	Orchard Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
31 	Pearl Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
81 	Pearl Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
70 	Pearl Street 	Yes 	2011 	Yes 	No 
94 	Pearl Street 	Yes 	2011 	Yes 	No 
77 	Perkins Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
84 	Perkins Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
132 	Perkins Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
143-145 	Perkins Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
155-157 	Perkins Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
65-67 	Perkins Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
4 	Phillips Place 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
11 	Pleasant Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
12 	Pleasant Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
15 	Pleasant Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
18 	Pleasant Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
20 	Pleasant Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
22 	Pleasant Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
23 	Pleasant Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
24 	Pleasant Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
4-6 	Pleasant Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
22 	Porter Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
23 	Porter Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
52 	Powderhouse Blvd 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
29 	Powderhouse Terrace 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
16 	Preston Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
20 	Preston Road 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
5 	Prospect Hill Avenue 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
122 	Prospect Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
61 	Putnam Street 	Yes 	2011 	Yes 	No 
5-11 	Putnam Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
25 	Russell Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
18 	Sanborn Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
50 	Sargent Avenue 	Yes 	2011 	Yes 	No 
101 	School Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
117 	School Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
156 	School Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
193 	School Street 	Yes 	2011 	Yes 	No 
205 	School Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
237 	School Street 	Yes 	2011 	Yes 	Yes 
5 	Smith Avenue 	Yes 	2017 	Yes 	No 
9 	Smith Avenue 	Yes 	2017 	Yes 	No 
10 	Smith Avenue 	Yes 	2017 	Yes 	No 
13 	Smith Avenue 	Yes 	2017 	Yes 	No 
380 	Somerville Avenue 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
430 	Somerville Avenue 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
437 	Somerville Avenue 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
365-367 	Somerville Avenue 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
439-441 	Somerville Avenue 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
439-441R 	Somerville Avenue 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
15 	Spring Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
28 	Spring Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
32 	Spring Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
34 	Spring Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	Yes 
35 	Spring Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
37 	Spring Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
38 	Spring Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	Yes 
42 	Spring Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	Yes 
44 	Spring Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
45 	Spring Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
47 	Spring Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
49 	Spring Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
50 	Spring Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	Yes 
54 	Spring Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	Yes 
18-20 	Spring Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	Yes 
22-24 	Spring Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
31-33 	Spring Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
46-46A 	Spring Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
1 	Summer Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
22 	Summer Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
24 	Summer Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
104 	Summer Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
125 	Summer Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
151 	Summer Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
152 	Summer Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
154 	Summer Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
162 	Summer Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
166 	Summer Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
168 	Summer Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
170 	Summer Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	Yes 
172 	Summer Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
174 	Summer Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
176 	Summer Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
184 	Summer Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
381 	Summer Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
156-158 	Summer Street 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
16 	Summit Avenue 	Yes 	2003 	Yes 	No 
18 	Summit Avenue 	Yes 	2003 	Yes 	No 
26 	Summit Avenue 	Yes 	2003 	Yes 	No 
17 	Summit Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
58 	Sycamore Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
78 	Sycamore Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
143-145 	Sycamore Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
35 	Temple Street 	x 	1985 	x 	x 
45 	Tennyson Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
11 	Thorpe Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
67 	Thurston Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
42 	Vinal Avenue 	No 	- 	Yes 	Yes 
45 	Vinal Avenue 	Yes 	2003 	Yes 	No 
47 	Vinal Avenue 	Yes 	2003 	Yes 	No 
48 	Vinal Avenue 	Yes 	2003 	Yes 	Yes 
49 	Vinal Avenue 	Yes 	2003 	Yes 	Yes 
50 	Vinal Avenue 	Yes 	2003 	Yes 	No 
54 	Vinal Avenue 	Yes 	2003 	Yes 	Yes 
56 	Vinal Avenue 	Yes 	2003 	Yes 	No 
37 	Walnut Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
45 	Walnut Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
60 	Walnut Street 	Yes 	2003 	Yes 	No 
67 	Walnut Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
8-10 	Walnut Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
141-143 	Walnut Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
56-58 	Walnut Street 	Yes 	2003 	Yes 	Yes 
24 	Warren Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
26 	Warren Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
27 	Warren Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
28 	Warren Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
29 	Warren Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
30 	Warren Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
31 	Warren Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
32 	Warren Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
33 	Warren Avenue 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
113 	Washington Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
117 	Washington Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	Yes 
215 	Washington Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
237 	Washington Street 	Yes 	2013 	Yes 	Yes 
384 	Washington Street 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
275-277 	Washington Street 	Yes 	1989 	Yes 	No 
13 	Webster Avenue 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
1 	Webster Street 	Yes 	2010 	Yes 	No 
1 	Westwood Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
2 	Westwood Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
3 	Westwood Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
5 	Westwood Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
6 	Westwood Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
7 	Westwood Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
8 	Westwood Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
9 	Westwood Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
10 	Westwood Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
11 	Westwood Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
12 	Westwood Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
14 	Westwood Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
15 	Westwood Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
16 	Westwood Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
17 	Westwood Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
18 	Westwood Road 	Yes 	1985 	Yes 	Yes 
 
(Code 1963, § 18-3; Ord. No. 1985-2, 3-7-85; Ord. No. 1989-6, 10-26-89; Ord. No. 1993-2, 2-25-93; Ord. No. 2003-01, 2-27-03; Ord. No. 2010-03, 1-28-2010; Ord. No. 2010-07, 6-10-2010; Ord. No. 2010-08, 7-8-2010; Ord. No. 2010-13, 12-16-2010; Ord. No. 2010-14, 12-16-2010; Ord. No. 2011-04, 3-24-2011; Ord. No. 2011-10, 10-13-2011; Amend. of 12-22-2014 ; Ord. No. 2017-01 , 1-26-2017)  
Sec. 7-19. - Historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Generally. This article shall be administered by an historic preservation commission with the following terms, composition and administrative matters. 
(b)  Appointment; terms; vacancies. The historic preservation commission shall consist of seven members, and seven alternates, appointed by the mayor and subject to confirmation by the city council. All of the members and at least five of the alternates shall be residents of the city. Each member and alternate shall serve for a term of three years; except that the initial appointments shall be for two members and two alternates to serve a term of one year, two members and two alternates to serve a term of two years, and three members and three alternates to serve a term of three years. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the unexpired term. In case of the absence or inability to act, or unwillingness to act because of self-interest on the part of a member of the commission, his or her place shall be taken by an alternate member designated by the chairman. Each member and alternate shall continue in office after expiration of his or her term until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Composition. The commission membership shall be composed of the following: one member, preferably a professional architectural historian, chosen from three nominees submitted by the Somerville Historical Society or the Society for the Preservation of New England Antiquities; an architect, preferably a person registered in the commonwealth, chosen from three nominees submitted by the local chapter of the American Institute of Architects; a licensed real estate broker chosen from three nominees submitted by the regional chapter of the board of realtors; a city planner, preferably with knowledge about allied local activities and boards; a lawyer with knowledge of real estate and historic preservation law; and two citizen members who, through education or experience, have demonstrated a commitment to historic preservation. Two or more of the members so appointed shall be residents of a designated historic district. The alternate members shall include at least one resident of a designated historic district, one landscape architect, one licensed general contractor or building tradesperson and four persons with a background in any of the other categories represented by the regular members of the commission. If, within 30 days after the submission of a written request for nominees to any of the above named organizations, no such nominations have been submitted, the mayor may make such appointment without nomination by said organization. To the extent a person meets more than one of the foregoing specific membership requirements, then each such specific membership requirement so met shall be satisfied by such person's membership on the commission. 
(d)  Compensation. No member or alternate shall receive compensation for his or her service on the commission, but shall be reimbursed, subject to availability of appropriated funds, for his or her actual expenses reasonably and necessarily incurred in performance of his or her official duties. 
(e)  Conflict of interest. If any commission member or alternate is employed or to be employed by the city or to have directly or indirectly a financial interest in any contract with the city, the classification of "special municipal employee" should be obtained from the city council, and all other requirements as set forth under Chapter 268A of the General Laws, shall be met. 
(f)  Officers. The commission shall elect before the end of its fourth regular meeting during the first year and every May thereafter, a chairman, vice-chairman, and a secretary. All officers, except the secretary, shall be elected from its own members. Whenever the secretary shall not attend a meeting of the commission, the commission shall elect a secretary pro tempore who shall take the minutes of the meeting. The records of the commission shall set forth every determination made by the commission, the vote of every member participating in such determination and the absence or failure to vote of every other member. 
(g)  Expenses. The commission may enter into contracts and may, if necessary, subject to appropriation, employ clerical and technical assistance of consultants and incur other expenses appropriate to the carrying on of its work. 
(h)  Gifts. The commission may accept money gifts and expend the same for the carrying on of its work. The commission may also administer on behalf of the city any properties or easements, restrictions or other interests in real property which the city may have or may accept as gifts or otherwise and of which the city may designate the commission as the administrator. 
(i)  Record keeping and rules. The commission shall keep a permanent record of its resolutions, transactions and determinations and of the vote of each member participating therein, and may adopt and amend such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this article and prescribe such forms as it shall deem desirable and necessary for the regulations of its affairs and the conduct of its business. The commission shall file a copy of any such rules and regulations with the city clerk. An annual report of the commission's activities shall be filed with the state historical commission under provisions of Chapter 40C, Section 15 of the General Laws and shall be submitted to the city clerk for filing. 
(j)  Powers and duties. The commission shall have, in addition to the powers, authority and duties granted to it by this article, such other powers, authority and duties as may be delegated or assigned to it from time to time by vote of the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 18-4; Ord. No. 1990-7, § 1, 5-10-90)  
Sec. 7-20. - Historic district changes. 
(a)  Enlargements or reductions. An historic district may be enlarged or reduced or an additional historic district in the city created in the manner established under section 7-18 for creation of the initial district, except that in the case of the enlargement or reduction of an existing historic district the investigation, report and hearing shall be by the historic preservation commission having jurisdiction over such historic district instead of by a study committee. 
(b)  Additional districts. In the case of creation of an additional historic district the investigation, report and hearing shall be by the historic preservation commission instead of by a study committee unless the commission recommends otherwise. 
(c)  Notice. If the district is to be reduced, written notice, as provided in section 7-18 for creation of the initial district, shall be given to said owners of each property in the district. 
(d)  Filing requirements. No changes to the boundaries of an historic district shall become effective until a map setting forth the changes to the boundaries of the historic district has been filed with the city clerk and has been recorded in the South Middlesex registry of deeds and the provisions of Chapter 36, Section 13A of the General Laws, shall not apply. 
(Code 1963, § 18-5)  
Sec. 7-21. - Historic district certificates of appropriateness, nonapplicability or hardship. 
(a)  Considerations of commission. In passing upon matters before it the commission shall consider, among other things, the historic and architectural value and significance of the site, building or structure, the general design, arrangement, texture, material and color of the features involved, and the relation of such features to similar features of buildings and structures in the surrounding area. In the case of new construction or additions to existing buildings or structures, the commission shall consider the appropriateness of the size and shape of the building or structure both in relation to the land area upon which the building or structure is situated and to buildings and structures in the vicinity, and the commission may in appropriate cases impose dimensional and setback requirements in addition to those required by applicable ordinance or bylaw. The commission shall not consider interior arrangements or the other categories of exclusions specified in subsection (c) of this section. The commission may after public hearing set forth in such manner as it may determine the various designs of certain appurtenances, such as light fixtures, which will meet the requirements of an historic district and a roster of certain colors of paint and roofing materials which will meet the requirements of an historic district, but no such determination shall limit the right of an applicant to present other designs or colors to the commission for its approval. The commission shall not make any recommendation or requirement except for the purpose of preventing developments incongruous to the historic aspects or the architectural characteristics of the surroundings and of the historic district. 
(b)  Submission requirements. Except for the exclusions noted in subsection (c) of this section, no building or structure within an historic district shall be constructed or altered in any way that affects exterior architectural features unless the commission shall first have issued a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a certificate of hardship with respect to such construction or alteration. 
Any person who desires to obtain a certificate shall file with the commission an application for a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a certificate of hardship, as the case may be, in such form as the commission may reasonably determine, together with such plans, elevations, specifications, material and other information, including, in the case of demolition or removal, a statement of the proposed condition and appearance of the property thereafter, as may be reasonably deemed necessary by the commission to enable it to make a determination on the application. 
No building permit for construction of a building or structure or for alteration of an exterior architectural feature within a historic district and no demolition permit for demolition (full or partial) or removal of a building or structure within an historic district shall be issued by inspectional services until the certificate required by this section has been issued by the commission. 
(c)  Exclusions. The authority of the commission shall not extend to the review of the following categories of buildings, structures or exterior architectural features of the historic district and, in this event, the buildings, structures or exterior architectural features so excluded may be constructed or altered within the historic district without review by the commission: 
(1)  Temporary structures or signs, subject, however, to such conditions as to duration of use, location, lighting, removal and similar matters as the commission may reasonably specify; 
(2)  Storm doors and windows, screens, window air conditioners, lighting fixtures, antennae, lawn statuary and similar appurtenances, or any of them; 
(3)  The color of paint; 
(4)  Signs of one foot square or less in area in connection with use of a residence for a customary home occupation or for professional purposes, provided only one such sign is displayed in connection with each residence and if illuminated is illuminated only indirectly; and one sign in connection with the nonresidential use of each building or structure which is not more than 12 square feet in area, is appropriately located and consists of letters or symbols or trademark compatible with the character of the area and if illuminated only indirectly; or either of them; 
(5)  The reconstruction, substantially similar in exterior design, type of use and size of a building, structure or exterior architectural feature damaged or destroyed by storm or other disaster, provided such reconstruction is begun within one year thereafter and carried forward with due diligence. 
Upon request by an applicant, the commission shall issue a certificate of nonapplicability with respect to construction or alteration in any category then not subject to review by the commission in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. 
(d)  Issuance procedures. The commission shall have the following powers, functions and duties related to issuance of certificates: 
(1)  If the commission determines that the construction or alteration for which an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been filed will be appropriate for or compatible with the preservation or protection of the historic district, the commission shall cause a certificate of appropriateness to be issued to the applicant. In the case of a disapproval of an application for a certificate of appropriateness the commission shall place upon its records the reasons for such determination and shall forthwith cause a notice of its determination, accompanied by a copy of the reasons therefor as set forth in the records of the commission, to be issued to the applicant. The commission may make recommendations to the applicant with respect to appropriateness of design, arrangement, texture, material and similar features. Prior to the issuance of any disapproval the commission may notify the applicant of its proposed action accompanied by recommendations of changes in the applicant's proposal which, if made, would make the application acceptable to the commission. The commission shall, as feasible, identify sources of additional information, technical assistance and financial incentives, which may eliminate the area of concern. If, within 14 days of the receipt of such notice, the applicant files a written modification of his or her application in conformity with the recommended changes of the commission, the commission shall cause a certificate of appropriateness to be issued to the applicant. 
(2)  In the case of a determination by the commission that an application for a certificate of appropriateness or for a certificate of nonapplicability does not involve any exterior architectural feature, or involves an exterior architectural feature which is not then subject to review by the commission in accordance with the provisions of subsection (c) of this section, the commission shall cause a certificate of nonapplicability to be issued to the applicant. 
(3)  The commission shall determine if the construction or alteration for which an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been filed is inappropriate, or in the event of an application for a certificate of hardship, the commission shall determine if, owing to conditions especially affecting the building or structure involved, (e.g. handicapped access), but not affecting the historic district generally, failure to approve an application will involve a substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the applicant. The commission shall also determine whether such application may be approved without substantial detriment to the public welfare and without substantial derogation from the intent and purposes of this article. If the commission determines that owing to such conditions failure to approve an application will involve substantial hardship to the applicant and approval thereof may be made without such substantial detriment or derogation, or in the event of failure to make a determination on an application within the time specified in section 1-22(d), the commission shall cause a certificate of hardship to be issued to the applicant. 
(4)  Each certificate issued by the commission shall be dated and signed by its chairman, vice-chairman, secretary or such other person designated by the commission to sign such certificates on its behalf. Each certificate issued by the commission shall also be accompanied by a document substantiating in sufficient detail the basis of the determination. Certificates are valid for one full year from the date of issuance and must be revalidated by the commission if substantial work has not been completed by the end of this period. 
(5)  The commission shall file with the city clerk and with the city building department a copy or notice of all certificates, determinations of disapproval and substantiating documents issued by it. 
(Code 1963, § 18-6; Ord. No. 1989-6, § 2, 10-31-89)  
Sec. 7-22. - Historic preservation commission meetings and determinations. 
(a)  Voting. The commission shall hold meetings at the call of the chairman and at the request of two members of the commission, and in such other manner as the commission shall determine in its rules. A majority of the members of a commission shall constitute a quorum. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the commission shall be necessary to issue a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a certificate of hardship. 
(b)  Review of applications for certificates. The commission shall determine promptly, and in all events within 14 days after the filing of an application for a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a certificate of hardship, as the case may be, whether the application involves any exterior architectural features which are subject to approval by the commission. If the commission determines that such application involves any such features which are subject to approval by the commission, the commission shall hold a public hearing on such application unless such hearing is dispensed with as hereinafter provided. 
(c)  Hearing on application for certificates. The commission shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing on any application and shall give public notice of the time, place and purposes thereof at least 14 days before said hearing in such manner as it may determine, and by mailing, postage prepaid, a copy of said notice to the applicant, to the owners of all adjoining property and other property deemed by the commission to be materially affected thereby as they appear on the most recent real estate tax list of the board of assessors, to the city planning board, to any person filing written request for notice of hearing, such request to be renewed yearly in December, and to such other persons as the commission shall deem entitled to notice. 
(d)  Period of determination. As soon as convenient after such public hearing, but in any event within 45 days after the filing of the application, or within such further time as the applicant may allow in writing, the commission shall make a determination on the application. If the commission shall fail to make a determination within such period of time, the commission shall thereupon issue a certificate of hardship. 
(e)  Waiver of public hearing. A public hearing on an application need not be held if such hearing is waived in writing by all persons entitled to notice thereof. In addition, a public hearing on an application may be waived by the commission if the commission determines that the exterior architectural feature involved or its category or color, as the case may be, is so insubstantial in its effect on the historic district that it may be reviewed by the commission without public hearing on the application; provided, however, that if the commission dispenses with a public hearing on an application, notice of the application shall be given to the owners of all adjoining property and other property deemed by the commission to be materially affected thereby as above provided and ten days shall elapse after the mailing of such notice before the commission may act upon such application. 
(Code 1963, § 18-7)  
Sec. 7-23. - Appeals of determinations. 
(a)  Court appeal. A person aggrieved by a determination of the commission may, within 20 days after the filing of the notice of such determination with the city clerk, appeal to the South Middlesex Superior Court. 
(b)  Court option. The court shall hear all pertinent evidence and shall annul the determination of the commission if it finds the decision of the commission to be unsupported by the evidence or to exceed the authority of the commission, or may recommend the case for further action by the commission, or make such other decree as justice and equity may require. 
(c)  Other options. The remedy provided by this section shall be exclusive but the parties shall have all rights of appeal and exception as in other equity cases. 
(d)  Costs. Costs shall not be allowed against the commission unless it shall appear to the court that the commission acted with gross negligence, in bad faith or with malice in the matter from which the appeal was taken. Costs shall not be allowed against the party appealing from such determination of the commission unless it shall appear to the court that such party acted in bad faith or with malice in making the appeal to the court. 
(Code 1963, § 18-8)  
Sec. 7-24. - Maintenance and repair. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance, repair or replacement of any exterior architectural feature within an historic district which does not involve a change in design, material, color or the outward appearance thereof, nor to prevent landscaping with plants, trees or shrubs, nor construed to prevent the meeting of requirements certified by a duly authorized public officer to be necessary for public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition, nor construed to prevent any construction or alteration under a permit duly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(Code 1963, § 18-10)  
Sec. 7-25. - Amendments. 
This article enabling the creation of historic districts may from time to time be amended in a manner not inconsistent with the provisions of Chapter 40C of the General Laws, by a two-thirds vote of the city council, provided that the substance of such amendment has first been submitted to the historic preservation commission and the state historical commission, for their recommendation and their recommendations have been received or 60 days have elapsed without such recommendations. 
(Code 1963, § 18-11)  
Sec. 7-26. - Enforcement. 
The South Middlesex Superior Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of Chapter 40C of the General Laws and this article enacted thereunder and the determinations, rulings and regulations issued pursuant thereto and may, upon the petition of the mayor or the city council or of the commission, restrain by injunction violations thereof; and, without limitation, such court may order the removal of any building, structure or exterior architectural feature constructed in violation thereof, or the substantial restoration of any building, structure or exterior architectural feature altered or demolished in violation thereof, and may issue such other orders for relief as may be equitable. 
(Code 1963, § 18-9)  
Sec. 7-27. - Penalties and fines. 
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. Each day during any portion of which a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1963, § 18-9; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 7, 7-14-2005)  
Sec. 7-28. - Demolition review ordinance. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The purpose of this section is to preserve and protect significant buildings within the City of Somerville ("city") by providing advance notice of their proposed demolition, which constitute or reflect distinctive features of the architectural, cultural, political, economic, or social history of the city, and which are outside the designated historic district; to encourage owners of such preferably preserved significant buildings and members of the Somerville Historic Preservation Commission ("commission") to seek out persons willing to purchase and to preserve, rehabilitate, or restore such buildings, rather than demolish them; and to promote the public welfare by making the city a more attractive place in which to live. To achieve these purposes, the commission is empowered to advise the building inspector with respect to the issuance of demolition permits. The issuance of demolition permits for significant buildings is regulated as provided in this section. 
Exclusions. This section shall not apply to any building or structure located within the boundaries of the proposed Assembly Square District or the Inner Belt Industrial Park District, which districts are shown on the maps attached hereto. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below: 
Applicant means any person filing an application for a demolition permit. However, if the applicant is not the owner of the building or structure that is subject of the application, the owner to give written authorization for the demolition, including a statement of ownership and identification of his or her authorized agent, on the application. 
Application means an application for a permit for the demolition of a building or structure. 
Board of survey means the board ordered to respond, by Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 143 Section 8, when an owner of a building or structure does not respond to a notice that the building or structure is unsafe. The board shall consist of the city engineer, the head of the fire department, and one disinterested person to be appointed by the building inspector. 
Building means any combination of materials forming a shelter for persons, animals or property. 
Building inspector means the person occupying the office of superintendent of inspectional services, or any person otherwise authorized to issue demolition permits in the city. 
Business day means a day that is not a recognized municipal or federal holiday, and is not a Saturday or Sunday. 
Chairperson means the head of the commission, the person performing the functions of the chairperson in the event no one holds that title, or any other person to whom the chairperson delegates authority to act according to this section. 
City clerk means the person holding the office of city clerk in the city. 
Demolition means the act of pulling down, destroying, removing, or razing a building or structure or commencing the work of total or substantial destruction with the intent of completing the same. For the purposes of this section, the term "demolition" shall not include routine maintenance, interior renovations, removal or construction of porches, decks, windows or other types of renovations for which commission approval is generally not required. 
Final determination means a determination made by the commission in accordance with subsection 7-28(2)d of this chapter. 
Initial determination means a determination made by the commission in accordance with subsection 7-28(2)d of this chapter. 
Owner means the person with legal title to a building or structure. 
Permit means a permit issued by the building inspector for demolition of a building or structure pursuant to an application. 
Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, trust, or society. 
Preferably preserved significant building or structure means any significant building or structure, which the commission determines as provided in the definition of significant building or structure of this chapter, that it is in the public interest to be preserved or rehabilitated rather than to be demolished. 
Premises mean the parcel of land upon which the demolished building or structure was located and all adjoining parcels of land under common ownership or control. 
Significant building or structure means any building or structure within the city which: 
(1)  Is listed on, or is within an area listed on, the National Register of Historic Places, or which is the subject of a pending application for listing on the National Register, or 
(2)  Is at least 50 years old, and is or has been determined by the commission to be a significant building or structure after a finding that the building or structure is either: 
a.  Importantly associated with one or more historic persons or events, or with the broad architectural, cultural, political, economic or social history of the city or the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, or 
b.  Historically or architecturally significant (in terms of period, style, method of building construction, or association with a reputed architect or builder) either by itself or in the context of a group of buildings or structures, and therefore it is in the public interest to be preserved or rehabilitated rather than to be demolished. 
Structure means any constructed, erected, or placed material or combination of materials in or upon the ground, excluding sidewalks, stairs and paving on streets, driveways, parking areas, and patios. 
Voluntarily means any act(s) done by design or intention, which is proposed, intended, or not accidental. An act of God is not considered voluntary, but rather is regarded as an act done without the will or choice of the applicant (or owner, if different from applicant). For the purposes of this chapter, the destruction of a significant building or structure for failure to properly secure it shall be considered voluntary. 
(c)  Computation of time. The day from which a period runs is excluded. The last day is included, unless it is a municipal or federal holiday or a Saturday or Sunday, in which case the period runs to the end of the next day business day 
(d)  Procedure. 
(1)  When the building inspector receives a demolition permit application for a significant building or structure, he or she will within seven business days notify the commission in writing that a demolition permit application has been received by forwarding a copy of the application to the commission by interoffice mail and fax, or by in-hand delivery. 
(2)  Board's determinations. 
a.  Initial determination: The commission or its designee shall make a written determination whether the building or structure, which is the subject of the demolition permit application, is a significant building or structure, within 30 days of receiving a copy of the application. 
1.  If the commission determines that the building or structure is not a significant building or structure, this determination shall be transmitted to the building inspector, the applicant, the building owner and to the city clerk. The applicant will not be required to take any further steps and the permit may be granted by the building inspector. 
2.  If the commission determines that the building or structure is a significant building, it shall notify the building inspector, the applicant, and the city clerk, of its determination. 
3.  If the commission fails to act in accordance with subsections 7-28(2)a. through 7-28(2)a.2 within the prescribed time periods, the building inspector shall grant the demolition permit, provided that the applicant has met all other requirements under the demolition permit application, and shall notify the commission in writing that the permit has been granted. 
b.  Demolition plan review: After the commission's initial determination that a demolition permit application involves a significant building or structure, the applicant for a demolition permit may submit to the commission a demolition plan that shall include: 
1.  A brief description of the type of building or structure. 
2.  A scaled plot plan showing the location of the significant building or structure on the property and with reference to neighboring properties 
3.  Photographs of all street facade elevations and portions of the building or structure visible from a public way. 
c.  Public hearing: The commission shall conduct a hearing on the application and the initial determination within 45 days of its initial determination. The commission shall give the public notice of the hearing by publishing the time, place, and purpose of the hearing in a local newspaper, at least 14 days prior to the hearing. The commission shall also mail, in a form designated by the commission, a notice to the applicant, the building owner and abutters to the property, which is the subject of the application, at least 14 days prior to the hearing. 
d.  Final determination: Within 21 days following the date of the public hearing, the commission shall file a final determination, in writing, with the city clerk. If the commission determines that the demolition of the significant building or structure would be detrimental to the architectural, cultural, political, economic, or social heritage of the city, such building or structure shall be considered a preferably preserved building or structure. 
(3)  Upon the commission's final determination that said building or structure is preferably preserved, it shall so advise the building inspector, the applicant and the building owner (if different from applicant). Upon this determination, the building inspector shall not issue a demolition permit for building or structure for a period of nine months from the date upon which the commission made the final determination that building or structure is preferably preserved. During the nine month delay, the applicant, the owner (if different from applicant), and the commission are required to actively pursue alternatives to demolition of the preferably preserved building or structure, including but not limited to, finding a buyer for the building or structure that is willing to rehabilitate the property, rather than demolish it. 
(4)  Upon a determination by the commission that a building or structure is a preferably preserved building or structure, the owner shall be responsible for properly securing the building or structure. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the preceding, the building inspector may issue a demolition permit at anytime, upon receipt of written advice from the commission that there is no reasonable likelihood that either the owner or some other person or group is willing to purchase, preserve, rehabilitate or restore such building or structure. 
(6)  Emergency demolition: Nothing in this [section] shall derogate from the authority of the building inspector to act under Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 143 and the state building code. 
(7)  Enforcement: 
a.  The commission and the building inspector are each specifically authorized to institute any and all actions and proceedings, in law or in equity, as they deem necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements of this article, or to prevent a threatened violation thereof. 
b.  Anyone who voluntarily demolishes a significant building or structure without complying fully with the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. 
c.  No building permit shall issue for a new building or structure on any premises where a significant building or structure is voluntarily demolished in violation of this section for a period of two years after the date of demolition. 
(8)  Historic Districts Act: If any provision of this section conflicts with the "Historic Districts Act," Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40(C), the Act shall prevail. 
(9)  Severability: In case any section, paragraph or part of this section for any reason shall be declared invalid by any court, every other section, paragraph and part shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2003-05, §§ 1—4, 5-22-2003; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 8, 7-14-2005) 
Editor's note— The proposed Assembly Square District or the Inner Belt Industrial Park District maps mentioned in this section are not set out herein but are on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference— Demolition and fire details, § 5-8; Demolition of buildings at fires, § 5-36; Demolition of buildings, § 11-105.  
Sec. 7-29. - Minimum maintenance standards. 
(a)  This section is intended to preserve and protect significant buildings in the City of Somerville in conjunction with the demolition review ordinance and the ordinance creating and protecting historic districts. 
Exclusions. This section shall not apply to properties in receipt of a residential exemption as determined by the board of assessors. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section and unless the context of usage clearly indicates another meaning, terms and words shall have the meaning given in the demolition review ordinance and the ordinance creating and protecting historic districts set forth in Article II, Chapter VII, Sections 7-16—7-28 of the Somerville Code of Ordinances 
(c)  No owner or person with an interest in real property that is within a local historic district, is on the National Register of Historic Places, or has been determined to be a "significant" building or structure shall fail to preserve or otherwise permit a deterioration or decay of any significant exterior architectural feature, including, but not limited to, balustrades, bargeboards, belt courses, brackets, buttresses, chimneys, corbelling, cornices, cresting, decorative carvings, dentils, finials, gable ends, masonry, pediments, porches, roofing, shutters, siding, spires, stained glass, towers, and window sashes and casings, provided that such deterioration or decay is not otherwise regulated by the state building code. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a property owner from installing replacement siding. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a property to be renovated or restored to original conditions. 
(e)  Procedure. 
(1)  If any property is suspected of being in deterioration and decay and is potentially "significant", a duly noticed public meeting shall be scheduled before the historic preservation commission to determine if the property is "significant". The property owner and direct abutters shall be provided with written notification regarding the public meeting and advised of their ability to provide comment. 
(2)  Historic preservation staff shall state in writing the findings of fact in support of such determination of violation of the minimum maintenance standards ordinance and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and/or other parties in interest therein an order to repair within a time to be specified in the written decision those features of the structure that do not comply with subsection (b). Findings made by the historic preservation staff may be appealed to the planning board. To perfect such an appeal, a written application must be filed by an aggrieved party with the historic preservation staff within ten business days following receipt of the order. A hearing on the appeal shall be held within 60 days of the written application. 
(f)  Enforcement. The provisions of this section may be enforced by the historic preservation staff, by noncriminal disposition pursuant to G. L. c. 40, § 21D. Each day on which a violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. No fine shall be levied in accordance with G. L. c. 40, § 21D unless and until the historic preservation staff sends a written notice to the person responsible for each violation indicating the nature of the violation and ordering corrective action. The notice shall also set forth the time period when corrective measures must be completed. The notice shall state that failure to correct the violation within the specified time period will result in the fines. If after the allotted time period has expired and after the hearing of an appeal, if any, by the planning board, corrective action has not been completed, any person, firm, corporation, association or other entity violating any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of $100.00 per day. 
(g)  If, after the allotted time period has expired and after the hearing of an appeal, if any, the owner or person with an interest in property has failed to meet the requirements of this section, the city may enter the property, subject to applicable law, to correct the violations of this section. The city shall charge the expenses incurred in doing such work or having work done or improvements made to the owner of record of such property. If such work is done or improvement made at the expense of the city, then such expenses shall be assessed as a lien on the real estate, lot, or lots upon which such expense was incurred. Subject to applicable law, the city is authorized to enter upon private property at all reasonable hours for the purpose of completing the work necessary for correcting the violations of this section. 
(h)  Severability: In case any section, paragraph or part of this section for any reason shall be declared invalid by any court, every other section, paragraph and part shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, 6-25-2008)  
Secs. 7-30—7-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FAIR HOUSING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Unlawful discrimination, M.G.L.A. c. 151B. 
 
Sec. 7-41. - Fair housing policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city that each individual regardless of race, color, creed, religion, sex, handicap, children, marital status, sexual preference, source of income, military status, age, ancestry and/or national origin shall have equal access to housing accommodations, facilities, services and financial aid, and to encourage and bring about mutual understanding and respect among all individuals in the city by the elimination of prejudice and discrimination in the area of housing. 
(Code 1963, § 17-1)  
Sec. 7-42. - Police power. 
This article shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of said city for the protection of public welfare, prosperity, health and peace of its people. 
(Code 1963, § 17-2)  
Sec. 7-43. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commission means the City of Somerville Fair Housing Commission, its agents and employees. 
Discriminate includes designing, promoting, implementing or carrying out any policy, practice or act which by design or effect segregates, separates, distinguishes or has a disproportionate impact according to race, color, creed, religion, sex, handicap, children, marital status, sexual preference, source of income, military status, age, ancestry and/or national origin. 
Handicap means any condition or characteristic that renders a person a handicapped person as defined in Title 45, Subtitle 84.3(j) of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
Housing accommodation includes any building or structure or portion thereof or any parcel of land, developed or undeveloped, which is occupied or to be developed for occupancy as the home, residence or commercial business for one or more persons. 
Person includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and the city and all boards, commissions, offices and agencies thereof. 
(Code 1963, § 17-3) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-4.  
Sec. 7-44. - Unlawful housing practices. 
It shall be un unlawful housing practice: 
(1)  For any owner, lessee, sublessee, assignee, managing agent, real estate agent, or other person having the right to sell, rent, lease, or manage a housing accommodation or an agent of any of those: 
a.  To discriminate or directly or indirectly make or cause to be made any written or oral inquiry concerning the race, color, creed, religion, sex, handicap, marital status, sexual preference, military status, age, ancestry and/or national origin of any prospective purchaser, occupant, or tenant of such housing accommodations; 
b.  To discriminate or directly or indirectly to refuse to sell, rent, lease, let or otherwise deny to or withhold from any individual, such housing accommodation because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, handicap, marital status, children, sexual preference, military status, source of income, age, ancestry and/or national origin; 
c.  To discriminate or to directly or indirectly print or publish or cause to be printed or published, circulated, broadcasted, issued, used, displayed, posted, or mailed any written, printed, painted or oral communication, notice or advertisement relating to the sale, rental, lease, or let of such housing accommodation which indicates any preference, denial, limitation, specification, qualification, or discrimination, based upon race, color, creed, religion, sex, handicap, children, marital status, sexual preference, source of income, military status, age, ancestry and/or national origin; 
d.  To directly or indirectly discriminate against any person because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, handicap, children, marital status, sexual preference, source of income, military status, age, ancestry and/or national origin in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, rental, lease, or letting of any such housing accommodation or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; 
(2)  For any person to whom application is made for a loan or other form of financial assistance for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing accommodation, whether secured or unsecured: 
a.  To discriminate or to directly or indirectly make or cause to be made any written or oral inquiry concerning the race, color, creed, religion, sex, handicap, marital status, sexual preference, military status, age, ancestry and/or national origin of any individual seeking such financial assistance, or of existing or prospective occupants or tenants of such housing accommodation; 
b.  To discriminate directly or indirectly in the terms, conditions or privileges relating to the obtaining or use of any such financial assistance because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, handicap, children, marital status, sexual preference, source of income, military status, age, ancestry and/or national origin; 
c.  To discriminate or to directly or indirectly deny or limit such application for financial assistance on the basis of an appraiser's evaluation, whether independent or not, of the property or neighborhood under consideration, when such evaluation is based on race, color, creed, religion, sex, handicap, children, marital status, sexual preference, source of income, military status, age, ancestry and/or national origin; 
(3)  For any person, whether or not acting for monetary gain, to directly or indirectly induce, attempt to induce, prevent or attempt to prevent the sale, purchase, rental, or letting of any housing accommodation by: 
a.  Implicit or explicit representations regarding the existing or potential proximity or real property owned, used or occupied by persons of any particular race, color, creed, religion, sex, marital status, sexual preference, handicap, military status, age, ancestry and/or national origin; 
b.  Implicit or explicit representations regarding the effects or consequences of any such existing or potential proximity including, but not limited to, the lowering of property values, an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior, or a decline in the quality of schools or other facilities; 
c.  Implicit or explicit false representations regarding the availability of suitable housing within a particular neighborhood or area, or failure to disclose or offer to show all properties listed or held for sale, rent, lease, or let within a requested price range, regardless of location, on the basis of race, color, creed, religion, sex, marital status, sexual preference, source of income, children, handicap, military status, age, ancestry and/or national origin; 
(4)  Except where based on a valid affirmative action program or recordkeeping or reporting requirement approved by the state or federal government or adopted pursuant to a court decree: 
a.  For any person, agent, manager, owner, or developer of any apartment or housing unit, complex or development, whether commercial or residential, to directly or indirectly make or keep a record of any applicant's, prospective tenant's or existing tenant's race, color, creed, religion, sex, handicap, children, marital status, sexual preference, military status, age, ancestry and/or national origin; 
b.  To use any form of housing or loan application which contains questions or entries directly or indirectly pertaining to race, color, creed, religion, sex, handicap, children, marital status, sexual preference, source of income, military status, age, ancestry and/or national origin; 
c.  To establish, announce or follow a pattern, practice, or policy of denying, excluding or limiting by any means whatsoever housing accommodations because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, handicap, children, marital status, sexual preference, source of income, military status, age, ancestry and/or national origin; 
(5)  For any person to discriminate in any manner against any individual or to otherwise deny to or withhold from such individual housing accommodations because he or she has opposed any practice forbidden by this article or because he or she has made a charge, testified, or assisted in any manner in any investigation or proceedings under this article; 
(6)  For any person, whether or not acting for monetary gain, to aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the doing of any act declared by this article to be an unlawful housing practice, or to obstruct or prevent any person from complying with the provisions of this article or any regulations or orders issued thereunder, or to attempt directly or indirectly to commit any act declared by this section to be an unlawful housing practice. 
(Code 1963, § 17-4)  
Sec. 7-45. - Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding anything herein contained, the following shall not be violations of this article: 
(1)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to extend the application of this article, or other existing laws, to cover housing accommodations or units presently exempted under federal and state law; it is the intention of this article to apply to only those housing accommodations or units presently covered by applicable federal and state laws; 
(2)  For a religious organization or institution to restrict any of its housing accommodations which are operated as a direct part of religious activities to persons of the denomination involved; 
(3)  For the owner of a housing facility devoted entirely to the housing of individuals of one sex, to restrict occupancy and use on the basis of sex; 
(4)  The operation or establishment of housing facilities designed for the exclusive use of the handicapped or the establishment of programs designed to meet the needs or circumstances of handicapped persons; 
(5)  The operation or establishment of state-aided or federally-aided housing developments for the elderly or self-contained retirement communities constructed expressly for use by the elderly which are at least 20 acres in size and have a minimum age requirement for residency of at least 55 years. 
(Code 1963, § 17-5)  
Sec. 7-46. - Fair housing commission. 
(a)  There shall be in the city a commission known as the Somerville Fair Housing Commission hereinafter called the "commission," which shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council, to serve without compensation. 
(b)  The members of the commission shall serve a term of three years; provided, however, that of the members first appointed to the commission two shall be appointed to a term of one year, two shall be appointed to a term of two years, and one shall be appointed for a term of three years. Thereafter the mayor shall appoint each successor to a term of three years. In the event of the death or resignation of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed to serve for the unexpired period of the term for which such member has been appointed. 
(c)  At least three members of the fair housing commission shall live in the city and the remaining members shall either live or work in the city at the time of their appointment and throughout their tenure. The members of the commission shall include persons who have experience or a demonstrated interest in housing, social services, or civil rights. One commissioner shall be a representative from the administration of the housing authority. One commissioner shall be a Somerville tenant who, at the time of his or her appointment, is eligible on the basis of income for assisted housing in the city. 
(d)  The mayor shall annually appoint a chairperson of the commission with the advice of the commission. Three members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting business. 
(Code 1963, § 17-6; Ord. No. 2018-13, 9-13-2018 )  
Sec. 7-47. - Fair housing commission duties. 
(a)  Whenever the commission receives a complaint that is or appears to be within the jurisdiction of the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (hereinafter "MCAD"), the commission shall: 
(1)  Prepare an MCAD complaint in the form and manner prescribed by MCAD and have such complaint signed under oath by the complainant; 
(2)  Transmit such complaint to MCAD for filing within three days of its preparation by the commission. 
(b)  Whenever the commission receives a complaint that is not within the jurisdiction of MCAD, the commission shall: 
(1)  Prepare a complaint in the form and manner prescribed by the commission; 
(2)  Investigate such complaint. In connection with any investigation, the commission may hold hearings, summon witnesses, compel their attendance, administer oaths, take the testimony of any person under oath, and require the protection of any evidence relating to any matter in question or under investigation by the commission. The power to summon witnesses as defined herein shall be limited to those powers and procedures set forth in Chapter 233, Section 8 of the General Laws. At any hearing before the commission, or any committee thereof, a witness shall have the right to be advised and represented by counsel. However, unavailability of counsel is not an adequate basis for requiring a delay of any hearing or proceeding; 
(3)  Attempt by mediation to resolve such complaint and recommend to all appropriate governmental agencies, federal, state or local, such action as it feels will resolve such complaint; 
(4)  After completion of the investigation of any such complaint not resolved by mediation, make a written report of its findings and recommendations to the mayor and the city council, and to any court or other governmental agency having jurisdiction of the matter in question and, in all cases, urge and use its best efforts to bring about compliance with its recommendations. 
(c)  In addition to the aforementioned complaint-processing responsibilities, the commission shall have the following additional functions, powers and duties: 
(1)  To make studies and surveys and to issue such publications and such results of investigations and research as, in its judgment, will tend to promote goodwill and minimize or eliminate discrimination in housing because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, handicap, children, marital status, sexual preference, source of income, military status, age, ancestry and/or national origin; 
(2)  To develop courses of instruction for presentation in public and private schools, public libraries, and other suitable places, devoted to eliminating prejudice, intolerance, bigotry and discrimination in housing and showing the need for mutual self-respect and the achievement of harmonious relations among various groups in the city; 
(3)  To render each year to the mayor and city council a full written report of all its activities and of its recommendations; 
(4)  To create such subcommittees from the members of the commission as, in the commission's judgment, will best aid in effectuating the policy of this article; 
(5)  To enter into cooperative working agreements with federal, state and city agencies, and to enlist the cooperation of the various racial, religious and ethnic groups, civic and community organizations and other groups in the city to effectuate the policy of this article. 
(Code 1963, § 17-7)  
Sec. 7-48. - Fair housing commission procedures. 
(a)  The commission may adopt rules and regulations consistent with this article and the laws of the commonwealth to carry out the policy and provisions of this article and the powers and duties of the commission. 
(b)  The commission shall adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its investigations. Said rules shall ensure the due process rights of all persons involved in the investigations. 
(c)  Any charge filed under this article must be filed within six months of the alleged act of discrimination. 
(d)  All commission records shall be public except those that are necessary to ensure privacy rights under other local, state or federal laws and those records that must be kept confidential in compliance with laws and rules of evidence. 
(Code 1963, § 17-8)  
Secs. 7-49—7-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION AND REMOVAL OF RENTAL UNITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-06, adopted March 28, 2019, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 7-61—7-76, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1985-9, §§ 1—16, August 22, 1985; Ord. No. 2006-09, § E, April 11, 2006. 
State Law reference— Condominiums, M.G.L.A. c. 183A. 
 
Sec. 7-61. - Declaration of emergency. 
Pursuant to the authority vested in the City of Somerville by Chapter 527 of 1983, as amended by Chapter 709 of 1989, and Chapter 218 of the Acts and Resolves of 1985, the City of Somerville finds and declares that a serious public emergency exists with respect to the housing of a substantial number of the residents of the City of Somerville. This rental housing emergency has been created by the lack of sufficient new rental housing production, by prolonged increases in housing costs at a rate substantially exceeding increases in personal income, and by increased costs of new housing construction and finance. In addition, the critical undersupply of housing in general within the surrounding region further exacerbates the emergency conditions that exist within Somerville. It has also been created by the effect of conversion of rental housing into condominiums or cooperatives. While these forms of home ownership may constitute an important and positive dimension in addressing the housing needs of the City of Somerville, absent sufficient new rental housing production, such conversion necessarily reduces the stock of rental housing otherwise available. A substantial and increasing shortage of rental housing, especially for the elderly, the disabled, and persons and families of low and moderate income, has been and will continue to be the result of this emergency. Unless the available stock of rental housing, and the tenants who reside therein, receive further protection from the consequences of conversion of said accommodations to condominiums and cooperatives than the law now affords, this rental housing shortage will generate serious threats to the public health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the city, particularly the elderly, the disabled, and persons and families of low and moderate income. It is therefore necessary that such emergency be dealt with immediately. 
( Ord. No. 2019-06 , 3-28-2019)  
Sec. 7-62. - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Somerville Condominium/Cooperative Conversion Ordinance." 
( Ord. No. 2019-06 , 3-28-2019)  
Sec. 7-63. - Definitions. 
As used in this ordinance, the following words shall, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, have the following meanings: 
Condominium or cooperative conversion eviction, shall mean 
(i)  an eviction of a tenant for the purpose of removing such tenant from a housing accommodation in order to facilitate the initial sale and transfer of legal title to a condominium or cooperative unit in such housing accommodation to a prospective purchaser, or 
(ii)  an eviction of a tenant by any other person who has purchased a condominium or cooperative unit in a housing accommodation when the tenant whose eviction is sought was a resident of the housing accommodation at the time the notice of intent to convert is given or should have been given to convert the building or buildings to the condominium or cooperative form of ownership pursuant to section 7-64. However, the eviction of a tenant for non-payment of rent or other substantial violation of a rental agreement shall in no event be deemed a condominium or cooperative conversion eviction, as long as the landlord would have taken the same action at the same time whether or not the owner was converting the building to condominiums. 
If a prior owner transfers property to a prospective purchaser where the owner knows or should have known that the prospective purchaser intends to convert the property to a condominium or cooperative unit, and such prior owner seeks to evict the tenant in anticipation of conversion, such eviction shall be deemed to be a condominium or cooperative conversion eviction for the purposes of this section. 
For purposes of this definition, the "initial sale and transfer of legal title" shall mean the first bona fide sale or proprietary lease for fair market value; and "eviction" shall include, without limitation, any action by an owner of a housing accommodation which causes substantial deprivation of a tenant's beneficial use of such housing accommodation, materially impairs such tenant's beneficial enjoyment of such housing accommodation, or is intended to compel such tenant to vacate or to be constructively evicted from such housing accommodation. An eviction shall be presumed to be a condominium or cooperative conversion eviction if the owner has the intent to convert, as defined herein. 
Condominium review board, the City of Somerville board established pursuant to section 7-66 herein. 
Condominium unit, a unit in a housing condominium as that term is defined in G. L. c. 183A. 
Conversion permit, the permit referred to in section 7-67 herein. 
Convert, the initial offer, in any manner, for sale and transfer of title to any residential unit as one or more condominium units pursuant to an individual unit deed or deeds or, in the case of a cooperative, an individual proprietary lease or leases. 
Cooperative unit, a unit in a housing cooperative as set forth in G. L. c. 157. 
Disabled tenant, a tenant who is a person or group of persons residing in the same unit of a housing accommodation any one of whom has a physical or mental impairment, as of the date the notice provided for hereunder is given or should have been given, which (1) substantially limits such person's ability to care for him or herself, perform manual tasks, walk, see, hear, speak, breathe, learn or work; or (2) significantly limits the housing appropriate for such person or significantly limits such person's ability to seek new housing; or (3) meet the disability related provisions contained within the definition of "handicapped persons of low income" in G.L. c. 121B § 1. 
Elderly tenant, a tenant who is a person or group of persons residing in the same unit of a housing accommodation any one of whom has reached the age of 65 years or over as of the date the notice provided for hereunder is given or should have been given. 
Household, all tenants who occupy a unit in a housing accommodation, including a single family, one person living alone, two or more families living together, or any other group of related or unrelated persons who share such unit. 1 [] 
Housing accommodation, any building or buildings, structure or structures, or part thereof, or land appurtenant thereto, or any other real or personal property rented or offered for rent for living or dwelling purposes, together with all services connected with the use or occupancy of such property, including two or more adjacent, adjoining, or contiguous buildings under common legal or beneficial ownership which are used in whole or in part for residential purposes, but not including the following: 
(i)  housing accommodations which the United States or the commonwealth or any authority created under the laws thereof either owns or operates; 
(ii)  housing accommodations in any hospital, convent, monastery, asylum, public institution or college or school dormitory operated exclusively for charitable or educational purposes, or in any nursing or rest home for the aged; 
(iii)  housing accommodations in hotels, motels, inns, tourist homes, and rooming and boarding houses which are occupied by transient guests staying for a period of fewer than 14 consecutive days; and 
(iv)  single family dwellings. 
Intent to convert, the intent to make the initial sale and transfer of title to a residential unit in a housing accommodation as one or more condominium or cooperative units pursuant to an individual unit deed or deeds, or, in the case of a cooperative, a proprietary lease or leases. Factors which shall be considered in determining whether an owner has the intent to convert are: 
(i)  a master deed or articles of organization for the housing accommodation has been prepared or recorded; 
(ii)  the owner of the housing accommodation dwelling has prepared or is in the process of preparing a purchase and sale agreement for the sale of any unit as a condominium or cooperative unit; 
(iii)  the owner has advertised for sale any unit in the housing accommodation as a condominium or cooperative unit; 
(iv)  the owner has shown to any prospective purchaser a unit in the housing accommodation for the sale of such unit as a condominium or cooperative unit; 
(v)  the owner has made any communication, written or oral, to any person residing in the housing accommodation expressly indicating an intent to sell any unit as a condominium or cooperative unit; 
(vi)  the owner has had any unit in the housing accommodation measured or inspected to facilitate the sale of the units as a condominium or cooperative unit; 
(vii)  the owner has had the land surveyed, an engineering study performed or architectural plans prepared for the purpose of converting such housing accommodation into one or more condominium or cooperative units; 
(viii)  retaining a real estate agent for the sale of the converted unit; and 
(ix)  retaining an attorney for the purpose of pursuing a conversion. 
Low/moderate income tenant household, a tenant/household is a person or group of persons residing in the same unit of a housing accommodation whose total income for the 12 months immediately preceding the date the notice provided for hereunder is given or should have been given is at or below 80% of Boston Area Median Income, adjusted for household size, as published annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Notice, the notice of intent to convert required in section 7-64(1) of this ordinance. 
Owner, a person who holds title in any manner to a building or housing accommodation, including without limitation, a corporation, partnership or trust, and an employee, agent, servant or other representative of such owner. 
Tenant, a person or group of persons who are collectively entitled to occupy a unit in a housing accommodation pursuant to a rental agreement written or implied, and who occupy such unit on the date that the notice required hereunder is given or should have been given. 
Tenant subsidy, any payment made by the federal or state government for or on behalf of any tenant to be applied toward the reduction of the tenant's rental payment. 
Unit or residential unit, the room or group of rooms within a housing accommodation which is used or intended for use as a residence by one household. 
( Ord. No. 2019-06 , 3-28-2019) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-4. 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Note— 1 "household" definition adapted from Community Development Block Grant regulations at 24 CFR 570.3. 
 
Sec. 7-64. - Condominium conversion requirements. 
(1)  Notice requirements. 
(a)  Vacant units. If an owner has an intent to convert an unoccupied housing accommodation to the condominium or cooperative form of ownership, the owner shall give one year advance notice to the condominium review board ("review board") on a form prescribed by the review board. This one year waiting period requirement shall not apply under the following circumstances: 
(i)  Where the unit had been previously owner occupied for the 12 months immediately preceding the unit becoming vacant; or 
(ii)  Where the city or designee purchases the vacant unit for the purpose of deed-restricting it for affordability; or 
(iii)  Where the owner is selling the unit to a family member as provided for under section 7-64(4)(c). 
(b)  Occupied units. If an owner has an intent to convert an occupied housing accommodation to the condominium or cooperative form of ownership, such owner shall give to each tenant then residing in a unit in such housing accommodation and simultaneously give to the condominium review board a written notice translated into the tenant's primary language if a need for such translation has been identified or is otherwise apparent to a reasonable person. This notice shall be deemed given on the date when the notice is delivered in person to the tenant or the date on which the notice is received by the tenant after being sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or the date of service by a deputy sheriff or constable. The notice shall state the following in clear and conspicuous language: 
(i)  that the owner intends to file (or has filed) a master deed at the Middlesex South District Registry of Deeds or Land Registration Office in Cambridge, thereby converting the housing accommodation to a condominium; or that the owner intends to file (or has filed) articles of organization with the secretary of the commonwealth, thereby converting the housing accommodation to a cooperative; and 
(ii)  that the tenant shall have one year from the date the notice is given before the tenant shall be required to vacate the housing accommodation, except that any elderly, disabled, or low/ moderate income tenant shall have five years from the date the notice is given before such tenant shall be required to vacate the housing accommodation; and 
(iii)  that, except as set forth in section 7-64(4)(c), the tenant shall have a period of 120 days, or 180 days in the case of an elderly, disabled, or low/moderate income tenant, from the date the notice is given to purchase the tenant's unit on terms and conditions which are substantially the same as or more favorable than those which the owner would, in good faith, extend or actually extends to prospective arm's length purchasers of such unit during the applicable period following the expiration of said tenant's right to purchase, as provided in section 7-64(4), provided that such terms and conditions represent fair market value for such unit in "as is" condition as described in section 7-64(4)(a) last paragraph; and 
(iv)  that there is a permit review process involving (1) a preliminary hearing after service of this notice and (2) a final hearing for a conversion permit at the end of the notice period or upon vacancy of the tenant, in addition to hearings as necessary that may be initiated by the tenants, owner or review board. These hearings shall be before the review board and that the tenant and owner shall be notified of the date and time at least two weeks prior to the hearing date. The tenant and owner shall have a right to attend any such hearings and to present evidence as to whether the owner has or has not met the requirements of the Somerville Condominium/Cooperative Conversion Ordinance; and 
(v)  that if the tenant does not purchase the tenant's unit or another unit in the housing accommodation, the tenant has a right to relocation benefits as provided in section 7-64(5); and 
(vi)  that the owner is obliged to find comparable housing for elderly, disabled, and low or moderate income tenants as provided in section 7-64(6) unless the owner is exempt thereunder or the notice period will be extended for up to two additional years; and that no change may be made in the tenant's rental agreement during the notice period, except that the owner may increase the rent at the expiration of the tenancy agreement by an amount not to exceed the sum which would result by multiplying said rent by the percentage increase in the consumer price index for all urban consumers as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics during the calendar year immediately preceding the date of the proposed rent increase, or ten percent, whichever is less and the owner may collect real estate taxes due under a valid tax escalation clause, provided such tax escalation clause was included within the rental agreement existing as of the date of the notice of intent to convert; and 
(vii)  that the tenant is entitled to an extension of the tenant's rental agreement to coincide with the period of notice, as provided in section 7-64(7) of this ordinance; and 
(viii)  that the tenant is entitled to freedom from unreasonable disruption and breach of quiet enjoyment as a result of rehabilitation, repairs or improvements made by the owner during the period of notice, as provided in Section 7-64(8); and 
(ix)  that the date the notice is deemed "given" is the date on which the notice is delivered in person to the tenant or the date on which the notice is received by the tenant after being sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or the date of service by a deputy sheriff or constable. 
The burden of proving that a tenant is elderly, disabled, or low or moderate income shall, if contested, rest with the tenant. The owner shall be entitled to provide the tenant with a written request to disclose whether the tenant claims to be elderly, disabled, or low or moderate income. In the event the tenant confirms in writing that they do not claim that they are elderly, disabled, or low or moderate income, then there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the tenant is not elderly, disabled, or low or moderate income, which presumption shall only be overcome by clear and convincing evidence to the contrary. Any tenant may request that the office of housing stability assist the tenant in establishing eligibility for extended protections on account of age, disability or status as a low or moderate income household. 
(2)  Renting units during conversion. 
(a)  If an owner intends to sell or offer for sale fewer than all of the units in a housing accommodation, within the applicable notice period or a reasonable time thereafter, the owner shall give to each tenant in a unit not for sale a notice which (a) informs such tenant of the date when the owner reasonably expects to offer the tenant's unit for sale and (b) states that, on or about such date, the owner will give to the tenant the notice required by section 7-64(1)(b)(i)—(ix) hereunder; and thereafter, at such time as the owner is ready to offer the unit for sale, the owner shall give the tenant then occupying such unit the notice required by section 7-64(1)(b)(i)—(ix) hereunder. The notice required herein must be translated into the tenant's primary language if a need for such translation has been identified or is otherwise apparent to a reasonable person. 
(b)  If a tenant who is entitled to receive the notice of intent to convert vacates such tenant's unit either before the initial sale and transfer of title to the residential unit as a condominium unit has occurred, and/or after the owner has otherwise already obtained a conversion permit for a unit which has not expired pursuant to section 7-67(3), then the owner shall give each prospective tenant of the unit written notice, prior to the inception of the tenancy, which informs such prospective tenant that the unit is being or will be offered for sale as a condominium or proprietary lease as a cooperative, but such prospective tenants shall not be entitled to the protections of this ordinance, except that they shall be entitled to the benefits of any remaining notice period for which the original tenant was entitled to, not to exceed one year. If such notice is not provided to the prospective tenant prior to the inception of the tenancy, the prospective tenant will then be afforded full tenant rights pursuant to section 7-64(1)(b) and the applicable notice period will restart in accordance with the status of the new tenant. 
(3)  Condominium/cooperation eviction. No owner shall seek or conduct a condominium or cooperative eviction against a tenant in occupancy of a housing accommodation at the time the notice of conversion was served or should have been served pursuant to 7-64(1)(b) above until the expiration of the notice period required therein. Failure of the owner to comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall constitute a defense in a summary process action against such tenant(s). 
(4)  Tenant/city and/or designee right to purchase. 
(a)  Occupied units. An owner shall extend to a tenant who is entitled to receive notice of intent to convert an exclusive right to purchase such tenant's unit, which right shall extend for a period of 120 days, or 180 days in the case of an elderly, disabled, or low/moderate income tenant beginning on the date the tenant receives a purchase and sale agreement from the owner containing the same or more favorable terms of sale than those the owner would, in good faith, offer, or actually does offer, to prospective arms' length purchasers of such unit, provided that such terms and conditions represent fair market value for such unit in "as is" condition. A copy of such agreement shall be contemporaneously provided to the condominium review board. Once the owner sets these terms of sale, the owner may not sell the unit under more favorable terms for 90 days from the expiration of the tenant's right to purchase. The tenant may exercise the right to purchase the tenant's unit by executing such purchase and sale agreement within the applicable period, whereupon the owner shall promptly countersign the agreement. Where there is more than one unrelated adult tenant in a household, the right to purchase shall only apply if (a) all tenants opt to purchase the unit jointly or (b) if all tenants other than those opting to exercise their rights to purchase waive their right to purchase under this section. 
If the tenant does not wish to exercise the tenant's right to purchase and the tenant so notifies the owner, in writing, prior to the expiration of the applicable period, the applicable period shall be deemed to have expired as of the date the owner receives such notice as to the tenant. The same applicable right to purchase that is provided to the tenant shall also be provided to the City of Somerville or its designee, who will maintain the property as affordable housing in perpetuity. In the event that the city or its designee purchases such unit and to the extent possible dependent on any restrictions of funding source, no tenant shall be displaced as result of such sale. The applicable period for this right to purchase shall run concurrently with the tenant's applicable right to purchase, but shall extend to the full notice period of 120 or 180 days, whichever is applicable, unless the city or its designee also waive such rights in writing. In the event that the tenant wishes to exercise the tenant's right to purchase, the tenant shall have priority over any other entity also wishing to purchase the unit pursuant to a right to purchase. Nothing herein shall be construed to provide any right to purchase, or obligation of any owner to sell, any unit for an amount which is less than the amount being offered, in good faith, to third parties, provided that such amount represents the fair market value of such unit in its condition as of the date of the notice set forth in section 7-64(1)(b) above. Fair market value shall include the cost of repairs required by law in the tenant's unit in order to sell it as a condominium and a proportional amount of costs based on square footage for repairs required by law to be performed to the common areas in order to sell the unit as a condominium. Fair market value in "as is" condition does not contemplate pricing reflecting the cost of optional upgrades or any required upgrades or repairs that are triggered by optional upgrades. 
(b)  Unoccupied units. With respect to unoccupied units, the owner shall provide a 120 day right to purchase to the City of Somerville or its designee, within 30 days of notification to the condominium review board of the intent to convert, containing the same or more favorable terms of sale than those the owner intends to offer to prospective arms' length purchasers. A non-tenant entity as set forth above wishing to purchase shall inform the owner of its intent to purchase within 120 days of the notice and shall execute a purchase and sale agreement within 30 days of informing the owner of its intent to purchase. Nothing herein shall be construed to provide any right to purchase, or obligation of any owner to sell, any unit for an amount which is less than the amount being offered, in good faith, to third parties, provided that such amount represents the fair market value of such unit in its condition as of the date of the notice set forth in section 7-64(1)(a) above. 
(c)  If an owner has an intent to convert a housing accommodation to a condominium or cooperative form of ownership, and the owner is transferring property as part of a conversion to a relative within the fourth degree of kindred, there shall be no tenant/city right to purchase. Any notices required pursuant to section 7-64 need not comply with section 7-64(1)(b)(iii). Any subsequent sale of such unit within a two-year period from the date of sale shall be subject to the city or its designee's right to purchase and the notice requirements of section 7-64(1)(b)(iii). 
(5)  Relocation payments. An owner shall pay to a tenant who is entitled to receive notice of the owner's intent to convert, and who does not purchase the unit which such tenant occupies or another unit in the same housing accommodation and who relocates within the notice period or such longer period allowed for access to public or subsidized housing as set forth in this section below, a relocation benefit of $10,000.00 per unit for elderly, disabled, or low/moderate income tenants and $6,000.00 per unit for all other tenants. This dollar amount shall be adjusted annually in February of each year, by an amount equal to the increase in the consumer price index for all urban consumers (as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics) during the immediately preceding calendar year. In the event that a tenant vacates the premises pursuant to a notice under this ordinance without having paid all rent due, the owner may subtract any sums owed from the required payment of moving expenses. in the event an elderly, disabled, low or moderate income tenant is seeking public or subsidized housing and requires a judgment for possession to be issued in order to obtain emergency status or other preference/priority necessary to access such housing or housing subsidy program on an expedited basis, such tenant shall continue to be entitled to the relocation benefit whether or not the tenant has vacated by the end of the notice period, so long as the tenant vacates the unit within 90 days of any trial date set forth in a summary process complaint filed against the tenant, or such longer time period as agreed upon by the parties. 
Relocation benefits shall be paid to the tenant within ten days after the date on which the tenant vacates the unit with the following exception: in recognition of the fact that many relocation costs must be paid in whole or in part before a tenant actually moves out, the owner shall, upon request of the tenant, make payments, up to the amount authorized by this section, directly to a moving company, realtor, storage facility, or successor landlord (upon receipt of a signed lease, tenancy at will agreement, or letter signed by the prospective landlord indicating that he/she has agreed to rent a particular unit to the tenant as of a date certain with a copy of proof of ownership), prior to the date on which they vacate the premises. 
(6)  Housing search assistance. Any owner shall assist elderly, disabled, and low or moderate income tenants who are entitled to notice of intent to convert by locating, within the five-year period of the notice to such tenants, comparable rental housing within the City of Somerville which rents, for at least the remainder of the notice period, for a sum which is equal to or less than the sum which any such tenant had been paying for the tenant's unit. The failure of the owner of such residential property to find such comparable housing shall extend the period of notice required by section 7-64(1)(b)(vi) until the owner locates such comparable rental housing, or for 2 additional years, whichever occurs first. 
Any owner who has both kept rent levels at or below Somerville Housing Authority Section 8 payment standards in place at the time the notice is served for a minimum of three consecutive years and has limited rent increases to no more than five percent annually for three consecutive years shall be exempt from (a) being required to locate comparable rental housing and (b) from providing an additional two-year notice period in the event that after five years, the elderly, disabled or low or moderate-income tenant has not yet located alternative housing. 
(7)  Extension of rental agreement. An owner shall give to a tenant who is entitled to notice of intent to convert an extension of such tenant's rental agreement, whether it be a lease or a written or oral tenancy at will, until the expiration of the notice period or the applicable right to purchase period, whichever is later. Conversely, if the one-year or five-year notice period would expire before the expiration date of such tenant's rental agreement, then the notice period shall be extended to coincide with the expiration date of such rental agreement. 
The provisions of such rental agreement may not be modified by the owner except with respect to the amount of annual rent. The total increase in rent for any one year during the period of notice shall not exceed an amount equal to the sum which would result by multiplying said rent by the percentage increase in the consumer price index for all urban consumers as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, during the calendar year immediately preceding the date of receipt of the notice of intent to convert, or ten percent, whichever is less; provided, however, nothing herein shall limit the right of an owner to any amounts which may be due under a valid tax escalation clause, provided such tax escalation clause was included within the rental agreement existing as of the date of the notice of intent to convert. The review board shall be notified of any rent increase on a form prescribed by the review board. 
(8)  Renovation to units during the notice period. Tenants are entitled to freedom from unreasonable disruption as a result of rehabilitation, repairs or improvements. The owner may only make repairs in a tenanted unit undergoing conversion that are required by the State Sanitary or Building Codes. Other unit renovations or improvements may only be undertaken with the express written consent of the tenant. In the event that the owner wishes to make optional upgrades to vacant units or common areas, the owner must comply with review board rules and policies regarding such repairs or renovations including, but not limited to, days and times repairs can be made, methods for notifying tenants in advance of the work schedule, rules regarding any interruption of services and clean up procedures. 
(9)  Tenant's right to vacate. A tenant shall be permitted to vacate the unit upon 30 days' notice without penalty regardless of the status of their rental agreement, during the notice period. 
The rights specified in section 7-64 hereunder shall vest with a tenant at the time that the owner intends to convert any unit in such property to the condominium or cooperative form of ownership. 
( Ord. No. 2019-06 , 3-28-2019)  
Sec. 7-65. - Notice to tenants given prior to date of this ordinance. 
In the case of any housing accommodation for which the applicable notice required under City of Somerville Ordinance 1985-9 was given prior to the adoption of this ordinance, the period of notice shall be deemed to have commenced on the date the notice was received by the tenant. 
( Ord. No. 2019-06 , 3-28-2019)  
Sec. 7-66. - Condominium/cooperative review board. 
(1)  There is hereby established a condominium/cooperative conversion review board to consist of five members, all of whom shall be City of Somerville residents. The failure of a review board member to reside in Somerville shall result in automatic termination of membership. Review board members shall serve staggered terms of three years each. The review board shall include two homeowners, two tenants, and one elderly, disabled, or low or moderate income person, who may be either a homeowner or a tenant. 
(2)  Review board members shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. For good cause shown, a review board member may be removed by the mayor prior to the expiration of such member's term of office. Members of the review board shall receive such annual compensation as the mayor shall propose and the city council shall approve. 
(3)  The review board shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this ordinance and shall be responsible for promulgating such rules, policies and procedures, as it may deem advisable in furtherance of its purposes. The review board may adopt such rules, policies and procedures by majority vote. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the review board shall be responsible for developing administrative forms, conducting hearings, and granting or denying conversion permits. 
(4)  Review board members shall be deemed public employees for purposes of G.L. c. 258. Review board members shall be deemed special municipal employees for purposes of G.L. c. 268A. 
( Ord. No. 2019-06 , 3-28-2019)  
Sec. 7-67. - Permitting process. 
(1)  Application for conversion permits and granting of conditional permits. 
(a)  Any owner who has an intent to convert a housing accommodation shall provide notice of intent to covert to the review board and tenant as required in section 7-64(1). In addition, the owner shall, within one month of service of said notice, submit to the review board a fully completed application for a conversion permit and all required documentation. 
(b)  Upon submission of a completed application for a conversion permit, a preliminary hearing will be scheduled for an upcoming regularly scheduled review board meeting. The review board shall be responsible for giving written notice to the owner and the tenant(s) described in paragraph 2(e) below stating the date, time, and place of any hearing regarding the housing accommodation in which such tenants reside or formerly resided. At such preliminary hearing the owner shall appear and the tenants may appear and testify, if so desired. The review board, after reviewing relevant documents and any testimony will render a determination regarding whether the actions taken by the owner thus far comply with this ordinance. In addition, the review board shall review with any tenants present their rights afforded by this ordinance. If the review board agrees that the owner has complied with its obligations under this ordinance a conditional conversion permit shall issue. Such conditional permit shall indicate if the unit is tenanted and the expiration date of any applicable notice period. An owner may not seek a final conversion permit until the tenant has vacated the unit or the notice period has expired, whichever comes first. 
(c)  In the event that the tenant and the city and/or its designee have relinquished their right to purchase the unit pursuant to section 7-64(4) an owner who has received a conditional permit may sell the unit to any other purchaser prior to issuance of a conversion permit only under the condition that the new owner takes the unit subject to the tenant's rights under this ordinance including, but not limited to, the right to remain in their unit for the remainder of any notice period, payment of relocation expenses and the duty to find comparable housing. In order to effectuate such a sale the owner must provide to the review board and the tenant a sworn document signed by the then current and future owners stating that the purchaser stands in the shoes of the prior owner and that they must fully comply with all obligations of the owner under this ordinance. 
(d)  If at any point a tenant or an owner believes the other has not complied with their obligations under this ordinance they may request a hearing before the review board. The review board will notify the tenant, all other building tenants also undergoing conversion and the owner of the time and date of the hearing. The party that requested the hearing must appear and the other party may appear at such hearing and may testify. 
(2)  Conversion permit timeline. 
(a)  An owner may not engage in a condominium conversion eviction of a tenant or sell a unit for immediate occupancy by the purchasing owner prior to the granting of a conversion permit by the board. 
(b)  An owner of a unit that was occupied at the time the notice of intent was provided to the review board may request a conversion permit on a form provided by the review board no sooner than the earlier of (i) the expiration of the notice period or (ii) when the tenant vacates the premises or (iii) when the tenant or city or its designee purchase the unit. 
(c)  An owner of a unit that was vacant at the time the notice of intent to convert was provided to the review board may request a conversion permit on a form provided by the review board at the end of any required waiting period. 
(d)  In addition to other documentation required for a conditional permit or a conversion permit, an owner applying for a permit shall submit with the application a complete list of names and contact information of (i) current tenants; (ii) former tenants who vacated during the previous 12 months, if known, or reasonably discoverable in the exercise of due diligence; (iii) any tenant who was evicted during the previous 12 months along with a copy of the summons and complaint; and (iv) any tenants who received a notice to quit or a notice of rent increase during the previous 12 months, with a copy of the notice to quit and/or the notice of rent increase. 
(e)  A conversion permit shall be granted where all documents required by the review board have been submitted and the review board has made a determination after a hearing, of which notice has been provided to the owner and tenants as required by paragraph (e) below, that the requirements of sections 7-64(1)(b)—(9) in the case of a housing accommodation have been met. 
Notwithstanding the above, the review board may deny a conversion permit where documentation is incomplete in any material respect. The review board may also impose reasonable conditions on the granting of a permit. The review board may deny a conversion permit where it has made a determination that any document or statement is false in any material respect. In addition, the review board, in its discretion, may deny a conversion permit if the review board finds that the owner has taken any action to circumvent the state or local condominium law, including, but not limited to, unreasonable rent increases, reduction or elimination of services, termination of tenancy without cause, or the imposition of new conditions of the tenancy. The review board may revoke a conversion permit previously granted where it makes a determination that any document or statement was false in any material respect at the time of the review board's decision to grant the conversion permit. The review board shall have the power to require the submission of additional documentation, including without limitation, purchase and sale agreements, deeds, agreements with real estate brokers, and/or cancelled checks, if in the review board's reasonable judgment, such documentation is necessary to ensure the fairness of its deliberations. The review board may, in its discretion, continue a hearing. A decision shall be rendered by the review board within 60 days of the close of the hearing. 
(3)  Conversion permit expiration. A conversion permit shall lapse and the owner shall reapply for a new permit subject to the then current provisions of this ordinance or any successor ordinance in the case of either of the following: (1) the owner has failed to file a master deed within one year after the date on which the conversion permit has been granted; or (2) the unit for which a conversion permit has been granted has not been sold to a bona fide purchaser or leased by proprietary lease to a bona fide lessee within two years after the date of the granting of said permit. 
( Ord. No. 2019-06 , 3-28-2019)  
Sec. 7-68. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall take effect on July 31, 2019. 
( Ord. No. 2019-06 , 3-28-2019)  
Sec. 7-69. - Severability. 
In the event that the court determines that Chapter 218 of the Acts and Resolves of 1985 does not remain in full force and effect, or that the City of Somerville is otherwise prohibited from regulating dwellings with less than four units, it is the intent of this ordinance to regulate four or more units in the same manner as set forth in this ordinance, to the extent permitted by state law. Furthermore, in the event that the court determines that Chapter 218 of the Acts and Resolves of 1985 does not remain in full force and effect, it is the intent of this ordinance to provide any tenant protections to the extent permitted by state law. Otherwise, it is hereby declared to be the intention of this ordinance that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of these ordinances are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of these ordinances, shall be declared invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of these ordinances, since the same would have been enacted without the incorporation in these ordinances of any such invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section. 
( Ord. No. 2019-06 , 3-28-2019)  
Secs. 7-70—7-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SOMERVILLE MUNICIPAL AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-05, adopted Mar. 24, 2005, deleted the former Art. V, §§ 7-91—7-96, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to affordable housing trust and derived from Ord. No. 1989-3, §§ 1—6, adopted June 8, 1989. 
 
Sec. 7-91. - Creation of trust/purpose. 
In accordance with Chapter 491 of the Acts of 2004, which the City of Somerville has accepted in accordance with Mass. General Laws, c. 4, § 4, by Order No. 178184 dated March 24, 2005, there is hereby established a trust to be known as the Somerville Municipal Affordable Housing Trust Fund (the "trust"). The purpose of the Trust is to provide for the creation and preservation of affordable housing in the City of Somerville, for the benefit of low and moderate income households. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-24-2005)  
Sec. 7-92. - Board of trustees. 
There is hereby established a board of trustees (the "board"), which shall include no fewer than five and no more than nine trustees, including ex officio those persons who are serving from time to time in the following capacities: the Mayor of Somerville or designee; the President of the Somerville City Council or designee; and the Executive Director of the Somerville Housing Authority or designee. Those members of the board who are not serving in an ex officio capacity shall be appointed by the mayor and are designated as public agents for purposes of the constitution of the commonwealth. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-24-2005)  
Sec. 7-93. - Powers of trustees. 
In addition to the powers expressly enumerated in Chapter 491 of the Acts of 2004, as it may be amended from time to time, the board shall have the power to make grants and loans upon such terms, as the board shall, in its sole discretion, deem advisable. The board shall exercise its powers in furtherance of the purposes of said Chapter 491 and this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-24-2005)  
Sec. 7-94. - No necessity for appropriation of monies. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of any general or special law to the contrary, all monies paid to the trust in accordance with any zoning ordinance or by-law, exaction fee, or private contributions, shall be paid directly to the trust, and need not be appropriated or accepted and approved into the trust. General revenues appropriated into the trust become trust property; and to be expended, these funds do not need to be further appropriated. All monies remaining in the trust at the end of any fiscal year, whether or not expended by the board within one year of the date they were appropriated into the trust, remain trust property. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-24-2005)  
Sec. 7-95. - Public employees. 
The trust is a public employer and the members of the board are public employees for purposes of M.G.L. c. 258. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-24-2005)  
Sec. 7-96. - Special municipal employees. 
The trust shall be deemed a municipal agency and the trustees special municipal employees, for purposes of M.G.L. c. 268A. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-24-2005)  
Sec. 7-97. - Tax exemption. 
The trust is exempt from the provisions of M.G.L. c. 59 and c. 62 and from any other provisions concerning the payment of taxes based upon or measured by property or income imposed by the commonwealth of any political subdivision thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-24-2005)  
Sec. 7-98. - Annual audit. 
The books and records of the trust shall be audited annually by an independent auditor in accordance with accepted accounting practices. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-24-2005)  
Sec. 7-99. - Filing with city clerk. 
The declaration of trust, which establishes and controls the trust fund, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-24-2005)  
Sec. 7-100. - Governmental body. 
The trust is a governmental body for purposes of M.G.L. c. 39, §§ 23A, 23B, and 23C. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-24-2005)  
Sec. 7-101. - City board. 
The trust is a board of the city for purposes of M.G.L. c. 30B and M.G.L. c. 40, § 15A, provided 
that M.G.L. c. 30B procedures need not be followed in the making of grants and loans to nonprofit organizations for the purposes of providing affordable housing, but only in the procurement of goods and services on behalf of the trust. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-24-2005)  
Sec. 7-102. - Ratification. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of any general or special law to the contrary, all actions which caused monies or property to be placed, pursuant to provisions of the Somerville Zoning Ordinance, in the Somerville Affordable Housing Trust Fund established by Ordinance No. 1989-3 and Declaration of Trust dated June 8, 1989 as amended, and all actions of the board pursuant to said ordinance and declaration of trust as amended are hereby ratified, validated, and confirmed insofar as any of these actions may have been invalid by reason of the prior invalidity of said ordinance, declaration of trust as amended, or procedures followed by the board. This provision shall be deemed severable if determined to be invalid by a court of law, and its invalidity shall have no effect on the validity of the rest of the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, 3-24-2005)  
Secs. 7-103—7-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PROCEDURE FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION IN THE CITY'S LAND USE AND ZONING AND BUILDING REGULATIONS PURSUANT TO FAIR HOUSING LAWS 
 
Sec. 7-131. - Purpose. 
It is the policy of the jurisdiction, pursuant to the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and the Massachusetts Fair Housing Act, G.L. Chapter 151B (hereafter "fair housing laws"), to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and procedures to ensure equal access to housing and facilitate the development of housing for individuals with disabilities. This article establishes a procedure for making requests for reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures of the jurisdiction to comply fully with the intent and purpose of fair housing laws. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 10-13-2011)  
Sec. 7-132. - Findings. 
The city council finds: The federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and Massachusetts Fair Housing Act, G.L. Chapter 151B impose an affirmative duty on local governments to make reasonable accommodation in their land use and zoning regulations and practices when such accommodation may be necessary to afford individuals with disabilities an equal opportunity to housing; 
(1)  The office of strategic planning and community development must identify and develop a plan for removing governmental constraints to housing for individuals with disabilities including local land use and zoning constraints or providing reasonable accommodation; 
(2)  A fair housing reasonable accommodation procedure for individuals with disabilities and developers of housing for individuals with disabilities to seek relief in the application of land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures will further the jurisdiction's compliance with federal and state fair housing laws and provide greater opportunities for the development of critically needed housing for individuals with disabilities. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 2, 10-13-2011)  
Sec. 7-133. - Applicability. 
Reasonable accommodation in the land use and zoning context means providing individuals with disabilities or developers of housing for people with disabilities, flexibility in the application of land use and zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures, or even waiving certain requirements, when it is necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities. 
In accordance with 42 United States Code Section 3602, an individual with a disability is someone who has a physical or mental impairment that limits one or more major life activities; anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone with a record of such impairment, pursuant to 24 Code of Federal Regulations Section 100.201. 
A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any individual with a disability, his or her representative, or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities, when the application of a land use, zoning or building regulation, policy, practice or procedure acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 3, 10-13-2011)  
Sec. 7-134. - Notice to the public of availability of accommodation process. 
Notice of the availability of reasonable accommodation shall be prominently displayed at the office of strategic planning and community development, advising the public of the availability of the procedure for eligible individuals. Forms for requesting reasonable accommodation shall be available to the public in the office of strategic planning and community development. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 4, 10-13-2011)  
Sec. 7-135. - Requesting reasonable accommodation. 
(a)  In order to make housing available to an individual with a disability, any eligible person as defined in section 7-133 may request a reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures. 
(b)  Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be in writing and provide the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the individual(s) requesting reasonable accommodation; 
(2)  Name and address of the property owner(s); 
(3)  Address of the property for which accommodation is requested; 
(4)  The current actual use of the property; 
(5)  The basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled under the Acts; 
(6)  Description of the requested accommodation and the regulation(s), policy or procedure for which accommodation is sought; 
(7)  Reason that the requested accommodation may be necessary for the individual(s) with the disability to use and enjoy the dwelling; 
(8)  Copies of memoranda, correspondence, pictures, plans or background information reasonably necessary to reach a decision regarding the need for the accommodation; and 
(9)  Other supportive information deemed necessary by the office of strategic planning and community development to facilitate proper consideration of the request, consistent with fair housing laws. 
(c)  A request for reasonable accommodation in regulations, policies, practices and procedures may be filed at any time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. A reasonable accommodation does not affect an individual's obligations to comply with other applicable regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation. 
(d)  If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable accommodation, the office of strategic planning and community development will provide assistance to ensure that the process is accessible. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 5, 10-13-2011)  
Sec. 7-136. - Reviewing authority. 
(a)  Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the office of strategic planning and community development using the criteria set forth in section 7-137. 
(b)  The office of strategic planning and community development shall issue a written decision on a request for reasonable accommodation within 30 days of the date of the application and may either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with the required findings set forth in section 7-137. 
(c)  If necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, the office of strategic planning and community development may request further information from the applicant consistent with fair housing laws, specifying in detail the information that is required. In the event that a request for additional information is made, the 30-day period to issue a decision is stayed until the applicant responds to the request. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 6, 10-13-2011)  
Sec. 7-137. - Required findings. 
The written decision to grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation shall be consistent with fair housing laws and based on the following factors: 
(1)  Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation, will be used by an individual with disabilities protected under fair housing laws; 
(2)  Whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make housing available to an individual with disabilities protected under the fair housing laws; 
(3)  Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the jurisdiction and; 
(4)  Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the jurisdiction's land use and zoning or building program. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 7, 10-13-2011)  
Sec. 7-138. - Written decision on the request for reasonable accommodation. 
(a)  The written decision on the request for reasonable accommodation shall explain in detail the basis of the decision, including the office of strategic planning and community development's findings on the criteria set forth in section 7-137. All written decisions shall give notice of the applicant's right to appeal and to request reasonable accommodation in the appeals process as set forth below. The notice of decision shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail. 
(b)  The written decision of the office of strategic planning and community development shall be final unless an applicant appeals it to the zoning board of appeals. 
(c)  While a request for reasonable accommodation is pending, all laws and regulations otherwise applicable to the property that is the subject of the request shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 8, 10-13-2011)  
Sec. 7-139. - Appeals. 
(a)  Within 30 days of the date of the office of strategic planning and community development's written decision, an applicant may appeal an adverse decision. Appeals from the adverse decision shall be made in writing. 
(b)  If an individual needs assistance in filing an appeal on an adverse decision, the zoning board of appeals will provide assistance to ensure that the appeals process is accessible. 
(c)  All appeals shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal. 
(d)  Nothing in this procedure shall preclude an aggrieved individual from seeking any other state or federal remedy available. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 9, 10-13-2011)  
Sec. 7-140. - Fee. 
The fee for an application for reasonable accommodation shall be established by the office of strategic planning and community development. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 10, 10-13-2011)  
Sec. 7-141. - Other requirements. 
(a)  An approved request for reasonable accommodation is subject to the applicant's compliance with all other applicable zoning regulations. 
(b)  A modification approved under this chapter is considered a personal accommodation for the individual applicant and does not run with the land. 
(c)  Where appropriate, the office of strategic planning and community development may condition its approval on any or all of the following: 
(1)  Inspection of the property periodically, as specified, to verify compliance with this section and any conditions of approval; 
(2)  Removal of the improvements, where removal would not constitute an unreasonable financial burden, when the need for which the accommodation was granted no longer exists; 
(3)  Time limits and/or expiration of the approval if the need for which the accommodation was granted no longer exists; 
(4)  Recordation of a deed restriction requiring removal of the accommodating feature once the need for it no longer exists; 
(5)  Measures to reduce the impact on surrounding uses; 
(6)  Measures in consideration of the physical attributes of the property and structures; 
(7)  Other reasonable accommodations that may provide an equivalent level of benefit and/or that will not result in an encroachment into required setbacks, exceedance of maximum height, lot coverage or floor area ratio requirements specified for the zone district; and 
(8)  Other conditions necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 11, 10-13-2011)  
Secs. 7-142—7-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - UNIVERSITY ACCOUNTABILITY 
 
Sec. 7-151. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically indicated otherwise, these definitions shall apply and control in this article. 
Campus means any real property owned by a school. 
City means the City of Somerville. 
Directory means the compilation of names, addresses, telephone numbers, statuses, and expected graduation dates gathered by a school in compliance with these sections. 
School means any post-secondary educational institution that provides individuals with a degree or certification upon completion of a curriculum and owns or leases property within the city that houses students at that school. 
Student means any person who is enrolled in the school, whether full time or part-time. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01 , § I, 1-22-2015)  
Sec. 7-152. - Purpose. 
Many students live within the campuses of their respective universities and colleges. These students receive the benefit of their school's security or campus police services in addition to the city's police services. Because the schools know where their on-campus students live, the schools are better positioned to provide the security and regulation enforcement services necessary to protect students and property in these on-campus regions. 
Many other students, however, live outside the campuses of their respective universities and colleges. When schools do not know where their off-campus students live, it is more difficult to assess and satisfy off-campus security and regulatory enforcement needs. Therefore, it is essential for schools within the city to collect and maintain records of the locally residing off-campus student population to better assist the city in its provision of security and regulatory enforcement services for residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01 , § II, 1-22-2015)  
Sec. 7-153. - Collection of records—Directory. 
Each and every school in any part of the city shall collect and maintain a directory of the names, complete addresses, statuses (i.e., undergraduate or graduate, part-time or full time), expected graduation dates, and telephone numbers of all students enrolled at the school. In addition, the school shall collect and maintain a list of all properties currently owned, leased, rented, or operated by the school for use as students' residences. The addresses and telephone numbers collected for the purposes of these sections must reflect where the student actually resides locally and at what phone number the student can be reached for the period in which the student resides in the city. 
Each and every school shall collect the required directory information no less than twice each calendar year such that any school on a semester system shall collect and update the required directory information no later than 30 calendar days following the first day of each semester, and any school on a quarterly system shall collect and update the required directory information no later than 30 calendar days following the first day of the first quarter of each academic year, and every alternating quarter of the academic year thereafter. 
Upon collection, all information collected for the directory shall be organized and maintained by the school in such a way that the required information is easily accessible and understandable to any authorized school official. 
All schools shall be responsible for publicizing to their students the limitations of the city's zoning ordinance which limits occupancy to not more than four unrelated individuals. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01 , § III, 1-22-2015)  
Sec. 7-154. - Report and statistics supplied to the city. 
Each and every school shall supply a report with required statistics to the city. This report shall be based on the most current information in the directory. The information in the report shall be compiled by the school within 45 calendar days of the beginning of each semester or quarter that information is gathered. The report required by this section shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The total number of students enrolled at the school as of the date of collection of the directory information; 
(2)  The total number of students enrolled at the school as of the date of collection of the directory information that reside on the campus of the school; 
(3)  The total number of students enrolled at the school as of the date of collection of the directory information that reside off the campus of the school in the city; 
(4)  An anonymous breakdown of the number of students enrolled at the school as of the date of collection of the directory information that reside off the campus of the school, organized by address and unit number, and also including ZIP code, student status (i.e., undergraduate or graduate, part-time or full time) and expected graduation date; the breakdown shall further include, from the following list, the type of off-campus housing each student resides in: 
a.  Property owned, leased, rented, or operated by the school; 
b.  The home of a family member; or 
c.  Other private housing, and 
(5)  A complete list of the addresses of all properties currently owned, leased, rented, or operated by the school at which students are housed. 
Each and every school shall forward within 45 calendar days of the beginning of each semester or quarter that information is gathered the report required by this section to the clerk of the city and the clerk shall forward the report to the mayor of the city and the superintendent of the office of inspectional services. The clerk also shall docket the report and include the docket on the agenda of the next-occurring meeting of the city council. The failure or refusal of a school to forward the report shall be deemed an event of non-compliance with the provisions of these sections. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01 , § IV, 1-22-2015)  
Sec. 7-155. - Violations. 
It is unlawful for any school to fail to comply with the requirements of this section. The provisions of this section may be enforced by the superintendent of inspectional services by a noncriminal disposition pursuant to G.L. c. 40, § 21D. Each violation of a provision of this section is a separate and distinct offense, and in a case of a continuing violation, each day that a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. Any school violating any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-11 of this Code. The imposition of penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the city from instituting other remedies to abate violations of this article as permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01 , § IV, 1-22-2015)  
Secs. 7-156—7-189. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SOMERVILLE MUNICIPAL JOB CREATION AND RETENTION TRUST FUND[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-01 , adopted February 22, 2018, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 7-103—7-113. For purposes of maintaining Code format, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 7-191—7-200. 
 
Sec. 7-190. - Creation of trust/purpose. 
In accordance with Chapter 199 of the Acts of 2016, there is hereby established a trust to be known as the Somerville Municipal Job Creation and Retention Trust Fund (the "trust"). The purpose of the Trust is to assist in the creation and maintenance of employment opportunities within the City of Somerville for the citizens of the City of Somerville. 
( Ord. No. 2018-01, § 7-103, 2-22-2018 )  
Sec. 7-191. - Board of trustees. 
The board of trustees shall be composed of the following representatives: 
•  Mayor of Somerville or designee; 
•  City Council President or designee; 
•  Representatives of two workforce development non-profits for a period of three years; 
•  Two Somerville residents for a period of three years, with a preference that one resident have participated in a workforce development program in the City of Somerville; 
•  Representatives of two local businesses for a period of three years; and 
•  Superintendent of schools or designee. 
Those members of the board who are not serving in an ex officio capacity shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the confirmation of the city council, and are designated as public agents for purposes of the constitution of the commonwealth. In order to stagger the terms of the non-ex-officio members, the initial appointments of one of the two representatives of the workforce development non-profit members, one of the two Somerville residents, and one of the two representatives of the Somerville local businesses shall be for two years. A vacancy in any of the non-ex-officio members appointed shall be filled by the mayor, subject to city council approval. 
( Ord. No. 2018-01, § 7-104, 2-22-2018 )  
Sec. 7-192. - Powers of trustees. 
The trustees shall have all of the powers expressly enumerated in Chapter 199 of the Acts of 2016, as it may be amended from time to time, and shall have the power to make grants and loans upon such terms, as the board shall, in its sole discretion, deem advisable. 
( Ord. No. 2018-01, § 7-105, 2-22-2018 )  
Sec. 7-193. - No necessity for appropriation of monies. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of any general or special law to the contrary, all monies paid to the trust in accordance with any zoning ordinance or by-law, exaction fee, or private contributions, shall be paid directly to the trust, and need not be appropriated or accepted and approved into the trust. General revenues appropriated into the trust become trust property; and to be expended, these funds do not need to be further appropriated. All monies remaining in the trust at the end of any fiscal year, whether or not expended by the board within one year of the date they were appropriated into the trust, remain trust property. 
( Ord. No. 2018-01, § 7-106, 2-22-2018 )  
Sec. 7-194. - Public employees. 
The trust is a public employer and the members of the board are public employees for purposes of M.G.L. c. 258. 
( Ord. No. 2018-01, § 7-107, 2-22-2018 )  
Sec. 7-195. - Special municipal employees. 
The trust shall be deemed a municipal agency and the trustees special municipal employees, for purposes of M.G.L. c. 268A. 
( Ord. No. 2018-01, § 7-108, 2-22-2018 )  
Sec. 7-196. - Tax exemption. 
The trust is exempt from the provisions of M.G.L. c. 59 and c. 62 and from any other provisions concerning the payment of taxes based upon or measured by property or income imposed by the commonwealth of any political subdivision thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2018-01, § 7-109, 2-22-2018 )  
Sec. 7-197. - Annual audit. 
The books and records of the trust shall be audited annually by an independent auditor in accordance with accepted accounting practices. 
( Ord. No. 2018-01, § 7-110, 2-22-2018 )  
Sec. 7-198. - Filing with city clerk. 
The declaration of trust, which establishes and controls the trust fund, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
( Ord. No. 2018-01, § 7-111, 2-22-2018 )  
Sec. 7-199. - Governmental body. 
The trust is a governmental body for purposes of M.G.L. c. 39, §§ 23A, 23B, and 23C. 
( Ord. No. 2018-01, § 7-112, 2-22-2018 )  
Sec. 7-200. - City board. 
The trust is a board of the city for purposes of M.G.L. c. 30B and M.G.L. c. 40, § 15A, provided that M.G.L. c. 30B procedures need not be followed in the making of grants and loans to nonprofit organizations for the purposes of furthering the purpose of the trust, but only in the procurement of goods and services on behalf of the trust. 
( Ord. No. 2018-01, § 7-113, 2-22-2018 )  
Secs. 7-201—7-219. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - COMMUNITY BENEFITS NEIGHBORHOOD COUNCIL DESIGNATION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-10 , adopted June 28, 2018, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 7-171—7-175. For purposes of maintaining Code format, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 7-220—7-224. 
 
Sec. 7-220. - Definitions. 
Community benefits shall mean the provision of programs or services that directly benefit Somerville residents including but not limited to human services, the arts, cultural enrichment, sustainability measures, public health, preventing and mitigating commercial and residential displacement, housing, educational programs focused on science, technology, engineering, and other areas of community enrichment. 
Community benefits agreement shall mean a written agreement negotiated by and between a designated neighborhood council and a developer to mitigate development impacts in a specific neighborhood arising from such developer's project. A community benefits agreement may include a commitment to provide or fund one or more community benefits. 
Community benefits funds shall mean monies offered to and received by the city in connection with any agreements entered into with the city or otherwise by which funds are given to and held by the city to be expended for community benefits and other related purposes. 
Community benefits stabilization fund or fund shall mean any fund created for the specific purpose of funding community benefits and other related programs. Such fund shall be created by the city council pursuant to G.L. c. 40, § 5 and any expenditures therefrom shall be appropriated in accordance therewith. Funds allocated to mitigate development impacts in a specific neighborhood shall be deposited into a neighborhood-specific community benefits stabilization fund sub-account. 
Neighborhood council shall mean an open, inclusive, transparent and duly democratic non-profit organization representing a particular Somerville neighborhood. 
( Ord. No. 2018-10, 6-28-2018 )  
Sec. 7-221. - Designation qualifications. 
In order to be designated as the negotiating entity of a community benefits agreement for a particular neighborhood, a neighborhood council shall: 
(a)  Be an open, inclusive, and duly democratic non-profit organization; 
(b)  Be organized with a corporate purpose to maintain and improve the health, safety and welfare of all Somerville residents, with special attention given to the members of the community for whom quality of life and permanence in the community may be harder to attain, including environmental justice populations and residents facing mobility, age and/or other personal and family challenges; 
(c)  Make special efforts to seek out and listen to a broad array of community opinions with regard to policy and practices that may affect the neighborhood and its residents; 
(d)  Observe all laws, regulations, and commonly held ethical standards, including recusal of any member who may have a direct or indirect conflict of interest, whether personal, financial, or organizational. 
( Ord. No. 2018-10, 6-28-2018 )  
Sec. 7-222. - Designation process. 
At such time as a neighborhood council seeks to be designated as the negotiating entity for a community benefits agreement, it shall submit to the mayor and the city council the following: 
(a)  Copies of all organizational documents, including records of votes; 
(b)  A list of its elected board members showing all of the community affiliations of those members; 
(c)  A map delineating the neighborhood represented by the neighborhood council; 
(d)  Such other materials evidencing the council's commitment to the principles of inclusivity, transparency, and participatory democracy, including its efforts to seek out and listen to a broad array of community opinions with regards to policy and practices that may affect the neighborhood and its residents and businesses; 
(e)  Affidavits, signed by each neighborhood council board member and each member of any committee formed to negotiate the community benefits agreement, covenanting that each signatory shall observe all laws, regulations, and commonly held ethical standards, including recusal of any member who may have a conflict of interest, whether personal, financial, or organizational, in the performance of their duties. Each signatory shall acknowledge that failure to observe such laws, regulations, and standards may result in revocation of the council's designation as the negotiating entity. 
Upon receipt of such filings, the city council shall hold a public hearing to consider the council's request for designation as the negotiating entity. The city council may approve the council's request for designation by a ? vote after reviewing all submissions of the council and any testimony, oral and written, from the public hearing. Upon a favorable vote, the city council shall communicate the council's designation as the appropriate negotiating entity for a community benefits agreement to the mayor and the developer, and such council shall be the negotiating entity thereafter, unless and until such designation is revoked by the city council as set forth below. Only one council may be designated as the negotiating entity at any given time. 
( Ord. No. 2018-10, 6-28-2018 )  
Sec. 7-223. - Revocation of designation. 
The city council may also revoke by a ? vote a neighborhood council's designation as the negotiating entity for a community benefits agreement, after notice and a public hearing, for good cause as determined by the city council, including without limitation based upon receipt of written allegations of: 
(a)  A violation of law, regulation, or commonly held ethical standard, including the failure of a member who may have a conflict of interest, whether personal, financial, or organizational, to recuse him- or herself; 
(b)  A failure to act in accordance with the neighborhood council's own organizational documents; or 
(c)  A failure to comply with the requirements of subparagraph section 7-222(a), above. 
( Ord. No. 2018-10, 6-28-2018 )  
Sec. 7-224. - Community benefits stabilization fund. 
There is hereby created a community benefits stabilization fund, into which all monies received by the city for the purpose of funding community benefits shall be deposited. Funds to be expended for the benefit for a particular neighborhood shall be held in a neighborhood-specific sub-fund. Any expenditure from such community benefits stabilization fund or sub-fund shall be appropriated by vote of the city council. 
( Ord. No. 2018-10, 6-28-2018 )  
Chapter 8 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinances of the city specifying fees for business licenses and permits are not printed herein but are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Cross reference— Disposal of combustibles, § 5-3; RDNA permits, § 6-61; removal of rental units, § 7-66; placement and maintenance of electric wires and appliances, § 11-54; inspection of grandstands, carnivals, staging and other entertainment structures, § 11-106; excavating streets and other public places, § 11-143; drain or sewer work, § 11-166; drain layers and work on sewers, § 11-168; signs over streets and sidewalks, § 12-15; obstacles in streets or sidewalks at night, § 12-18; use of parks and playgrounds during closed times, § 12-49; taxi and hackney carriage license, § 13-36 et seq. 
State Law reference— Licenses generally, M.G.L.A. c. 140. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Revoking licenses and permits. 
Any license or permission which may be granted under the provisions of any ordinance may be revoked or annulled at any time by the city council without notice; and no license or permission granted under any ordinance, or any thing done or right acquired by virtue of the same, shall entitle any person to a continuance of such license, permission, or thing done or right acquired. 
(Code 1963, § 11-1)  
Sec. 8-2. - Issuance and expiration of licenses. 
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the city clerk, and shall expire on the first day of May, annually, unless otherwise provided by law, ordinance or order of the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 11-2)  
Sec. 8-3. - Payment of taxes as a condition of licenses. 
Any board, officer or department who issues local licenses or permits for the city ("the licensing authority") may deny any application for, or revoke or suspend a building permit, or any local license or permit including renewals and transfers for any person, corporation, or business enterprise, who has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other municipal charges, including amounts assessed under the provisions of G. L. c. 40, § 21D, or with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject of such license or permit and which activity, event or matter is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate whose owner has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other municipal charges, provided that: 
(1)  The tax collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges, hereinafter referred to as the tax collector, shall annually furnish to each department, board commission or division, hereinafter referred to as the licensing authority, that issues licenses or permits including renewals and transfers, a list of any person, corporation, or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the party, that has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges for not less than a twelve month period, and that such party has not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending petition before the appellate tax board. 
(2)  The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit, including renewals and transfers of any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority for the tax collector or with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject of such license or permit and which activity, event or a matter is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate owned by any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the tax collector; provided, however, that written notice is given to the party and the tax collector, as required by applicable provision of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier than fourteen days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any party. The tax collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purposes of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this section shall not be reissued or renewed until the license authority receives a certificate issued by the tax collector that the party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes fees, assessment, betterments or other municipal charges, payable to the municipality as the date of issuance of said certificate. 
(3)  Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement, thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating said limitations to the license or permit and the validity of said license shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law. 
(4)  The city council may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as defined in section one of chapter two hundred and sixty-eight A of the Massachusetts General Laws in the business or activity conducted in or on said property. 
This section shall not apply to the following licenses and permits: open burning (G. L. c. 48, § 13); bicycle permits; (G. L. c. 85, § 11A); sales of articles for charitable purposes (G. L. c. 101, § 33); children work permits (G. L. c. 149, § 69); clubs, associations dispensing food or beverage licenses (G. L. c. 140, § 21E); dog licenses, (G. L. c. 140, § 137); fishing, hunting, trapping license, (G. L. c. 131, § 12); marriage licenses, (G. L. c. 207, § 28); and theatrical events, public exhibition permits (G. L. c. 184, § 181). 
(Code 1963, § 11-2A; Ord. No. 1990-22, 12-13-90; Ord. No. 2001-17, 11-20-2001) 
State Law reference— Authorized, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 57.  
Sec. 8-4. - Slaughtering and rendering licenses. 
Whenever a new application for a slaughtering or rendering license, or for an addition to an existing license, is received by the city clerk, he or she shall arrange for a public hearing and shall cause notice to be published in a city newspaper or any newspaper, at least one week in advance of the hearing date, and shall notify all abutters by registered mail. 
(Code 1963, § 11-67)  
Sec. 8-5. - Hazardous material transport for commercial vehicles. 
(a)  Required. No commercial vehicle carrying a cargo of liquid natural gas (LNG), liquid propane gas (LPG) or other hazardous cargo as may be specified from time to time by the chief engineer of the fire department, shall be operated on any street or part thereof under the control of the city unless the destination point of such vehicle is within the limits of said city; provided, however, that a commercial vehicle whose destination is within the city limits may operate upon the city streets or parts thereof if a permit therefor has been obtained by the owner from the chief engineer of the fire department. 
(b)  Application; contents. The owner of a vehicle who desires to transport a hazardous cargo as defined herein, within the city limits, may obtain a permit for that purpose by making application therefor to the chief engineer of the fire department on forms provided for that purpose. Such application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name of the owner of the vehicle transporting the hazardous cargo; 
(2)  The destination point of the vehicle; 
(3)  The quantity of the cargo; 
(4)  The proposed route of the vehicle; 
(5)  The estimated departure and arrival times of the vehicle; 
(6)  The safety precautions taken to ensure the prompt and safe delivery of the cargo; and 
(7)  A proposed alternate route for the delivery of the cargo. 
(c)  Issuance; conditions. Upon approval of such application by the chief engineer and the payment of the appropriate fee, the owner of such vehicle shall be granted a permit to transport such hazardous cargo; provided, however, that no permit shall be valid unless and until it has been signed by the chief engineer or by some other authorized person; provided further, that such permit shall only be valid for the delivery or deliveries as specified therein; and upon the completion of such delivery or deliveries the permit shall be null and void. 
(d)  Safety requirements. The chief engineer of the fire department shall have the power to require any applicant for a permit to take such precautions to ensure the safe delivery of his or her cargo as he or she deems necessary and appropriate, including but not limited to the escort of a vehicle carrying a hazardous cargo by apparatus of the fire department while such vehicle is within the city limits; and he or she shall charge a reasonable fee for such escort not to exceed the actual cost of labor and fuel as may be determined from time to time. Such additional charge shall be added to the fee for a permit and shall be paid at the time such fee is due. 
(e)  Administration. The chief engineer of the fire department may designate the deputy chief for fire prevention or any other deputy chief as the person in charge of the administration of this section by filing a writing for that purpose with the city council. He or she may, at any time, withdraw such designation in a similar manner. 
(Code 1963, § 11-70) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 5.  
Sec. 8-6. - Hazardous material transport for trains. 
Prior to the rail transportation of any hazardous materials into or within the city, the operator of the rail carrier shall notify the chief engineer of the fire department 24 hours in advance of the content, amount, route and destination point of any such shipment. 
(Ord. No. 1980-10, 10-9-80) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 5.  
Sec. 8-7. - Operating hours of retail, restaurant and service establishments. 
(a)  No establishment engaged in any retail, restaurant or service business open to the public shall, unless expressly granted permission by the city council, remain open for the transaction of regular business between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. 
(b)  As used in this section the following definitions shall apply: 
Retail shall include any business engaged in the sale of goods including, but not limited to, food, produce, meats, dairy, prepackaged foods, merchandise, supplies, raw materials and finished products. As used in this section "retail" is not intended to be distinguished from "wholesale" and is intended to include all such businesses open to the general public whether membership is required or not. 
Restaurant shall include any business engaged in the sale and/or delivery of prepared meals and foods for the consumption on or off premises. It shall not include establishments licensed to serve or sell alcoholic beverages. 
Service shall include any business open to the public other than one engaged in the sale of goods whereby something of value, including, but not limited to, maintenance, repairs, and the use of equipment or facilities, is provided for a fee. 
(c)  Business hours shall be stated on the establishment's main window or door. 
(d)  The city council may issue an extended hours permits for the purpose of allowing certain establishments to conduct business between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. if, in their opinion, the public convenience will be served. The permit shall be posted within public view in the establishment. 
(e)  A permit may contain such terms and conditions as the city council specify. Application for such permit shall be made on forms provided by the city council by and through the city clerk. Each permit shall expire annually on the fifteenth day of May unless sooner modified, revoked, suspended or renewed. The fee for such permit shall be set from time to time and such fee shall be on file in the city clerk's office. 
(f)  When the city council determine that the public interest will be served due to the potential neighborhood impacts of the permit, the city council, in its discretion, may determine that a permit may only be granted after a public hearing, called for that purpose, and duly advertised at least seven days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. In such event, the applicant shall notify all property owners within 300 feet of the licensed establishment at least ten days prior to the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested of the application and of the date, time and location of the public hearing. The applicant shall post notice on the subject property, in the manner prescribed by the city clerk, identifying the date, time, location and nature of the public hearing. 
(g)  Any vendor having been notified by an enforcing authority that they are in violation of their approved hours of operation shall immediately cease conducting business after midnight. 
(h)  No permit shall be revoked or suspended, nor its terms or conditions modified, until the permitted establishment has been notified and a public hearing has been held for that purpose. Such hearing shall be called in like manner to that pertaining to original issuance of the permit. 
(i)  For the purposes of this section every calendar day on which an establishment remains open for business without special permission of the city council, in violation of this section, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(j)  Every establishment to which this section applies that was not previously regulated by this section shall be considered as having been granted special permission by the city council as provided by this section, until a public hearing is held on any request for an extended hours permit. The city council may, however, specify terms and conditions under which such permission shall continue. After May 15, 2010, no such establishment shall remain open for the transaction of regular business between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m., unless an extended hour permit has been issued pursuant to subsection (a). 
(k)  Any violations of this section are subject to a penalty in accordance with section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1963, § 11-53A; Ord. No. 2008-01, 1-24-2008; Ord. No. 2010-04, 2-11-2010)  
Sec. 8-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-09, § F, adopted Apr. 11, 2006, repealed § 8-8, which pertained to tables for vendors on public streets and sidewalks and derived from Code 1963, § 11-11.  
Sec. 8-9. - Pasteurization of milk and cream. 
No person shall have in his or her possession with intent to sell or deliver any milk or cream in a bottle, can or other container, whether capped or sealed, unless marked legibly with the day of the week on which the milk or cream was pasteurized. 
(Code 1963, § 12-52) 
Cross reference— Health, Ch. 6. 
State Law reference— Milk and cream, M.G.L.A. c. 94, §§ 12—48E.  
Sec. 8-10. - Milk deliveries. 
No person shall make a delivery of milk in this city except to hospitals, stores, restaurants or hotels before 7:00 a.m. 
(Code 1963, § 12-53)  
Sec. 8-11. - Discarding plastic bags. 
(a)  Definition. "Plastic bag" shall mean any type of bag generally referred to as a "plastic bag" regardless of its precise chemical components, and shall include, but not be limited to, any such plastic bag used as a container for merchandise offered for sale or as a protective cover over garments or wearing apparel or other articles where services rather than merchandise are being offered for sale. 
(b)  Regulated. No person shall sell or distribute in retail trade any plastic bag unless the same is: 
(1)  Perforated with holes of at least one-half inch diameter over each four square inches of surface of such bag; or 
(2)  So manufactured that there are at least two openings in plastic bag container so designed as to eliminate the danger of asphyxiation if the bag were pulled on or placed over a child's head; or 
(3)  Plainly stamped or labelled "Dangerous to Children" in red lettering of a size type not less than one inch. 
(c)  Discarding restricted. No person shall leave or discard in any place under his or her or its control in a place accessible to children any plastic bag unless the same has been torn open or broken or destroyed to the extent that the inherent danger of its being an instrument of asphyxiation of children if inserted over a child's head has been eliminated. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Code 1963, §§ 12-64—12-67) 
Editor's note— Amend. of April 18, 2017, changed the title of § 8-11 from "Asphyxiation from plastic bags" to "Discarding plastic bags". 
Cross reference— At-store recycling program for plastic bags, Art. XIII, §§ 8-301—8-303.  
Sec. 8-12. - Self-service gasoline stations. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be a public purpose to promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city, the prevention and control of fires, the control of traffic, and the restraint of vandalism, to regulate the number of gasoline service stations within the city which operate by means of a self-service dispensing method and the conditions of operation of said self-service stations. 
(b)  For purpose of licensing self-service gasoline stations under the provisions of Chapter 148, Section 13 of the General Laws, there shall be one license issued for every 5,000 inhabitants, or portion thereof as established by the most recent decennial census. 
(c)  Each license heretofore or hereafter issued under the provisions of Chapter 148, Section 13 of the General Laws and regulations promulgated thereunder shall be subject to the additional conditions: 
(1)  No gasoline shall be dispensed in or upon the licensed premises by means of self-service dispensing systems, unless during the hours when open for business there shall be on duty at all times no fewer than one person, owner or operator or employee, for each four dispensing hoses; and 
(2)  No gasoline shall be dispensed in or upon the licensed premises by means of self-service dispensing system between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. not-withstanding the provisions of subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(d)  Evidence of repeated violations of this section shall be taken into consideration in connection with proceedings for the revocation of such license in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 148, Section 13 of the General Laws. 
(Code 1963, § 12-80; Ord. No. 1990-10, § 1, 11-8-90)  
Sec. 8-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-09, § G, adopted Apr. 11, 2006, repealed § 8-13, which pertained to electric motors and derived from Code 1963, § 11-15—11-17; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 9, adopted July 14, 2005.  
Sec. 8-14. - Carnivals, concerts, circuses and other entertainment and amusement. 
(a)  The mayor may grant a license or permit to conduct a carnival, circus, festival, fiesta, street fair or any other type of amusement or entertainment or similar event utilizing a different designation, to any nonprofit educational, charitable, religious or philanthropic organization established pursuant to the General Laws; provided, however, that no license for public property or permit for private property may be granted for the purpose of conducting any such carnival, circus, festival, fiesta, street fair or other type of event upon any public or private property within the city without the express approval of the city council; and provided further, that any petitioner granted a permit under this section shall indemnify the city against any loss which may arise by way of any suit, action or proceeding against the city as a result of any accident or occurrence related to the conduct of any event. Said indemnification shall be in a form approved by the mayor and the city solicitor and shall be made in advance of the issuance of any carnival permit. The insurance carried by any entity receiving a permit under this section, shall specifically name the city as an "additional insured." 
(b)  No officer or official of the city shall give or attempt to give any person a permit or authorization to conduct any such carnival on Lincoln Park, or any other park or playground in the city. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be liable to a penalty in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Code 1963, §§ 12-73—12-75; Ord. No. 2009-07, 5-14-2009)  
Sec. 8-15. - Amusement devices, video games and pinball machines. 
(a)  No person shall keep or cause to be kept, operate, or suffer to be operated, on premises owned or leased by him or her or subject to his or her control any mechanical or electronic automatic amusement device, whether or not coin-or token-operated, as defined under but not limited to Chapter 140, Section 177A(2) and Section 181 of the General Laws, except devices designed and intended for private use within a residential dwelling, coin-operated juke boxes, pool tables, billiard tables, bowling alleys, athletic training and sports simulation devices, which shall be exempt from the requirements of this section; however, amusement devices, including electronic amusement devices, may be kept and operated within the city subject to compliance with the provisions of subsections (b) through (j) of this section. 
(b)  The city council may issue, subject to approval by the mayor, licenses for the installation and operation of coin-or token-operated amusement devices, including electronic amusement devices, provided that the amusement devices are located in premises containing a minimum of 5,000 square feet of floor space, including its primary business use and which contains facilities, including cooking and seating, to serve food to a minimum of 100 patrons, as determined by the inspectional services department of the city, and which holds a common victualler's license issued by the city, subject, however, to the right of any applicant for an amusement device license to seek and obtain any required variances, special permits, site plan review and other approvals authorized under the zoning ordinance of the city and the provisions of Chapter 40A of the General Laws. 
(c)  No amusement device shall be licensed which pays a cash return, cash prize or cash award, or a return, prize, or award redeemable for cash at any time, nor shall a device be permitted which is intended or used for gambling or wagering. An amusement device may award the user free additional use of the device, or coupons, non-postage stamps, tokens, chits, or other similar evidences which are redeemable for non-cash prizes. 
(d)  The city council, subject to approval by the mayor, may limit the location of amusement devices within premises where alcoholic beverages are to be served. 
(e)  The city council, subject to approval by the mayor, also may determine the zoning districts in which such licenses may be issued. 
(f)  Such licenses as may be approved shall be personal and shall not run with the land nor shall the holder thereof be invested with any rights or privileges not expressly granted by the city council. Every license granted shall state on its face the location of the premises where such license may be exercised, the number of devices licensed, a description of each device licensed, the name of the holder thereof, the date of expiration of the license, and the annual fee charged therefor. A license issued hereunder shall expire annually on December 31 and shall be renewed upon application and payment of all annual fees, provided the licensee has complied with the terms of the license. No license may be sold, pledged, conveyed, alienated, or transferred, whether by gift or otherwise, without the prior approval of the city council and the mayor. 
(g)  The city council with the approval of the mayor, may, in their discretion, limit the number of licenses to be issued hereunder. 
(h)  The fee for any license issued hereunder shall be set from time to time by the city council with the approval of the mayor. 
(i)  Any person or entity convicted of a violation of this section by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be fined in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. 
(j)  The city council may revoke or suspend any license then issued for just cause, after notice and a full fair hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1986-9, 12-29-86; Ord. No. 1994-1, 12-9-93; Ord. No. 1995-8, 7-13-95; Ord. No. 2006-09, § H, 4-11-2006) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1994-1 was approved by the city council Dec. 9, 1993, vetoed by the mayor, and the veto overridden by the board Jan. 13, 1994. Ord. No. 1994-3, adopted severability provisions relating to Ord. No. 1994-1. Since that subject is covered by § 1-15 of this Code, the text of Ord. No. 1994-3 has not been included.  
Sec. 8-16. - Commercial trash and garbage pickup. 
(a)  All commercial establishments and persons or legal entities desirous of having their rubbish, garbage and other offal, other than household, collected by the city shall be classified in one of the following groups, based on the average weekly amounts of offal they have for disposal: 
(1)  Group A: One barrel or four cubic feet per week. 
(2)  Group B: Up to three barrels or 12 cubic feet a week. 
(3)  Group C: Up to five barrels or 20 cubic feet a week. 
(4)  Group D: Up to ten barrels or 40 cubic feet per week. 
(5)  Group E: Up to 15 barrels or 60 cubic feet per week. 
(6)  Group F: Up to 20 barrels or 80 cubic feet per week. 
(7)  Group G: Up to 30 barrels or 120 cubic feet per week. 
(b)  The collection of such offal shall be subject to the following fees, payable annually in advance: 
Group A ..... $143.00 
Group B ..... 429.00 
Group C ..... 715.00 
Group D ..... 1,430.00 
Group E ..... 2,146.00 
Group F ..... 2,860.00 
Group G ..... 4,290.00 
Group S: One special collection per week at additional fee equal to basic fee. 
(Code 1963, § 11-68; Ord. No. 1968-12; Ord. No. 1979-3; Ord. No. 1983-6, § 1, 2-2-83; Ord. No. 2000-16, 1-4-2001) 
Editor's note— The city instructed that the provisions relating to fees for rubbish collection found in § 11-68 of the 1963 Code, as amended by the ordinances included in the history note, be included in this Code. The editor has included the provisions as § 8-16.  
Secs. 8-17—8-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DRAIN LAYERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Drain or sewer work, § 11-166; drain layers and work on sewers, § 11-168. 
State Law reference— Sewers, drains and sidewalks, M.G.L.A. c. 83; supervision of plumbing, M.G.L.A. c. 142. 
 
Sec. 8-41. - Opening and repairing drains and sewers, sidewalk repair. 
(a)  Every opening into a common sewer for the purpose of connecting a drain therewith, and the repairs of every drain laid from any house, building, cellar or land to such common sewer, and every opening into such drain, and all openings and excavations in any street for the purpose of constructing or repairing any private drain, shall be made by a person licensed in writing for that purpose by the city council and by no other person. 
(b)  The city engineer shall stipulate that it is mandatory for all drain layers who open sidewalks, to allow a "temporary patch" to remain no longer than 90 days after completion of work, before replacing with the exact type of material they first removed, whether it be cement, brick, etc., to its original good and proper condition. This stipulation shall apply to outside drain layers, utility companies such as the electric, gas and telephone companies, to the various departments of the city and to any and all doing such work. 
(Code 1963, § 11-3)  
Sec. 8-42. - Permits for opening and repairing drains and sewers. 
No licensed drain layer shall perform any work such as is specified in section 8-41, without first obtaining a written permit from the city engineer; and he or she shall in every case comply with the conditions of such permit. 
(Code 1963, § 11-5)  
Sec. 8-43. - Performance bonds and work requirements. 
(a)  Every person licensed as provided in section 8-41 shall, before performing any work authorized thereby, execute an agreement or bond, in the sum of $10,000.00 with one or more sureties, satisfactory to the city council, that he or she will properly make the openings into all common sewers opened by him or her; that he or she will construct or repair the drains to be connected by him or her with the common sewers or with other drains in a thorough and workmanlike manner; that he or she will leave no material or obstruction of any description in the sewer which he or she may open, or in any drain leading into any sewer; that he or she will properly close up the excavation, and restore the earth and pavement taken up, and regrade and repave the street, and put it in good and proper condition, and remove all superfluous material, all to the satisfaction of the commissioner of public works. 
(b)  If a drain layer shall fail to perform the requirements of subsection (a) of this section or if at any time within one year from the date of the completion of any drain the surface of the street shall settle or otherwise become unsafe for public travel, then the commissioner shall repave and regrade the street at the expense of the said drain layer, and within five days thereafter deliver a bill of the same to the city auditor for collection, and said drain layer shall immediately pay the same, and he or she shall not be entitled to receive another permit until the said bill and all other bills of expense incurred by the city on account of his or her negligence or default shall be paid in full. 
(c)  A drain layer will cause a sufficient fence to be placed so as to enclose the excavation and the earth, stone and other materials which may be put into the street, and he or she will maintain such fence during the whole time such excavation, earth or other material may obstruct the street, and will cause a sufficient number of lighted lanterns to be maintained in suitable places over such excavation, earth, material, and fence, from the beginning of twilight every evening and through every night during the time such obstruction in the street may exist. 
(d)  Drain layers will comply with the ordinances which may be at any time in force in relation to sewers, drains and streets, and with such orders and regulations as the city council have adopted, or may from time to time adopt, for the government of persons licensed to construct or repair private drains, or open or dig in the street for that purpose; and drain layers will indemnify and save harmless the city from all damages, costs and expenses which it may incur or sustain, by reason of any kind, all injuries resulting to anyone in person or property, from the neglect or carelessness of himself or herself or his or her servants in opening, closing, making or repairing any sewer or drain, in performing work connected therewith or in properly fencing, or in lighting by night, any excavation or obstruction caused or made by him or her or his or her servants, or which the city may incur or sustain in any other manner by reason of the excavation or construction of any sewer or drain by him or her or his or her servants or agents, or any work or acts performed or done by him or her or them connected therewith. 
(Code 1963, § 11-4)  
Secs. 8-44—8-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - JUNK AND SECONDHAND GOODS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Licensing, regulation of junk and secondhand dealers, M.G.L.A. c. 140, § 54 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-60. - License for junk dealers, antique stores, second-hand stores and consignment shops. 
(a)  No person shall purchase, sell, barter for, collect, store or keep any junk, old metals, rags or other secondhand articles, without having first received a license to do so from the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 11-43; Ord. No. 2006-09, § I, 4-11-2006)  
Sec. 8-61. - Junk dealer requirements. 
All licenses which shall be granted, according to law, to any person to be keepers of shops for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metals or secondhand articles, and to be dealers therein, shall contain the following conditions and restrictions: 
(1)  That every keeper of such shop shall keep a book in which shall be written, at the time of every purchase of any such article, a description thereof, the name, age and residence of the person from whom and the day and hour when such purchase was made, and that such book shall at all times be open to the inspection of the mayor and the councilors, and each of them, and the chief of police or any person by either of them authorized, and of any police officer of the city; 
(2)  That every keeper of such shop shall put in some suitable and conspicuous place on his or her shop a sign having his or her name and occupation legibly inscribed thereon in large letters; 
(3)  That such shop and all articles of merchandise therein may be examined by the mayor and the councilors, or each of them, the chief of police, or any police officer of the city, at all times; 
(4)  That no keeper of such shop shall, directly or indirectly, either purchase or receive, by way of barter or exchange, any of the articles aforesaid of any minor or apprentice, knowing or having reason to believe him or her to be such; and that no article purchased or received by such shopkeeper shall be sold until at least 30 days from the date of its purchase or receipt has elapsed; 
(5)  Unless otherwise set forth in the license, licensees under this section shall comply with the operating hours provisions set forth in Somerville Code of Ordinances section 8-7. 
(Code 1963, § 11-40; Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-24-2014 )  
Sec. 8-62. - Junk dealer identification when using a vehicle. 
Every licensee engaged in collecting junk, rags, or other secondhand metals in a wagon or motor vehicle shall wear conspicuously in sight a badge of such form as shall be approved by the chief of police with words "Junk License" and the number of his or her license thereon, said license to be worn by the individual licensed, by the member of the firm in case of a license issued to a firm or by the person engaged in operating the vehicle in the case of a license issued to a corporation. Such badge shall be furnished by the city clerk, and shall be returned to him or her on the expiration or revocation of the license. No person not so licensed shall wear such badge. 
(Code 1963, § 11-43)  
Sec. 8-63. - Penalties and fines. 
Any person who shall violate any condition or restriction contained in his or her license shall forfeit a sum in accordance with section 1-11 for each offense; and any person who shall collect, purchase or barter for junk, old metal, rags or any secondhand articles, without having a license as required by section 8-61, shall be liable to the same penalty. 
(Code 1963, § 11-47)  
Sec. 8-64. - Junk dealer vehicles. 
(a)  Every wagon, cart, sleigh, sled or other vehicle used in the collection of junk, metals, rags or secondhand articles shall be licensed by the city council, and shall have the owner's name and the number of his or her license placed upon the outside, and upon each side thereof, in plain, legible words and figures of not less than one and one-half inches in size, and so that the same may be distinctly seen. 
(b)  The person in whose name a license is taken out for any such vehicle shall be considered the owner of the same until such license is surrendered. 
(Code 1963, § 11-41)  
Sec. 8-65. - Junk storage. 
No person licensed under the provisions of this article shall keep or store junk, old metals, rags or secondhand articles in any shop or place other than that designated in his or her license. No more than one license shall be granted for the same shop or place. 
(Code 1963, § 11-42)  
Sec. 8-66. - Recordkeeping. 
Every keeper of a shop for the purchase, exchange, storage or sale of secondhand furniture, bric-a-brac, art objects, paintings, jewelry or antiques shall keep a book in which he or she shall record, at the time of purchase, a description of such item or items, the name, age and residential address of the person from whom and the day and hour when such purchase, exchange or sale was made. No entry in such book shall be made in other than ink pen; and no entry shall be changed, erased, obliterated or defaced. Such book shall be open at all times to the inspection of the police department and the licensing inspector for the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 11-43A)  
Sec. 8-67. - Gold, silver and metal objects. 
Every keeper of a shop for the purchase, exchange, storage or sale of items shall hold any metal objects, including those containing gold, silver, platinum or other precious metal that he or she intends to melt down or otherwise make indistinguishable or unidentifiable, for a period of not less than 30 days from the purchase or acquisition thereof, prior to reselling of the same. 
(Code 1963, § 11-43A; Ord. No. 2012-11, 11-20-2012)  
Sec. 8-68. - Monthly reports. 
Every dealer licensed to sell items specified in this article, shall make a monthly report to the chief of police, giving a listing of all items purchased, exchanged or sold, with accurate description thereof, price paid, if any, time when such articles were purchased, exchanged or sold and the persons involved in said transaction. 
(Code 1963, § 11-43B)  
Sec. 8-69. - Junk collection on holidays. 
No person licensed to collect junk, old metal, rags or other secondhand articles, shall engage in such collection on any MA Legal Holiday (as published by the secretary of the commonwealth). 
(Code 1963, § 11-44; Ord. No. 2019-03 , 1-24-2019)  
Sec. 8-70. - Rags and waste papers. 
(a)  No person shall use, or occupy or maintain any building except a building whose outer walls are entirely of brick, stone or other incombustible materials at least four inches in thickness and at least six feet from any adjoining building, in this city for the purpose of picking, sorting or storage of rags or waste papers therein without a license from the city counciil. 
(b)  No person shall pick, sort or store rags or waste papers in any building without a license from the city council. 
(c)  No person shall pick, sort or store rags in any building used for habitation. 
(d)  No person shall pick, sort or store rags in or upon any lot of land within 300 feet of any building. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to rags and waste papers amounting to less than 100 pounds in weight nor to rags and waste papers allowed to remain not more than 48 hours in any vehicle in which they have been collected by any person licensed to be a collector of junk, old metal or secondhand articles. 
(Code 1963, § 11-45)  
Sec. 8-71. - Public hearing for licensing buildings for rags and waste papers. 
In no case shall the license required under section 8-70 be granted until after a notice of the application for such license has been published in one or more newspapers in the city and a public hearing given to all persons interested therein. 
(Code 1963, § 11-46)  
Sec. 8-72. - Penalties. 
Every person subject to this article who fails to comply with the provisions hereof shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with section 1-11 for each day of noncompliance. 
(Code 1963, § 11-43C)  
Secs. 8-73—8-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Art. IV was formerly entitled "Hawkers, Peddlers and Vendors"; consisted of §§ 8-91—8-104; and was derived from Code 1963, §§ 11-48—11-59, 11-66. These provisions were superseded by Ord. Nos. 1992-4, 1992-5 and 1992-6, which enacted new Arts, IV—VI. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 12. 
State Law reference— Hawkers and peddlers, M.G.L.A. c. 101, § 13 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-76. - Hawkers and peddlers. 
As used in this article, the term "hawker" or "peddler" shall mean and include any person who goes from place to place either on foot or on or from any animal or any vehicle carrying, exhibiting or selling any goods, wares or merchandise. Mobile food vendors shall be exempt from this section and shall instead be subject to article XV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1992-5, 8-13-92; Ord. No. 2012-08, 10-25-2012) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-4. 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, M.G.L.A. c. 101, § 13.  
Sec. 8-77. - Hawker and peddler licenses. 
(a)  Articles, other than those the sale of which is permitted in accordance with articles V and VI of this chapter, or permitted without a license as described in section 8-78 below, or not permitted to be sold at all as described in section 8-79 below, shall not be sold by hawkers or peddlers unless duly licensed by the commonwealth's director of standards or by the city council as provided in section 8-80 of this article. 
(b)  All hawkers and peddlers duly licensed by the director of standards of the commonwealth are required to register with and obtain a certificate of such registration from the city clerk prior to conducting business in the city. The fee for such registration shall be determined annually by the city council. The certificate of registration shall expire on the first day of May in each year. 
(Ord. No. 1992-5, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-78. - Goods not requiring a license. 
No license, state or local, is required for the sale of newspapers, religious publications, flowering plants and wild or uncultivated flowers, fruits, nuts and berries by hawkers and peddlers. 
(Ord. No. 1992-5, 8-13-92) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L.A. c. 101, § 17.  
Sec. 8-79. - Goods prohibited. 
Except as otherwise provided in section 8-81, hawkers and peddlers are prohibited from selling jewelry, other than costume jewelry valued at not more than $10.00 and made by a nonprofit charitable organization, furs, wines, spirituous liquors, small artificial flowers, and miniature flags. 
(Ord. No. 1992-5, 8-13-92) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L.A. c. 101, § 16.  
Sec. 8-80. - Licenses and food sales. 
(a)  Before selling any meats, butter, cheese, fish, fresh fruit or vegetables, any hawker or peddler must either be duly licensed by the director of standards of the commonwealth or by the city council; however, this section shall not apply to any person who peddles only fish obtained by his or her own labor or his or her family's or to any person who peddles only fruits, vegetables or other farm products raised by himself or herself or his or her family. 
(b)  The city council shall have authority to grant a license under this section to any person of good repute as to morals and integrity who has shown responsibility and business acumen. 
(c)  Should a license be issued pursuant to this article, the licensee shall be responsible for obtaining and maintaining any and all other relevant licenses, permits and seals, including, but not limited to, health department and fire department permits, and seals from the sealer of weights and measures. 
(d)  Any hawker or peddler of any meats, butter, cheese, fish, fresh fruit or vegetables who uses, or possesses with intent to use, any false, condemned or unsealed weighing or measuring device shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. 
(e)  Any license issued by the city council under this section shall be issued by and signed by the city clerk upon payment of a license fee set by the city council with the approval of the mayor. Every hawker and peddler so licensed shall be assigned a number by the city clerk, who shall keep a record of all licenses issued. 
(f)  No license shall be issued until such hawker or peddler has posted a bond with, or has provided a certificate of liability insurance naming the city as an "additional insured" to, the city clerk in an amount to be determined by the mayor, and has signed an agreement providing for indemnification of the city against any loss which may arise by way of any suit, action or proceeding against the city as a result of any act or failure to act on the part of such hawker or peddler while operating within the territorial limits of the city. Said indemnification shall be in a form approved by the mayor and city solicitor. 
(g)  Any license granted by the city council under this section may be revoked by the city council for good cause after reasonable notice to the licensee and a hearing upon the grounds for revocation. The use, or possession with intent to use, by any person licensed under this section by the city council, of any false or unsealed weighing or measuring device shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of that license. 
(h)  Unless sooner revoked, any license granted by the city council under this section shall expire one year from the first day of May in each year. 
(Ord. No. 1992-5, 8-13-92; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 10, 7-14-2005; Ord. No. 2006-09, § J, 4-11-2006)  
Sec. 8-81. - Sale of small items for nonprofit organizations. 
The city council shall, under such conditions as it may deem proper, grant to any organization engaged exclusively in charitable work, or to a part of any incorporated organization of veterans who served in the military services of the United States in time of war or insurrection, a special license authorizing it, upon a particular day and for a charitable purpose named in such license, to sell, through its accredited agents in the streets and other public places within the city, or in any designated part thereof, flags, badges, medals, buttons, flowers, and similar small articles; provided, that no person under 16 years of age shall be accredited as such agent and that each agent shall wear in plain sight while engaged in selling such articles a badge, provided by such organization or post and approved by the city council, bearing upon it the name of such organization or post and the date on which the license is to be exercised, and that no such agent shall be authorized to make or attempt to make such sales in front of any private premises against the objection of the owner of occupant thereof. The exercise of the licenses hereby provided for shall be subject to the provisions of all statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations not inconsistent herewith. 
(Ord. No. 1992-5, 8-13-92) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L.A. c. 101, § 33.  
Sec. 8-82. - Display of license. 
Every hawker or peddler shall exhibit his or her license and/or certificate of registration when the same is demanded of him or her by a councilor or sealer or deputy sealer of weights and measures or member of the police department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1992-5, 8-13-92) 
State Law reference— Display and production of hawker or peddler's license, M.G.L.A. c. 101, § 27.  
Sec. 8-83. - Minimum age. 
No person under 16 years of age shall receive a license or be registered as a hawker or peddler. 
(Ord. No. 1992-5, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-84. - Additional restrictions. 
The terms of every hawkers and peddlers license and certificate of registration issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to such further restrictions and regulations as the city council shall impose. 
(Ord. No. 1992-5, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-85. - Waiver of fees. 
The city council may waive in whole or part any and all fees required by this article, as it deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1992-5, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-86. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be liable to a penalty in accordance with section 1-11 or be subject to arrest as provided for in Chapter 101, Section 32 of the General Laws. 
(Ord. No. 1992-5, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-87. - Conflict with state license. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as conflicting with any license duly issued under the laws of the commonwealth. 
(Ord. No. 1992-5, 8-13-92)  
ARTICLE V. - TRANSIENT VENDORS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. IV of this chapter, § 8-76 et seq. 
State Law reference— Transient vendors, M.G.L.A. c. 101, §§ 1—12A. 
 
Sec. 8-88. - Transient vendors. 
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Transient vendor means any person who engages in a "temporary or transient business" selling goods, wares or merchandise, either in one locality or in traveling from place to place. 
Temporary or transient business means any exhibition and sale of goods, wares or merchandise which is carried on in any tent, booth, building or other structure, unless such place is open for business during usual business hours for a period of at least 12 consecutive months. 
(Ord. No. 1992-6, 8-13-92) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-4. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L.A. c. 101, § 1.  
Sec. 8-89. - Transient vendor licenses. 
(a)  Every transient vendor, before making any sale of goods, wares or merchandise in the city, shall apply to the city council for a license and shall accompany such application with a license fee to be determined annually by the city council. 
(b)  No license shall be granted under this section until the applicant has complied with the provisions of Chapter 101, Section 3 of the General Laws and has exhibited to the city clerk a license issued by the director of standards of the commonwealth. 
(c)  If, after review of said application, it appears that the applicant is a person of good repute as to morals and integrity and he or she is a person of responsibility and business acumen, the city council may authorize the city clerk to issue a city license to the applicant. Upon order of the city council and proof of payment of all license fees the city clerk shall issue the city license endorsed upon the state license "local license fees paid" and shall affix thereto his or her official signature and date of such endorsement. 
(Ord. No. 1992-6, 8-13-92) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L.A. c. 101, § 8.  
Sec. 8-90. - Expiration of license. 
The city transient vendor license shall remain in force so long as the licensee shall continuously keep and expose for sale such stock of goods, wares and merchandise but not later than the first day of January following its date. 
(Ord. No. 1992-6, 8-13-92) 
State Law reference— Term of local license, M.G.L.A. c. 101, § 5.  
Sec. 8-91. - Licenses for nonprofit organizations. 
The city council may, under such conditions as they may deem proper, grant to any organization engaged in charitable work or to a post of any incorporated organization of veterans who served in the military or naval service of the United States in time of war or insurrection a special license authorizing it, for a particular time period to be stated in such license, and for a charitable purpose stated in such license, to conduct under their control a temporary or transient business, provided that no person under 16 years of age shall be accredited as an agent of the license holder. The exercise of the license hereby provided for shall be subject to the provisions of all statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations not inconsistent herewith. 
(Ord. No. 1992-6, 8-13-92) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L.A. c. 101, § 12A.  
Sec. 8-92. - Display of license. 
Every transient vendor shall exhibit his or her state and city licenses when the same are demanded of him or her by a councilor or sealer or deputy sealer of weights and measures or member of the police department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1992-6, 8-13-92) 
Cross reference— Appointment of chief sealer and deputies, § 2-171 et seq.  
Sec. 8-93. - Additional city permits. 
Should a license be issued pursuant to this article, the licensee shall be responsible for obtaining and maintaining any and all other relevant licenses, permits and seals, including, but not limited to, health department and fire department permits, and seals from the sealer of weights and measures. 
(Ord. No. 1992-6, 8-13-92) 
Cross reference— Appointment of chief sealer and deputies, § 2-171 et seq.  
Sec. 8-94. - Revocation of license. 
Any transient vendor license granted by the city council may be revoked by the city council for good cause after reasonable notice to the licensee and a hearing upon the grounds for revocation. 
(Ord. No. 1992-6, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-95. - Bond or insurance required. 
No transient vendor shall sell goods, wares or merchandise in the city unless such transient vendor has posted a bond with, or has provided a certificate of liability insurance naming the city as an "additional insured" to, the city clerk in an amount to be determined by the mayor, and has signed an agreement providing for indemnification of the city against any loss which may arise by way of any suit, action or proceeding against the city as a result of any act or failure to act on the part of such transient vendor while operating within the territorial limits of the city. This indemnification agreement shall be in a form approved by the mayor and city solicitor. 
(Ord. No. 1992-6, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-96. - Minimum age. 
No person under 16 years of age shall receive a license as a transient vendor. 
(Ord. No. 1992-6, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-97. - Additional restrictions. 
The terms of every transient vendor license issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to such further restrictions and regulations as the city council shall impose. 
(Ord. No. 1992-6, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-98. - Waiver of fees. 
The city council may waive in whole or part any and all fees required by this article, as it deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1992-6, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-99. - Penalties. 
Any transient vendor who violates any provision of this article shall be liable to a penalty in accordance with section 1-11 or be subject to arrest as provided for by Chapter 101, Section 32 of the General Laws. 
(Ord. No. 1992-6, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-100. - Conflict with state license. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as conflicting with any license duly issued under the laws of the commonwealth. 
(Ord. No. 1992-6, 8-13-92)  
Secs. 8-101, 8-102. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OPEN-AIR VENDING OF GOODS, WARES AND MERCHANDISE FROM ONE LOCATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. IV, § 8-76 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-103. - Open air vendors. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to license and regulate the open-air, temporary sale of goods, wares and merchandise, from one location in the city. Any person duly licensed pursuant to Chapter 101 of the General Laws or Article IV or V of this chapter, who is carrying on business in a manner consistent with said license, shall not be subject to the licensing requirements of this article. 
(b)  As used in this article, the terms "goods, wares or merchandise" shall include, but not be limited to, consumer goods, novelty items, clothing, shoes, sports memorabilia, trees, Christmas trees, wreaths, plants, flowering plants, cut flowers and food of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 1992-4, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-104. - Open air vendor licenses. 
(a)  No person, whether principal or agent, shall, on a temporary basis, offer for sale, expose for sale, or sell any goods, wares or merchandise, in any open area, alley or lot, located in the city unless such person has first obtained a license therefor from the city council. Said license shall be known as a "city open-air vending license". 
(b)  In order to receive such a license, the applicant must submit written consent to its issuance on the part of the owner or owners of the premises on which or in front of which he or she desires to carry on business and of the tenants of the ground floor of such premises. Said owners or tenants shall not demand or accept consideration for such grant of approval. The property owner may obtain legally negotiated rent from a license holder operating on his or her premises. When the exercise of the license will occur on or in front of premises owned by the city, the owner's consent herein provided for may be given by the department having charge of the premises. 
(c)  The fee for such license shall be determined annually by the city council. 
(d)  Whenever the license is intended to be exercised on public property, including but not limited to public ways, sidewalks and parks, the city council may make and collect an additional charge as rent, unless the licensee is the tenant of the ground floor of the premises in front of which the location is granted and the character of the merchandise he or she is selling under the license is essentially the same as that being sold within the ground floor of those premises. Rental rates shall be determined annually by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1992-4, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-105. - Expiration of license. 
The city open-air vendor license shall remain in force for a specified period of time, indicated on the license, but not later than the first day of January following its date. 
(Ord. No. 1992-4, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-106. - Licenses for nonprofit organizations. 
The city council may, under such conditions as they may deem proper, grant to any organization engaged in charitable work or to a post of any incorporated organization of veterans who served in the military or naval service of the United States in time of war or insurrection a special license authorizing it, for a particular time period to be stated in such license, and for a charitable purpose stated in such license, to conduct under their control a temporary open-air vending business, provided that no person under 16 years of age be accredited as an agent of the license holder. The exercise of the license hereby provided for shall be subject to the provisions of all statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations not inconsistent herewith. 
(Ord. No. 1992-4, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-107. - Display of license. 
Every city open-air vendor shall exhibit his or her city license when the same is demanded of him or her by a councilor or sealer or deputy sealer of weights and measures or member of the police department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1992-4, 8-13-92) 
Cross reference— Appointment of chief sealer and deputies, § 2-171 et seq.  
Sec. 8-108. - Additional city permits. 
Should a license be issued pursuant to this article, the licensee shall be responsible for obtaining and maintaining any and all other relevant licenses, permits and seals, including, but not limited to, health department and fire department permits, and seals from the sealer of weights and measures. 
(Ord. No. 1992-4, 8-13-92) 
Cross reference— Appointment of chief sealer and deputies, § 2-171 et seq.  
Sec. 8-109. - Revocation of license. 
Any license granted by the city council pursuant to this article may be revoked by the city council for good cause after reasonable notice to the licensee and a hearing upon the grounds for revocation. 
(Ord. No. 1992-4, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-110. - Bond or insurance required. 
No person licensed pursuant to this article shall sell goods, wares or merchandise, in the city unless such person has posted a bond with, or has provided a certificate of liability insurance naming the city as an "additional insured" to, the city clerk in an amount to be determined by the mayor, and has signed an agreement providing for indemnification of the city against any loss which may arise by way of any suit, action or proceeding against the city as a result of any act or failure to act on the part of such vendor while operating within the territorial limits of the city. Said indemnification shall be in a form approved by the mayor and city solicitor. 
(Ord. No. 1992-4, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-111. - Minimum age. 
No person under 16 years of age shall receive a license pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1992-4, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-112. - Additional restrictions. 
The terms of every license issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to such further restrictions and regulations as the city council shall impose. 
(Ord. No. 1992-4, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-113. - Waiver of fees. 
The city council may waive in whole or part any and all fees required by this article, as it deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1992-4, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-114. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be liable to a penalty in accordance with section 1-11, or be subject to arrest as provided for by Chapter 101, Section 32 of the General Laws. 
(Ord. No. 1992-4, 8-13-92)  
Sec. 8-115. - Conflict with state license. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as conflicting with any license duly issued under the laws of the commonwealth. 
(Ord. No. 1992-4, 8-13-92)  
Secs. 8-116—8-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - STREET PERFORMERS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-01, adopted April 11, 2013, repealed Art. VII and enacted a new Art. VII to read as set out herein. Former Art. VII, §§ 8-121—8-128, pertained to musicians, lecturers and other street performers and derived from the Code of 1963, §§ 11-60—11-65, 12-57. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 12. 
 
Sec. 8-121. - Definitions. 
" Perform " includes, but is not limited to, the following activities: acting, singing, playing musical instruments, pantomime, juggling, magic, dancing, reading, and reciting exclusively for the enjoyment of the public. 
" Public areas " means public sidewalks, paths, parks, playgrounds and other public ways and public property located in the City of Somerville. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 4-11-2013)  
Sec. 8-122. - Prohibited performances. 
(a)  No person shall perform where such person conducts the activity: 
(1)  Within 100 feet of an elementary and/or secondary school, library, or place of worship while in session, a hospital or nursing home at any time, or within public areas excluded by the commissioner of public works, or the chief of police pursuant to subsection (c) of this section; 
(2)  In public areas where an authorized street fair, festival, or other public event is being conducted, unless written permission from the sponsor of such fair or festival is obtained; or 
(3)  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless otherwise permitted by the commissioner of public works; or 
(4)  In such a manner as to violate the Somerville Noise Ordinance; or 
(5)  In such a manner as to create an undue interference with the passage of the public through a public area; or 
(6)  In such a manner as to block roadways, sidewalks, crosswalks, driveways, stairways, curb cuts, handicapped access ramps or block access to buildings, parks, public conveyances, businesses, crosswalks, traffic control poles containing pedestrian crosswalk button(s), or within ten feet of a fire hydrant or within five feet of any fire alarm or other emergency communication device, including public telephones; or 
(7)  Within 20 feet of property used for outdoor seating in accordance with a permit issued under Somerville Code of Ordinances section 12-14. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prevent any street performer from requesting contributions or money or property at a performance, provided that no sign requesting contributions shall exceed 12 inches by 18 inches in size. Contributions may be received in any receptacle, such as an open musical instrument case, box or hat. 
(c)  No performer may display or sell any goods, wares or other merchandise, except for recordings of their own performances, without obtaining a hawkers and peddlers license pursuant to the ordinances [codified] at chapter 8, article IV. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 4-11-2013)  
Sec. 8-123. - Exclusion of public areas. 
(a)  A specific public area may be excluded by decision of the chief of police in the case of an emergency. 
(b)  A specific public area may be excluded by decision of the commissioner of public works in the case of an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 4-11-2013)  
Sec. 8-124. - Penalties; noncriminal disposition. 
Whoever violates any provision of this article may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in G.L. c. 40, s. 21D. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The penalty for each violation will be as set forth in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 4-11-2013)  
Sec. 8-125. - Exclusivity. 
The provisions of this article take precedence over any other city regulations or ordinances applicable to street performances. To the extent other city regulations or ordinances are applicable and are inconsistent with this article, this article shall govern. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to limit the use of other lawful methods to enforce applicable state statutes relative to street performances. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 4-11-2013)  
Sec. 8-126. - Peace and quiet. 
A performance in accordance with this article shall be presumed not to constitute a disturbance of the peace or quiet. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 4-11-2013)  
Sec. 8-127. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article may be enforced by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 4-11-2013)  
Sec. 8-128. - Severability. 
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any part of this article should be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the remainder of the article and the remainder of the article shall stay in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, 4-11-2013)  
Secs. 8-129—8-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 12. 
 
Sec. 8-146. - Door to door solicitors and canvassers. 
The terms "soliciting" and "canvassing" shall mean and include any one or more of the following activities: 
(1)  Seeking to obtain the purchase, or orders for the purchase, of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services, or any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; or 
(2)  Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers, and every other type or kind of publication; or 
(3)  Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable things for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit association, organization, corporation, or project. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to those who are operating validly as hawkers or peddlers or open air vendors, or to officers or employees of the city, county, state or federal government, or any subdivision thereof, when on official business, or to neighborhood youth and students who solicit for the shoveling of snow or cutting of lawns or other services, or to milkpersons, bakery persons, insurance agents, laundry persons, and ice, oil and coal dealers; nor shall it construed to prevent route salespersons or other persons having established customers to whom they make periodic deliveries from calling upon such customers. 
The provisions of this article also shall not apply to any solicitor or canvasser who is under the age of 18 years and is soliciting or canvassing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit association, organization, corporation or project, If any solicitor or canvasser is under the age of 18 years and is selling goods or periodicals for a commercial purpose, the provisions of Chapter 101, Section 34 of the General Laws, shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1994-13, 6-23-94)  
Sec. 8-147. - Registration with the police. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or canvass, for him or herself or for another person, by foot, automobile, or any other type of conveyance, from place-to-place, house-to-house or street-to-street, calling at residences without the previous consent of the occupant, without first having registered with the chief of police.  
Sec. 8-148. - Certificate of registration. 
Application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a form provided by the police department. 
An authorized representative of the sponsoring organization shall apply to the chief of police or his/her designee either personally, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. from Monday through Thursday, excluding holidays, or by mail, and truthfully state in full the information requested on the application, to wit: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the sponsoring organization; 
(2)  State and/or federal taxpayer identification number or tax-exempt number of the sponsoring organization; 
(3)  Name, residential and business address, length of residence at such residential address, telephone number, social security number, and date of birth, of each and every representative of the sponsoring organization who will be soliciting or canvassing in the city; 
(4)  Description including make, model, year, color and license plate number of any vehicle to be used by the sponsoring organization or its representatives while soliciting or canvassing in the city; 
(5)  Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting or canvassing in which organizations will engage; 
(6)  Period of time for which the certificate is applied (said certification shall expire within one year of date of issue); 
(7)  The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for certificate under this article, if any; 
(8)  Any previous revocation of a certificate of registration issued to the organization by the city; 
(9)  Any convictions for a violation of a felony under the laws of the commonwealth or any other state or federal law of the United States, within five years of the application, by the sponsoring organization or any of its representatives who will be soliciting or canvassing in the city; 
(10)  Names of the three most recent communities where the organization has solicited or canvassed house-to-house; 
(11)  Proposed method of operation; and 
(12)  Signature of authorized representative of the sponsoring organization. 
A photograph or an acceptable photocopy of a photograph of each representative of the sponsoring organization who will be soliciting or canvassing in the city must be attached to the application. 
If the sponsoring organization is required by Chapter 68, Section 19 of the General Laws to register as a charitable organization with the commonwealth, a copy of said registration must be attached to the application. 
All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath. The applicant shall also produce a statement of authorization for the applicant and other representatives of the sponsoring organization to solicit or canvass on behalf of the sponsoring organization. Dates and times that the soliciting or canvassing will take place must also be provided. 
No certificate of registration shall be issued to (1) any person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the commonwealth or any other state or federal law of the United States, within five years of the date of the application; or (2) any person who has violated any provisions of this article within five years of the date of the application; or (3) any person whose certificate of registration issued hereunder has been revoked within five years of the date of the application as herein provide. 
The chief of police shall cause to be kept in his or her office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all certificates of registration issued under the provisions of this article, and of the denial of applications. Fully completed applications for certificates, shall be acted upon within three business days of receipt. No application for a certificate shall be denied provided that it satisfies the requirements of this article VI. The original copy of the application shall be given to the applicant and a duplicate copy shall be retained on file in the office of the chief of police. 
When an application is approved, each solicitor or canvasser shall be issued a certificate of registration and shall at all times while soliciting or canvassing in the city carry upon his/her person the registration certificate, and the same shall be exhibited by such registrant whenever he/she is required to do so by any person solicited. 
(Ord. No. 1994-13, 6-23-94)  
Sec. 8-149. - Revocation of certificate. 
Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by the chief of police if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article or has made a false material statement in the application or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of registration under the terms of this article. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the chief of police to holder of the certificate in person or by certified United States mail addressed to his or her residence address set forth in the application. 
Immediately upon the giving of such notice the certificate of registration shall become null and void. 
Every certificate or registration shall expire within one year from its date of issue. 
The certificate of registration shall state the expiration date thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1994-13, 6-23-94)  
Sec. 8-150. - Deceptive practices. 
No solicitor or canvasser registered or exempted from registering may use any plan, scheme or ruse which misrepresents the true status or mission of the person making the call in order to gain admission to a person's home, office or other establishment. 
(Ord. No. 1994-13, 6-23-94)  
Sec. 8-151. - Duty of solicitors and canvassers. 
It shall be the duty of every solicitor and canvasser going onto any premises in the city to first examine whether there is a notice stating that no solicitors are welcome; if such notice is present, then the solicitor or canvasser shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises. 
Any solicitor or canvasser who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 1994-13, 6-23-94)  
Sec. 8-152. - Penalties. 
Any solicitor or canvasser who violates any provision of this article shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-11 or, in certain cases, by arrest as provided by Chapter 101 at the General Laws. 
(Ord. No. 1994-13, 6-23-94) 
State Law reference— M.G.L.A. c. 101, § 32.  
Secs. 8-153—8-165. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - COMMERCIAL GARAGES, AUTO REPAIR SHOPS AND BODY SHOPS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-12, adopted Dec. 4, 2000 amends the former Art. IX, §§ 8-166—8-169 and enacted a new Art. IX, §§ 8-166—8-169 as set out herein. The former Art. IX pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1963 Code, §§ 11-18—11-21; Ord. No. 1990-1, adopted Jan. 25, 1990. 
 
Sec. 8-166. - Commercial garages, auto body shops and automobile repair shops. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed by them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial garage shall mean any business in which a motor vehicle is kept or stored in a building or structure, whether temporarily or regularly, except residential structures or accessory structures thereto. 
Motor vehicle shall mean an automobile, truck, motorcycle or self-propelled vehicle designed primarily to transport persons or property over public streets and highways, and shall include motorized off-road vehicles, but shall not include trailers. 
Motor vehicle body shop shall mean any business of a person or firm that repairs, modifies, remodels, paints or alters in any way a motor vehicle body, or part thereof. 
Motor vehicle repair shop shall mean any business of a person or firm that maintains, repairs, modifies, remodels, or alters in any way any engine or mechanical parts of a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2000-12, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 2006-08, § B, 1-26-2006)  
Sec. 8-167. - Commercial garage, auto body shop and automobile repair shop license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to maintain and use a building or structure for a commercial garage, motor vehicle repair shop or motor vehicle body shop, unless such person or firm has first obtained a license for such purposes from the city council. 
(b)  When a person or firm engages in the business of operating a motor vehicle repair shop and motor vehicle body shop at the same location, a single application for the two uses may be submitted and a single license may be issued. 
(c)  No owner of any real property shall allow any person or firm to maintain and use a building or structure for a commercial garage, motor vehicle repair shop or motor vehicle body shop on the owner's real property without the person or firm having obtained a license therefore from the city council and complying with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-12, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 2006-08, § C, 1-26-2006)  
Sec. 8-167.1. - License application. 
(a)  Applications for licenses hereunder shall be made to the city clerk on forms to be provided by the clerk. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount to be determined by the city council, which shall be retained by the city. 
(b)  If filed by an individual, the application shall be signed by the individual; if filed by a partnership, the application shall be signed by all partners; if filed by a corporation or other organization, the application shall be signed by the president or chief officer. 
(c)  Upon application for a commercial garage, motor vehicle repair shop or motor vehicle body shop, the city clerk shall cause notice of such application together with the location of the business, to be advertised at least seven days prior to the hearing in one or more daily newspapers, stating that a public hearing will be given by the city council or a committee thereof, at the time and place stated in such notice. Notice shall also give given by registered or certified mail return receipt requested by the applicant not less than seven days prior to the hearing, to all owners of real estate within a 300-foot radius of the land for which the application is made. 
(d)  The costs of the advertising shall be paid by the applicant at the time of application. These costs are in addition to the filing fee described in subsection (a) of this provision. 
(e)  After application and notice, the city council or committee thereof shall hold a public hearing at the time and place stated in the notices. At the public hearing, the city council or committee thereof will hear fully the applicant and any interested person wishing to be heard. The city council or committee thereof may limit the discussion to a reasonable length of time. 
(Ord. No. 2000-12, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 2006-08, § D, 1-26-2006)  
Sec. 8-167.2. - License issuance. 
(a)  In determining whether to grant a license, the city council shall consider the effect the commercial garage, motor vehicle repair shop or motor vehicle body shop will have on the neighborhood in relation to fire hazards, aesthetics, traffic, waste discharge, water, and air and noise pollution. 
(b)  No license shall be granted unless the applicant has obtained the following: 
(1)  A statement from the building inspector that the building or structure to be used conforms to the applicable requirements of the Somerville Zoning Ordinance and State Building Code. 
(2)  A statement from the bureau of fire prevention that the building or structure to be used conforms to the requirements of the Fire Safety Code. 
(3)  A certificate of occupancy issued by the inspectional services department (if applicable). 
(c)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, regulations, and ordinances. 
(d)  The city council may impose restrictions and conditions as to the operation of the business concerning hours of operation, fencing and screening, parking, vehicle storage, number of vehicles, location of outside storage, outdoor work areas, and/or restrictions and conditions which the city council decides are necessary to protect the public safety and welfare. 
(e)  The applicant shall comply with such conditions and restrictions as may be imposed by the city council. 
(f)  Any license granted under this article shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises of the licensed property. 
(Ord. No. 2000-12, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 2006-08, § E, 1-26-2006)  
Sec. 8-168. - Transferability of license. 
(a)  Any license granted under this article shall be a personal privilege and shall not be assignable or transferable. 
(b)  Any license granted under this article shall allow the holder to operate only on the property address for which the license is granted. The license shall terminate upon the transfer of the business to another location. 
(Ord. No. 2000-12, 12-4-2000)  
Sec. 8-168.1. - Revocation of license. 
The city council may revoke or suspend any license issued under this article for any violation of any condition or restriction of the license or any violation of any applicable law, regulation, or ordinance, after giving the license holder notice and an opportunity to be heard at a public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2000-12, 12-4-2000)  
Sec. 8-168.2. - License renewal. 
Any license issued hereunder shall be effective as of May 1 in each year and shall expire on April 30 of the following year. At least 30 days prior to the expiration of any license, the license holder shall apply for the renewal of the license to the city council on forms provided by the city clerk. Renewals shall be issued without the necessity of a public hearing. The filing fee for a renewal application shall be in an amount to be determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2000-12, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 2006-08, § F, 1-26-2006)  
Sec. 8-169. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article may be enforced by the superintendent of inspectional services, by a noncriminal disposition pursuant to M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 21D. Each day on which a violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person, firm, corporation, association or other entity violating any provision of this article shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 2000-12, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 11, 7-14-2005)  
Sec. 8-170. - Additional conditions. 
(1)  The use and occupancy of every garage shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(A)  All vehicles, serviced by the license holder shall be serviced inside the building and not on any public or private way. All vehicles shall be stored within property lines. 
(B)  Hours of operation shall be as established by the city council. 
(C)  There shall be no blocking of the sidewalk or any public way with snow during snow removal periods. 
(D)  Vehicle parking and vehicle storage limitations shall be as established by the city council. 
(E)  Additional restrictions and conditions shall be as established by the city council, and each license will be accompanied by a list of uses and conditions to be determined by the city council. 
(2)  If spray painting is allowed, the following conditions shall be met: exterior garage doors shall be closed while painting vehicles and painting of cars shall be done in a spray booth or spray space which conforms to 780 CMR Section 411. 
(3)  If towing service is allowed, the following conditions shall be met: after normal business hours, service shall not take place from the employer/employee's private dwelling and tow trucks shall be maintained at the licensed location or other suitable place and not on the public way. 
(Ord. No. 2000-12, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 2006-08, § G, 1-26-2006)  
Secs. 8-171—8-185. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - WALKATHONS, MARATHONS, ETC.[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 12. 
 
Sec. 8-186. - Marathons, walkathons and other endurance exhibitions. 
No person shall conduct in any hall or other public place in the city any dancing exhibition or other form of public amusement such as a walkathon or marathon exhibition wherein the participants therein are permitted to engage in an endurance contest, or wherein persons engaged in such a contest continue to dance or walk or engage in said contest for more than four hours in any one day; nor shall any amusement or entertainment conducted in connection with or as a part of such dancing or walking contest be permitted after 12:00 midnight on any weekday except Saturday, on which day said walking or dancing contest or amusement or entertainment conducted in connection therewith on the premises or place of amusement shall cease at 11:45 p.m. 
(Code 1963, § 12-70)  
Sec. 8-187. - Restrictions on marathons, walkathons and other endurance exhibitions. 
No person shall engage in or participate in any such dancing or walking contest or in any amusement or entertainment conducted or carried on, on the premises used for said dancing or walking contest, after 12:00 midnight on any weekday except Saturday, and on Saturday not later than 11:45 p.m.; provided, however, that no person engaging in such dancing or walking contest shall be permitted to continue therein for more than four hours in any one day. 
(Code 1963, § 12-71)  
Secs. 8-188—8-200. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-11, § 12, adopted July 14, 2005, deleted § 8-188, which pertained to penalties and derived from Code 1963, § 12-71.  
ARTICLE XI. - BOTTLE REDEMPTION CENTERS 
 
Sec. 8-201. - Bottle redemption centers. 
No individual or business shall commence operation of a bottle redemption center as defined in Chapter 94, Section 323(e) of the General Laws without first having obtained a license to do so from the city council. Any bottle redemption center existing at the time at the time of the adoption of this article shall [be] required to obtain a license to continue operation by July 1, 1994. All licenses issued shall be renewable on an annual basis each July 1. 
(Ord. No. 1994-8, 6-9-94)  
Sec. 8-202. - Bottle redemption center restrictions. 
All licenses granted hereunder to any individual or business be subject to the following conditions and restrictions: 
(1)  Prior to commencement of operation, any person or business intending to establish a bottle redemption center shall provide the city council, in such format as the board shall determine, information including but not limited to the following: 
a.  The owner's name and address; 
b.  The operator's name and address, if different from the owner; 
c.  The address of the redemption center; 
d.  The anticipated number of beverage containers to be received and redeemed on a monthly basis; and 
e.  Such information as the city council shall determine is necessary to ensure the protection of the public good. 
(2)  In case of an existing redemption center, the information required by subsection (1) above, shall be provided to the city council, in such format as the board shall determine, with current information as to its operations each July 1. In place of section (1)d. above, an existing redemption center shall provide the city council with the number of beverage containers received and redeemed on a monthly basis.  
Sec. 8-203. - Public hearing. 
In no case shall the license required under section 8-201 shall be granted until after a notice of the application for such license has been published in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city for two consecutive weeks within 30 days prior to any public hearing scheduled thereon, which public hearing shall be provided for all interested persons. 
(Ord. No. 1994-8, 6-9-94)  
Sec. 8-204. - Penalties. 
Every individual or business subject to this article who fails to comply with the provisions hereof shall be subject to penalty in accordance with section 1-11 for each day of noncompliance. 
(Ord. No. 1994-8, 6-9-94)  
Secs. 8-205, 8-206. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - PACKAGED FORMS OF MARKETING 
 
Sec. 8-207. - Guerilla marketing defined. 
The terms "guerilla marketing", "ambush marketing", "buzz marketing" and other types of cleverly packaged forms of marketing "such marketing" shall apply to those marketing activities utilized by certain public relations firms that a common objective of deriving so-called "free" media attention to the paid client based upon the outlandishness of the message delivery and any other type of marketing activity involving non-traditional methods of communication. This article shall not apply to artists of any medium engaged in the displaying or demonstrating of works of art. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-22-2007)  
Sec. 8-208. - Registration with the police. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in such marketing activities for hire, for him or herself or another person, by foot, automobile, or any other type of conveyance, approaching persons without the previous consent of such persons, without first having registered with the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-22-2007)  
Sec. 8-209. - Certificate of registration. 
(a)  Application for a certificate of registration shall be made on a form provided by the police department. An authorized representative of the sponsoring organization shall apply to the chief of police or his/her designee either personally, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. from Monday through Thursday, excluding holidays, or by mail, and truthfully state in full the information requested on the application, to wit: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the sponsoring organization; 
(2)  State and/or federal taxpayer identification number or tax-exempt number of the sponsoring organization; 
(3)  Name, residential and business address, length of residence at such residential address, telephone number, Social Security number, and date of birth, of each and every representative of the sponsoring organization who will be engaged in such marketing activities in the city; 
(4)  Description, including the make, model, year, color and license plate number of any vehicle to be used by the sponsoring organization or its representatives while engaged in such marketing activities in the city; 
(5)  Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the such marketing activities in the city; 
(6)  Period of time for which the certificate is applied (said certificate shall expire within one year of date of issue); 
(7)  The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for certificate under this article, if any; 
(8)  Any previous revocation of a certificate of registration issued to the organization by the city; 
(9)  Any convictions for a violation of a felony under the laws of the commonwealth or any other state or federal law of the United States, within five years of the application, by the sponsoring organization or any of its representatives who will be conducting the marketing activities in the city; 
(10)  Names of the three most recent municipalities wherein the organization has conducted such marketing activities; 
(11)  Proposed method of operation; and 
(12)  Signature of the authorized representative of the sponsoring organization. 
A photograph or an acceptable photocopy of a photograph of each representative of the sponsoring organization who will be conducting the marketing activities in the city must be attached to the application. If the sponsoring organization is required to register in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts as a charitable organization, a copy of the registration must be attached to the application. 
(b)  All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath and signed under the pains and penalties of perjury. The applicant shall also produce a statement of authorization for the applicant and other representatives of the sponsoring organization to solicit or canvass on behalf of the sponsoring organization. Dates and times that the marketing activities will be conducted must also be provided. 
(c)  No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the Commonwealth or any other state or federal law of the United States within five years of the date of the application; or who has violated any provisions of the this article within five years of the date of the application; or whose certificate of registration issued hereunder has been revoked within five years of the date of the application as herein provided. 
(d)  The chief of police or his or her designate shall cause to be kept in his or her office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon, together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all certificates of registration issued under the provisions of this article, and of the denial of applications. Fully completed applications for certificates shall be acted upon within three business days of receipt. No application for a certificate shall be denied provided that it satisfies the requirements of this article. The original copy of the application shall be given to the applicant, and a duplicate copy shall be retained on file in the office of the chief of police. 
(e)  When an application is approved, each marketing representative shall be issued a certificate of registration and shall at all times while conducting such marketing activities in the city carry upon his or her person the registration certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-22-2007)  
Sec. 8-210. - Revocation of certificate. 
(a)  Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by the chief of police if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article or has made a false material statement in the application or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of registration under the terms of this article. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the chief of police or his or her designee to the holder of the certificate in person or by certified United States mail addressed to his or her residence address set forth in the application. 
(b)  Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the certificate of registration shall become null and void. 
(c)  Every certificate shall expire within one year from its date of issue. 
(d)  The certificate of registration shall state the expiration date thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-22-2007)  
Sec. 8-211. - Deceptive practices. 
No representative of any organization conducting such marketing activities registered or exempted from registering under this article may use any plan, scheme or ruse which misrepresents the true status or mission of the marketing activity or the status of the representative of any organization conducting such marketing activities. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-22-2007)  
Sec. 8-212. - Duties of representative of organizations conducting such marketing activities. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every representative of any organization conducting such marketing activities to apply for, and keep current, any licenses, permits or approvals required by any local, state or federal authority for such marketing activity. Examples of such licenses, permits or approvals include, without limitation, public occupancy permits, commercial sign permits, food service permits, parking permits and drivers licenses for the operation of motor vehicles. 
(b)  It shall also be the duty of every representative of any organization conducting such marketing activities to be aware of, and comply with, any local, state and federal law or regulation pertaining to such marketing activity. Examples of such local, state and federal laws or regulations include trespassing statutes and ordinances, graffiti statutes and ordinances and peaceful assembly statutes and ordinances. 
(c)  The failure of the representative of any organization conducting such marketing activities shall lead to the immediate revocation of the certificate of registration and such other fines and penalties as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-22-2007)  
Sec. 8-213. - Penalties. 
Any representative of any organization conducting such marketing activities who violates any provision of this article, in addition to the revocation of his or her certificate of registration, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances or, in certain cases, by arrest as provided by the General Laws. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-22-2007)  
Secs. 8-214—8-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - AT-STORE RECYCLING PROGRAM FOR PLASTIC BAGS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Plastic bags, § 8-11. 
 
Sec. 8-301. - Definitions. 
Wherever used in this article, the following terms shall be defined as follows unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires: 
Operator shall mean a person in control of, or having daily responsibility for, the daily operation of a store, which may include, but is not limited to, the owner or manager of the store. 
Plastic carryout bag shall mean a plastic carryout bag provided by a store to a customer at the point of sale and which is composed of low density polyethylene ("LDPE"), linear low density polyethylene ("LLDPE"), medium density polyethylene ("MDPE") or high density polyethylene ("HDPE"). 
Store as used herein shall mean a retail establishment that (1) provides plastic carryout bags to its customers as a result of the sale of a consumer good; and (2) occupies an area of 5,000 square feet or more. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 7-10-2008)  
Sec. 8-302. - At-store recycling program; requirements. 
The operator of a store shall establish an at-store recycling program as follows: 
(1)  Each store shall have a sign clearly readable when exiting the store, which shall be no less than two feet high and two feet wide, which encourages the reuse or recycling of plastic carryout bags. 
(2)  A plastic carryout bag collection bin ("bin") shall be placed in a visible location that is easily accessible to the consumer. The color of such bin must be highly visible and the bin must clearly indicate that it is intended for the recycling of plastic carryout bags only and not for the discarding of garbage. The inspectional services division shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations regarding the specific requirements of the bin as may be necessary. 
(3)  The plastic carryout bag collection bin shall be available to the general public for the recycling of all clean plastic bags regardless of origin of said plastic bags. No store shall prohibit or otherwise limit the acceptance of plastic bags from any person unless said plastic bag is not appropriate for recycling. 
(4)  All plastic carryout bags collected by the store are to be collected, transported and recycled in a manner consistent with all applicable laws or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this law. 
(5)  The operator of a store shall cooperate with the inspectional services division. Upon written request, the operator shall furnish the inspectional services division with information to verify that the plastic carry-out bags are being properly recycled in accordance with all applicable laws. 
(6)  This article shall take effect six months after enactment, except that the inspectional services division shall take such actions, including the promulgation of rules, as are necessary for the implementation of this article prior to such effective date. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 7-10-2008)  
Sec. 8-303. - Penalties. 
This provisions of this article shall be enforced by a noncriminal disposition pursuant to G. L. c. 40, § 21D. Each day on which a violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be punished by a fine specified in Section 1-11(b) of this Code of Ordinances. Nothing in this provision shall be deemed to limit the use of other lawful methods of abating violations of this section, including but not limited to application for equitable relief from a court of law. The city may seek costs and attorney's fees from a court of competent jurisdiction for any enforcement action taken. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, 7-10-2008)  
Secs. 8-304—8-340. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - FORTUNETELLING 
 
Sec. 8-341. - Definitions. 
Fortunetelling shall mean the telling of fortunes, forecasting of futures, or reading the past, by means of any occult, psychic power, faculty, force, clairvoyance, cartomancy, psychometry, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves, tarot cards, scrying, coins, sticks, dice, sand, coffee grounds, crystal gazing or other such reading, or through mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mindreading, telepathy talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, or by any such similar thing or act. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 4-12-2012)  
Sec. 8-342. - City council authorized to license. 
The city council is authorized to issue licenses to individuals for the regulation of the business of fortunetelling. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 4-12-2012)  
Sec. 8-343. - License requirement and qualifications. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of fortunetelling in the city without a valid license issued by the city council. Said license shall be posted in a place that is visible to all customers during their interaction with the fortuneteller. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 4-12-2012)  
Sec. 8-344. - Application for license. 
An applicant for a fortunetelling license shall file written application on a form prescribed by the city clerk. The application form shall require the applicant to provide information regarding the existence of consumer complaints against the applicant and authorization to submit to a CORI check. The fees for such license shall be set by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 4-12-2012)  
Sec. 8-345. - Enforcement. 
The inspectional services division shall enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 4-12-2012)  
Sec. 8-346. - Transferability of license. 
No license issued under this article shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 4-12-2012)  
Sec. 8-347. - Modification, suspension, or revocation. 
The board may modify, suspend, or revoke fortuneteller license for cause, after reasonable notice to the licensee of the grounds for the proposed action and the time and place of the hearing regarding such proposed action. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 4-12-2012)  
Sec. 8-348. - Expiration of license. 
Unless otherwise specified in this article, each license issued under this article shall continue in force until the following April 30, unless sooner revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 4-12-2012)  
Sec. 8-349. - Renewal of license. 
A license issued under this article may be renewed by the city council. An individual requesting a renewal must submit an application on a form prescribed by the city clerk. The fee for such renewal permit shall be set by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 4-12-2012)  
Sec. 8-350. - Penalty for violation of ordinance. 
Any person violating any section of this article shall be punished by a fine in accordance with Section 1-11(b) of this article. Each day on which a violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, 4-12-2012)  
Secs. 8-351—8-360. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS 
 
Sec. 8-361. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Board means the City Council for the City of Somerville. 
Mobile food vendor means any mobile operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves, sells, or otherwise provides for human consumption any prepared or packaged food or beverages from a truck or cart, including ice cream and non-ice cream food and beverage products. 
Mobile food vendor license refers to the license to sell food issued under the authority of article XV of the City of Somerville's Code of Ordinances, and refers collectively to both a) ice cream truck vendor permits and b) food vendor licenses that are issued to businesses operating from a truck or cart. 
Mobile food vendor licensee means the holder of a mobile food vendor license. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, 10-25-2012)  
Sec. 8-362. - Mobile food vendor license required. 
No person or business entity, including a religious or charitable organization, shall operate as a mobile food vendor in any public, private or restricted space without obtaining a license from the city council. Said license shall be conspicuously posted in a place that is visible to all customers. This provision shall not apply to mobile food operations that receive a temporary event permit from the board of health. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, 10-25-2012)  
Sec. 8-363. - Application for a mobile food vendor license. 
The applicant must complete an application form prescribed by the city clerk. The fee for such permit shall be set in accordance with Chapter 40, Section 22F of the General Laws. The operator of the vehicle must provide a valid state hawker's license issued by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and any applicable local board of health license before a mobile food vendor license will be issued by the City of Somerville. In the event a state hawker's license and/or an applicable board of health license is revoked and/or does not otherwise remain in effect, the mobile food vendor license shall automatically become void. If a state hawker's license and/or applicable board of health license is revoked and/or does not otherwise remain in effect, the licensee shall notify the city clerk that such license has been revoked and/or does not otherwise remain in effect. Failure to notify the city clerk within ten days that such license has been revoked shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, 10-25-2012)  
Sec. 8-364. - Public hearing. 
In no case shall a license required under this section be granted until after a public hearing is given to all persons interested therein. At least 14 days before the public hearing, notice of the application for such license shall be published in one or more newspapers in the city, and placed on the city website and cable wheel. The costs of any advertising shall be paid by the applicant at the time of application. These costs are in addition to the filing fee described in section 8-363. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, 10-25-2012)  
Sec. 8-365. - Renewal. 
Every mobile food vendor license may be renewed annually upon payment of a renewal fee, provided that the mobile food licensee is in compliance with applicable requirements of this article. The fee for such renewal permit shall be set in accordance with Chapter 40, Section 22F of the General Laws. The renewal of a license does not guarantee renewal of previously approved route or location. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, 10-25-2012)  
Sec. 8-366. - Criteria for issuance of license. 
In considering a mobile food vendor's application for a mobile food license, the board shall consider the public good and general welfare and convenience of the community, and shall take into account factors such as the sort of operation proposed (including the proposed menu, days and hours of operation, and location), any impact on the community with respect to such matters as noise, traffic, congestion, odors, sanitary and waste disposal facilities, parking, dust and fumes, the impact of the character of the neighborhood and city, and whether any articulable harm would follow from granting the license. Also, the board shall consider whether a public benefit would flow from proposed location and use, and the competitive or other impact on existing restaurants. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, 10-25-2012)  
Sec. 8-367. - Conditions of operation. 
(a)  The issuance of a mobile food vendor license does not grant to, or entitle, the licensee the exclusive use of any service route or location, in whole or in part, other than the time and place specified in the license or permit for the term of the license or permit. 
(b)  Mobile food vendors are encouraged to provide consumers with compostable single-service articles, such as compostable forks, and paper plates, and a waste and recycling container for their disposal. No styrofoam products are permitted. Mobile food vendors are encouraged to use energy efficient resources. All mobile food vendors shall offer a waste container for public use that operators shall empty at their own expense. All adjacent streets, sidewalks and alleys within 100 feet shall be inspected regularly for purposes of removing any litter found. 
(c)  Unless otherwise provided, no mobile food vendor licensee may operate between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(d)  The mobile food licensee shall comply with all applicable local rules, ordinances, and regulations, including but not limited to the board of health regulations, traffic and parking regulations, and noise ordinance. 
(e)  Mobile food vendors are encouraged to offer at least 25 percent healthy choice meal options as defined by the Somerville Health Department, except that menus providing only desserts/sweets or confectionary items are encouraged to offer at least one healthy option at all times of operation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, 10-25-2012)  
Sec. 8-368. - Transfers. 
(a)  Transfers for value prohibited. A license issued under this article shall be personal to the applicant. No mobile food vendor licensee may transfer a mobile food vendor license, nor shall they sell, lend, lease or in any manner transfer a license for value. A transfer by merger, acquisition, or consolidation, or operation of law is prohibited. 
(b)  Unauthorized transfers. Any unauthorized transfers or attempt to transfer a license shall automatically void such permit. Whoever violates this provision shall be subject to a fine pursuant to section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, 10-25-2012)  
Sec. 8-369. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Fine for violation. Any mobile food vendor licensee operating in violation of any provision within this section or any other rules and regulations promulgated by the board may be subject to a fine in accordance with subsection 1-11(b) of this article. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense under General Laws c. 40, section 21D. 
(b)  Revocation, suspension, modification. The board may modify a mobile food vendor license, including an approved location, (i) at any time before the issuance of a mobile food vendor license, (ii) if after the issuance of such license, for cause, after reasonable notice to the licensee of the grounds for the proposed modification and the time and place of the hearing regarding such proposed modification, or iii) by request of the licensee, subject to board approval. The board may suspend, revoke, or decline to renew a mobile food vendor license for cause, after reasonable notice to the licensee of the grounds for the proposed action and the time and place of the hearing regarding such proposed action. 
(c)  Enforcement. The provisions of this section or any rules and regulations promulgated by the board may be enforced by the police department and inspectional services division. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, 10-25-2012)  
Sec. 8-370. - Additional conditions and restrictions. 
The terms of every mobile food vendor license issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to such further restrictions and conditions as the city council shall impose. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, 10-25-2012)  
Sec. 8-371. - Applicability of mobile food truck vendor provisions. 
This article shall not apply to a food truck vendor who lawfully operated under a hawker and peddler license at the time of the enactment of the mobile food vendor ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, 6-26-2013)  
Chapter 9 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Power of city council to set penalties for violation of ordinances, § 17(3). 
Cross reference— Penalties and violations, § 1-11; police, Ch. 10. 
State Law reference— Crimes and punishments, M.G.L.A. c. 263—274. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Alcoholic beverages in public places. 
(a)  No person shall give, sell, deliver, have in his or her possession either in an open or unopened container, or consume any alcoholic beverage in a public park, playground, rest area, school grounds, recreational area, swimming pool or skating rink located within the city. Persons violating the provisions of this subsection shall have confiscated both those opened and unopened containers in their possession. 
(1)  The above prohibition in subsection (a) shall not apply to public events in or upon a public park or recreational area, excepting athletic fields, where prior written consent has been issued by way of a license from the city council, a license has been issued by the Somerville Licensing Commission to serve alcoholic beverages to the extent required by law, and provided that no disturbance or annoyance is created thereby. 
(b)  No person shall give, sell, deliver or consume any alcoholic beverage, including but not limited to beer and wine, on any street nor shall any person have in his or her possession an open container containing such beverage on any street, unless said person (1) is a licensed common victualler that has been granted a permit to place and maintain outdoor seating on a public sidewalk (section 12-14) and is duly permitted by the Somerville Licensing Commission to serve alcoholic beverages with food, at outdoor seating, or is a patron thereof, or (2) is licensed to conduct a festival, fiesta, street fair or any similar event (section 8-14(a)) and is permitted by the Somerville Licensing Commission to serve alcoholic beverages within the boundaries of said event, or is a patron thereof. For purposes of this subsection a container shall be deemed open, regardless of its closed or capped condition if the original sealant of the bottler has once been broken. 
(c)  No person shall give, sell, deliver, consume or have in his or her possession in an opened container any alcoholic beverage in the common areas of the city housing authority projects. Common areas shall include, but not be limited to, hallways, stairwells, front steps, basements, rooftops, sidewalks, parking areas, roadways and park areas. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of subsection (c) of this section shall have confiscated such containers in his or her possession by the police department or other person authorized with police powers by law and be fined in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Code 1963, § 12-14; Ord. No. 2008-05, 4-24-2008; Ord. No. 2009-07, 5-14-2009; Ord. No. 2017-02 , 1-26-2017) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 12. 
State Law reference— Gift, sale, delivery or possession of alcoholic beverages on public school grounds prohibited, M.G.L.A. c. 272, § 40A.  
Sec. 9-2. - Sale of alcoholic beverages to persons under 21. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, business, corporation, or partnership to sell or cause to be sold to any person under the age of 21 years any low or nonalcoholic beer or wine or any beverage with any alcoholic content, however much reduced. 
(b)  Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be fined in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 1998-3, 3-26-98; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 13, 7-14-2005) 
Editor's note— The city has advised that Ord. No. 1998-3, adopted Mar. 26, 1998, includes the phrase "in accordance with section 1-11".  
Sec. 9-3. - Marijuana in public places and businesses. 
(a)  No person shall give, sell, deliver or consume marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol in a public park, playground, rest area, school grounds, recreational area, swimming pool, skating rink, or in the common areas of city housing authority projects, and further, no person shall consume marijuana within 50 feet of the aforementioned public places. For the purposes of this section, "common areas" shall include, but not be limited to, hallways, stairwells, front steps, basements, rooftops, sidewalks, parking areas, roadways, and park areas. 
(b)  No person shall sell or deliver marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol, unless licensed by the Licensing Commission and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Cannabis Control Commission and also permitted under Sections SZO 7.15 or 7.16. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall have confiscated any marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol in his or her possession by the police department or other person authorized with police powers by law and be subject to a fine in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, 5-14-2009; Ord. No. 2017-13 , 11-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-18, 11-8-2018 ; Ord. No. 2018-23 , 12-13-2018)  
Secs. 9-4—9-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Obstruction of fire prevention bureau personnel, § 5-10. 
State Law reference— Crimes against public justice, M.G.L.A. c. 268. 
 
Sec. 9-16. - Disorderly conduct in city council chamber. 
(a)  No person shall behave in a rude or disorderly manner, or use any indecent, profane or insulting language at public meetings of the city council, in the city council chamber. 
(b)  Violation of the provisions of this section is subject to a penalty in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Code 1963, § 12-14.1) 
State Law reference— Disturbing public meetings, M.G.L.A. c. 272, §§ 38, 40.  
Sec. 9-17. - Signs in city council chamber. 
(a)  No person shall display, carry, post or affix any signs, banners, posters, notices or effigies at public meetings of the city council, in the city council chamber, where they may endanger the safety of the public. 
(b)  Violations of the provisions of this section are subject to a penalty in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Code 1963, § 12-46.1)  
Secs. 9-18—9-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Crime against the person, M.G.L.A. c. 265. 
 
Sec. 9-31. - Wage theft. 
(a)  The city, by and through its officials, boards and commissions, may deny an application for any license or permit issued by it, if, during the three-year period prior to the date of the application, the applicant admitted guilt or liability or has been found guilty, liable or responsible, in any judicial or administrative proceeding, of committing or attempting to commit a violation of: 
(1)  Commonwealth of Massachusetts Payment of Wages Law, General Laws Chapter 149, Section 148, and any and all other state or federal laws regulating the payment of wages, including, but not limited to, Chapter 149, Sections 27, 27G, 27H, 52D, 148A, 148B, 150C, 152, 152A, 159C; and Chapter 151, sections 1, 1A, 1B, 15, 19 and 20 of the General Laws; and 
(2)  The Fair Debt Collection Practices Act, 15 U.S.C. §1692, or any other federal or state law regulating the collection of debt, as to the employees of the applicant or others who had performed work for said applicant. 
(b)  Any license or permit issued by the City of Somerville, its boards or commissions, may be revoked or suspended if, during the three years prior to the issuance of the license or permit, the licensee or permittee admitted guilt or liability or has been found guilty or liable in any judicial or administrative proceeding of committing a violation of any of the laws set forth in subsection (a) above. 
(c)  Any license or permit issued by the City of Somerville, its boards or commissions, may be revoked or suspended if the applicant, licensee or permittee is a person who was subject to a final judgment or other decision for violation of any of the laws set forth in subsection (a) above within three years prior to the effective date of this section, and the judgment was not satisfied within the lawful period for doing same, or the expiration of the period for filing an appeal; or if an appeal is made, the date of the final resolution of that appeal and any subsequent appeal resulting in a final administrative or judicial affirmation of violation of any of the laws set forth in subsection (a) above. 
(d)  The period of non-issuance, revocation or non-renewal shall be one year, and the licensee or permittee or the person who is the principal of a license or permit shall not again be licensed or permitted in any other manner during such period. 
(e)  Within 14 calendar days from the date that the notice of refusal to issue, revocation or refusal to renew notice is mailed to the applicant or licensee or permittee, the applicant, licensee or permittee may appeal such decision by filing a written notice of appeal setting forth the grounds therefor. Said notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. The hearing shall be conducted by the board, commission or individual who made the decision not to issue, not to renew, or to revoke within 30 days of receipt of such notice of appeal. 
(f)  An applicant for a business certificate, license or permit shall be provided with a copy of the ordinance from which this section derived and shall certify that he has not been found guilty, liable or responsible, in any judicial or administrative proceeding, of committing or attempting to commit a violation of any of the laws set forth in subsection (a) above. 
(g)  This law shall apply to any person or entity whose final administrative decision or adjudication or judicial judgment or conviction was entered on or after July 1, 2013, with the exception of judgments that remain unsatisfied as set forth in subsection (c) above. 
(h)  Application of this section is subject to applicable state or federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04, 6-26-2013)  
Secs. 9-32—9-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Crimes against property, M.G.L.A. c. 266. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 9-46. - Vandalism and damage to public property. 
No person, unless duly authorized, shall injure, deface or destroy any tree, shrub, plant, statue, fountain, vase, guidepost, guideboard, lamppost, lamp, lantern, building, fence, post or other structure or ornament or utility, in a street, park, or other public place. 
(Code 1963, § 12-16)  
Sec. 9-47. - Graffiti and damage to property. 
No person shall make any indecent figure, or write any indecent or obscene word upon, or mar, disfigure or deface any fence, buildings or other structure in any public place. 
(Code 1963, § 12-14) 
Cross reference— Fire alarm signal boxes, § 5-7; interference with water system, § 11-121; damaging water meters, § 11-122.  
Sec. 9-48. - Signs and posters on public property. 
(a)  No person shall attach or cause to be attached a sign, placard, notice or any other thing to a tree, pole, post or other structure in a public park, public way or public boulevard. 
(b)  No person shall post, affix, paint or write any placard, poster, notice, advertisement or bill upon curbstone or sidewalk, or upon any tree, pole, post or other structure in any street, park or other public place, or upon any building or other property belonging to the city, without the consent of the mayor, unless authorized by law or ordinance. 
(Code 1963, §§ 12-17, 12-46) 
Cross reference— Leafleting and handbills, § 12-4.  
Sec. 9-49. - Signs and posters on private property. 
No person shall post, affix, paint or write any placard, poster, notice, advertisement or bill upon a fence, wall, building, post or tree, without the previous consent of the person owning or having possession of such fence, wall, building, pole, post or tree. 
(Code 1963, § 12-45)  
Sec. 9-50. - Tampering with signs and posters. 
No person, at any time prior to the event of which notice is given upon any placard, poster, notice, advertisement or bill, previously posted, affixed, painted, printed or written, shall cover or conceal, mutilate, destroy or remove the same or any part thereof. 
(Code 1963, § 12-47)  
Sec. 9-51. - Protection of trees. 
No person, unless duly authorized, shall climb by the use of spurs, or otherwise injure, pierce, tear, cut, deface or destroy a tree or any branch thereof standing in any street, park, or other public place, or attach a sign, cross bar, wire, or other fixture, except a tree protector, to any such tree. 
(Code 1963, § 12-18) 
Cross reference— Fastening animals to trees, § 3-1. 
State Law reference— Malicious injury of trees and fences, M.G.L.A. c. 266, § 114.  
Sec. 9-52. - Disturbing trash containers before collection. 
No person, except as authorized by ordinance of the city, by order, regulation, license or permission of the city council or other board or officer of the city thereto duly authorized, or except an officer or employee of the city and for some public purpose or use, shall move or disturb a barrel or other receptacle containing ashes or other refuse materials, or disturb, overhaul or interfere with the contents thereof, while said barrel or other receptacle remains in or upon a highway of the city, placed there in order that said contents may be carried away by some person authorized as aforesaid, or while said barrel or other receptacle remains in or upon a private way or land within ten feet of a highway, placed there in order that said contents may be carried away by some person authorized as aforesaid. 
(Code 1963, § 12-27) 
Cross reference— Placing trash in public trash containers, § 9-53; collection of ashes and offal, § 11-30; household trash and rubbish collection, § 11-31; rubbish or trash picking, collecting or disturbing, § 11-32; littering and dumping trash and rubbish on public property, § 12-3; trash and rubbish on streets and sidewalks, § 12-12.  
Sec. 9-53. - Placing trash in public trash containers. 
No person, subject to fees for offal collection which fees are on file in the city clerk's office, shall deposit any rubbish, garbage or other offal in any public litter basket or barrel. 
(Code 1963, § 12-27A) 
Cross reference— Disturbing trash containers before collection, § 9-52; collection of ashes and offal, § 11-30; household trash and rubbish collection, § 11-31; rubbish or trash picking, collecting or disturbing, § 11-32; littering and dumping trash and rubbish on public property, § 12-3; trash and rubbish on streets and sidewalks, § 12-12.  
Sec. 9-54. - Trash and litter removal from sidewalks. 
(a)  No owner, tenant, or occupant of land or a building abutting upon a sidewalk within the limits of any public way in this city, and no agent of such owner having the charge of such land or building, shall place or suffer to remain on such sidewalk any rubbish, refuse, debris, garbage, scrap, by-products and other waste material. Such rubbish, refuse, debris, garbage, scrap, by-products and other waste material shall be removed on a daily basis and shall not be allowed to remain during any part of the nighttime, except as otherwise provided by ordinance regulating the collection of trash. 
(b)  Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be fined in accordance with section 1-11. 
(c)  Upon neglect or violation of the duty imposed by the provisions of this section, such duty may be performed by the superintendent of the highway division of the department of public works at the expense of the person liable to perform the same. 
(Ord. No. 1990-15, 12-13-90; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 14, 7-14-2005) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1990-15, adopted Dec. 13, 1990, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 9-54 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 12.  
Sec. 9-55. - Trash and litter removal from storefronts and businesses. 
(a)  No person in control of a place of business abutting on a street shall knowingly suffer any rubbish, litter or other refuse to remain in the open on the estate upon which such place of business is located, including the sidewalk immediately adjacent to such business, except in a receptacle from which such rubbish, litter or refuse is not likely to be blown onto such street. 
(b)  Every business establishment licensed by the board of health as a "retail food store" or as a "food services establishment" as those terms are defined by department of public health regulation 105 CMR 590.001 and which provides private off-street parking for its customers shall provide one or more trash barrels to be located and properly secured outside such establishment at all times. The required number and size of said barrels and the frequency at which the barrels must be emptied shall be determined by the board of health. In no event shall said barrels be emptied less frequently than once a day. 
(c)  Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be fined in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 1990-16, 12-13-90; Ord. No. 1996-2, 3-28-96; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 15, 7-14-2005) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1990-16, adopted Dec. 13, 1990, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 9-55 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 12.  
Sec. 9-56. - Vegetation and wood on private property. 
(a)  No person in control of any property abutting a sidewalk or public right-of-way shall allow to remain uncut any overgrowth of grass, shrubs, and weeds growing in or around such sidewalk or public right-of-way. 
(b)  All persons in control of property shall maintain such property free of vegetation that is infested with rodents, vermin, other dangerous insects or other animals, conceals pools of stagnant water conducive to the breeding of mosquitoes, or creates a fire hazard. 
(c)  No person in control of property shall store, place, or permit to be stored or placed any wood out of doors in a manner which may reasonably provide rodents or other animals with harboring places. 
(d)  No person in control of any property shall allow to remain any decayed, dead, or hazardous trees or tree limbs potentially injurious to the public health and safety or property. 
(e)  Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be fined in accordance with section 1-11. Each day that a violation exists shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1990-18, 12-13-90; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 16, 7-14-2005; Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 3-10-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1990-18, adopted Dec. 13, 1990, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 9-56 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 12.  
Sec. 9-57. - Repairing and storing motor vehicles on public and private property. 
(a)  Repairing automobiles on public property. No person shall repair, restore or maintain any vehicle on any street or on any public property. 
(b)  Unregistered motor vehicles on private property. No person, firm, or corporation shall store, place or permit to be stored or placed, any unregistered motor vehicle on private property located in the city for more than 90 days. No more than one unregistered motor vehicle may be stored, placed, or permitted to be stored or placed at any time. This ordinance shall not apply to the storage of motor vehicles within an enclosed building or to a person licensed under G. L. c. 140, s. 59. 
(c)  Inoperable motor vehicles. No person, firm, or corporation shall store, place, or permit to be stored or placed, any inoperable motor vehicles on private property located within the City of Somerville. For purposes of this article, "inoperable motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle which, for a period of at least seven days, is incapable of being driven under its own motor power, including, but not limited, to where the engine, wheels, windshields, or other parts have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged, or otherwise so treated, but shall not include: 1) Any motor vehicle that is kept within a building when not in use; 2) A motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business licensed under G. L. c. 140, s. 59. 
(d)  Storage of boats, trailers and recreational vehicles. One recreational vehicle, boat or utility trailer may be stored outside of a building on any lot containing a dwelling unit. The recreational vehicle, boat or trailer must be located not closer to the street than the existing front facade of the front-most dwelling unit on the property. The recreational vehicle, boat or trailer must be sight-screened from the street and abutting properties by solid fencing at least six feet in height. The recreational vehicle, boat or trailer shall not be occupied for living, housekeeping, or business purposes. All such recreational vehicles, boats or trailers shall be kept in good repair and must comply with all other city ordinances concerning nuisances and abandoned vehicles. This provision shall not be construed to apply to lawfully erected construction trailers or limited duration emergency housing as authorized by the superintendent of inspectional services. 
(e)  Penalty. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be fined in accordance with section 1-11(b). Each day that a person, firm, or corporation violates this section shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1990-19, 12-13-90; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 17, 7-14-2005; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 11-9-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1990-19, adopted Dec. 13, 1990, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 9-57 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 12.  
Sec. 9-58. - Trespassing on lawns and private property. 
(a)  No person without lawful authority or without the express or implied consent of the owner or his or her agent, shall enter any building or enter on any enclosed or improved real estate, lot or parcel of ground in the city; or, being upon the land of another, shall fail, or refuse to leave the same when requested to do so by the person lawfully in possession thereof, his or her agent or representative; or deposit on the premises of another, or remove therefrom any material, substance, earth, dirt, ashes, refuse, turf or other article or thing whatsoever. 
(b)  Provided further, all delivery personnel, including letter carriers, whether employed by a private firm or government agency or government-supported corporation shall use sidewalks and accepted and approved sidewalks and shall refrain from traversing lawns or other private property not normally used as a walkway by the general public in order to effect delivery. 
(Ord. No. 2000-2, 10-2-2000)  
DIVISION 2. - GRAFFITI 
 
Sec. 9-59. - Graffiti: Declaration of a nuisance. 
It is hereby declared that graffiti, upon public and private property, is a nuisance which endangers the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the citizens of Somerville. Graffiti contributes to the creation of substandard, decadent and blighted neighborhoods; to the spread of crime and juvenile delinquency; to the reduction of property values; to the arrest of economic growth; and to the overall decline in the quality of life within the city. Left uncontrolled, graffiti encourages additional graffiti, and constitutes an economic and social liability for the city and its citizens. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8, 9-12-2002)  
Sec. 9-60. - Definitions. 
Graffiti as used in this article, as well as other applicable sections of the City Code, shall mean: any letters, words, writings, numbers, symbols, logos, drawings, paintings, carvings, etchings, inscriptions or other markings, not required or approved of by law, affixed to any real property or improvements thereto, either privately or publicly held, which destroys, damages, defaces, disfigures, alters, marks or mars the property in any manner or to any degree. 
Owner as used in this article, shall mean every person alone or severally with others who: 
(1)  Has legal title to any building or parcel of land, vacant or otherwise; or 
(2)  Has care, charge or control of any building, or parcel of land, vacant or otherwise, in any capacity including but not limited to agent, executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the holder of legal title; or 
(3)  Is a mortgagee in possession of any such property; or 
(4)  Is an agent, trustee or other person appointed by the courts and vested with possession or control of any such property. 
Real property as used in this article shall mean land, and whatever is attached to its surface, including but not limited to buildings, bridges, poles, fences, trestles, playground equipment, fire hydrants, gravestones, tablets, trees, rocks, or any other object natural or manmade. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8, 9-12-2002)  
Sec. 9-61. - Property owner responsible for the removal of graffiti. 
(a)  The prompt removal of graffiti shall be the responsibility of the owner as defined herein, whether public or private, following the discovery or notice thereof. 
(b)  In the case of privately-owned property, the owner shall be required to remove or cause graffiti to be removed within ten days following receipt of written notice from the board of health, or its authorized agent, served upon the owner or the owner's authorized agent. The notice shall be in writing and shall contain an order to remove the graffiti, hereinafter sometimes called an "order of notice." The notice shall also contain the following information: 
(1)  The location of the property; 
(2)  A concise description of the graffiti conditions; 
(3)  A statement that the graffiti must be removed within ten days after receipt of notice; 
(4)  A statement that if the graffiti is not removed within the ten days, the property will be subject to the removal, cost, and penalty provisions of sections 9-64; 9-66; and 9-67; and 
(5)  Notification of an owners right to a hearing pursuant to section 9-62. 
Copies of all referenced sections of the Code shall be attached to said notice. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8, 9-12-2002)  
Sec. 9-62. - Request and procedure for hearing. 
(a)  The owner or owner's authorized agent to whom an order of notice has been served pursuant to this section may request a hearing before the board of health by filing with the board of health within seven days after the day the order was served, a written petition requesting a hearing on the matter. Upon receipt of such petition, the board of health shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall inform the petitioner thereof in writing. The hearing shall be commenced not later than 30 days after the day on which the order was served. The board of health, upon application of the petitioner, may postpone the date of hearing for a reasonable time beyond such 30-day period if, in the judgment of the board of health, the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such postponement. 
(b)  At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why the order should be modified or withdrawn. 
(c)  After the hearing, the board of health shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the order and shall inform the petitioner, in writing, of its decision. If the board of health sustains or modifies the order, it shall be carried out within the time period allotted in the original order or in the modification. 
(d)  Every notice, order, or other record prepared by the board of health in connection with the hearing shall be entered as a matter of public record in the office of the clerk of the city or in the board of health. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8, 9-12-2002)  
Sec. 9-63. - Judicial appeal. 
Any owner aggrieved by the final decision of the board of health with respect to an order of notice issued under the provisions of this section may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8, 9-12-2002)  
Sec. 9-64. - Failure to remove graffiti from privately-owned property. 
(a)  If an owner, as defined herein, has not requested a hearing within seven days after receiving notice, and fails or refuses to remove graffiti with the period provided in section 9-61, the city may enter upon the property and remove the graffiti. 
(b)  If an owner, as defined herein, has been ordered to remove graffiti following a hearing on the matter, and fails or refuses to remove the graffiti within ten days following the hearing, the city may enter upon the property and remove the graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8, 9-12-2002)  
Sec. 9-65. - Other relevant sections. 
Nothing herein shall prevent the city from enforcing other applicable sections of the Code, namely article IV, section 9-47, or applicable sections of Massachusetts General Laws, including, but not limited to, Chapter 266, section 126. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8, 9-12-2002)  
Sec. 9-66. - Cost of removal. 
(a)  If the owner, or the owner's authorized agent, fails to comply with an order issued pursuant to section 9-61 or 9-62, and the city removes or causes such graffiti to be removed, the removal cost(s), pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 111, Section 125, shall constitute a debt due the city, and shall be recoverable from such owner in an action of contract. 
(b)  Furthermore, pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 111, Section 125, any such debt, together with interest thereon at the rate of six percent from the date such debt becomes due shall constitute a lien on land upon which the graffiti was located if a statement of claim, signed by the director of the board of health and the city tax collector, setting forth the amount claimed without interest is filed, within 90 days after the debt becomes due, with the register of deeds for Middlesex County. 
Such lien shall take effect upon the filing of the statement aforesaid and shall continue for two years from the first day of October next following the date of such filing. If the debt for which such a lien is in effect remains unpaid when the city assessor is preparing a real estate tax list, the director of the board of health, or the city tax collector shall certify such debt to the city assessor, who shall forthwith add such debt to the tax on the property to which it relates and commit it with their warrant to the collector as part of such tax. If the property to which such debt relates is tax exempt, such debt relates is tax exempt, such debt shall be subject to the provisions of law relative to interest on the taxes of which they become, or, if the property were not tax exempt would become, a part; and the collector of taxes shall have the same powers and be subject to the same duties with respect to such debts as in the case of annual taxes upon real estate, and the provisions of law relative to the collection of such annual redemption of land so sold or taken shall, except as otherwise provided, apply to such claims. A lien under this section may be discharged by filing with the Register of Deeds for Middlesex County, a certificate from the city tax collector that the debt constituting the lien, together with any interest and costs thereon has been paid or legally abated. All costs of recording or discharging a lien under this section shall be borne by the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8, 9-12-2002)  
Sec. 9-67. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine for each offense and may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided for under section 1-11 of the City Code and Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40, Section 21D. Each day's failure to comply with an order shall constitute a separate violation. In the alternative, any person who violates a provision of this section and remedies said violation prior to the issuance of an order to remove pursuant to section 9-64 or enters into a removal of graffiti agreement with the city for the city to remove said graffiti prior to the issuance of said order, then said person will not be subject to fines hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2002-8, 9-12-2002; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 18, 7-14-2005)  
Secs. 9-68—9-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Crimes against chastity, morality, decency and good order, M.G.L.A. c. 272. 
 
Sec. 9-71. - Nude swimming or bathing. 
No person in a nude state shall swim or bathe in any of the waters within the city, so as to be exposed to the view of other persons in any street or house. 
(Code 1963, § 12-15) 
State Law reference— Indecency generally, M.G.L.A. c. 272, § 53 et seq.  
Sec. 9-72. - Peeping and stalking. 
(a)  No person other than an officer of the law, acting in performance of his or her legal duty, shall enter upon the premises of any person with the intention of peeping into a dwelling or spying upon any person therein, nor shall any person peep into a dwelling or spy upon any person therein from his or her own dwelling or from any public property. 
(b)  Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be fined in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 1994-6, 4-14-94)  
Secs. 9-73—9-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 9-86. - Shooting guns and firearms. 
No person shall, except in the performance of some duty required of him or her by law, discharge any cannon, gun, pistol or other firearm, loaded with ball or shot, or with power or other explosive only, or any flobert rifle, so-called, or any air gun, without authority of the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 12-41) 
State Law reference— Offenses involving weapons generally, M.G.L.A. c. 269, § 10 et seq.  
Sec. 9-87. - Skyrockets. 
No person shall sell, expose for sale, give away, use, or discharge a sky rocket without the permission of the mayor. 
(Code 1963, § 12-42) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 5.  
Sec. 9-88. - Fireworks and guns. 
No person shall discharge, fire or use any firecracker, rocket, torpedo, Roman candle, so-called BB gun, or other fireworks, or a pistol, cane, cannon, or other appliance, using blank cartridge or cap containing chlorate of potash mixture or other explosive, without permission from the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 12-43; Ord. No. 2003-03, 3-27-2003) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 5.  
Sec. 9-89. - Selling or storing fireworks. 
No person shall sell or store any fireworks without permission from the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 12-44) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 5.  
Sec. 9-90. - Abandoned refrigerators. 
(a)  No person shall leave or deposit on any vacant lot or on any premises outside of any building a refrigerator, icebox or other container unless the door has been removed or unless the locking mechanism has been removed from the refrigerator, icebox or other container. 
(b)  No person shall allow to remain on any premises owned or occupied by him or her outside of any building an abandoned refrigerator, icebox or other container which has a door, unless the door has been removed or unless the locking mechanism of the door has been removed. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, each day during which such refrigerator, icebox or other container is allowed to remain in violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Code 1963, §§ 12-59—12-62) 
State Law reference— Removal of doors from discarded containers originally used for refrigerative purposes, M.G.L.A. c. 271, § 46.  
Sec. 9-91. - Abandoned automobiles and motor vehicles. 
Whoever abandons or discards a motor vehicle or parts of a motor vehicle on public or private property within the city shall be punished in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Code 1963, § 12-68) 
State Law reference— Abandonment of motor vehicles, M.G.L.A. c. 90, § 22B.  
Sec. 9-92. - Removal of abandoned automobiles and motor vehicles. 
The commissioner of public works or a person acting under his or her authority is hereby authorized to remove or cause to be removed from said public or private property within the city, any abandoned or discarded motor vehicle or part thereof; and the person abandoning or discarding said motor vehicle or part thereof, shall be liable to the city for the cost of said removal. 
(Code 1963, § 12-69) 
Cross reference— Towing vehicles that obstruct snow removal, § 11-2. 
State Law reference— Removal of abandoned motor vehicles, M.G.L.A. c. 90, § 22C.  
Sec. 9-93. - Spray paint, indelible markers and graffiti. 
(a)  No person or business, including every retail and hardware store in the city shall sell, expose for sale or give away spray paint and/or indelible markers to any person under the age person under the age of 18. 
(b)  Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be fined in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 1995-1, 2-9-95; Ord. No. 1995-3, 2-23-95; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 19, 7-14-2005) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1995-1, adopted Feb. 9, 1995, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as § 9-93 was at the discretion of the editor. Subsequently, Ord. No. 1995-3, adopted Feb. 23, 1995, amended Ord. No. 1995-1.  
Sec. 9-94. - Unregistered motor vehicles. 
No person shall operate on a public way or sidewalk under the control of the city a motorized vehicle not licensed under the Massachusetts General Laws. Such vehicles shall include, but not be limited to, miniature motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles, and motorized skateboards. Such vehicles shall not include a Segway or an electronic personal assistive mobility device or other mobility device for a person with disabilities. 
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of $50.00 for each offense, in accordance with section 1-11(b). 
(Ord. No. 2004-13, 10-28-2004)  
Sec. 9-95. - Sniffing or inhaling of the vaporized form of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No licensed establishment, as defined in chapter 138 of the Massachusetts General Laws, shall allow or permit in the premises of such licensed establishment the sniffing or inhaling of the vaporized form of alcoholic beverages, as defined by section 1 of chapter 138 of the Massachusetts General Laws. This section shall be enforced by the police department. 
(b)  Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be fined in accordance with section 1-11(b). In addition, any violation of this section shall be referred to the licensing commission for a disciplinary hearing before said commission. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, 1-26-2006)  
Sec. 9-96. - Knives and dangerous weapons. 
No person, except as provided by law, shall carry on his or her person, or carry under his or her control in a vehicle, any machete, saber, sword or weapon of like or similar nature; any knife having any type of blade in excess of two and one-half inches (except when being used for hunting or fishing, in lawful employment, or for any other innocent purpose); or any other object or tool so designed, redesigned, fashioned, prepared, or treated that the same may be used to inflict bodily harm or injury to another [including those weapons and instruments described in M.G.L. chapter 269, section 10, par. (b)]. 
Violations of any provision of this section shall be subject to arrest and a fine of not more than $300.00 for each offense thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, 1-26-2006)  
Sec. 9-97. - Nuisance control. 
(a)  Purpose. In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Somerville, this section shall permit the city to impose penalties on property owners and other responsible persons for the nuisances and harm caused by loud and/or unruly gatherings on private property and shall prohibit the consumption of alcoholic beverages by underage persons at such gatherings. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Eviction means actively trying to evict a tenant from a premise by delivery of a notice to quit and subsequent court proceedings, if a tenant fails to vacate the premises. 
Gathering is a party or event where two or more persons have assembled or are assembled. 
Premises means any residence or other private property, place, or location, including any commercial or business property. 
Property owner means the legal owner of record of a premises as listed by the tax assessor's records. 
Public nuisance means a gathering of persons on any premises in a manner that creates a substantial disturbance of the quiet enjoyment of private or public property in a neighborhood. Behavior constituting a public nuisance includes, but is not limited to excessive noise and excessive pedestrian and vehicular traffic related thereto, obstruction of public ways or sidewalks by crowds, vehicles, trash or refuse, illegal parking, public urination, the service of alcohol to underage persons, public consumption of alcohol, fighting, disturbances of the peace, and littering. 
(c)  Mailing of notice to property owners and others. In the event police or other duly authorized local officials have responded to a gathering constituting a public nuisance, a notice of response shall be made within ten days of the gathering as follows: 
(1)  Property owners: The chief of police or his/her designee shall mail a notice of response by certified mail to the property owner of the premises where the gathering occurred as listed in the City of Somerville tax assessment records and shall advise the property owner that the second such response on the same premises within a one-year period, as measured from the date of the first notice, shall result in responsibility of the property owner for all penalties associated with such response as more particularly described in subsections (d) and (e) herein. 
(2)  Educational institutions: The chief of police or his/her designee shall send a notice of response to the president/headmaster or his/her designee of an educational institution if the persons who are liable in subsections (d) and (e) herein are students at such educational institution. Such notice shall be sent by mail or other appropriate means. 
(3)  Persons cited: The chief of police or his/her designee shall send a notice of response to any person who was personally cited at the time of the offense. Such notice shall be sent by mail or other appropriate means to the address stated on the individual's government issued identification. 
(4)  The officer in charge shall attempt to provide verbal notice to the property owner at the time of the offense. 
(d)  Liability for a first response to a gathering constituting a public nuisance on a premises. If the police department or other duly authorized local officials have responded to a gathering constituting a public nuisance on a premises, the following persons shall be responsible for fines as set forth below, provided that no previous gathering constituting a public nuisance on a premises has occurred at the premises within the previous one-year period. 
(1)  The person or persons residing on or otherwise in control of the premises where such gathering took place whether present or not. 
(2)  The person or persons who organized or sponsored such gathering. 
(3)  All persons attending such gatherings who engage in any activity resulting in the public nuisance. 
(e)  Liability for a second and subsequent response to a gathering constituting a public nuisance on a premises. If the police department is required to respond to a gathering constituting a public nuisance on a premises more than once in any one-year period, as measured from the date of the first response, the following persons shall be responsible for fines as set forth below. 
(1)  The person or persons residing on or otherwise in control of the premises where such gathering took place whether present or not. 
(2)  The person or persons who organized or sponsored such gathering. 
(3)  All persons attending such gatherings who engage in any activity resulting in the public nuisance. 
(4)  The person, or persons or business entity which at the time of the gathering owned the premises where the gathering which has resulted in a public nuisance took place, provided that notice of the first and subsequent responses has been mailed to the property owner of the premises as set forth herein and the gathering occurs at least 14 days after the mailing of the first such notice. The property owner shall not be held responsible for any violation and penalties if the property owner is actively pursuing eviction from the premises of a tenant who controlled, organized, sponsored or attended the gathering. The one-year time period for violations for a premises shall pertain only to the same residents occupying the premises who have had the prior violation(s). New residents shall start a new time cycle of one year should they violate the provisions of this section. 
(f)  Consumption of alcohol by underage persons is prohibited in a public place, place open to public or place not open to public. Except as permitted by law, it is unlawful for any underage person to: 
(1)  Consume any alcoholic beverage at any public place or any place open to the public; or 
(2)  Consume any alcoholic beverage at any place not open to the public. 
(g)  Hosting, permitting, or allowing a public nuisance or party, gathering, or event where underage person consume alcoholic beverages is prohibited. 
(1)  It is the duty of any person having control of any premises who knowingly hosts, permits, or allows a gathering at said premises to take all responsible steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any underage person at the gathering. Reasonable steps include, but are not limited to, controlling access to alcoholic beverages at the gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages present at the gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the gathering by inspecting driver's licenses or other government issued identification cards to ensure that underage persons do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the gathering; and supervising the activities of underage persons at the gathering. 
(2)  A gathering constituting a public nuisance may be abated by all reasonable means including, but not limited to, an order by the police requiring the gathering to be disbanded and citation and/or arrest of any persons under any applicable provision of local or state law. 
(3)  It is the unlawful for any person having control of any premises to knowingly host, permit, or allow a gathering to take place at said premises where at least one underage person consumes an alcoholic beverage, provided that the person having control of the premises either knows an underage person has consumed an alcoholic beverage or reasonably should have known that an underage person consumed an alcoholic beverage and the person having control of said premises failed to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcohol by an underage person. 
(4)  This subsection shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that occurs exclusively between an underage person and his or her parent or legal guardian as set forth in G. L. c. 138, § 34. 
(5)  This subsection shall not apply to any Massachusetts Beverages Control Commission licensee at any premises regulated by the Massachusetts Beverages Control Commission. 
(h)  Enforcement. This section may be enforced by the noncriminal disposition process of M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D. For the purpose of noncriminal enforcement, the enforcing persons shall be any police officer of the City of Somerville. All violation(s) of this section are subject to penalty in accordance with section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances. 
Each violation of a provision of this section is a separate and distinct offense. 
The provisions of this section are enforceable independent of any provisions of the Somerville Code of Ordinances pertaining to noise and without reference to the fact that the police officer issuing a citation has not obtained a scientific noise measurement prior to issuing the citation. No such scientific noise measurement is required under this section and the lack of a measurement shall not constitute a defense. 
The provisions of this section shall not limit the authority of police officers to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated herein, nor shall they limit the City of Somerville or the Commonwealth of Massachusetts' ability to initiate and prosecute any criminal offense arising out of the same circumstances necessitating the application of any provision of this section, nor shall they limit the authority of the police officers to enforce any other applicable state laws or city ordinances. 
Further, if in the discretion of the chief of police or his/her designee of the City of Somerville, it is necessary to post a police detail in order to enforce the provisions of this section, he may do so in accordance with Somerville Code of Ordinances Section 10-16. 
(i)  Appeal of imposition of penalty. Any interested person may request, in writing, a hearing before a municipal hearing officer to contest the issuance of a fine, as provided in Chapter 106 of the Acts of 2008. 
(j)  Effect. This section shall take effect upon its passage. 
(Ord. No. 2011-07, 10-13-2011)  
Secs. 9-98, 9-99. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EXPANDED POLYSTYRENE CONTAINERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-03, adopted May 23, 2013, added new provisions to the Code designated as §§ 8-351—8-355. At the direction of the city, those provisions have been redesignated as §§ 9-100—9-104. 
 
Sec. 9-100. - Purpose. 
This division is enacted pursuant to the general police power in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 8-351, 5-23-2013)  
Sec. 9-101. - Definitions. 
City facility shall mean any building, structure, land, or recreational area owned, leased, or operated by the City of Somerville. 
Disposable food service container shall mean single-use disposable products for serving or transporting prepared, ready-to-consume food or beverages, including, without limitation, take-out foods and/or leftovers from partially consumed meals prepared by a food establishment. This includes, but is not limited to, plates, cups, bowls, trays, hinged or lidded containers, straws, cup lids, or utensils. It does not include single-use disposable packaging for unprepared foods. 
Food establishment shall mean any operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides food for human consumption, as further defined in 105 CMR 590.002. Any establishment requiring a permit to operate in accordance with the State Food Code, 105 CMR 590.000, et seq., shall be considered a food establishment for purposes of this division. 
Expanded polystyrene shall mean blown polystyrene (polystyrene that has been expanded or blown using a gaseous blowing agent into a solid foam) and expanded and extruded forms, which are thermoplastic petrochemical materials utilizing a styrene monomer and processed by any number of techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of polymer spheres (expandable bead polystyrene), injection molding, form molding, and extrusion-blow molding (extruded foam polystyrene). 
Prepared food shall mean any food or beverage prepared on the food establishment's premises using any cooking or food preparation technique. Prepared food does not include any raw uncooked meat, fish or eggs unless provided for consumption without further food preparation. Prepared food may be eaten on or off the food establishment's premises. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 8-352, 5-23-2013)  
Sec. 9-102. - Prohibition. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, on and after the date that is one year from the enactment of this division: 
(1)  Food establishments are prohibited from dispensing prepared food to customers in disposable food service containers made from expanded polystyrene; 
(2)  City departments or agencies shall not purchase or use disposable food service containers made from expanded polystyrene while in the performance of official city duties; and 
(3)  Individuals, contractors, vendors, or other entities shall not use disposable food service containers made from expanded polystyrene in a city facility while acting or performing under a city contract, lease, license, permit, grant, or other agreement. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit city employees from purchasing or using said containers for personal use. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 8-353, 5-23-2013)  
Sec. 9-103. - List of available alternatives. 
Not later than 30 days before the date set forth in subsection 9-102(a) of this division, the director of environment and sustainability shall adopt a list of available suitable affordable biodegradable/compostable or recyclable alternatives for each product type, which shall be updated regularly. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 8-354, 5-23-2013)  
Sec. 9-104. - Enforcement; penalties and fines. 
(a)  The health department, inspectional services department, or their designee shall have primary responsibility for enforcement of this provision and shall have authority to issue citations for violation(s). The health department or its designee is authorized to establish regulations or administrative procedures and to take any and all actions reasonable and necessary to further the purposes of this division or to obtain compliance with this division, including, but not limited to, inspecting any food establishment's premises to verify compliance in accordance with applicable law. The food service permit for any food establishment failing to comply with this division may be suspended or revoked, upon notice and a hearing before the permitting authority, in accordance with applicable law. 
(b)  This division may be enforced through any lawful process and the election of one remedy shall not preclude enforcement through any other lawful means. 
(c)  Any violation(s) of this division are subject to a penalty in accordance with section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances. Multiple violations of this division on any one calendar day shall constitute a single offense. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 8-355, 5-23-2013)  
DIVISION 3. - PLASTIC BAG PROHIBITION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Amend. of April 18, 2017, changed the title of Div. 3 from "Plastic bag ordinance" to "Plastic bag prohibition". 
 
Sec. 9-105. - Purpose. 
The reduction in the use of disposable plastic shopping bags by retail establishments in the City of Somerville (the "city") is a public purpose that protects the marine environment, advances solid waste reduction, reduces greenhouse gas emissions, and protects waterways. This ordinance seeks to reduce the number of plastic bags that are being used, discarded and littered, and to promote the use of reusable checkout bags and recyclable paper bags by retail establishments located in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1, 11-24-2015)  
Sec. 9-105.1. - Definitions. 
The following words shall, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, have the following meanings: 
Disposable plastic shopping bag means any checkout bag made predominately of plastic derived from either petroleum, natural gas, or a biologically based source, such as corn or other plant sources, which is provided to a customer at the point of sale. The term, "disposable plastic shopping bag" includes: 
(1)  Degradable plastic bags; and 
(2)  Biodegradable plastic bags that are not commercially compostable as well as commercially compostable plastic bags. 
The term "disposable plastic shopping bag" shall not include: 
(1)  Reusable bags; 
(2)  Produce bags; or 
(3)  Product bags. 
As used in this definition, the term "produce bag" or "product bag" means any bag without handles used exclusively to carry produce, meats or other food items to the point of sale inside a store or to prevent such food items from coming into direct contact with other purchased items. 
Checkout bag means a carry-out bag provided by a retail establishment to a customer at the point of sale. Checkout bags shall not include: 
(1)  Bags, whether plastic or not, in which loose produce or products are placed by the consumer to deliver such items to the point of sale or check out area of the retail establishment; 
(2)  Laundry or dry cleaner bags; 
(3)  Newspaper bags; or 
(4)  Bags used to contain or wrap frozen foods, meat or fish, whether prepackaged or not, to prevent or contain moisture. 
Reusable bag means a bag that is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse and is either polyester, polypropylene, cotton or other durable material, and meets the following requirements: 
(1)  Has a minimum lifetime capability of 125 or more uses carrying 22 or more pounds; and 
(2)  Is machine washable or is made of a material that can be cleaned or disinfected 125 times. 
Recyclable paper bag means a paper bag that is 100 percent recyclable and contains at least 40 percent post-consumer recycled content, and displays the words "Recyclable" and "made from 40% post-consumer recyclable content" in a visible manner on the outside of the bag. 
Retail establishment means any commercial enterprise, defined as the following: whether for or not for profit, including, but not limited to, restaurants, pharmacies, convenience and grocery stores, liquor stores, seasonal and temporary businesses, jewelry stores, and household goods stores. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 2, 11-24-2015)  
Sec. 9-105.2. - Prohibition on disposable plastic shopping bags. 
No retail establishment shall provide a disposable plastic shopping bag to any customer for the purpose of enabling the customer to carry away goods from the point of sale. Nothing in this section shall be read to preclude any establishment from making reusable bags available for sale to customers or utilizing recyclable paper bags at checkout. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 3, 11-24-2015)  
Sec. 9-105.3. - Penalties and enforcement. 
The penalty for each violation that occurs after the issuance of the warning notice shall be in accordance with section 1-11(b) of the Code of Ordinances. The warning notice issued for the first offense shall provide at least 14 days to correct the violation. No fine for the second offense shall be issued until at least 14 days after the warning is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 4, 11-24-2015)  
Sec. 9-105.4. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall take effect nine months after passage (August 24, 2016) for retail establishments with a floor area equal to or exceeding 10,000 square feet. This ordinance shall take effect one year after passage (November 24, 2016) for retail establishments less than 10,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 5, 11-24-2015)  
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Crimes against public peace, M.G.L.A. c. 269. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 9-106. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-11A, § 4, adopted Nov. 21, 2000, repealed § 9-106 which pertained to disorderly conduct and derived from 1963 Code, § 12-14; Ord. No. 1994-2, adopted Jan. 27, 1994.  
Sec. 9-107. - Conduct, graffiti, signs and posters in subways. 
No person shall loiter in or obstruct the free passage of another person through any public underground street, passageway, or subway, or cut, injure, mar, deface, defile or make any drawing on the interior or exterior wall, or the ceiling, or the pathway or roadway thereof, or attach any handbill, advertisement, placard or drawing thereto, or address another person with or use profane or obscene language therein. 
(Code 1963, § 12-13) 
State Law reference— Disorderliness in public conveyances, M.G.L.A. c. 272, § 43.  
Sec. 9-108. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-11A, § 5, adopted Nov. 21, 2000, repealed § 9-108 which pertained to pickup of dumpsters and derived from 1963 Code, § 12-82; Ord. No. 1991-8, adopted Apr. 25, 1991.  
Sec. 9-109. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-11A, § 2, adopted Nov. 21, 2000, repealed § 9-109 which pertained to noise restricted and derived from Ord. No. 1986-5, §§ I, II, adopted Sept. 11, 1986.  
Sec. 9-110. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-11, § 20, adopted July 14, 2005, deleted § 9-110 which pertained to moving and relocating and derived from Ord. No. 1995-9, adopted Oct. 12, 1995.  
Sec. 9-111. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-11A, § 3, adopted Nov. 21, 2000 repealed § 9-111 which pertained to alarms.  
DIVISION 2. - NOISE CONTROL ORDINANCE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-11, §§ I—VII, IX, adopted Nov. 22, 2000, did not specify manner of codification, hence; inclusion of these provisions as §§ 9-112—9-119 was at the discretion of the editor. In the event of conflict it is presumed that the more recent provisions will prevail. 
 
Sec. 9-112. - Noise prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2000-11, 11-22-2000)  
Sec. 9-113. - Noise control ordinance purpose. 
(a)  Findings. Excessive sound and vibration are serious hazards to the public health, welfare, safety, and quality of life. The people have a right to, and should be ensured, an environment free from excessive sound and vibration that may jeopardize their health, welfare, safety, or quality of life. 
(b)  Intent and purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this section to prevent excessive noise and excessive vibration and to limit, control, and eliminate excessive noise and excessive vibration in general from whatever source. 
(c)  Construction. This section is intended to prohibit preventable and unnecessary noise and is not intended, nor shall it be construed, to regulate the usual and customary noise incidental to urban life. Due consideration shall be given to the zone in which the establishment is located and the customary and natural noise incident to the operation of businesses or industries permitted in the area zoned shall be considered so as not to work an undue hardship upon lawful business establishments. 
(d)  Scope. This section shall apply to the control of all sound and vibration originating within the city, unless otherwise exempted by law. 
(Ord. No. 2000-11, 11-22-2000)  
Sec. 9-114. - Noise control standard. 
The standard which may be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The level of noise; 
(2)  The time of day or night of noise; 
(3)  Duration of noise; 
(4)  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; 
(5)  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
(6)  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
(7)  The level and intensity of the background noise, if any; 
(8)  The proximity of noise to residential sleeping facilities; 
(9)  The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates; and 
(10)  The nature of the zoning area within which the noise emanates. 
(Ord. No. 2000-11, 11-22-2000)  
Sec. 9-115. - Definitions. 
Ambient noise shall be mean the all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, being either a composite of sounds transmitted by any means from many sources near and far or a single, predominant source. 
Authorized emergency vehicle shall mean any of the following vehicles when equipped and identified according to law: 
(1)  A vehicle of a fire department; 
(2)  A publicly owned police vehicle or a privately owned vehicle used by a police officer for police work under agreement, express or implied, with the authority to which he or she is responsible; 
(3)  An ambulance, whether publicly or privately owned; 
(4)  An emergency vehicle of a city department or a public service corporation. 
Commercial area shall mean any area defined as an office or business district by the zoning ordinance. 
Construction shall mean any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, but excluding demolition. 
Decibel, db or db(A) shall mean the weighted sound level measured by the use of metering characteristics and the prescribed A-weighting frequency response specified in American National Standards SL.4. 1971 as established by the American National Standards Institute, Inc. 
Demolition shall mean any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property. 
Emergency shall mean any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage, which demands immediate action. 
Emergency work shall mean any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
Industrial zone shall mean any area defined as an industrial district by the Somerville Zoning Ordinance. 
Motor vehicle shall mean any vehicle so defined in G.L. c. 90, § 1. 
Motorboat shall mean any vehicle so defined in G.L. c. 90B, § 1. 
Motorcycle shall mean any vehicle so defined in G.L. c. 90, § 1. 
Noise disturbance shall mean any sound which (a) causes temporary or permanent hearing loss in persons exposed; or (b) is injurious to the public health; or (c) causes a nuisance; or (d) is defined as a noise disturbance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; (e) which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others within the limits of the city. 
Official traffic-control device shall mean any traffic light, stop or yield sign, official or police officer. 
Person shall mean any individual, association, partnership, or corporation, and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a state or any political subdivision of a state. 
Public right-of-way shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley, or similar place, which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Public space shall mean any property or structures thereon which are owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Residential area means any area defined as a residence district by the zoning ordinance. 
Sound for the purposes of the "duration of sound" column in the table of section 9-117, includes continuous, continual and intermittent sounds transmitted by any means, the interval of silence between which does not exceed ten seconds. 
Vibration perception threshold shall mean the minimum ground, or structure, borne vibration motion necessary to cause a normal person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects. 
Violation shall mean a determination by an enforcing agent, officer or employee that a noise disturbance has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2000-11, 11-22-2000)  
Sec. 9-116. - Noise disturbances. 
Noise disturbances prohibited. The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. 
(1)  Air conditioners. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any refrigeration machinery or air conditioning, consisting of air compressors or rotating or reciprocating machinery, in such manner as to create a noise disturbance. 
(2)  Animals and birds. Owning, possessing or harboring any animal or bird which creates a noise disturbance. 
(3)  Construction. Unless otherwise authorized by the enforcing authority, based on consideration of the factors contained in section 9-114 of this chapter, the public convenience and consultation with the ward councilor, it shall be unlawful to operate or permit the operation of any tools, pile drivers, hammers or equipment used in construction, drilling, demolition, or similar work, or otherwise conduct any related activity before 7:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m. on weekdays, or before 9:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m. on Saturdays, and the day after Thanksgiving and Christmas (unless such day falls on a Sunday), or anytime on Sundays and Massachusetts Legal Holidays (as published by the Secretary of the Commonwealth), such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance. 
(4)  Domestic power tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or garden tool, or similar device used outdoors in residential areas between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, or between 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Saturdays, Sundays, and state and federal holidays so as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(5)  Alarms. 
a.  Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm unless such alarm is automatically terminated within minutes of activation and does not sound again at all within the hour. 
b.  Each ten minute interval of sounding, or part thereof, within an hour after the initial ten minute sounding shall constitute a separate violation. 
c.  Fines for the sounding of burglar or fire alarms in violation of this section may be assessed against the owner or the occupant of the building in which the alarm is located. 
d.  Any motor vehicle, located on either public or private property, whose alarm has been sounding in excess of ten minutes in an hour, is hereby deemed to be a public nuisance subject to immediate abatement. To effect abatement, police must have reasonable evidence that the sounding has lasted in excess of ten minutes, and then make reasonable efforts to contact the owner of such vehicle to either have the owner shut off the alarm or to authorize police to arrange for the shut-off of the alarm. If such efforts are unsuccessful, police are hereby authorized to abate the nuisance by arranging for tow company employees to shut off the alarm and/or to tow the motor vehicle to a storage area or other place of safety. In addition to any fines for violating this section, the registered owner of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for all reasonable expenses, costs and charges incurred by the deactivation of the alarm, and by the removal and storage of such vehicle. 
(6)  Stationary nonemergency signaling devices. 
a.  Sounding or permitting the sounding of any single from any bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device, intended primarily for nonemergency purposes, from any place, for more than ten minutes in any hourly period. 
b.  Devices used in conjunction with places of religious worship shall be exempt from the operation of this provision. 
(7)  Engine exhausts. The discharge into the open air within the city of the exhaust of any steam engine, gasoline engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or other kind or type of engine, or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom, provided that fines for such noise disturbance shall be provided for in G.L. c. 90, § 16. 
(8)  Explosives, firearms, and similar devices. The use or firing of explosives, firearms, firecrackers, or similar devices which create impulsive sound so as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(9)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use within the city of any wagon, cart, motor vehicle, truck, motorcycle, or other vehicle, so out of repair or loaded in such manner or with material of such nature as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noises. 
(10)  Horns and other signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any motor vehicle, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. The use of sirens, except by authorized emergency vehicles, is prohibited. 
(11)  Loading and unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans, dumpsters or similar objects between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(12)  Loudspeakers and public address system. Unless otherwise permitted by a duly authorized agent of the city, using or operating for any purpose any loudspeaker, public address system, or similar device (1) such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance; or (2) between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(13)  Radios, television sets, musical instruments, and similar devices. Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier, or similar device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance. 
(14)  Shouting. Shouting, yelling, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to create a noise disturbance. 
(15)  Street sales. Offering for sale or selling anything by shouting or outcry within any residential or commercial area of the city, except in a stadium or sports arena. Ice cream trucks shall be exempt from this section. 
(16)  Vehicle repairs and testing. Repairing, rebuilding, modifying, or testing any motor vehicle, motorcycle, or motorboat in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. 
(17)  Vibration. Operating or permitting the operation of any device that creates vibration which is above the vibration perception threshold of an individual at or beyond the property boundary of the source if on private property or at 50 feet from the source if on a public space or public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2000-11, 11-22-2000; Ord. No. 2016-13 , 8-25-2016; Ord. No. 2018-05 , 4-12-2018)  
Sec. 9-117. - Noise levels. 
It shall be unlawful to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, any noise in excess of the noise levels set forth in subsection (1) unless such noise is reasonably necessary to the preservation of life, health, safety or property. 
(1)  Measurement of noise. Any activity, not expressly exempted by this section, which creates or produces sound, regardless of frequency, exceeding the ambient noise levels at the property line of any property, or if a condominium or apartment house, within any adjoining apartment, above the ambient noise levels as designated in the following table, at the time and place and for the duration then mentioned, shall be deemed to be a violation of this article, but the following enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
Duration of Sound 	I 	II 	III 
	7 AM 6 PM (all districts) 	6 PM 10 PM (residential districts) 6PM 7AM (all other districts) 	10 PM 7 AM (residential districts) 
Less than 10 minutes 	75 db 	70 db 	60 db 
Between 10 minutes and 2 hours 	70 db 	60 db 	50 db 
In excess of 2 hours 	60 db 	50 db 	40 db 
 
(2)  In determining whether a particular sound exceeds the maximum permissible sound level in the table set out in subsection (1): 
a.  Sounds in excess of the residential district limitations as measured in a residential district are violations of this section whether the sound originates in a residential district or any other district. 
b.  During all hours of Sundays and state and federal holidays, the maximum allowable decibel levels for residential districts are as set forth in column III of the table. 
(3)  Noise emanating from the operation of the following are exempt from the application of this section: 
a.  Motor vehicles on a public highway; 
b.  Outdoor implements such as power lawn mowers, power hedge clippers and power saws; 
c.  Pile drivers, jackhammers and other construction equipment. 
(4)  A guide to noise. The intensity of noise is measured in decibels (db). Its measurement is logarithmic, which means that each decibel increase of ten, is a ten times increase in the level of noise: 
130 is 10 times greater than 120 
130 is 100 times greater than 110 
A guide to the noise intensity: 
30 decibels is considered 
very quiet 
50 decibels is considered 
moderately quiet 
80 decibels is considered 
annoying 
100 decibels is considered 
intolerable 
140 decibels is considered 
threshold of pain 
180 decibels is considered 
lethal 
Applying the decibel scale to everyday, we find: 
LEVEL 	DECIBELS 
Lethal Level 	180 Rocket engine 
	150 Jet plane at takeoff 
Pain Threshold 	120 Machine gun at close range 
	120 Pneumatic chipper 
	115 House party, 4 piece rock band 
	115 Jet airliner (500 ft. overhead) 
	111 Motorcycle 
	108 Pneumatic hammer, 6ft. away 
	107 Power mower 
	104 Walking near a helicopter 
Discomfort and Danger Area 	102 Outboard motor 
	102 Outside, jet taking off at airport 
	100 Heavy automobile traffic or jet, aircraft passing overhead 
	100 Train stopping in station 
	100 150 cubic foot air compressor 
	98 Farm tractor 
	96 Pushing a power lawn mower 
	95 Subway train 
	95 At a seat in subway, windows open 
	94 Inside a jet airplane on take off 
	93 Food blender 
	92 Screaming child 
Hearing Damage (8 hours) 	90 Bus idling, heavy city noises 
	90 Niagara Falls at base, garbage disposal 
	88 Propeller aircraft flyover at 1,000 ft. 
	86 Sports car running in street 
	85 Garbage truck, 200 ft. away 
	82 Traffic at a residential intersection 
Recommended Maximum Noise Level 	75 Average traffic 
	75 Vacuum cleaner, dishwasher 
	70 Automobile, home air conditioner 
	60 Conversational speech 
	60 Large office 
	55 Window air conditioner 
	50 Quiet restaurant 
	45 Homes 
	40 Quiet office 
	35 Library 
	30-40 Refrigerator 
	30 Whispering 
	20 Leaves rustling in breeze 
	20 Broadcasting studio 
	10 Normal breathing 
	0 Audibility Threshold (level of weakest sound that can be heard by young person with excellent hearing) 
 
(Ord. No. 2000-11, 11-22-2000)  
Sec. 9-118. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the chief of police, the superintendent of inspectional services, and their duly authorized agents, officers and employees, by a noncriminal disposition pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40 Section 21D. Each violation shall be deemed a separate offense. Unless otherwise provided, any person, firm, corporation, association or other entity violating any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. Nothing in this provision shall be deemed to limit the use of other lawful methods of abating violations of this section, including but not limited to application for equitable relief from a court of law. 
(Ord. No. 2000-11, 11-22-2000; Ord. No. 2006-09, § K, 4-11-2006)  
Sec. 9-119. - Additional noise policies. 
The chief of police and superintendent of inspectional services are hereby authorized and empowered to make and adopt such policies as they deem proper and necessary for the implementation of this division for the better protection of the health, welfare and safety of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2000-11, 11-22-2000)  
DIVISION 3. - STREET GANG ACTIVITY[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Note— (Acts 2004, Chapter 327, approved August 26, 2004) 
 
Sec. 9-120. - Criminal street gang activity as public nuisance. 
(a)  Any real property which is erected, established, maintained, owned, leased, or used by any criminal street gang for the purpose of conducting criminal gang activity is a public nuisance. No person shall keep, maintain or use such real property as a public nuisance. 
(b)  The chief of police shall by written directive promulgate procedures to prevent the enforcement of this section against persons who are engaged in activities that are protected by the Constitution of the United States and/or the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
(c)  The city may use all lawful methods of abating violations of this section, including, but not limited to, application for equitable relief from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Criminal street gang means any ongoing organization, association in fact or group of three or more persons, whether formal or informal, having as one of its substantial activities the commission of one or more of the criminal acts enumerated in paragraph (2), and whose members individually or collectively engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal gang activity. 
(2)  Criminal gang activity means the commission, attempted commission, or solicitation of the following offenses, provided that the offenses are committed by two or more persons, or by an individual at the direction of, or in association with, any criminal street gang, with the specific intent to promote, further or assist in any criminal conduct by gang members: 
The following sections of the Massachusetts General Laws: M.G.L. c. 265, Section 1 (murder); M.G.L. c. 265, Section 13 (manslaughter); M.G.L. c. 13A, (assault or assault and battery); M.G.L. c. 265, Section 13B (indecent assault and battery on a child under fourteen); M.G.L. c. 265, Section 13C (assault and battery to collect loan); M.G.L. c. 265, Section 13D (assault and battery upon public employees); M.G.L. c. 265, Section 13D (indecent assault and battery on mentally retarded person); M.G.L. c. 265 Section 13H (Indecent assault and battery on person fourteen or older); M.G.L. c. 265, Section 13I (assault or assault and battery on emergency medical technician, ambulance operator, or ambulance attendant); M.G.L. c. 265, Section 13J (assault and battery upon a child); M.G.L. c. 265, Section 13K (assault and battery upon an elderly or disabled person); M.G.L. c. 265, Section 14 (mayhem); M.G.L. c. 265, Section 15 (assault; intent to murder or maim); M.G.L. c. 265, Section 15A (assault and battery with dangerous weapon); M.G.L. c. 265, Section 16 (attempt to murder); M.G.L. c. 265, Section 17 (armed robbery); M.G.L. c. 265, Section 18 (assault with intent to rob or murder); M.G.L. c. 265, Section 18A (dangerous weapon; assault in dwelling house); M.G.L. c. 265, Section 18B (Use of firearms while committing a felony); M.G.L. c. 265, Section 18C (entry of dwelling place; persons present within); M.G.L. c. 265, Section 19 (robbery by unarmed person); M.G.L. c. 265, Section 20 (simple assault; intent to rob); M.G.L. c. 265, Section 21 (stealing by confining or putting in fear); M.G.L. c. 268, Section 21A (assault, confinement, etc. of person for purpose of stealing motor vehicle; weapons); M.G.L. c. 268, Section 22 (rape); M.G.L. c. 268, Section 22A (rape of child); M.G.L. c. 268, Section 23 (rape or abuse of child); M.G.L. c. 268, Section 24 (assault with intent to commit rape); M.G.L. c. 268, Section 24B (assault of child; intent to commit rape); M.G.L. c. 268, Section 25 (attempted extortion); M.G.L. c. 268, Section 26 (kidnapping); M.G.L. c. 268, Section 26A (kidnapping of minor or incompetent by relative); M.G.L. c. 268, Section 26B (drugging persons by kidnapping); M.G.L. c. 268, Section 29 (assault; intent to commit felony); M.G.L. c. 268, Section 39 (assault or battery for purpose of intimidation; weapons); M.G.L. c. 268, Section 44 (coercion of child under eighteen into criminal conspiracy); M.G.L. c. 266, Section 1 (dwelling house; burning or aiding in burning); M.G.L. c. 266, Section 2 (meeting house; burning or aiding in burning); M.G.L. c. 266, Section 14 (burglary; armed; assault on occupants); M.G.L. c. 266, Section 15 (burglary; unarmed); M.G.L. c. 266, Section 16 (breaking and entering at night); M.G.L. c. 266, Section 17 (entering without breaking at night; breaking and entering in the day time; weapons); M.G.L. c. 266, Section 18 (dwelling house; entry at night; breaking and entry in the day time; weapons); M.G.L. c. 266, Section 25 (larceny by stealing; punishment; victim sixty-five or older); M.G.L. c. 266, Section 30 (larceny); and M.G.L. c. 94C (Controlled Substance Act). 
(3)  Pattern of criminal gang activity means two or more acts of criminal gang activity of which at least two such acts were committed within five years of each other. 
(Ord. No. 2002-13, 11-26-2002)  
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES AFFECTING MINORS 
 
Sec. 9-121. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  Established. No minor under 16 years of age shall be present, loiter or remain upon any street, highway, park, public way or place, or upon any other place to which the public has a right of access as licenses or invitees in this city, after the hour of 9:30 p.m. of any day and before sunrise of the following day, unless accompanied by, or under the control or care of a parent, guardian or other adult person or unless in some employment, or in the performance of some legitimate business or interest directed in writing by said parent, guardian or other adult person, which will not permit loitering as mentioned in this section. If an alarm or audible signal is not sounded at 9:30 p.m. each night, it shall not be an excuse for the violation of the curfew. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be liable to a penalty in accordance with Chapter 119 of the General Laws. 
(c)  Warning for first offense. In enforcing this section, a police officer may, in his or her discretion, warn and send home any child who for the first time violates the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1963, §§ 12-48, 12-50, 12-51)  
Secs. 9-122—9-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC CODES 
 
Sec. 9-131. - Building code. 
(a)  In order to protect and enhance public health, safety and welfare, to the extent the city is the enforcing authority for violations of applicable provisions of such code, the provisions of Sections 101.0 through 3622.4, of Chapter 780 of the Code of Massachusetts Regulations (780 CMR), as from time to time amended, are hereby incorporated and made a part of this article and any violation of any provision thereof shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(b)  The penalty for violation of any provision of this article shall be in accordance with section 1-11(b) of the Code of Ordinances. Each day on which a violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. Nothing in this provision shall be deemed to limit the use of other lawful methods of abating violations of this section, including but not limited to application for equitable relief from a court of law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 2-12-2004)  
Sec. 9-132. - Fire code. 
(a)  In order to protect and enhance public health, safety and welfare, to the extent the city is the enforcing authority for violations of applicable provisions of such code, the provisions of Sections 1.00 through 50.00, of Chapter 527 of the Code of Massachusetts Regulations (527 CMR), as from time to time amended, are hereby incorporated and made a part of this article and any violation of any provision thereof shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(b)  The penalty for violation of any provision of this article shall be in accordance with section 1-11(b) of the Code of Ordinances. Each day on which a violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. Nothing in this provision shall be deemed to limit the use of other lawful methods of abating violations of this section, including but not limited to application for equitable relief from a court of law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 2-12-2004)  
Sec. 9-133. - Sanitary code. 
(a)  In order to protect and enhance public health, safety and welfare, to the extent the city is the enforcing authority for violations of applicable provisions of such code, the provisions of Sections 410.000 through 419.00, of Chapter 105 of the Code of Massachusetts Regulations (105 CMR), as from time to time amended, are hereby incorporated and made a part of this article and any violation of any provision thereof shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(b)  The penalty for violation of any provision of this article shall be in accordance with section 1-11(b) of the Code of Ordinances. Each day on which a violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. Nothing in this provision shall be deemed to limit the use of other lawful methods of abating violations of this section, including but not limited to application for equitable relief from a court of law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, 2-12-2004)  
Chapter 10 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Inspector of claims, § 2-127; residency requirement, § 2-310 et seq.; emergency management, Ch. 4; medical panel for fire fighters and police officers, § 5-45; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 9; taxi bureau, § 13-2; cooperation with police, § 13-5; directions of police officers, § 13-13; taxi inspections, § 13-58. 
State Law reference— Constables generally, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 91 et seq.; general powers and duties of police, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 98. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Police department organization. 
The police department shall consist of a chief of police and not more than the following: two deputy chiefs of police, six captains, 11 lieutenants and 16 sergeants; and the mayor and city council shall endeavor to provide not less than 130 patrolmen at all times. The chief shall devote his or her full time to the position. Patrolmen shall be appointed as soon as practicable, whenever such vacancy arises. 
(Code 1963, § 7-1; Ord. No. 1997-2, 5-6-97; Ord. No. 2008-13, 7-17-2008)  
Sec. 10-1.1. - Alternate number of lieutenants. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 10-1 above, there shall be not less than 12 lieutenants in the police department until such time as one of the 12 shall retire, resign or otherwise vacate the position; thereafter, the provisions of this section shall become null and void, and the provisions of section 10-1 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1988-13, § 1, 8-25-88)  
Sec. 10-2. - Transfers to fire department. 
Any former officer or member of the police department who may qualify for appointment to the fire department may, upon appointment, enter the service of the fire department without loss of pay, seniority, retirement or pension rights. 
(Code 1963, § 7-2) 
Cross reference— Fire department organization, § 5-31 et seq.  
Sec. 10-3. - Salaries of officers and members. 
Salaries and benefits of officers and members of the police department shall be set by collective bargaining. 
(Code 1963, § 7-3)  
Sec. 10-4. - Police chief duties. 
(a)  Generally. The chief of police shall be responsible for the discipline and efficiency of his or her department, and shall have entire control thereof and of all special police officers when they are engaged in the service of the city. He or she shall execute and enforce the laws of the commonwealth, the special laws relating to the city, the city ordinances, the orders of the mayor and of the city council, and the regulations for the government of the police, and shall enforce the regulations of the board of health when required by said board. He or she shall, on the last day of every month, and at all times when especially required, make a written report to the mayor of the doings of the department, and of all misconduct, neglect of duty or want of efficiency in any member. 
(b)  Employment of assistants. The chief of police, subject to the approval of the mayor, may employ and discharge such assistants, not regular members of the police department, as he or she may deem expedient, not exceeding four in all, as matrons and clerk in the police department. Their compensation shall be fixed by the city council. 
(c)  Prosecution of cases. The chief of police shall receive all complaints from any and all persons for any breach of the criminal laws, ordinances or regulations of the board of health, and shall cause to be prosecuted all cases where, in his or her judgment, there may be a willful violation of either. 
(d)  Closing of public ways. The chief of police shall have authority to call upon the superintendent of streets to remove all obstructions found unlawfully encroaching or remaining in, upon or over the streets, sidewalks or other public places, and may prosecute any contested case. 
(e)  Record of arrests. The chief of police shall cause to be kept a record, with a suitable index, of every person arrested with the name of the arresting officer, the offense charged, the place of birth, age, height, complexion and residence of the prisoner, with such other description as may be useful for his or her identification. When complaints are made he or she shall cause to be kept a record of the sentence or disposition made of the case. 
(f)  Personnel records. The chief of police shall keep an account of the duties performed by each member and of all absences from duty and the cause of the same. 
(Code 1963, §§ 7-4—7-8, 7-10)  
Sec. 10-5. - Medical examinations of persons arrested under the influence of drugs. 
The officer in charge, upon the arrest of a person utterly under the influence of intoxicants or drugs, shall, during the winter months from October 1 to April 1, immediately summon the city physician or his or her assistant for a physical examination and the officer in charge will be guided by his or her instructions. 
(Code 1963, § 7-9) 
Cross reference— Health, Ch. 6.  
Sec. 10-6. - Injury leave. 
Permanent members absent from duty on account of injury caused while in the performance of duty, and such injury being certified to by the city physician, shall receive full pay for a period not exceeding 60 days; provided, however, that the chief of police, with the approval of the city physician and mayor, may grant such extension of time as may be deemed necessary. 
(Code 1963, § 7-12) 
Cross reference— Injury leave, § 5-42.  
Sec. 10-7. - Sick leave. 
Permanent members of the police department absent from duty on account of sickness, and such sickness being certified to by the city physician, shall be entitled to full pay for not more than 20 days of absence on any one occasion; provided, however, that the chief of police, with the approval of the city physician and mayor, may grant such extension of time as may be deemed necessary. 
(Code 1963, § 7-13) 
Cross reference— Sick leave, §§ 2-318, 5-43.  
Sec. 10-8. - Exceptions to sick or injury leave. 
No pay will be allowed under the provisions of sections 10-6 and 10-7 if the sickness or injury is feigned, simulated, exaggerated, or arises from carelessness, improper or vicious conduct, excessive indulgence of appetite or other bad habits, or from improper, illegal or immoral practices, or if the sick or injured person shall fraudulently, by concealment, false statement or otherwise seek to deceive or mislead the attending physician or surgeon in relation to his or her case, or if he or she refuses or neglects to conform to the instructions of the attending physician or surgeon. 
(Code 1963, § 7-14)  
Sec. 10-9. - Funeral leave. 
At the discretion of the chief of police, any member of the police department shall be entitled to full pay during absence not exceeding three days for the purpose of attending a funeral in his or her immediate family. 
(Code 1963, § 7-15) 
Cross reference— Bereavement leave, § 2-319. 
Cross reference— Funeral leave, § 5-46.  
Sec. 10-10. - Duty hours. 
The permanent members of the police department shall be given two days off, without loss of pay, as determined by the chief of police. They shall be given two days off without loss of pay, after working four days or nights. The time and the manner of excusing them from duty shall be determined by the chief of police. The period during which any member is on vacation is not considered for the purpose of allowing days off under this section. Allowances otherwise provided for or time off because of injury, sickness or other cause, shall not be affected by the provisions of this section. A member so excused shall be exempt from duty and from attendance at a police station or other place, but otherwise shall be subject to all laws, rules and regulations relating to members of the department. 
(Code 1963, § 7-16)  
Sec. 10-11. - Emergency duty. 
The chief of police shall have authority, whenever in his or her judgment public emergency or any unusual demand for the services of the police requires, to prevent any such member from taking the day off authorized by section 10-10 at the time when he or she is entitled thereto or at the time assigned therefor; provided, however, that such day off shall be granted him or her as soon thereafter as is practicable in the judgment of the chief of police. In no case shall the number of such days off be less than 98 in each entire calendar year. 
(Code 1963, § 7-17)  
Sec. 10-12. - Duties of officers, inspectors and patrolmen. 
The captains and lieutenants of police shall be under the immediate control of the chief, and shall assist him or her in his or her duties, and officiate for him or her in his or her absence. The sergeants, inspectors and patrolmen shall perform the duties assigned them by the chief, and attend to such duties at the station house under the direction of the officer in charge. Each member shall devote his or her entire time to and acquaint himself or herself with the business of the department, shall hold himself or herself ready at all times whenever his or her services may be required, obey the orders of his or her superior officers, and make daily reports of his or her doing and of important facts coming to his or her knowledge. 
(Code 1963, § 7-19)  
Sec. 10-13. - Police station, presentation of ordinances. 
(a)  The chief of police shall have general charge and care of the police station and of all property belonging to the police department, and shall make his or her headquarters at the said station. He or she shall require the officers to report there, at least once every 24 hours, and shall then communicate to them such orders or instructions as he or she may deem necessary. The police station shall be kept open at all hours of the day and night, and shall be furnished with a copy of the General Laws. 
(b)  Each officer shall be provided with a copy of this article of the Code of Ordinances and a copy of the rules and regulations of the city council for the government of the police. 
(Code 1963, § 7-20)  
Sec. 10-14. - Clothing allowance. 
A clothing allowance shall be paid to each and every police officer in the police department on the first day of December in each year, for the cost of new uniforms and upkeep thereof during the calendar year. The amount of such clothing allowance shall be set from time to time by the city council and a schedule of such allowance kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1963, § 7-21) 
Cross reference— Clothing allowance, § 5-50.  
Sec. 10-15. - School traffic supervisors unit. 
(a)  There shall be a school traffic supervisors unit established within and under the direction of the police department. Appointments thereto shall be made by the mayor after consulting with the chief of police. School traffic supervisors shall report to their assigned posts at the time specified and safely conduct the school children crossing to and from school across the vehicular traveled ways. They shall attend to their duties as assigned by the chief of police and shall be subject to his or her orders and rules and regulations which may be promulgated by him or her for their guidance. They shall receive a salary for each day actually worked in school traffic supervision paid on a semi-monthly basis which salary shall be set from time to time by the city council and a schedule of such salary kept on file in the city clerk's office. 
(b)  School traffic supervisors shall be empowered to enforce Chapter 90 of the General Laws in so far as said chapter applies to the control of vehicular traffic. They shall be empowered to enforce the traffic ordinance of the city in so far as said ordinance applies to the control of vehicular traffic. While on duty they shall display a badge of office and wear a distinguishing uniform or part of a uniform as designated by the chief of police. 
(c)  They shall be subject to disciplinary action by the mayor and chief of police and may be discharged for cause by the mayor. 
(d)  A separate appropriation shall be made in the budget of the police department for the personal services and equipment of the school traffic supervisors. 
(Code 1963, § 7-22; Ord. No. 1999-6, §§ 2, 3, 1-27-2001)  
Sec. 10-16. - Police details. 
Where any contractor is doing construction work in the city, and where the passage or flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic will be impeded or rerouted, and where the safety, health and welfare of the general public is concerned, said contractor receiving the permit or license for such construction shall procure at his or her own expense sufficient police detail furnished by the police department. 
The chief of police or his or her designee shall have the authority to require police details at any time he or she shall determine in his or her discretion that it is in the interest of public safety to do so. Any establishment, entity or individual operating under license or otherwise, and any individual or private entity which produces and operates an event open to the public, shall procure at his or her own expense sufficient police detail furnished by the police department as the chief of police or his or her designee may require. 
The fee for police details shall be set by the mayor and shall be payable in advance. 
(Code 1963, § 12-25A; Ord. No. 2004-10, 7-22-2004)  
Sec. 10-17. - Selection of police chief; qualifications. 
Upon removal of the position of chief of police from civil service status, the chief of police shall be selected by the mayor in accordance with the City Charter and shall have the following minimum qualifications, in addition to those developed by the assessment process provided in section 10-18(b): 
(a)  The chief of police shall be a law enforcement professional with minimum of 15 years experience in federal, state, county, municipal or military policing, no less than five of which shall be in a progressively responsible law enforcement management position; 
(b)  The chief of police shall have a master's degree or a four-year degree in criminal justice or a related field; 
(c)  The requirements for formal education provided in (b) above can be waived for candidates with a minimum of 15 years of progressively responsible law enforcement management experience as long as they possess an associate's degree, or with a minimum of 20 years progressively responsible law enforcement experience as long as they possess a high school diploma; 
(d)  Preference shall be given to candidates who have experience in a multi-lingual and multi-cultural urban law enforcement environment from municipalities with a population of 50,000 or more residents, and/or possess managerial experience, as defined in paragraph (a), in the command structure of the Somerville Police Department and/or are bilingual, with the second language reflecting the linguistic diversity of the citizens of Somerville, and/or possess a minimum rank of lieutenant or higher for a minimum of three years in a policing environment and/or who have successfully completed any of the nationally recognized police leadership programs, such as the Senior Management Institute for Police, FBI National Academy, and the Southern Police Institute; 
(e)  The chief of police shall have experience in financial management, budgeting, innovations in police operations, and information technology, as it pertains to law enforcement; 
(f)  The chief of police shall have strong leadership and supervisory skills, excellent interpersonal skills to include labor relations, community relations, mediation and facilitation skills; and 
(g)  The chief of police shall have excellent management and supervisory skills, and familiarity with state-of-the-art law enforcement practices, including staff development, training, community policing and use of crime data for deployment and decision-making. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 11-22-2005)  
Sec. 10-18. - Selection of police chief; manner of appointment. 
(a)  The candidates for chief of police shall be reviewed by a selection committee consisting of the following individuals: 
(1)  The personnel director, who shall serve as the chair of the selection committee; 
(2)  One member of the city council to be appointed by the president of the city council; 
(3)  The director of the multicultural affairs commission; 
(4)  Two members of the general public to be appointed by the president of the city council, with at least one of said members being a representative of the city's socioeconomic and racial and ethnic segments; 
(5)  Two members of the general public to be appointed by the mayor with at least one of said members being a representative of the city's socioeconomic and racial and ethnic segments; and 
(6)  Two sworn officers of the Somerville Police Department, one of whom shall be a member of the union representing patrol officers, elected by that body, and one of whom shall be a member of the union representing superior officers, elected by that body. 
The mayor may appoint appropriate support personnel to facilitate the operations of the selection committee. 
(b)  The mayor, in consultation with the selection committee and the procurement officer, shall select a qualified recruitment and assessment contractor to analyze candidates for chief of police. Such recruitment and assessment contractor shall be charged with development of selection criteria, after consultation with members of the public at community meetings, with an effort to invite representatives of diverse populations within the community; recruitment of qualified candidates; and administration of a selection process consisting of, without limitation, a written exam, an assessment center and a psychological evaluation. The community meetings required above shall provide interpretative services for the hearing-impaired and non-English speaking, as requested and otherwise shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(c)  The selection committee shall vote a list of no more than five and no less than three unranked qualified candidates for chief of police and shall submit such list to the mayor. All votes taken by the selection committee shall be by majority vote of those present. There shall be a public interview process conducted for the finalists by the selection committee prior to the appointment of the chief of police by the mayor. If the selection committee determines that there are fewer than three candidates for chief of police, the selection committee shall nonetheless send the names of the candidate(s) to the mayor. If the selection committee should submit to the mayor a list of fewer than three candidates for chief of police, or for any reason designated in writing, the mayor may choose to commence a new selection process, in the manner prescribed herein. 
(d)  The mayor shall make the final appointment from the list, subject to confirmation of the final appointment by the city council. Prior to confirmation of the final appointment, the city council shall be provided with a copy of the contract negotiated with the candidate selected by the mayor, as well as a complete report of those candidates who applied and were deemed less qualified. The contract may not be subsequently amended without the approval of the city council. The length of such contract of chief of police shall be for a period of at least three years, but no longer than five years. 
(e)  Upon such time as the mayor shall become aware of a vacancy in the office of chief of police, the mayor shall within a reasonable period of time, but by no later than the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council, notify the city council that a vacancy has occurred. The mayor shall in a timely manner thereafter commence the process to fill the vacancy, in the manner prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, 11-22-2005)  
Sec. 10-19. - Deputy police chief: selection; qualifications; appointment; compensation. 
(a)  The chief of police shall select candidates for the position of deputy chief of police, which candidates must, prior to appointment, be approved by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. 
(b)  The term for deputy police chief shall be for a period no longer than from July 1 through June 30 in any 12-month period. Any individual appointed to the position of deputy police chief may be reappointed pursuant to subsection (a). No deputy may serve in excess of one year without reappointment. 
(c)  Should any candidate appointed deputy chief of police possess civil service protection provided under chapter 31 of the general laws of Massachusetts, such candidate shall revert to the status held prior to reassignment. The deputy police chief may be removed from that rank at any time upon recommendation of the chief of police and the approval of the mayor. Deputies who fail to be re-appointed or are removed from that rank by the chief of police and have civil service status within the Somerville Police Department will return to that status (for example, if a captain was appointed to the rank of deputy and was either removed or not re-appointed he or she would return to the rank of captain). Any deputy reduced in rank to a civil service rank for which he or she is qualified may be further disciplined, as provided in chapter 31 of the general laws. If a deputy is removed prior to the expiration of his or her term, it will be with the approval of the mayor and the concurrence of the city council. 
(d)  The deputy chief of police shall not have an employment agreement. 
(e)  Pursuant to an agreement with the Somerville Police Superior Officers Association (SPSOA) the first two deputies to be appointed will emanate from the rank of captain within the Somerville Police Department. 
(f)  The minimum qualifications for the position of deputy chief shall include an extensive knowledge of principles, procedures and technical aspects of modern law enforcement. All candidates must come from the superior ranks in the Somerville Police Department and have the ability to lead and innovate. 
(g)  Compensation: deputies are "exempt" or salaried employees and are therefore not eligible for overtime compensation. Deputies will not be permitted to work on police detail assignments. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, 7-17-2008)  
Sec. 10-20. - [Constables; residency requirement.] 
All constables appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council, in accordance with section 21 of the City Charter, shall be residents of the City of Somerville upon appointment and shall remain residents of the city during their tenure in office. This requirement shall not apply to those constables who hold appointments at the time of passage of this section. Applicants applying for reappointment will be subject to this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05 , § (1), 8-27-15)  
Secs. 10-21—10-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Fire alarm signal boxes, § 5-7; control of fire alarm signals boxes, § 5-37. 
State Law reference— Interference with police signal systems, M.G.L.A. c. 268, § 32. 
 
Sec. 10-31. - Burglar alarms and security alarm systems. 
Residential, commercial or industrial security alarm systems may be connected to the communications console in the police department by obtaining prior written approval from the chief of police. In accordance with the requirements of law and ordinance, the chief of police is hereby authorized to request bids from alarm companies to furnish, at no cost to the city a communications console and the necessary telephone lines which are compatible to the receipt of alarm signals from alarm systems whose lines are connected to the police department. Each bid shall set forth the annual fee each alarm user will be required to pay the alarm company for services rendered with respect to the communications console. Services shall be set forth in the form of a written contract between the alarm company and the alarm user. Any alarm user may contract with any alarm company of his or her choice for sale, installation and or servicing of the alarm system to be installed on his or her premises. 
"Alarm system" shall mean any device which, when activated by a criminal act, fire or other emergency call for a police response, transmits a signal to police department headquarters, transmits a signal to a person who relays information to the police department headquarters or produces an audible or visible signal to which the police department is expected to respond. 
"Alarm user" shall mean the owner of any premises on which an alarm system is used, provided that an occupant who expressly accepts responsibility for an alarm system by registration shall be deemed an "alarm user." 
"Avoidable alarm" shall mean any activation of an alarm device to which the police department responds and which is not caused by a criminal act, fire or other emergency, except an activation caused by malfunction of telephone company equipment or lines as verified by monitoring facilities at police headquarters or power failure as verified by police headquarters. A series of such activations attributable to the same cause and occurring under circumstances attributable to the same cause and occurring under circumstances beyond the control of the responsible alarm user shall be deemed a single "avoidable alarm." 
(Code 1963, § 7-23; Ord. No. 2003-13, 9-11-2003)  
Sec. 10-32. - Fees for burglar or security alarm systems. 
The initial fee for connection of an alarm system to the communications console of the police department and the fee for the annual renewal of a connection shall be set from time to time and such fees are on file in the city clerk's office. Each such fee shall be payable to the city. 
(Code 1963, § 7-25)  
Sec. 10-33. - Automatic dialing services. 
Automatic dialing services shall not be interconnected to any telephone lines at the police department. Any person using an automatic dialing device may have the device interconnected to a telephone line transmitting directly to: 
(1)  A central station; 
(2)  An answering service; or 
(3)  Any privately owned or operated facility or terminal. 
(Code 1963, § 7-23)  
Sec. 10-34. - Information required for alarm users. 
Every alarm user shall submit to the chief of police the name and telephone number of at least two other persons who can be reached at any time, day or night, and who are authorized to respond to an emergency signal transmitted by an alarm system, and who can allow access to the premises in which the alarm system is located. 
(Code 1963, § 7-23)  
Sec. 10-35. - Alarm system tests, shut-offs for audible alarms. 
(a)  All alarm users shall notify the police department, in advance of any testing of equipment. Failure to so notify the police department shall constitute a false alarm and be subject to the assessment schedule specified in this article. 
(b)  All alarm systems which use an audible bell or horn shall be equipped with an automatic shut-off device which shall deactivate the alarm system within ten minutes. All alarm users with an audible bell or horn shall comply with this requirement within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(Code 1963, § 7-23)  
Sec. 10-36. - Avoidable alarms. 
(a)  Any alarm system which has two or more avoidable alarms within a calendar year shall be subject to the assessment specified in this section. After the police department has recorded two separate avoidable alarms from an alarm user within a calendar year, the chief of police shall notify the alarm user, in writing, and by certified mail, of such facts and shall require the user to submit within ten working days of receipt of such notice, a report describing the user's efforts to discover and eliminate the cause or causes of the avoidable alarms. The notice to the user from the chief of police shall contain the dates and times of each alleged avoidable alarm. If the chief of police determines that the report submitted by the alarm user is unsatisfactory or that the alarm user has failed to show by his or her report that he or she has taken or will take reasonable steps to eliminate avoidable alarms, then the chief of police shall order that the use of the alarm system be discontinued for a period of not less than 30 days. If a fine assessed for an avoidable alarm pursuant to this section has not been paid by the due date, the city shall impose a lien on the real property where such false alarm occurred pursuant to the provision of G. L. c. 40, § 58 and shall notify the alarm system user of such lien. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to fines that remain unpaid or that become due and payable on or after the effective date of this section. 
(b)  Any user of an alarm system which transmits a third or subsequent avoidable alarm signal in a 12-month period shall be assessed a fine, pursuant to G. L. c. 40 § 21D, in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. 
All fines assessed under this chapter shall be payable to the City of Somerville. 
Each day after any such avoidable alarm shall be considered a new violation. An alarm system user shall be assessed said fine until he or she can demonstrate to the chief of police that the causes of the avoidable alarms have been remedied. 
(Code 1963, § 7-23; Ord. No. 2003-13, 9-11-2003; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 21, 7-14-2005; Ord. No. 2006-05, 1-26-2006; Ord. No. 2006-09, § L, 4-11-2006)  
Sec. 10-37. - Appeal of avoidable alarm fines. 
(a)  Any alarm user who is aggrieved by a decision of the chief of police may, within five working days of notice of the chief's decision, appeal his or her case in writing, to the chief for further consideration. Thereafter the decision of the chief of police shall be final and binding on the parties. 
(b)  The following shall be exclusive grounds for appeal of a decision of the chief of police under this article: 
(1)  Proof of an avoidable alarm assessment; and 
(2)  Written verification from the alarm user and the alarm company, that all necessary steps have been taken to upgrade, improve and insure the dependability and accuracy of the alarm system. 
(Code 1963, § 7-23; Ord. No. 2003-13, 9-11-2003)  
Sec. 10-38. - Waiver of avoidable alarm fines. 
If an alarm user submits a report as required in section 10-36(a), the chief of police shall determine whether the action taken or to be taken will eliminate the likelihood of avoidable alarms. If it is determined that the action taken or to be taken will result in the elimination or substantial reduction of avoidable alarms, then the chief of police shall notify the alarm user, in writing, that no assessment will be made at that time. 
(Code 1963, § 7-23; Ord. No. 2003-13, 9-11-2003)  
Sec. 10-39. - Avoidable alarms caused by acts of God. 
Proof that an avoidable alarm was caused by an act of God or by actions of the telephone company shall constitute an affirmative defense to assessment of a fine. 
(Code 1963, § 7-23; Ord. No. 2003-13, 9-11-2003)  
Sec. 10-40. - Penalty for nonpayment of fines. 
Upon failure of the user of an alarm system to pay two consecutive fines assessed under section 10-36, within 60 days of such assessment, the chief of police shall order that the user discontinue the use of the alarm system for not less than 30 days nor more than 180 days. 
(Code 1963, § 7-23)  
Sec. 10-41. - Applicability of avoidable alarm provisions. 
The provisions of this article relating to avoidable alarms, notification to the chief of police and the assessment of specified fines for avoidable alarms shall apply uniformly to those alarm systems either connected or unconnected to the communications console of the police department except municipal buildings or other government agencies. 
(Code 1963, § 7-23; Ord. No. 2003-13, 9-11-2003)  
Sec. 10-42. - Penalties. 
The following acts and omissions shall constitute violations of this article punishable by a fine in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11: 
(1)  Failure to obey an order of the chief of police to discontinue use of an alarm system, after exhaustion of the right of appeal; or 
(2)  Failure to disconnect an automatic dialing device from any police department telephone lines within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives; or 
(3)  Interconnection of an automatic dialing device to any police department telephone lines after the effective date the ordinance from which this article derives; or 
(4)  Failure to pay two consecutive fines or more assessed, within 60 days of assessment; or 
(5)  Failure to contract with an alarm company for the sale, installation and for servicing of the alarm system to be installed on the premises. 
(6)  The city, at its election, may institute civil or criminal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1963, § 7-24; Ord. No. 2003-13, 9-11-2003; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 22, 7-14-2005)  
Secs. 10-43—10-50. - Reserved.  
Chapter 11 - PUBLIC WORKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Department of public works, § 40; powers and duties of commissioner of public works, § 40A; appointment of commissioner of public works, § 40B; divisions established within department of public works, § 40C; city engineer and superintendents to control divisions of department of public works, § 40D. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; housing, Ch. 7; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 12. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate sewers and drains, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 21(5); municipal authority to regulate pipes and fixtures for waterworks, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 21(7); municipal authority to regulate pipes, fittings and fixtures supplying gas to structures, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 21(18); municipal authority to regulate excavations, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 21(19); public water supply, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 38 et seq.; officers in charge of roads, sewers and water works, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 62 et seq.; board of public works, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 69C et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Commissioner of public works duties. 
(a)  The commissioner of public works shall have the direction and control of the construction, alteration, repair, maintenance and management of ways, streets, sidewalks and bridges; he or she shall have the powers and discharge the duties of surveyors of highways; the construction, alteration, repair and care of main drains and common sewers; the care, superintendence and management of the public grounds and parks, including cemeteries; he or she shall make and have the custody of all plans, surveys, measurements and levels appertaining to public ways, drains, sewers, waterworks or lands; he or she shall have charge of the construction, alteration, repair, maintenance and care of public buildings; he or she shall have charge, so far as the rights of the city extend, of fire alarm and police signal systems and of all electric light, power, telephone, telegraph and trolley wires, of all gas pipes and street lighting; he or she shall have charge of the construction, extension, alteration, repair, care and management of the waterworks; and shall perform such other duties as the city council may direct. 
(b)  By direction of the city council, the commissioner of public works shall have the direction and control of and shall attend to and have charge of the collection, carrying away and disposal of house offal, ashes, rubbish and house dirt of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 8-1) 
Editor's note— Similar provisions, § 40A.  
Sec. 11-2. - Towing vehicles that obstruct snow removal. 
The commissioner of public works is hereby authorized and empowered for the purpose of removing snow or ice from any way, to remove, or cause to be removed to some convenient place, including in such term a public garage, any vehicle interfering with such work, and impose liability for cost of such removal and of the storage charges, if any result therefrom, upon the owner of such vehicle. The charges for such towing and the parking fine established for violation of this section are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1963, § 8-19) 
Cross reference— Removal of abandoned automobiles and motor vehicles, § 9-92. 
State Law reference— Authorized, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 21(16).  
Sec. 11-3. - Department of public works divisions. 
(a)  There shall be established within the department of public works the following divisions: 
(1)  Division of highways, electric lines and lights; 
(2)  Division of engineering; 
(3)  Division of waterworks; 
(4)  Division of buildings. 
(b)  Each division of the department of public works shall have the management and control of such of the duties of the department of public works as may be determined by the commissioner of public works or by the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 8-2; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 1, 6-23-2005) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 40C. 
Cross reference— Residency requirement, 2-310 et seq.  
Sec. 11-4. - Directors of department of public works divisions. 
There shall be a superintendent of the division of highways, electric lines and lights; a city engineer; a superintendent of the division of waterworks; a superintendent of the division of buildings; and a supervisor of school facilities and energy conservation. The city engineer and the superintendents of the various divisions shall have the charge of their respective divisions under the direction of the commissioner of public works. 
(Code 1963, § 8-3; Ord. No. 2004-08, 6-24-2004; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 2, 6-23-2005) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 40D.  
Secs. 11-5—11-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DIVISION OF HIGHWAYS, ELECTRIC LINES AND LIGHTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Established, § 40C; superintendent to control, § 40D. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 5; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 12. 
State Law reference— Municipal jurisdiction over highways, M.G.L.A. c. 82, § 17; regulations relative to public ways generally, M.G.L.A. c. 85; construction of transmission lines and associated facilities, M.G.L.A. c. 166, § 21 et seq.; poles and wires, M.G.L.A. c. 166, § 30 et seq. 
 
Sec. 11-21. - Superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights; highway duties. 
(a)  The superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights shall cause the streets to be kept in good repair, safe and convenient for travelers, and shall see that all unlawful nuisances and obstructions therein are forthwith removed. 
(b)  The superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights shall, at least once a year, carefully examine all bridges and report their condition to the city council. 
(c)  Whenever any street or bridge of the city shall, from any cause, be unsafe for travel, the superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights shall forthwith put up a suitable fence across such street or bridge, and exclude travelers therefrom, or cause such parts thereof as are unsafe to be enclosed by a sufficient fence; and he or she shall keep lighted lanterns about the place every night as long as such fence shall be kept standing. 
(Code 1963, §§ 8-11, 8-12; Ord. No. 2005-10, §§ 3—5, 6-23-2005) 
Cross reference— Removal of signs, awning, outdoor seating and other items on or over streets and sidewalks, § 12-19.  
Sec. 11-22. - Laying out, altering, or discontinuing streets. 
(a)  All petitions for the laying out, widening, alteration or discontinuance of streets shall be presented to the city council and be referred to the committee on public works. 
(b)  The committee on public works shall not act on any petition in the manner set forth in subsection (a) of this section until the petitioners shall have filed with said committee an accurate plan and profile showing the present length, width, lines and grade of the streets which they desire to have laid out, widened, altered, or discontinued; the abutting lands, with the fences and buildings thereon, and the length of the frontage of each estate; the lands to be taken, and the names of the owners of said lands; and also showing, in red ink, the proposed lines and grades of said street, and giving sufficient reference to stone bounds or other boundary marks on the premises, to enable the city engineer to locate said street with accuracy. Said plan shall be prepared and such stone bounds or other sufficient boundary marks set by the city engineer at the expense of the petitioners. Said plan shall be accompanied by a release signed by all persons who claim no damages, and by those who will accept specific damages, with the amount thereof, and also a statement giving the names of all persons who decline to release or state their prospective damages. 
(c)  The committee on public works, before acting upon any petition, may require that the proposed street be brought to subgrade by the petitioners. 
(d)  The committee on public works upon receiving any such petition, or any order of the city council having in view the laying out, widening, altering or discontinuing of any street, shall report to the board whether, in the judgment of said committee the common convenience and necessity require that such street should be laid out, widened, altered or discontinued; and in case said committee shall report that such street ought to be laid out, widened, altered or discontinued, it shall cause the measurements and boundaries of the street as proposed to be laid out, widened, altered or discontinued, to be distinctly marked out on the premises by the city engineer, and also described in its report, and shall specify the manner in which such laying out, widening, altering or discontinuance shall be completed; and shall also report the names of the owners of all lands included therein, and in any wise sustaining damage by the laying out, widening, altering or discontinuance of such street as proposed, with the amount of damage proper and reasonable to be awarded to each of said owners; but the provisions of this section shall in no way limit the power of the city council to act in the premises independently of the committee on public works. 
(e)  Failure to observe any of the provisions of this section shall not invalidate the laying out, widening, altering or discontinuance of any street. 
(Code 1963, §§ 8-4—8-7)  
Sec. 11-23. - Width and elevation of new streets. 
No street shall be laid out of a less width than 40 feet, except such streets, not less than 30 feet in width, as were used as streets previous to the year 1872. No street shall be laid out at an elevation less than 16 feet above mean low water, city base. 
(Code 1963, § 8-8)  
Sec. 11-24. - Reconstructing or resurfacing streets. 
Whenever a street, or any part thereof, is to be resurfaced, or a new street reconstructed, the commissioner of public works shall, at least two weeks before such work is begun, notify all corporations and persons having rights under the surface of such street. The notice shall state where such work is to be done, when it is intended to begin such work, and shall request said corporations and persons to consult and arrange with the superintendent of highways if they have any work to be done in such street, in order that such work may be done before the surface of said street is again prepared for and opened to public travel. After such notice has been given, said corporations or persons shall not be permitted to open said street for a period of at least five years after the street has been constructed, or again opened to public travel except in a case of actual necessity certified to and approved by the mayor. 
(Code 1963, § 8-13; Ord. No. 2007-02, 3-8-2007)  
Sec. 11-25. - Use of streets for private construction. 
(a)  The superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights may permit any person engaged in the erection or repair of a building on land abutting on any street to use such portion of said street and for such period of time as he or she shall deem proper. The portion of the street so used shall immediately thereafter be cleared and restored to its former condition by such person, and if he or she fails so to do, the same may be done by the superintendent, and such person shall pay the expense thereof to the city. 
(b)  Such person shall be required by the superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights, to maintain a safe and convenient way satisfactory to the superintendent, by means of a plank walk or otherwise, for the use of foot travelers around or over any sidewalk that may be obstructed. 
(Code 1963, § 8-14; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 5, 6-23-2005)  
Sec. 11-26. - Safety requirements for excavations or other obstructions. 
Any person who digs up or otherwise obstructs a street shall guard the same by sufficient railings, lights and such other means as the superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights may require, so that it shall remain safe for public travel. 
(Code 1963, § 8-15; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 5, 6-23-2005) 
Cross reference— Excavating streets and other public places, § 11-143.  
Sec. 11-27. - Security bonds for excavations or other obstructions. 
The superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights may require that no person other than an agent of the city shall dig up or obstruct any street before furnishing security satisfactory to him or her to restore said street to its former condition and to indemnify the city against all liability and loss arising out of such digging up or obstruction. 
The construction, operations, maintenance and regulatory oversight of the public rights-of-way generate cost to the city, which are not reimbursed directly or through taxation. The superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights shall set an annual maintenance reimbursement fee of equal value for all users of the public right-of-way, regardless of the purpose or usage of the public right-of-way. 
(Code 1963, § 8-16; Ord. No. 2005-06, 4-14-2005; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 5, 6-23-2005) 
Charter reference— Security required for excavations of streets and sidewalks, § 42. 
Cross reference— Excavating streets and other public places, § 11-143.  
Sec. 11-28. - Railing or fences required for certain excavations. 
Any person whose land near a street is below the level thereof, and any person who digs a cellar or other cavity in the ground near any street, shall provide and maintain a railing or fence sufficient to protect travelers on such street, satisfactory to the superintendent. 
(Code 1963, § 8-17)  
Sec. 11-29. - Entrances to cellars from streets or sidewalks. 
No person shall suffer the platform or grate of the entrance or passageway to his or her cellar or basement in any street or sidewalk to rise above the surface of such street or sidewalk, and every such entrance or passageway shall, at all times, be kept covered by a suitable and substantial platform or grate, satisfactory to the superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights, unless authorized to be kept open by the city council; and if kept open, it shall be protected by a sufficient railing on both sides at least two and one-half feet high, and well lighted at night. 
(Code 1963, § 8-18; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 5, 6-23-2005)  
Sec. 11-30. - Collection of ashes and offal. 
The collection of ashes and offal shall be the responsibility, and administered as a section of the division of highways, electric lines and lights of the department of public works by direction of the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 8-21; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 6, 6-23-2005) 
Cross reference— Disturbing trash containers before collection, § 9-52; placing trash in public trash containers, § 9-53; littering and dumping trash and rubbish on public property, § 12-3; trash and rubbish on streets and sidewalks, § 12-12.  
Sec. 11-31. - Household trash and rubbish collection. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the intent of the city council that this chapter be liberally construed for the purpose of providing a sanitary and satisfactory method of handling, collecting, and disposing of refuse and for the maintenance of public and private property free of litter in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition for the appearance, health and safety of the community. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
(1)  Aluminum means aluminum cans, aluminum foil, and aluminum containers or trays used in packaging, preparation or cooking of food. 
(2)  Authorized litter receptacles means receptacles for the use of the general public placed outdoors by the city or by private persons on either public or private property. The receptacles shall be designed so as to prevent the escape of litter onto any public or private property. The receptacles may be identified by an appropriate sign, furnished either by the city or the owner, which includes the statement, "No Littering Subject to Fine Allowed by Law." 
(3)  Authorized recycling receptacles means "household recycling receptacle," "textile recycling receptacle," "toter" or "paper leaf bag" as defined herein. 
(4)  Authorized refuse receptacles means authorized recycling receptacles and authorized rubbish receptacles. 
(5)  Authorized rubbish receptacles means receptacles that contain rubbish awaiting collection and are kept outdoors. They shall be construed preferably of heavy plastic or of metal, with tight-fitting covers, and shall be flytight, rodent resistant, nonflammable and waterproof. Authorized rubbish receptacles for city rubbish collection shall not exceed fifty pounds per container. Limit on weight does not apply to authorized rubbish receptacles for private collection. Receptacles should have the resident's address displayed clearly on the side of the barrel. 
(6)  Cans means all containers composed in whole of iron or steel (so-called tin cans) used as containers for the packaging or storage of various food and nonfood items, except containers that contain paint or petroleum-based solvents, and any pressurized aerosol cans. 
(7)  Commercial establishment means any nonresidential building, including, but not limited to, those used for retail, wholesale, industrial, manufacturing, dining, offices, professional services, automobile service, hotels and motels, restaurants, or shipping and receiving areas. 
(8)  Corrugated cardboard means paper in which a portion has been made to have a wavy surface (alternating ridges and grooves) and is placed between two flat surfaces for the sake of strength, and which is commonly used to form cartons. 
(9)  Glass containers means bottles and jars, made of silica, sand, soda ash, and limestone, being transparent or translucent, and used for packaging or bottling various materials. This does not include plastics or glass products such as window glass, blue glass, flat glass, mirrors, plate glass, light bulbs, dishes or ceramics. 
(10)  Household recycling receptacle means a container designed for use by one household to store recyclable materials between pickups. 
(11)  Leaves means deciduous and coniferous seasonal deposition from trees. 
(12)  Litter means all refuse, and includes any other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as prohibited in this chapter, tends to create a danger or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare. 
(13)  Magazines means publications printed on glossy, clay-coated paper. 
(14)  Newspaper means newsprint-grade paper, the common, inexpensive machine-finished paper made chiefly from wood pulp, which is printed and distributed, and includes all newspaper advertisement, comics and enclosures. This does not include newspaper soiled by food, paint, petroleum products, oil or oil solvents, or other solid wastes that are not recyclable. 
(15)  Nonprofit establishment means an established organization or foundation dedicated to public service or culture, including, but not limited to, religious, educational and health care functions. 
(16)  Occupant means any person living, sleeping or cooking in, or conducting any commercial or nonprofit activity, or having actual possession of any building or part thereof. 
(17)  Owner means any person or entity which alone or jointly or severally with others: 
a.  Shall have legal or equitable title to any private property with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
b.  Shall have charge, care or control of any private property as owner or as executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner or any other person in a representative capacity. 
(18)  Paper leaf bag shall be a sanitary Kraft Paper Sack or equal of 30-gallon capacity, two-ply 50-pound wet strength with decomposing glue and reinforced self-supporting square bottom closure. 
(19)  Plastic means clear and colored bottles and jugs made from high-density polyethylene (HDPE) and polyethylene terephthalate (PET) plastics, excluding caps and lids. 
(20)  Recyclable plastic means clear and colored plastic bottles, containers, and jugs marked #1—#7 with the exception of polystyrene and plastic film or bags. 
(21)  Recyclable materials means any type of refuse designated by the commissioner of public works through rules and regulations issued under this chapter to be separated for recycling or composting. 
(22)  Refuse means all solid waste generated by occupiers of land in Somerville, excluding construction demolition debris. 
(23)  Residential dwelling means any residential building, including single-family homes, apartment buildings, buildings containing cooperatives and condominiums, group houses, rooming houses or boardinghouses. 
(24)  Rubbish means all refuse excluding recyclable materials. 
(25)  Sorted office paper means printed or unprinted sheets, shavings and cuttings of colored or white sulphite or sulphite ledger, bond, writing and other paper which have a similar fiber and filler content, and which are free of treated, coated, padded and heavily printed paper, carbon paper and nonpaper materials. 
(26)  Textile recycling receptacle means a bag or container specifically distributed for use to recycle clothing and other home goods (exclusive of white goods), as part of a textile recyclables program. All such receptacles are pre-approved by the commissioner of public works prior to their distribution and use. A plastic garbage bag shall not be an approved textile recycling receptacle. 
(27)  Toter means a central collection container used for storage of recyclable materials between pickups from numerous households in a multifamily dwelling and compatible with collection equipment used by the city's recyclables collection contractor. 
(28)  White goods means major kitchen and laundry appliances including, but not limited to, stoves, washers, refrigerators and dryers. Nothing in this definition shall waive compliance with the rules and regulations for the generation, transportation, storage, and disposal of hazardous waste. 
(29)  Yard waste/debris means grass clippings, weeds, hedge clippings, garden waste, and twigs and brush not longer than three feet in length. 
(c)  Private property owners and occupants—Duties. 
(1)  Residential property. 
a.  Every owner (or occupant if designated in a written agreement), shall supply authorized refuse receptacles sufficient to contain all refuse accumulated between collection days and to keep a tightly fitted cover in place at all times when refuse is contained therein, except when opened for the deposit or removal of refuse in accordance with subsection (g). The owner, his agent or occupant shall maintain the container so that all refuse spilled during usage is removed and the area is cleaned in a timely manner. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner, his agent or occupant of the premises served by a refuse container to deposit or cause to be deposited therein any article or thing whatsoever. 
b.  Every owner (or occupant, if designated in a written agreement), or the occupant of a single-family dwelling, shall cause the shared or common areas of the dwelling, its premises and yard area, and the adjoining sidewalk and gutter to be maintained in compliance with these ordinances. 
c.  Every occupant shall dispose of all refuse in a clean and sanitary manner in compliance with these ordinances. 
(2)  Private property occupied by commercial or nonprofit establishments. Every owner (or occupant, if designated in a written agreement) shall supply a sufficient quantity of authorized refuse receptacles in compliance with these ordinances. If refuse is not collected by the city, arrangements shall be made for adequate and regular private collection of refuse in compliance with these ordinances. 
(d)  Private property owners and occupants—Keeping premises and adjacent areas free of litter. 
(1)  Maintenance of private property. Every owner or occupant of private property shall maintain his property free of any accumulation of litter, and shall prevent any litter from escaping to any other public or private property. 
(2)  Maintenance of sidewalks. Every owner or occupant of private property bordering on a street where there is a public or private sidewalk or footway shall maintain such sidewalk or footway free of litter. 
(3)  Every owner or occupant of private property shall cut and dispose of weeds in any yard area or vacant lot, or around any public or private property. 
(4)  No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, square or other public place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot, or from any public or private sidewalk, footway or driveway. 
(e)  Litter from commercial or nonprofit establishments. 
(1)  Litter from commercial or nonprofit establishments shall not be thrown or deposited in any public litter receptacles by the owners, occupants, employees or agents of the commercial or nonprofit establishments. 
(2)  Commercial or nonprofit establishments may maintain authorized litter receptacles for the use of the general public outdoors on private property or on the adjoining sidewalk in a manner not to inconvenience the use of the sidewalk by pedestrians. The establishments are encouraged to identify such authorized litter receptacles as described in these ordinances. 
(f)  City's duties and responsibilities. 
(1)  The city shall maintain regular schedules of street cleaning, and shall post signs city-wide and otherwise publicize by all appropriate means the schedules of regular street cleaning times. 
(2)  The city shall maintain regular schedules of refuse collection subject to the provisions of these ordinances, and shall publicize the schedules by all appropriate means. 
(3)  The city shall maintain and service authorized litter receptacles owned by the city. 
(4)  The city shall require all federal, state and local government organizations to comply with the regulations in these ordinances, for owners of private property and for commercial or nonprofit establishments. 
(5)  The city shall publicize the provisions of this chapter through the media of signs, advertisements, flyers, leaflets, announcements on radios and television, newspaper articles and through any other appropriate means, so that all citizens will have the opportunity to become informed about the legal duties of property owners and occupants, pedestrians and motorists, and about the city recycling, refuse and anti-litter services. 
(6)  The city shall maintain a citizen information service to disseminate information and to accept and to track complaints about litter, recycling, refuse and snow removal problems. 
(g)  Time of placement. All refuse shall be placed upon the sidewalk not earlier than 4:00 p.m. of the day prior to collection and no later than 7:00 a.m. on collection day. Additionally, all empty cans and lids will be removed from the sidewalk by 7:00 p.m. the day of collection. There will be one collection day weekly. If refuse is placed out for collection after 7:00 a.m. and the collector has already driven by the residence, the refuse will not be collected and the owner or occupant shall be responsible for removing the refuse from the sidewalk. 
(h)  Use of receptacle. 
(1)  Any person desiring the removal of refuse from private residential property of six units or less shall cause the refuse to be placed in authorized refuse receptacles. No receptacle shall exceed 50 pounds per container or a 64-gallon volume. 
(2)  The city will not be responsible for any damage to barrels, including but not limited to splitting and/or denting due to subzero temperatures and icing. 
(3)  Nonregulation barrels or any other unapproved containers will be treated as a bulk item and disposed of as such. Cardboard barrels and cardboard boxes are deemed unapproved containers. If such a container falls apart during collection, any rubbish remaining shall not be the responsibility of the city. 
(i)  Paper goods. Newspapers, magazines, or collapsed cardboard boxes may be set out in securely tied bundles not to exceed 50 pounds. 
(j)  Yard waste/debris. Yard waste/debris such as tree trimmings, hedge clippings and similar materials shall be cut to a length not exceeding three feet and shall be securely tied in bundles before being set out for collection or disposed of in either paper leaf bags or barrels labeled with "yard waste" stickers provided by the department of public works. 
(k)  Hazardous waste. Hazardous waste shall not be put out for collection. Hazardous waste includes gasoline, explosives, compressed gases from other than household consumer products, explosive chemicals, wet-cell batteries, tires and all other hazardous wastes as so defined by the department of environmental protection or any other materials as the commissioner of public works may determine to be hazardous. 
(l)  Bulk items. 
(1)  Bulk items shall not be deemed to be acceptable rubbish. A bulk item shall be defined as any item so large or heavy that one man could not reasonably handle it, any item over 75 pounds or anything in the following categories: 
a.  Auto parts, such as generators, starters, air-cleaners, auto seats, wheel rims, or small pieces of body metal, but not to include large pieces of body metal or engine blocks, dismantled swing sets with concrete footings removed, bicycles and other similar items. 
b.  Appliances such as stoves, air conditioners, dishwashers, washing machines, dryers, hot water heaters and refrigerators will be picked up by the city, but are required to have all doors completely removed prior to being placed on the sidewalk for collection and must have affixed thereon a white goods disposal sticker purchased from the department of public works. 
(2)  If in the opinion of the commissioner of public works or his or her designee the household refuse from any one household is unusually great or if the quantity, size, weight or nature of bulk items cannot be reasonably handled, they will not be collected. Earth, stones, tree trunks or large tree limbs will not be collected by the city and are the responsibility of the resident for disposal. 
(3)  The following items will be accepted at the department of public works yard, sanitation division garage during normal business hours: 
a.  Automobile tires (unmounted, not mounted) up to four each; 
b.  Automobile wet-cell batteries up to two each. 
(m)  Building materials. Building materials from owner-occupied one- or two-family dwellings where the owners and not private contractors have done repairs or rehabilitation will be picked up subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Materials shall be tied in bundles not to exceed four feet in length or 24 inches in diameter or 50 pounds. 
(2)  Such materials shall not exceed one cubic yard per collection. 
(3)  Such collections will require a current building permit to be prominently displayed on the owner's building, and the following criteria must be met: the building permit is for an amount not to exceed $5,000.00, and the work must be performed by or supervised by the owner. 
(n)  Violation. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine pursuant to the provisions of section 1-11 to be imposed on the resident or owner of the property or the person responsible where the violation occurs. Each violation shall be subject to judicial action pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 401 of the Acts of 1977 (General Laws Chapter 40, Section 21D). 
(o)  Illegal dumping. No household refuse or bulk item, as defined herein, shall at any time be placed on any property other than the owner's own residence for collection. Any person violating the provisions of this paragraph may be prosecuted under the provisions of Chapter 270, Section 16 of the General Laws. 
(Code 1963, § 8-22; Ord. No. 1987-1, 1-29-87; Ord. No. 1987-2, § 1, 2-26-87; Ord. No. 1987-8, 8-27-87; Ord. No. 1990-6, 3-22-90; Ord. No. 1991-3, 2-14-91; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 23, 7-14-2005; Ord. No. 2006-12, 9-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-10, 5-24-2007; Ord. No. 2014-01, 4-24-2014 ; Ord. No. 2018-08 , 5-10-2018) 
Cross reference— Noncriminal disposition for violation of residential trash ordinance, § 1-11(b); disturbing trash containers before collection, § 9-52; placing trash in public trash containers, § 9-53; littering and dumping trash and rubbish on public property, § 12-3; trash and rubbish on streets and sidewalks, § 12-12.  
Sec. 11-32. - Rubbish or trash picking, collecting or disturbing. 
Ashes, recyclable materials, rubbish and garbage placed upon the sidewalk for collection shall be deemed to be in the custody of the commissioner of public works. No person, other than the commissioner, his or her agents, or a person duly licensed by the commissioner in writing, shall disturb, collect or take away any ashes, rubbish or garbage so placed, except that the depositor may reclaim any or all of it. 
(Code 1963, § 8-22; Ord. No. 2014-01, 4-24-2014 ) 
Cross reference— Disturbing trash containers before collection, § 9-52; placing trash in public trash containers, § 9-53; collection of ashes and offal, § 11-30; household trash and rubbish collection, § 11-31; littering and dumping trash and rubbish on public property, § 12-3; trash and rubbish on streets and sidewalks, § 12-12.  
Sec. 11-33. - Driveway construction. 
(a)  Curbcuts: The superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights is authorized to promulgate regulations and accept petitions from owners of property requesting that he or she cause the curb at the front of such property to be dropped to allow for the installation of a driveway. Upon approval of such petition by the superintendent he or she shall cause said curb to be dropped. The superintendent shall not approve a petition that does not conform to the Code of Ordinances, the Somerville Zoning Ordinance as applied through any special permit and/or variance granted by the planning board or zoning board of appeals, and the paving and driveway permit regulations in section 11-33(b) below. The fee for such service shall be set in accordance with Chapter 40, Section 22F of the General Laws. 
(b)  Paving and driveways: The city engineer is hereby authorized to promulgate regulations and accept petitions from owners of property requesting to construct, alter, reconstruct, restore or expand driveways, whether pervious or impervious, and other impervious surfaces that would not otherwise require a building permit on lots within the City of Somerville. The regulations will include a required review of stormwater runoff, landscaping requirements, pervious surface requirements and other related regulations in one comprehensive process. The city engineer may delegate the inspection and enforcement provisions of this regulation to the superintendent of inspectional services. The fee for such permit shall be set accordance with Chapter 40, Section 22F of the General Laws. Petitions submitted by applicants seeking to replace existing driveways or other impervious surfaces without change to dimensions, pavement material and stormwater runoff shall not be denied. 
(c)  Paving contractor registration: The construction, alteration, reconstruction, restoration or expansion of any impervious driveway, and any other impervious surface that would not otherwise require a building permit on any lot within the City of Somerville, (including but not limited to asphalt, concrete and compacted gravel) shall be made by a person who registers with the city engineer. Every person registered as a paving contractor shall, before performing any work authorized thereby, execute an agreement or bond with one or more sureties satisfactory to the city engineer, that he or she will restore any public infrastructure damaged by their operations. The value of the bond shall be determined by the city engineer, but shall not be less than $2,500.00. No registered paving contractor shall perform any work such as is specified in section 11-33(b), without first following the regulations referenced therein. If a paving contractor shall fail to perform the requirements of this section or section 11-33(b), then the paving contractor shall not be entitled to receive another permit until said violation has been remedied. Failure to comply with the regulations of this section or section 11-33(b) may result in the revocation of registration for a period of one year subsequent to the most recent violation. 
(d)  Penalties for violations of these regulations are established per section 1-11(b) of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1963, § 8-22; Ord. No. 2004-12, 9-23-2004; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 5, 6-23-2005; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1, 4-12-2012)  
Sec. 11-34. - Commercial trash and rubbish collection. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, commercial trash shall mean all rubbish, refuse, debris, garbage, scrap, by-products and other waste material produced by any commercial, industrial, manufacturing, retail and/or wholesale establishment, or by any individual, corporation or any other entity, that is not household refuse, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Building materials. 
(2)  Produce, including but not limited to vegetables, fruits and animal products. 
(3)  Industrial and commercial appliances including but not limited to vending machines, coin-operated washers and dryers, restaurant equipment, and the packaging all such appliances come in. 
(4)  Office equipment and furnishings. 
(5)  Computers and computer-related equipment. 
(6)  Motor vehicles, truck, and motorcycle parts. 
(7)  Restaurant garbage. 
(b)  It is mandatory that all such commercial trash shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of sections 8-16, 9-52, 9-53 and 11-31, by using either the collection service provided by the city, a duly licensed private trash collection service, or by dumping at any sanitary disposal site approved and licensed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 111, Section 150A of the General Laws. 
(c)  No commercial trash shall at any time be deposited on any way, public or private, on any public place or on the property of another. 
(d)  No individual may bring any trash originating outside the boundaries of the city into the city. 
(e)  Time of placement: When commercial trash is picked up between 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., the receptacle shall be placed upon the sidewalk no earlier than 6:00 p.m. prior to said pickup. When commercial trash is picked up between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., the receptacle shall be placed upon the sidewalk no earlier than 7:00 a.m. on the day of pickup. Receptacles shall be removed from the public way within three regular business hours after collection for pickups between 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., and within three hours after collection for pickups between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. In no event shall commercial trash receptacles remain on the public way for more than 24 hours after pickup, regardless of the regular business hours of the establishment. This subsection shall take effect on July 1, 2016. 
(f)  A violation of this section, disposed of pursuant to the noncriminal disposition procedures of Chapter 40, Section 21D of the General Laws shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. Any judicial enforcement pursuant to complaint shall carry a fine of up to $300.00 per day for each day of violation. Any individual violating this section shall be required to remove any trash disposed of in violation of this section at his/her expense, or pay the costs of removal if removed by the city or its agents or employees. 
(Ord. No. 1990-2, 12-13-90; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 24, 7-14-2005; Ord. No. 2006-12, 9-28-2006; Ord. No. 2016-04 , 4-28-2016)  
Sec. 11-35. - Trash and rubbish collection for dwellings with seven or more units. 
(a)  All dwellings of seven or more units desirous of having their refuse, as defined in section 11-31, collected by the city shall be subject to a fee of $150.00 per unit payable annually in advance. All of the definitions, time, place and manner restrictions and limitations regarding household trash and rubbish collection, as set forth in section 11-31, shall apply to such dwellings. 
(b)  It is mandatory that all trash from such dwellings shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of sections 8-16, 9-52, 9-53, 11-31 and 11-34, 11-36 by using either the collection service provided by the city, a duly licensed private trash collection service, or by dumping at any sanitary disposal site approved and licensed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 111, Section 150A of the General Laws. 
(c)  A violation of this section, disposed of pursuant to the noncriminal disposition procedures of Chapter 40, Section 21D of the General Laws, shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. Any judicial enforcement pursuant to complaint shall carry a fine of up to $300.00 per day for each day of violation. Any individual violating this section shall be required to remove any trash disposed of in violation of this section, and provide any other remedy necessary to correct any actions in violation of this section, at his/her expense, or pay the cost of such removal or other remedy if removed or corrected by the city or its agents or employees. 
(d)  The mayor or his or her delegate shall notify all affected property owners of this fee at least ninety days prior to the imposition of this fee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-09, 7-22-2004; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 25, 7-14-2005; Ord. No. 2006-12, 9-28-2006)  
Sec. 11-36. - Grease containers. 
(a)  Any container used by any food establishment, as defined in the State Sanitary Code Article X - Minimum Sanitation Standards for Food Service Establishments, for the storage, collection or removal of cooking grease or kindred refuse shall be constructed of impervious material and subject to the inspection of the health department. Cooking grease or kindred refuse shall be disposed of in a manner consistent with the State Sanitary Code and in accordance with the regulations of the department of environmental protection. 
(b)  Grease containers—Maintenance and removal. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of every person responsible for the use of a grease container in which cooking grease or kindred refuse is stored to (1) keep a tightly fitted cover in place, except when opened for the deposit or removal of its contents; and (2) remove spillage after every use by applying a cleaning agent and (3) contract with a licensed scavenger for grease removal. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of every grease hauler responsible for the collection of any grease container in which cooking grease or kindred refuse is stored to: 
a.  Provide a tightly fitting cover for the container; 
b.  Resecure the container cover if it is removed during collection; 
c.  Remove any grease spilled during collection by applying a cleaning agent. 
(3)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $300.00 for each offense. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. A violation of this section, disposed of pursuant to the noncriminal disposition procedures of Chapter 40, Section 21D of the General Laws, shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12, 9-28-2006)  
Sec. 11-37. - Disinfection of refuse vehicles. 
Any person owning or controlling any refuse vehicle shall cause all vehicles and all implements used in connection with the loading or unloading thereof, when not in use, to be stored and kept in such a place and in such a manner as not to create a nuisance, and shall cause all such vehicles and implements to be thoroughly disinfected and put in an inoffensive condition when so stored or not in use. Such vehicles and implements shall be thoroughly disinfected at least once a week, whether in use or not, unless the same shall not have been used since the last disinfection thereof. Any owner or other person found in violation of this section shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $300.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. A violation of this section, disposed of pursuant to the noncriminal disposition procedures of Chapter 40, Section 21D of the General Laws shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. Any judicial enforcement pursuant to complaint shall carry a fine of up to $300.00 per day for each day of violation. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12, 9-28-2006)  
Sec. 11-38. - Rodent control. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to limit the population growth, and prevent the potential spread of infectious and contagious diseases by rats, mice, and other rodents (hereinafter referred to as "rodents"). 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
(1)  Exterminate means to eliminate rodents through methods utilized by a licensed pest control management company. 
(2)  Exterminator means an individual duly licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to exterminate and in good standing. 
(3)  Infestation means the recurrent presence, as determined by burrows, droppings, gnaw marks, tracks and other physical evidence, of rodents that is determined to be a threat to public health. 
(c)  General requirements. 
(1)  All premises and places shall be maintained free from rats, mice, and other rodents; and it is unlawful for the owner and/or occupant thereof to fail to take such reasonable preventive and remedial measures for such purposes as shall be prescribed by the superintendent of inspectional services or board of health. 
(2)  The owners and/or occupants of premises shall: 
a.  Implement rodent-proofing and extermination measures as set forth below to prevent rats, mice, or other rodents from gaining access to or coming into contact with food and water sources, including food products, animal food, or bird food; and 
b.  Prevent the accumulation of materials stored in a manner capable of providing food or harborage for rodents, including, but not limited to, garbage, litter, excrement, filth, lumber, tree limbs, firewood, motor vehicle bodies or parts, construction or demolition debris, appliances, waste wood, scrap metal, overgrown vegetation, decaying animal or vegetable matter, and animal waste any other articles that provide shelter and protection for rodents. 
(d)  Duty to implement rodent-proofing and extermination. 
(1)  Rodent infestation. If evidence of a rodent infestation occurs, a property owner and/or occupant shall take all necessary measures at the expense of the owner and/or occupant to eradicate the infestation and prevent future infestation. In addition, the owner and/or occupant of the property shall perform all eradication measures as reasonably required by the superintendent of inspectional services or board of health, including, but not limited to, rodent-proofing and/or extermination by a duly licensed exterminator. 
(2)  Permitted work. The superintendent of inspectional services is authorized to promulgate regulations regarding mandatory rodent extermination measures in advance of demolition, construction and land clearing projects on private property. The superintendent of public works is authorized to promulgate regulations regarding mandatory rodent extermination measures in advance of subsurface work in the public right-of-way and on private streets. Where rodent control is determined necessary, an extermination program shall begin on the project at least seven days prior to the start of work, unless waived by the respective superintendent. The extermination program must continue until substantial completion of the project unless otherwise waived by the respective superintendent. 
(e)  Correction orders. If an inspection reveals a violation of this section, the superintendent of inspectional services or board of health shall issue a correction order. Such order shall be in writing and shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
Any owner and/or occupant served with a correction order under this section shall comply with the order within a period determined by the superintendent of inspectional services or board of health, but not to exceed 21 days. 
(f)  Right of entry of superintendent of inspectional services or board of health. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce or determine compliance with the provisions of this section, or whenever the superintendent of inspectional services or board of health has cause to believe that a violation of any provision of this section has been or is being committed, the superintendent of inspectional services, inspectors from the inspectional service department and the board of health shall have authority to enter any land, building, structure, or premises at reasonable times to inspect the same, provided such entry is consistent with the constitutions of the United States and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. If entry is refused, the superintendent of inspectional services or board of health shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry, including, but not limited to, obtaining a search warrant. Under these conditions, the superintendent of inspectional services or board of health and such authorized personnel may inspect the interior and exterior of buildings, other structures, or parcels on which a building has been demolished or is being constructed to determine evidence of rodent harborage and rodent infestation and when any evidence is found indicating the presence of rodents or openings through which rodents may enter such buildings or structures, to report such evidence to the inspectors who shall serve the owner, agent or occupant of such building, structure or parcel, with written notice to abate the conditions found. 
(g)  Area baiting requirements and hearings. If the board of health has cause to believe that a specified geographic area has a rodent infestation, then the board of health, may schedule a public hearing upon 14 days' prior written notice to landowners within the identified area and 300 feet around, and after a public hearing, may require that the all landowners within the geographic area bait their property and/or take other remedial measures on such conditions and terms deemed necessary by the board of health. 
(h)  Adoption of rules. The superintendent of inspectional services is authorized to adopt rules consistent with this section for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing its provisions. 
(i)  Violations. It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of real property to fail to comply with the requirements of this section or any order of the superintendent of inspectional services or board of health issued to carry out or enforce the requirements of this section. The provisions of this section may be enforced by the superintendent of inspectional services or board of health, by a noncriminal disposition pursuant to G. L. c. 40, s. 21D. Each violation of a provision of this section is a separate and distinct offense and in a case of a continuing violation, each day that the violation continues constitutes a separate offense. Any person, firm, corporation, association or other entity violating any provision of this article shall be punished in accordance with section 1-11 of this Code. Any interested person may request, in writing, a hearing before a municipal hearing officer to contest the issuance of a fine, as provided in Chapter 106 of the Acts of 2008. The imposition of penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the city from instituting other remedies to abate violations of this ordinances as permitted by law, including, but not limited to criminal proceedings, application for equitable relief, or receivership proceedings 
(j)  Failure to comply—Work by City—Lien on property. If an owner and/or occupant fails to comply with this section after notice given hereinbefore set forth, the city may cause the work to be performed, and charge the owner of the property and place a lien against the property for expenses incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12, 9-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-10, 5-24-2007; Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 10-13-2011)  
Sec. 11-39. - Removal of litter from a retail establishment's parking area. 
(a)  Every person owning, managing, or controlling any retail establishment with an adjacent parking area provided for customer use shall cause to be removed at his own expense all litter located in the parking area. It shall be the duty of the owner or manager to cause all litter placed in litter baskets to be deposited daily in the retail establishment's commercial refuse container for removal by a licensed vendor. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every owner or manager to provide and maintain in good condition and in good repair litter baskets, sufficient in size and number to prevent any overflow or accumulation of litter outside the containers. Litter baskets shall be placed at appropriate locations throughout the parking areas so as not to constitute a nuisance to adjacent properties or occupants thereof. 
(c)  Unremoved litter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. It shall be the duty of the commissioner of public works or designee to serve notice in writing by certified mail upon the owner or manager where a nuisance may be found, requiring him to abate the nuisance within three day from receipt of the notice. The commissioner may prescribe in his notice the manner in which any nuisance may be abated. If the owner or manager fails within three days from the date of notice to abate the nuisance, or if the owner or manager is unknown or cannot, with due diligence be found, the commissioner may proceed to abate the nuisance or seek to enjoin the nuisance. In addition to any fine or penalty, an amount equal to three times the cost or expense incurred by the city in abating a nuisance may be recovered in an appropriate court action. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the city from acting without notice to abate a nuisance in an emergency where nuisance poses an immediate threat to public health or safety, nor shall this section be construed to deny any common law right to anyone to abate a nuisance. 
(d)  Any owner or other person found in violation of this section shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $300.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. A violation of this section, disposed of pursuant to the noncriminal disposition procedures of Chapter 40, Section 21D of the General Laws shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. Any judicial enforcement pursuant to complaint shall carry a fine of up to $300.00 per day for each day of violation. 
(e)  The amendments to sections 11-31, 11-34 and 11-35, and the new sections 11-36, 11-37, 11-38 and 11-39 shall take effect 90 days after enactment. For the first 60 days, violations of these sections shall be punished by the issuance of warnings. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12, 9-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-10, 5-24-2007)  
Sec. 11-40. - Mandatory recycling. 
(a)  Purpose and declaration of policy. This section has been created because of the great interest of the people of Somerville in preserving the environment by reducing the amount of refuse sent to landfills and incinerators. It shall be the policy of the city to reduce the amount of solid waste generated and to require the recycling of recyclable materials to the fullest extent possible. 
(b)  Establishment of program. There is established a program for the mandatory separation of certain recyclable materials from refuse which shall apply to all buildings in Somerville and shall be carried out under the supervision of the commissioner of public works. 
(c)  Mandatory separation of recyclable materials. It shall be mandatory for each owner or occupant in Somerville to separate all designated recyclable materials from other refuse in accordance with the provisions of this section. These mandatory recycling requirements shall apply to all buildings without regard to whether the building's solid waste is collected by the city. 
(1)  Buildings which receive city solid waste collection services. It shall be mandatory for each owner or occupant of a building which receives city solid waste collection services to separate from other refuse all recyclable materials designated by the commissioner in rules and regulations issued under this section. This requirement shall also apply to all city-owned buildings, including schools. 
(2)  Buildings which do not receive city solid waste collection services. It shall be mandatory for each owner or occupant of a building which does not receive city solid waste collection to separate all designated recyclable materials from other refuse in accordance with a recycling plan to be submitted to the commissioner or his or her designee, in accordance with subsection (e) as set forth below. 
(d)  Collection of recyclable materials. 
(1)  Residential dwellings. 
a.  The preparation and placement of recyclables shall be accomplished in accordance with the requirements relative to time of placement for refuse as stated in subsection 11-31(g). 
b.  All recycling containers and receptacles shall be placed for collection on the outer edge of the sidewalk so as not to obstruct the free passage of pedestrians. 
c.  Recyclables shall only be placed in authorized recycling receptacles. Recyclables shall not be placed in plastic garbage bags for collection, removal or disposal. Recyclables shall not be placed in the same refuse containers as rubbish or mixed with rubbish or litter for collection, removal or disposal. If separation of recyclable materials from rubbish does not take place, the city may decide not to collect said rubbish. 
d.  Upon placement of recyclables for the city or its contractor at the curbside, pursuant to this subsection, such recyclables shall become the property of the city. It shall be a violation of this section if any person, other than authorized agents of the city acting in the course of their employment or contract, collects or causes to be collected any recyclables so placed. Each and every such collection in violation of this subdivision from one or more locations shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalty provided in this section, any violator of this subsection shall make restitution to the city for the value of recyclables illegally removed. No fine or restitution requirement shall apply under this subsection to any violation by a person who collects recyclable containers redeemable under state law without use of a motor vehicle. 
(2)  Commercial and nonprofit establishments. In commercial or nonprofit establishments, the materials designated for recycling in rules and regulations promulgated by the commissioner shall be placed in recycling receptacles provided by the owner or owners of such buildings. The owner or owners of such buildings shall be responsible for the costs of recyclables separation and collection. However, the owner or owners can choose to have the city provide recyclables collection provided that they pay a fee for the use of each recycling receptacle, as determined by the commissioner. The owner or owners of such buildings shall submit recycling plans to the commissioner in accordance with subsection (e) of this section. The commissioner shall have the authority to require documentation from the city's recyclables collection contractors and from any owner, lessee or tenant of a building which does not receive city recyclables collection services, that recyclables are being delivered to a broker or end market that causes the material to be recycled or composted rather than landfilled or incinerated. 
(e)  Recycling plans. 
(1)  All property owners of property whose recycling is not collected by the city or a contractor on behalf of the city are required to submit recycling plans to the commissioner upon request. 
(2)  Contents of plan. Each recycling plan will cover the following items: 
a.  Certification that all recyclable materials will be put out for collection; 
b.  Frequency of collection; 
c.  Methods to be used for collection, including types of containers; 
d.  Any other items which may be specified in rules and regulations promulgated by the commissioner under this section. 
(3)  Format of plan. Plans shall be submitted in a format to be specified in rules and regulations promulgated by the commissioner under this section. 
(f)  Recyclable materials. The recyclable materials to be separated shall be designated by the commissioner in rules and regulations to be issued under this section. 
(g)  Violation. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine pursuant to the provisions of section 1-11 to be imposed on the resident or owner of the property or the person responsible where the violation occurs. Each violation shall be subject to judicial action pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 401 of the Acts of 1977 (General Laws Chapter 40, Section 21D). 
( Ord. No. 2014-01, 4-24-2014 ; Ord. No. 2018-08 , 5-10-2018)  
Secs. 11-41—11-50. - Reserved.  
Sec. 11-51. - Superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights; lines and lights duties. 
(a)  The superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights shall have supervision of all wires over, under or in the streets and other public places and over buildings, and every wire within a building which is designed to carry any electric light or power current, and all poles, conduits and other structures holding, supporting or containing such wires in streets and other public places. 
(b)  Whenever any such wire, pole, conduit or other structure is, in his or her judgment, unsuitable or unsafe, any person owning or operating the same shall immediately at his or her request repair or replace the same to his or her satisfaction. 
(c)  The superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights may cause abandoned wires and poles to be removed. 
(d)  The superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights shall see that all laws, ordinances and orders of the city council relating to such wires, poles, conduits and other structures are enforced. 
(e)  Whenever in his or her opinion any wire appliance or apparatus used for the distribution of an electric current within a building is in a condition dangerous to public safety the superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights may direct any person using the same to shut off the current therefrom until existing defects are remedied and shall also notify the person or corporation supplying the current of existing defects. No person after being directed as aforesaid shall use or cause to be used any such wire, appliance or apparatus while in such a condition. 
(f)  The superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights shall have supervision over the installation and maintenance of parking meters authorized to be installed by ordinance and shall collect or cause to be collected the monies deposited in said meters. 
(Code 1963, § 8-41; Ord. No. 2005-10, §§ 7—9, 6-23-2005) 
State Law reference— Municipal inspector of wires, M.G.L.A. c. 166, § 32.  
Sec. 11-52. - Superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights; additional lines and lights duties. 
The superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights is hereby designated as the officer who shall have the authority and perform the duties provided for by Chapter 278 of the Acts of 1905 entitled; "An Act Relative to Wires and Electrical Appliances in the City of Somerville." 
(Code 1963, § 8-42; Ord. No. 2005-10, §§ 9, 10, 6-23-2005)  
Sec. 11-53. - Disconnection and removal of electric wires. 
The superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights or any member of the fire department or any other officer of the city may cut, disconnect and remove any wires whenever such wires interfere with the operations of firemen or the extinguishment of a fire or access to or egress from a building, or whenever such wires are for any other reason in his or her judgment a menace to person or property. The superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights may direct any person using a wire to shut off the current thereof for such period of time as he or she may deem necessary for public safety. Neither the city nor any officer mentioned in this section shall be liable for damages arising out of acts performed as set forth in this section. 
(Code 1963, § 8-43; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 9, 6-23-2005)  
Sec. 11-54. - Placement and maintenance of electric wires and appliances. 
(a)  All wires, appliances and apparatus in the interior of a public building or on private premises, which are intended for the transmission of electricity and to be connected with an outside circuit, shall be arranged, affixed, changed and maintained by the person owning or using the same, to the satisfaction of the superintendent of the division of highways, electric lines and lights of the public works department, who shall have access at all reasonable times to such wires, appliances and apparatus. 
(b)  No person shall place such wires, appliances or apparatus in any building in process of construction until all gas, steam, sewer, water and furnace pipes have been placed in proper position. Before any person shall arrange, affix or change any such wires, appliances or apparatus, he or she shall notify the superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights, who shall be given ample opportunity to inspect the same, and no wire, appliance or apparatus shall be covered or enclosed before such inspection. Such wires on private premises shall not be connected with an outside circuit without written permission from the superintendent. 
(c)  No person shall arrange, affix or change any such wires, appliances or apparatus or any fixture without first obtaining a permit so to do from said superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights. 
(Code 1963, § 11-23; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 9, 6-23-2005) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 8.  
Secs. 11-55—11-70. - Reserved.  
Sec. 11-71. - Laying conduit and wires and erecting poles. 
(a)  Every petition presented to the city council for permission to erect poles or to lay conduits to support or to contain wires for the transmission of electricity, or the transmission of intelligence by electricity, telegraph, telephone, television, or otherwise, including, but not limited to, cable television and internet, shall be accompanied by a plan showing the exact proposed location of each pole or conduit. All petitions shall have the approval of the superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights or his or her designee, before being granted by the city council. 
(b)  All the poles erected upon locations granted by the city council, and all other fixtures to which it is desired to attach wires, shall be located and placed as directed by the city council, and the particular position of such fixtures, unless designated by the city council, shall be satisfactory to the superintendent of the division of highways, electric lines and lights. A plan showing the exact location of each pole and conduit, certified by said superintendent and satisfactory in all respects to the city engineer, shall be made and filed by the person to whom the permission was granted, with the city engineer, within 20 days after the erection of said poles or the construction of said conduits. 
(Code 1963, §§ 11-24, 11-25; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 9, 6-23-2005; Ord. No. 2016-17 , 11-10-2016) 
State Law reference— Location of wires, M.G.L.A. c.166, § 22.  
Sec. 11-72. - Pole and transformer specifications. 
(a)  All poles shall be made of such material as the city council shall direct, and each pole before being erected shall be approved by the superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights. All new and replacement poles shall not be less than 45 feet in length and of not more than 14 inches in diameter at the surface of the ground and shall be erected to have a pole length of at least 35 feet above the ground, unless the superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights shall direct that poles of other dimensions may be used. 
(b)  All transformers mounted on wooden utility poles shall be limited in size not exceeding 150 KVA. 
(Code 1963, § 11-26; Ord. No. 1994-10, 6-23-94; Ord. No. 1995-7, 6-22-95; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 9, 6-23-2005)  
Sec. 11-73. - Height of wires and poles. 
All wires or poles shall be constantly maintained at a height from the ground of not less than 20 feet at every point, and shall be so constructed, placed and maintained as not to interfere with any other wires. The poles shall be erected and all wires placed thereon under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights. No wire shall be attached to a pole by means of a bracket or other side fixture, nor shall the wires of more than one person be placed on the same crossarm. 
(Code 1963, § 11-27; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 9, 6-23-2005)  
Sec. 11-74. - Pole maintenance and ownership signage. 
Poles shall be kept well-painted, of a uniform color, and in good condition to the satisfaction of the superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights. The name of the owner, with a special number of each pole and owner, shall be distinctly painted in white letters upon a dark background or in some other suitable manner on every pole, about seven feet from the ground, or the owners of the pole and all other persons and corporations having authority to attach wires, crossbars or other things thereto shall be otherwise designated thereon by words or figures to the satisfaction of the superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights. 
(Code 1963, § 11-28; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 9, 6-23-2005) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L.A. c.166, § 31.  
Sec. 11-75. - City use of poles. 
The city shall have the exclusive use of one crossbar of each pole free of cost, for the purpose of placing wires thereon for municipal purposes. Said crossbar shall be of such dimensions and have such number of pins as the superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights shall require, and shall be placed at not less than 30 inches from the next crossbar. 
(Code 1963, § 11-29; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 9, 6-23-2005)  
Sec. 11-76. - Attachment of wires to poles. 
Any person authorized to erect poles or wires under the provisions of this division shall not suffer the wires of any other person to be placed upon said poles without permission from the city council. No person shall place wires upon the posts or fixtures of any other person without permission of the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 11-30)  
Sec. 11-77. - Climbing steps on poles. 
Whenever the superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights shall direct, the person authorized to erect poles under the provisions of this division shall place steps on that portion thereof more than ten feet from the ground and no person shall climb any such pole by the use of spurs. 
(Code 1963, § 11-31; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 9, 6-23-2005)  
Sec. 11-78. - Time limits on laying conduit and wires and erecting poles. 
Every location and permission granted shall be void, unless within six months from the passage of the order granting the same, the poles shall have been erected, the conduits constructed and the wires placed and put in operation. The location of any pole, conduit or wire shall, if so declared by the city council, become null and void if the operation or use thereof shall be discontinued for a period of six months. 
(Code 1963, § 11-32)  
Sec. 11-79. - Removing poles, conduits and wires. 
(a)  No pole shall be removed without permission of the city council, except as provided in this section. 
(b)  The city council having first given the person to whom such permission is granted, or the person operating any poles, conduits or wires thereunder, opportunity to be heard, may, if in its judgment the interests of the public so require, or if each and all of the conditions, terms and requirements to be observed and performed under said permission are not complied with, order that said poles, conduits and wires, or any of them, shall be removed, and that such person shall thereupon remove the same; and if such person neglects to execute such order within 30 days after the passage thereof, the board may cause the order to be executed, and the expense thereof shall be paid by such person to the city. 
(Code 1963, §§ 11-33, 11-34)  
Sec. 11-80. - Moving poles, conduits and wires. 
The position of any pole, conduit, fixture or wire shall be changed by the person owning or using the same at his or her own expense and without delay, whenever ordered by the city council, or the same may be done by the superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights if ordered by said board and the expense shall be paid by such person to the city. 
(Code 1963, § 11-35; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 9, 6-23-2005)  
Sec. 11-81. - Electric, telephone or cable television wires. 
Persons owning or operating electric, telephone, or cable television wires that are unit, building, or general property service feeders shall place said wires in cable form as a single cable feed. The installation of all such cables shall follow a single route unless otherwise permitted by the superintendent of highways, electric lines and lights. 
(Code 1963, § 11-36; Ord. No. 1994-12, 6-23-94; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 9, 6-23-2005)  
Sec. 11-82. - Indemnification. 
Any person receiving such permission and any person using any pole, conduit or wire thereunder shall save harmless and indemnify the city against all loss, expense and damages, and against all claims for loss, expense and damages in any way arising out of the erection, maintenance or use of such pole, conduit or wire by such person, or out of the transmission of electricity over such wire or in any other way arising out of the rights granted by such permission. 
(Code 1963, § 11-37)  
Sec. 11-83. - Conditions for laying conduit and wires and erecting poles. 
The permission for the erection or construction and maintenance of poles, conduits or wires shall be granted upon the condition that if the provisions of law and of this division and all other ordinances applicable thereto shall not be fully complied with, then the permission and the locations therein granted shall be null and void. Such permission shall not issue, and the rights therein granted shall not take effect until the person to whom such permission is granted shall first give the city an agreement in writing satisfactory to the city solicitor, that said person accepts and holds said permission and his or her rights thereunder upon the terms and conditions therein stated, and that he or she agrees to all the same terms and conditions and will fully perform and be subject to the same. 
(Code 1963, § 11-38)  
Sec. 11-84. - Applicability to guy wires, stay wires and other wires. 
The provisions of this division shall, so far as applicable, apply to all guy, stay or other wires over any street or other public place, as to the height at which such wires shall be maintained above the ground and otherwise. 
(Code 1963, § 11-39)  
Secs. 11-85—11-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 11-91—11-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DIVISION OF BUILDINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— By the terms of M.G.L.A. c. 143, § 3A the state building code is effective throughout the state. 
Charter reference— Established, § 40C, superintendent to control, § 40D. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 5, housing, ch. 7. 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of buildings, M.G.L.A. c. 143, § 3. 
 
Sec. 11-101. - Superintendent of buildings duties. 
(a)  Under the direction of the commissioner of public works the superintendent of buildings, in his or her capacity as inspector of buildings shall have charge of the building division. He or she shall grant permits for the construction of new buildings and the additions to and alteration of existing buildings after satisfying himself or herself that the owners or persons intending to erect or alter such buildings have complied with the requirements of the building code. He or she shall require all owners of vacant property to notify the division of their intent for the future use of the property within 60 days after property becomes vacant, as required by section 11-111. He or she shall grant occupancy permits and permits for change in use of buildings. The inspector of buildings or his or her assistants shall examine all buildings in the course of erection, alteration or repair, as often as practicable. He or she shall keep a record of the business of the division of buildings and shall submit to the mayor and city council a yearly report of such business and such other reports as shall be required. 
(b)  Copies of all permits issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be forwarded to the chief engineer of the fire department within 14 days of the day of issuance. 
(Code 1963, § 8-44)  
Sec. 11-102. - Reports. 
The superintendent of buildings shall submit a bimonthly report to the city council listing all building permits issued during the reporting period. Said report shall include a summary of the information provided on the application for permit. The reports submitted under this section shall be forwarded to the city clerk on the second and fourth Wednesday of each month. 
(Code 1963, § 8-48)  
Sec. 11-103. - Inspection of buildings. 
The inspector of buildings or any of his or her assistants, so far as may be necessary in the performance of their respective duties, may enter any building or any premises, upon showing a badge of office. No building shall be lathed until the inspector of buildings has been notified that such building is ready and until he or she has given consent therefor. 
(Code 1963, § 8-45) 
Cross reference— Inspection of buildings, § 5-38; inspections, § 5-78. 
State Law reference— Inspector of buildings, M.G.L.A. c. 143, § 3.  
Sec. 11-104. - Use of new materials or forms of construction. 
The inspector of buildings shall have authority to allow use of new materials or forms of construction not specifically mentioned in the building code, under such conditions as he or she may determine. He or she may issue rules for the application of the provisions of the building code in cases not specifically covered, to carry out the intent of the code. 
(Code 1963, § 8-46) 
State Law reference— Inspector of buildings, M.G.L.A. c. 143, § 3.  
Sec. 11-105. - Demolition of buildings. 
(a)  No permit to demolish any structure which is within 30 feet of another structure shall be issued by the superintendent of the building department unless the applicant meets the following minimum conditions precedent: 
(1)  Provide with the fire department for a fire detail; 
(2)  Deposit with the fire department a sum of legal tender equal to the estimated cost of the fire detail; 
(3)  Compliance with the requirements of the board of health, division of highways, division of electric lines and lights, division of engineering and division of waterworks shall be provided by written acknowledgement of compliance as the superintendent of buildings deems necessary. 
(4)  A dust control plan that the superintendent of buildings determines is appropriate to protect the health and well-being of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(b)  The fire department must provide written acknowledgement to the superintendent of the building department of compliance with the provisions of subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section. 
(c)  Notification of demolition. No permit to demolish any building or structure in its entirety, or more than 25 percent of a building or structure excluding interior only demolition, shall be issued by the superintendent of inspectional services until the following notification has been provided by the applicant for the demolition permit: 
(1)  Written notice to abutting property owners and residents. The applicant must give written notification of his or her demolition application to residents of abutting property; to owners of all property within 300 feet of the lot on which demolition is proposed; or, in the case of a structure with a gross floor area of 500 square feet or less and a height of 15 feet or less, to owners of all property within 100 feet of the lot; and to the ward councilor. The notification must be mailed by certified mail with return receipt at least seven days before the demolition permit is issued and should state the proposed date, time and manner of demolition. An affidavit of compliance or certified mail return receipts must be submitted to the inspectional services department before the demolition permit may be issued. 
(2)  Post the application on the premises. The applicant is responsible for ensuring that notice of proposed demolition is posted continuously in a publicly visible place on the property subject to demolition for at least seven days prior to the issuance of the demolition permit. Such notice shall be on a form prepared by the inspectional services department. 
(3)  Post the application in city hall. The applicant, through the city clerk's office, shall post notice of proposed demolition in city hall for at least seven days prior to the issuance of the demolition permit. 
(4)  Definition of owner and resident. For the purpose of identification in providing notice, owners shall be those persons as they appear on the most recent tax list maintained by the city assessor, and residents shall be those persons as they appear in the most recent city listing as maintained by the city election commission. 
(5)  Revised date of demolition. If actual demolition will occur more than one week later than the initial proposed date of demolition as stated in subsection (c)(1), but less than 45 days from the initial proposed date of demolition, the applicant: shall post a revised notice stating the demolition date and time in a publicly visible place on the property subject to demolition for at least seven days prior to the revised demolition date; shall deliver a new notice to all abutting property owners as detailed in subsection (c)(1) via certified mail with return receipt requests and hand deliver or place a notice setting forth the revised demolition date and time on the abutting properties so as to be clearly seen by the occupants at least seven days prior to the revised date of demolition and; shall notify the ward councilor and the inspectional services department at least seven days prior to the revised date of demolition. An affidavit of compliance shall be submitted to inspectional services attesting to compliance of proper notice to abutting property occupants. An affidavit of compliance or certified mail return receipts shall be submitted to inspectional services regarding proper notice to abutting property owners. In the event that the actual demolition will occur more than 45 days after the initial proposed demolition date as stated in subsection (c)(1), the applicant must file new documentation pursuant to the entirety of section 11-105. 
(6)  Emergency demolition. The above notification requirements may be waived by the superintendent of inspectional services in the event of an emergency demolition of an unsafe structure in conformance with the regulations of the State Building Code 780 CMR, sections 123.0 and 124.0 regarding unsafe structures and emergency measures. 
(Code 1963, § 8-44; Ord. No. 1992-1, 2-27-92; Ord. No. 2016-03 , 4-14-2016) 
Cross reference— Demolition and fire details, § 5-8; demolition and fire details, § 5-36; demolition review ordinance, § 7-28.  
Sec. 11-106. - Inspection of grandstands, carnivals, staging and other entertainment structures. 
The inspector of buildings shall examine into the safety of all grandstands, merry-go-rounds, Ferris wheels, and other structures intended for use by the public in connection with any exhibition, show, game, or other amusement, and no person shall cause or allow such a structure to be used by the public until a permit has been given in writing for such use by the inspector of buildings. 
(Code 1963, § 8-47) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 8.0  
Sec. 11-107. - Rental of school buildings. 
The superintendent of buildings shall have authority to let the halls in the several school buildings for objects other than educational purposes, but never to the disturbance of the schools, and all rentals received shall be paid over to the city treasurer monthly. In no case shall the free use of any hall be granted by him or her. 
(Code 1963, § 8-48)  
Sec. 11-108. - Enlarging or moving structures in streets. 
No person shall enlarge his or her structures in any street, or place structures in new locations without permission from the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 12-2)  
Sec. 11-109. - Address and building numbers. 
The owner of any building or part of a building shall affix to the same the numbers designated by the city council or by some person duly authorized by said board, and shall not affix or retain thereon for more than three days any number contrary to such designation. 
(Code 1963, § 8-10) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for numbering of buildings, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 21(10).  
Sec. 11-110. - Moving buildings on streets. 
No person shall move a building through a street without written permission of the city council, containing such requirements as said board may prescribe, in regard to the cutting of electric wires, the crossing of railroad tracks, the removal of chimneys or other projections on such building, the protection of shade trees in the streets, the giving of bonds and otherwise. The petition for such permission shall be accompanied by a statement signed by the commissioner of public works, the superintendent of highways, and the superintendent of electric lines and lights, giving the dimensions of the building, the names of the streets and other places through which it is desired to move the same, and their opinion as to the injury which such removal would cause to public or private property. It shall be their duty to sign such statement at the request of the petitioner. 
(Code 1963, § 11-14) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 12.  
Sec. 11-111. - Vacant property. 
In the absence of extenuating circumstances, every owner of a vacant property shall inform the superintendent of inspectional services in writing of that owner's intended future use of the property, within 30 days of notification by the superintendent of inspectional services of that property's becoming vacant, if such property becomes vacant after the effective date of this section [September 27, 1988]. Every such owner shall provide the superintendent of inspectional services with a reasonable plan for the future use of the property. 
For the purposes of this section, "property" shall mean any building or structure, or part of a building or structure, which is designed, constructed or used as a separate unit, regardless of the purpose for which such property is used or has been used, or whether it is currently unused. "Vacant" shall mean any property which is abandoned, empty, uninhabitable, or which is not being used or occupied. 
This section shall not apply to a property containing three or fewer residential units unless all units of the property are unoccupied. 
Violations of the provisions of this section are subject to a penalty in accordance with section 1-11. Each day that such owner fails to comply with this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the superintendent of inspectional services shall enforce all other state and federal statutes and regulations pertaining to the maintenance of buildings. 
(Ord. No. 1988-15, § 2, 9-22-88; Ord. No. 2006-16, 12-14-2006)  
Secs. 11-112—11-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DIVISION OF WATERWORKS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Established, § 40C; superintendent to control, § 40D. 
Cross reference— Water and sewer income and expenses, § 2-371; water run-off and washing cars, § 12-2. 
State Law reference— Public water supply, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 38 et seq.; trespass or other injury to property pertaining to water supply, M.G.L.A. c. 111, § 170. 
 
Sec. 11-121. - Interference with water system. 
No person shall break or in any manner injure any water main, service pipe, stop-cock valve, hydrant, waterpost, drinking foundation or other fixture or appurtenance connected with the city waterworks, or shall obstruct or in any way interfere with the flow of water through the same. No person shall turn on or off the water in any water main, street service pipe, hydrant, waterpost, drinking foundation or other fixture or appurtenance connected with said waterworks, or make any opening into or connection therewith, without authority from the superintendent of waterworks, except that hydrants may be used by firemen in the discharge of their duties. No person shall in any manner place obstructions in the way of readily operating any valve, hydrant, waterpost, stop-cock or other fixture or appurtenance of the waterworks. 
(Code 1963, § 12-28) 
Cross reference— Graffiti and damage to public property, § 9-47.  
Sec. 11-122. - Damaging water meters. 
No person shall injure any water meter, or disconnect it from the service pipe, or open its bypass valve, or break its seal, or interfere with its registering device, or tamper with it in any way, or obstruct it with any material. 
(Code 1963, § 12-29) 
Cross reference— Graffiti and damage to public property, § 9-47.  
Sec. 11-123. - Waste or unlawful use of water. 
No person shall waste, or use unlawfully the water furnished by the city. 
(Code 1963, § 12-30)  
Sec. 11-124. - Rules and regulations of superintendent of water. 
No person shall violate any rule or regulation of the superintendent of waterworks. 
(Code 1963, § 12-31)  
Sec. 11-125. - Water rates and base charges. 
(a)  Established. Water rates and base charges for water use shall be established by the superintendent of the water and sewer department, subject to the approval of the mayor and city council. Prior to setting the water rates and base charges, the superintendent shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed rates and charges no later than May 15 of any given year with notice of any new rates or charges provided to the city council at least 14 days prior to the public hearing. Any proposed new rates and charges shall be provided to the city council on or before June 1 for its review and approval. Rates set may be adjusted, subsequent to initial approval by the superintendent with the approval of the mayor and city council, without the necessity of a public hearing, to reflect any changes in any charge assessed to the city by any governmental body or agency of the commonwealth. If any such adjustment results in a lower rate than previously set, the new rate shall take effect immediately upon approval by the mayor and city council. If such adjusted rate is higher than otherwise set, the new rate shall take effect no sooner than 30 days after approval by the mayor and city council. Failure to hold a public hearing or provide the proposed rates and charges to the board for its review on or before June 1 as required above shall prohibit the city from increasing rates and charges. 
(b)  Method of assessment. Rates shall be established based upon a uniform rate per 100 cubic feet of water consumed. Said assessments shall be made pursuant to readings obtained from metering devices approved by the commissioner. Where water consumption data is not available, bills for water use shall be based upon estimated consumption, as determined by the commissioner. 
(c)  Payment. Bills for water use shall be rendered a minimum of two per year and a maximum of six per year for commercial and four per year for residential and are due and payable within 45 days. Interest shall accrue on bills not paid within 45 days of the date of mailing at the rate established by Section 57 of Chapter 59 of the General Laws. 
(d)  Appeals. Persons aggrieved of bills rendered pursuant to subsection (c) of this section shall have the following rights of appeal: 
(1)  Notification. Within the time frame allowed for payment of said bill, the aggrieved party shall notify the commissioner that said bill is contested. The notification shall include an explanation as to why the bill is contested, and should provide the commissioner with such information as is necessary to determine the validity of the claim. The commissioner may prescribe such forms as are necessary to expedite this process. 
(2)  Resolution. Upon receipt of an appeal, the commissioner shall act upon same as quickly as possible and shall inform the claimant in writing of the results of the investigations. The determination of the commissioner shall also be transmitted to the treasurer who shall take the following action: 
a.  For first claims and claims found to be valid, the date of billing shall be revised to the date of the commissioner's determinations. Revised charges shall then be due and payable as is specified in subsection (c) of this section. 
b.  For second and subsequent claims found to be invalid, the date of billing shall be as originally issued, and charges and interest shall be computed as specified in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Increases restricted. The superintendent of the water division shall prepare and submit to the city council on or before April 1, 1984, a plan for the installation of water meters in each residence, business, industrial or other location where no meter currently exists. Said plan shall provide for the complete metering of water services in the city by December 31, 1986. The superintendent of the water division shall submit to the city council on or before December 8 in each year of the installation period a statement, signed under the penalties of perjury, that not less than one-third of the total number of unmetered services existing on December 8, 1984 have been installed during such year. If the total number of water meters out of service in any year next succeeding the end of the installation period on December 31, 1986 exceeds 500 meters, then no water rate increase shall be authorized or approved under subsection (a) or (b) of this section without additional approval of the city council. 
(f)  Residents who own and occupy their homes and qualify for the exemptions contained in G.L. c. 59, § 5, clause 41C, or G.L. c. 59, § 5, clause 17D, are eligible for a 25 percent discount on water/sewer bills issued after July 1, 2016. 
(Code 1963, §§ 16-1—16-4; Ord. No. 1990-8, 6-28-90; Ord. No. 2016-15 , 10-23-2016; Ord. No. 2016-16 , 10-13-2016; Ord. No. 2019-08 , 4-25-2019) 
State Law reference— Collection of water rates, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 43A et seq.  
Sec. 11-126. - Natural gas leaks. 
In the interest of improving the management of city infrastructure, each gas company that owns or operates natural gas transportation or storage infrastructure within the city shall, within 120 days of passage of this ordinance and at least annually thereafter, provide the following to city department of public works: 
(a)  Any plan to address aging or leaking natural gas infrastructure that the gas company provided to the department of public utilities within the prior year under section 145(b) of chapter 164 of the General Laws of the Commonwealth; 
(b)  Any report identifying Grade 1, Grade 2, and Grade 3 leaks located within the city that the gas company provided to the department of public utilities within the prior year as required by section 11 of chapter 164 of the General Laws of the Commonwealth; 
(c)  Notice of the scheduled start of any planned natural gas repair or replacement activities within the city; 
(d)  Any information or documents that the gas company provided to the department of public utilities within the prior year regarding Grade 3 natural gas leaks identified as having a significant environmental impact and located within the city; and 
(e)  Any information or documents that the gas company provided to the department of public utilities within the prior year related to the volume of, or the greenhouse gas emissions associated with, any individual gas leak or grouping of gas leaks located within the city. 
( Ord. No. 2018-22 , 12-13-2018)  
Secs. 11-127—11-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DIVISION OF ENGINEERING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Established, § 40C; city engineer to control, § 40D. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 12. 
 
Sec. 11-141. - City engineer duties. 
(a)  Generally. The city engineer shall make such surveys, plans, estimates and descriptions, and he or she shall perform all other such services, and impart such information concerning any department of the city's affairs, properly relating to the office of the city engineer, as may be required of him or her by the mayor, the city council or any committee thereof, or any board of officers of the city. He or she shall be consulted in relation to public improvements of every kind when the advice of a civil engineer would be of service. 
(b)  Descriptions of certain lands. The city engineer shall furnish to the city treasurer and collector of taxes, whenever requested, an accurate description in writing of the locations and boundaries of all lands which may become liable to sale for nonpayment of sewer, sidewalk or other betterment assessments. 
(c)  Custodian of all plans. The city engineer shall have the charge of all plans of every kind, not especially belonging to other departments, and shall keep the same properly classified and indexed and he or she may make such rules concerning the taking of plans from his or her office as he or she may deem necessary to ensure their safety. 
(d)  Information on streets. The city engineer shall give to all applicants, so far as the files and records of his or her office will permit, any information they may desire as to the lines and grades of streets on which their estates are situated, or upon which they intend to build and all information of this character furnished to owners of estates, or persons representing them or to those intending to build, shall be without charge. 
(e)  Annual report. The city engineer shall annually, in the month of January, present to the city council a report in relation to his or her division, showing the number of persons employed, the detailed expenses of the department, the general nature of the work, the property under his or her charge, the condition of all structures under his or her supervision that are in process of construction or that have been completed during the previous year, and such other general information in relation to the same as he or she may deem expedient. 
(Code 1963, §§ 8-23—8-27) 
Cross reference— Sewer specifications, § 11-157; plans of sewers and drains, § 11-159.  
Sec. 11-142. - Pipes, sewer, conduit, poles or other structures on, above, or under streets. 
(a)  No gas pipe, sewer, conduit, street railway tract, pole, or any other structure, except wires, whether belonging to the city or to any individual or corporation, shall be placed upon, beneath or above any street, unless a plan showing the proposed location thereof shall have first been deposited with the city engineer, and such location approved by him or her or authorized by the city council. Upon the completion of work approved or authorized as aforesaid a final plan shall be filed with the city engineer, showing the accurate location and manner of construction. 
(b)  Any person violating the foregoing provision shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with section 1-11 and shall remove such structure if required so to do by the city engineer, or the city engineer may cause the same to be removed. 
(Code 1963, § 12-1) 
Cross reference— Blocking sidewalks, § 12-5; trash and rubbish on streets and sidewalks, § 12-12; signs, awnings, outdoor seating and other items on or over streets and sidewalks, § 12-14; signs over streets and sidewalks, § 12-15; awnings over streets and sidewalks, § 12-16; posts and supports on streets and sidewalks, § 12-17.  
Sec. 11-143. - Excavating streets and other public places. 
(a)  Street opening permit. No person, except one authorized to do so as an employee of the city, shall dig up any street or other public place unless said person first obtains a written permit therefore from the commissioner of public works or the city engineer, and unless such permit is at all times in the possession of some person actually engaged in or supervising such digging, which permit shall be exhibited to any police officer of the city whenever said officer shall demand to see the same. Such permits for the purpose of laying or repairing drains shall be issued by the city engineer, and for all other purposes by the commissioner of public works, who shall grant such permits subject to the conditions set forth below and on such further terms as they may deem expedient. 
(b)  Notification requirement. No permit to allow the excavation of a public way shall be issued by the commissioner of public works or the city engineer until the following notification requirements have been provided by the applicant for said street opening permit. 
(1)  Written notice to abutting property owners and residents. The applicant must give written notification of its "street opening permit" application to abutters within 300 feet of the location in which the opening is proposed. The notification must be mailed by certified mail with return receipt at least seven days before the street opening permit is issued and must contain a description of the work to be performed, start date, contact personnel with telephone number and expected length of project. 
(2)  Posting the application. 
a.  The applicant is responsible for ensuring that notice of proposed street opening is posted continuously in a publicly visible place at the location for at least seven days prior to the issuance of the street opening permit. Such notice shall be on a form prepared by public works department. 
b.  The applicant, through the city clerk's office, shall post notice of the proposed street opening in city hall for at least seven days prior to the issuance of the street opening permit. 
(3)  Affidavit of compliance. An affidavit of compliance with the notice and posting requirements of this section including copies of certified mail return receipts must be submitted to the commissioner of public works or the city engineer before the street opening permit may be issued. 
(c)  Emergency street opening. The above notification requirements may be waived by the commissioner of public works or the city engineer in the event of an emergency street opening. An "emergency" shall exist only when the public health and safety is threatened as determined by the commissioner of public works or city engineer. A written notice of emergency shall be made to commissioner of public works or city engineer. 
(Code 1963, § 12-25; Ord. No. 2001-20, 12-13-2001) 
Charter reference— Security required for excavations of streets and sidewalks, § 42. 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 8; safety requirements for excavations or other obstructions, § 11-26; security bond for excavations or other obstructions, § 11-27.  
Sec. 11-144. - Openings in streets. 
(a)  No person shall make or maintain, or allow to be made or maintained, any vault, coal-hole or other opening in or under a street without permission from the city council. 
(b)  The opening of a coal-hole shall be circular and not more than 18 inches in diameter and furnished with a cover of iron having a rough upper surface. Such cover shall be kept securely fastened at all times when the coal-hole is not used, and shall be supplied with iron rods at least two feet in length fitting closely to the side of the opening and projecting downwards, so that the cover can be lifted perpendicularly, but cannot be tipped or easily removed from the opening, or shall be provided with such other safety device as the commissioner of public works shall require. 
(c)  The location, size, shape, and manner of construction of such vault, coal-hole, or other opening, and the material to be used therefor, shall be stated in such permission, or if not so stated, shall be subject to the approval in writing of the commissioner of public works. 
(Code 1963, § 11-6)  
Sec. 11-145. - Stormwater runoff. 
On any lot in the City of Somerville, no impervious area shall be constructed, expanded or altered such that it generates an increase in stormwater runoff onto adjacent lots or any public or private right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 4-12-2012)  
Secs. 11-146—11-155. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SEWERS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Health, Ch. 6; opening and repairing drains and sewers, sidewalk repair, § 8-41 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate sewers, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 21(5)(6); sewers, drains and sidewalks, M.G.L.A. c. 83. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 11-156. - Common sewers. 
Every sewer of drain laid in any land, or street, or way, public or private, opened or proposed to be opened for public travel and accommodation, for the purpose of draining more than one lot or building, shall be deemed to be a common sewer and no such common sewer shall be laid or shall be connected with any existing common sewer except by the city. 
(Code 1963, § 8-29) 
Cross reference— City engineer duties, § 11-141.  
Sec. 11-157. - Sewer specifications. 
Main drains or common sewers, which shall be ordered by the city council to be made, shall be laid in such places and manner and shall be made of such materials and dimensions as the city engineer shall determine, unless the city council shall otherwise specially direct. 
(Code 1963, § 8-29) 
Cross reference— City engineer duties, § 11-141.  
Sec. 11-158. - Drain specifications. 
Every drain which enters into any common sewer shall be built of such size and materials, in such place and direction, at such grade, and in such manner as shall be satisfactory to the city engineer, and with a due observance of all regulations of the board of health, so far as applicable thereto. 
(Code 1963, § 8-30)  
Sec. 11-159. - Plans of sewers and drains. 
The city engineer shall make accurate plans of all main drains and common sewers, showing their location, depth, and the materials of which they are made, and their size, shape, thickness, and manner of construction; also all existing connections with said sewers and all future connections as they are made. 
(Code 1963, § 8-31) 
Cross reference— City engineer duties, § 11-141. 
State Law reference— Provision authorized, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 21(5).  
Sec. 11-160. - Catch basin locations. 
The location of all catch basins shall be under the direction of the city engineer. 
(Code 1963, § 8-32)  
Sec. 11-161. - Report of drain and sewer costs. 
The city engineer shall keep an accurate account of the cost of each main drain or common sewer constructed, and make report thereof to the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 8-33)  
Sec. 11-162. - Sewer assessments. 
(a)  The city council shall make assessments for all main drains or common sewers heretofore constructed or reconstructed by the city, the expenses of which have not already been assessed and collected, in the same manner as for those which may hereafter be constructed; and the city engineer shall render all the services and perform all the duties in regard to the main drains or common sewers heretofore constructed the expenses of which have not already been assessed and collected, which he or she is required to render and perform in regard to those hereafter to be constructed. 
(b)  The city council shall deliver a list of such assessments, when made, to the collector of taxes, for collection. 
(Code 1963, §§ 8-34, 8-36) 
State Law reference— Sewer assessments, M.G.L.A. c. 83, §§ 14-24.  
Sec. 11-163. - Exemptions for sewer assessments. 
No estate, to the owner of which permission has been or may be given to construct private drains for such estate, shall by reason of the construction of such private drains be exempt from any assessment lawfully imposed for constructing common sewers in its vicinity. 
(Code 1963, § 12-35)  
Sec. 11-164. - Sewer user charges. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the same meaning as set forth below: 
The Act means the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq., as amended). 
Replacement means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement. 
User charge means a charge levied on users of the treatment works for the cost of operation of said works in accordance with Section 204(b) of the Act. 
(b)  User charges. 
(1)  Established. Charges for sewer service shall be established by the superintendent of the water and sewer department, subject to the approval of the mayor and city council. Prior to setting the new sewer service charge, the water and sewer superintendent shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed charge no later than May 15 of any given year with notice of any new charges provided to the city council at least 14 days prior to the public hearing. Any proposed new charges shall be provided to the city council on or before June 1 of any given year for its review and approval. 
Charges may be adjusted, subsequent to initial approval by the superintendent, with the approval of the mayor and city council, without the necessity of a public hearing, to reflect any changes in any charge assessed to the city by any governmental body or agency of the commonwealth. If any such adjustment results in a lower charge than previously set, the new charge shall take effect immediately upon approval by the mayor and city council. If such adjusted charge is higher than otherwise set, the new charge shall take effect no sooner than 30 days after approval by the mayor and city council. Failure to hold a public hearing or provide the proposed charges to the board for its review on or before June 1 as required above shall prohibit the city from increasing charges. 
(2)  Method of assessment. Rates shall be established based upon a uniform rate per 100 cubic feet of water consumed. At a user's option and expense, assessments may be made on continuously metered sewage flow, or upon water sales to activities resulting in a discharge to the sewer. Said assessments shall be made pursuant to readings obtained from metering devices approved by the commissioner. For users whose bill is based upon metered sewage, the rate shall be 1.11 times the rate established for those whose bill is based upon metered water. Where water consumption data is not available, bills for sewer services shall be based upon estimated consumption, as determined by the commissioner. 
(3)  Payment. Bills for sewer service shall be rendered a minimum of two per year and a maximum of six per year for commercial and four per year for residential and are due and payable within 45 days. Interest shall accrue on bills not paid within 45 days from the date of mailing at the rate established by Section 57 of Chapter 93 of the General Laws. 
(c)  Appeals. Persons aggrieved of bills rendered pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall have the following rights of appeal: 
(1)  Notification. Within the time frame allowed for payment of said bills, the aggrieved party shall notify the commissioner that said bill is contested. The notification shall include an explanation as to why the bill is contested, and should provide the commissioner with such information as is necessary to determine the validity of the claim. The commissioner may prescribe such forms as are necessary to expedite this process. 
(2)  Resolution. Upon receipt of an appeal, the commissioner shall act upon same as quickly as possible and shall inform the claimant in writing of the result of the investigations. The determination of the commissioner shall also be transmitted to the treasurer who shall take the following action: 
a.  For first claims and claims found to be valid, the date of billing shall be revised to the date of the commissioner's determinations. Revised charges shall then be due and payable as is specified in subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
b.  For second and subsequent claims found to be invalid, the date of billing shall be as originally issued, and charges and interest shall be computed as specified in subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(d)  Tax liens of overdue charges. Charges for sewer use which are overdue and uncontested shall become a tax lien as is provided in Sections 16A through 16F of Chapter 83 of the General Laws. 
(e)  Increases restricted. The superintendent of the water division shall prepare and submit to the city council on or before April 1, 1984, a plan for the installation of water meters in each residence, business, industrial or other location where no meter currently exists. Said plan shall provide for the complete metering of water services in the city by December 31, 1986. The superintendent of the water division shall submit to the city council on or before December 8 in each year of the installation period, a statement, signed under the penalties of perjury, that not less than one-third of the total number of unmetered services existing on December 8, 1984, have been installed during such year. If the total number of water meters out of service in any year next succeeding the end of the installation period on December 31, 1986, exceeds 500 meters, then no sewer rate increase shall be authorized or approved under subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section, without additional approval of the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 8-35; Ord. No. 2016-15 , 10-23-2016; Ord. No. 2019-08 , 4-25-2019) 
State Law reference— Apportionment of betterments, M.G.L.A. c. 80, § 13; charges for use of sewers, M.G.L.A. c. 83, § 16.  
Sec. 11-165. - Roof water, surface water and other drainage. 
(a)  All roof water, surface water, and other drainage matter, except sewage, shall, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be excluded from the main drains and common sewers which shall have been provided for conducting away sewage from buildings in the following districts: 
(1)  The territory the drainage of which is to be discharged into the sewers of the City of Medford and conducted through the same into the metropolitan sewer; 
(2)  The territory the drainage of which is to be discharged into the metropolitan sewer through a sewer in this city of which the City of Medford, for a certain district within its territory has the use in common with this city; 
(3)  The territory the sewage of which is to be discharged into the sewers in the City of Cambridge and conducted through the same into the metropolitan sewer; 
(4)  The territory west of Curtis Street, the drainage of which is to be discharged into the metropolitan sewer; 
(5)  The territory situated south and west of a line drawn from a point in the boundary line of the City of Boston, 100 feet north of Washington Street, and running westerly parallel with and 100 feet northerly from said Washington Street, Somerville Avenue and Elm Street, to Cutter Square, so far as there shall have been provided therein a system of sewerage for conducting away sewage only. 
(6)  All other portions of the city for which there shall have been provided a system of sewers for conducting away sewage only. 
(b)  The city engineer may, with the approval of the mayor, whenever in the judgment of the city engineer the exigencies of the case so require, give notice to the owner or agent of any premises situated in any part of the city so to change the drainage system thereof, within a reasonable time, specified in such notice, that no roof water, surface water or other drainage matter, except sewage, shall flow from said premises, directly or indirectly, into any public sewer which is used for conducting house drainage into the metropolitan sewerage systems; and such owner or agent shall, within the time specified in such notice, make such changes in said drainage system as may be necessary to comply with such notice. No person shall cause or allow such roof water, surface water, or other drainage matter to enter, directly or indirectly, any public sewer, in violation of the foregoing provisions of this section. 
(c)  Any conductor pipe or drain, maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this section, whether in an existing building or one hereafter erected, shall forthwith be changed so as to conform thereto, and may, by order of the city council, or by order of the city engineer when in his or her judgment immediate action is required, be cut off and disconnected or otherwise disposed of until such provisions are complied with in a manner satisfactory to him or her. 
(d)  The city engineer, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, shall not grant a permit to enter any drain or sewer into any such main drain or common sewer, or into any other drain or sewer which connects, immediately or ultimately, with any such main drain or common sewer, unless it shall appear to his or her satisfaction that such drain or sewer, for which such permit to enter is required, and will not conduct any roof water, surface water, or other drainage matter, in violation of the provisions of this section. Before any such permit is granted, he or she may require to be cut off or disconnected or may himself or herself cut off or disconnect from the drain or sewer for which such permit to enter is required, any drain or sewer which does not conform to the provisions of this section. 
(e)  The city engineer may in special cases for good cause shown, and subject to the approval of the mayor, grant written permission to enter any drain or sewer contrary to the provisions of this section for such length of time and upon such condition as he or she may deem advisable. 
(Code 1963, §§ 8-37—8-40)  
Sec. 11-166. - Drain or sewer work. 
No person shall cut into, interfere with or obstruct a main drain or common sewer, or shall enter, or attempt to enter, a private or other drain or sewer therein, or into any private drain connecting with any main drain or common sewer, except in accordance with a permit in writing from the city engineer. 
(Code 1963, § 12-32) 
Cross reference— Opening and repairing drains and sewers, sidewalk repair, § 8-41 et seq.  
Sec. 11-167. - Interference with sewers. 
(a)  No water pipe, gas pipe or other structure shall be so laid in a street as to obstruct or interfere with a common sewer or the maintenance thereof. 
(b)  If any water pipe, gas pipe or other structure interferes with or obstructs any existing common sewer or the maintenance thereof, or the construction or maintenance of any common sewer which the city council may hereafter order to make, the department of the city, corporation or person maintaining the same shall, upon notice from the city engineer, at once remove or change such pipe or other structure in such manner as he or she may direct, and upon failure so to do he or she may make such removal or change, and the cost thereof shall be paid by such department, corporation or person to the city. 
(Code 1963, § 12-33)  
Sec. 11-168. - Drain layers and work on sewers. 
No one shall employ any person other than a licensed drain layer to perform any work opening into a common sewer for the purpose of connecting a drain therewith, and the repairs of every drain laid from any house, building, cellar or land to such common sewer, and every opening into such drain, and all openings and excavations in any street for the purpose of constructing or repairing any private drain. 
(Code 1963, § 12-34) 
Cross reference— Opening and repairing drains and sewers, sidewalk repair § 8-41 et seq.  
Sec. 11-169. - Drains subject to tidewater. 
No drain connecting with a common sewer subject to the action of tidewater shall be constructed without a plug or clapper sufficient to prevent completely the reflux of drainage matter, storm or tidewater. 
(Code 1963, § 12-36)  
Sec. 11-170. - Substances prohibited from sewers. 
No exhaust from a steam engine and no blowoff from a steam boiler shall be connected with any common sewer or private drain. No gasoline or other explosive or inflammable substance shall be caused or allowed to enter directly or indirectly any common sewer or private drain. 
(Code 1963, § 12-37)  
DIVISION 2. - INFILTRATION AND INFLOW MITIGATION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-07, adopted May 10, 2018, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 11-181 and 11-182. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as §§ 11-171 and 11-172. 
 
Sec. 11-171. - Definitions. 
Whenever used in this division, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context requires otherwise. 
Infiltration. Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system (including sewer service connections and foundation drains) from the ground through means which include, but are not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manholes. Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished from inflow. 
Infiltration/inflow. The quantity of water from both infiltration and inflow without distinguishing the source. 
Inflow. Water other than sanitary flow that enters a sewer system (including sewer service connections) from sources which include, but are not limited to, roof leaders, cellar drains, yard drains, area drains, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections between storm sewers and sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, storm waters, surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage. Inflow does not include, and is distinguished from infiltration. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07 , 5-10-2018)  
Sec. 11-172. - Infiltration and inflow mitigation. 
Any person or entity changing, altering, repairing, adding to or improving property in any way that may impact the City of Somerville sewer system, or any person or entity proposing to add additional wastewater to an existing sewer connection, or any person or entity establishing a new connection to the city's common sewer system shall be required to mitigate infiltration/inflow entering the city's common sewer system. Said person or entity shall be subject to payment of a fee established by the city engineer to mitigate infiltration/inflow. In the alternative, subject to approval of both the city engineer and city council, said person or entity may complete repairs, alterations or improvements to the city's main drain and common sewer system to eliminate infiltration/inflow in accordance with plans and calculations approved by the city engineer. Such calculations shall include an administrative and oversight fee payable to the city in connection with the work to be performed. In the event a connection is subject to conditions issued by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection, the Massachusetts Environmental Policy Act Unit or the Massachusetts Water Resources Authority as part of a state or regional permitting process requiring the removal of infiltration/inflow prior to connection, said removal of infiltration/inflow shall be credited toward complying with the requirements of this ordinance. 
The mitigation requirements, fee schedule and methodology for calculating mitigation and fees, shall be determined and published by the city engineer, and may be revised from time to time. The city engineer shall provide the city council with the mitigation requirements, fee schedule and methodology for calculating mitigation and fees on or before January 1 of each year, and whenever the fee schedule and/or methodologies are revised. The city engineer shall adopt rules and regulations setting forth the mitigation requirements, fee schedule and methodology for calculating mitigation and fees. The mitigation requirements may include a de minimis exemption for minor work performed, at the discretion of the city engineer in consultation with the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07 , 5-10-2018)  
Secs. 11-173—11-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1991-5, adopted Feb. 14, 1991, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1.1—1.11 and the addendum as Ch. 11, Art. VIII, §§ 11-181—11-192, was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 11-181. - Cross connections in water supply. 
The purpose of this article is: 
(1)  To protect the public potable water supply served by the city department of public works/water department from the possibility of contamination or pollutants which could backflow or backsiphon into the public water system. 
(2)  To promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between its customers in-plant potable water system, and nonpotable systems. 
(3)  To provide for maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control which will effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems by cross connections. 
(Ord. No. 1991-5, § 1.1, 2-14-91)  
Sec. 11-182. - Authority of water superintendent. 
(a)  As provided in the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974 (Public Law 93-523), and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Drinking Water Regulations, 310 CMR 22.22, the water purveyor has the primary responsibility for preventing water from unapproved sources or any other substances from entering the public potable water system. 
(b)  As provided in this Code of Ordinances, section 11-124, violation of the superintendent's rules is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1991-5, § 1.2, 2-14-91)  
Sec. 11-183. - Protection of potable water supply. 
The water department or its designated agent shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow or backsiphonage of contaminants or pollutants. If, as a result of a survey of the premises, the department or its designated agent determines that an approved backflow prevention device is required at the city's water service connection or impact protection on any customer's premises, the department, or its designated agent, shall issue a cross connection violation form to the customer to install approved backflow devices. The customer shall, within a time frame determined by the department, install such approved device or devices at his/her own expense; and failure or refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install said device or devices within the specified time frame shall constitute a ground for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices have been properly installed. 
(Ord. No. 1991-5, § 1.3, 2-14-91)  
Sec. 11-184. - Definitions. 
(a)  Air gap separation shall mean the method of preventing backflow through the use of an unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the receptacle. 
(b)  Approved shall mean accepted by the reviewing authority as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this regulation or as suitable for the proposed use. 
(c)  Approved backflow prevention device or devices shall mean a method to prevent backflow approved by the D.E.P. for use in the state. 
(d)  Atmospheric vacuum breaker shall mean an approved backflow device used to prevent backsiphonage which is not designed for use under static line pressure. 
(e)  Auxiliary water supply shall mean any water supply of unknown or questionable quality on or available to the premises other than the supplier's approved public potable water supply. 
(f)  Back pressure shall mean pressure created by mechanical means or other means which causes water or other liquids or substances to flow or move in a direction opposite to that which is intended. 
(g)  Backsiphonage shall mean a form of backflow due to reduced or subatmospheric pressure within a water system. 
(h)  Backflow shall mean the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from any source other than the intended source. 
(i)  Backflow preventer with intermediate atmospheric vent shall mean a device having two independently operating check valves separated by an intermediate chamber with a means for automatically venting it into the atmosphere, in which the check valves are forces loaded to a normally closed position and the venting means is a force loaded to a normally open position. 
(j)  Barometric loop shall mean a loop of pipe rising at least 35 feet, at its topmost point, above the highest fixture it supplies. 
(k)  Contaminant shall mean any physical, chemical, biological or radiological substance or matter in water. 
(l)  Cross connection shall mean any actual or potential connection between a distribution pipe of potable water from a public waste system and any waste pipe, soil pipe, sewer, drain, or other unapproved source. 
(m)  Cross connection violation form shall mean a violation form designated by the D.E.P., which is sent to the owner by the water supplier with copies sent to the D.E.P., plumbing inspectors and board of health delineating cross connection violations found on the owner's premises and a procedure for corrective action. 
(n)  Department shall mean the City of Somerville Water Division. 
(o)  Designated agent shall mean any individual approved by the department who holds a current certificate as a backflow prevention device tester from the commonwealth. 
(p)  D.E.P. shall mean the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection. 
(q)  Double check valve assembly shall mean a backflow prevention device which incorporates an assembly of check valves, with shut-off valves at each end and appurtenances for testing. 
(r)  In-plant protection shall mean the location of approved backflow prevention devices in a manner which proves simultaneous protection of the public water system and the potable water system within the premises. 
(s)  Owner shall mean any person maintaining a cross connection installation or owning or occupying premises on which cross connections can or do exist. 
(t)  Permit shall mean a document issued by the D.E.P. which allows a cross connection installation. 
(u)  Person shall mean any individual, corporation, company, association, trust, partnership, the commonwealth, a municipality, district, or other subdivision or instrumentality of the United States, except that nothing herein shall be constructed to refer to or to include any American Indian tribe or the United States Secretary of the Interior in his or her capacity as trustee of Indian lands. 
(v)  Pressure vacuum breaker shall mean an approved backflow prevention device designed to prevent only backsiphonage and which is designed for use under static line pressure and which has necessary appurtenances for testing. 
(w)  Reduced pressure backflow preventer shall mean an approved backflow prevention device incorporating (1) two more check valves, (2) an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two checks, (3) two shut-off valves, and (4) necessary appurtenances for testing. 
(x)  Residential dual check shall mean an assembly of two spring-loaded, independently operated check valves without tightly closing shut-off valves and test clocks; generally employed immediately downstream of the water meter to act as a contaminant device. 
(y)  Reviewing authority shall mean the D.E.P., its designee, or the local plumbing inspector, authorized by Chapter 142 of the General Laws and licensed by the board of state examiners of plumbers and gas fitters, whichever is responsible for the review and approval of the installation of an approved backflow prevention device. 
(Ord. No. 1991-5, § 1.4, 2-14-91)  
Sec. 11-185. - Cross connection inspections. 
(a)  The department will operate an active cross connection control program, to include the keeping of necessary records, which fulfills the requirements of the state D.E.P.'s cross connection regulations and is approved by the D.E.P. 
(b)  The owner shall allow his or her property to be inspected for possible cross connections and shall follow the provisions of the department's program and the D.E.P. regulations, and failure or refusal or inability on the part of the owner to allow such inspections shall constitute a ground for discontinuing water service to the premises until such inspections have been performed. 
(Ord. No. 1991-5, § 1.5, 2-14-91)  
Sec. 11-186. - Cross connection responsibilities. 
(a)  Water department: 
(1)  On new installations, the department, or its designated agent, will provide on-site evaluation and/or inspection of plans in order to determine the type of backflow preventer, if any, that will be required, and notify the owner of the plan approval requirements by the appropriate reviewing authority. 
(2)  For premises existing prior to the start of this program, the department, or its designated agent, will perform surveys of the premises and reviews of as-built plans and issue a cross connection violation form to the owner detailing any corrective action required, the method of achieving the correction, and the time allowed for the correction to be made. The time period allowed shall depend upon the degree of hazard involved. 
(3)  The department will not allow any cross connection to remain unless it is protected by an approved backflow preventer for which a permit has been issued and which will be regularly tested to ensure satisfactory operation. 
(4)  If the department [determines] at any time that a serious threat to the public health exists, the water service will be terminated immediately. 
(5)  The department shall have on its staff, or shall have a designated agent, who is a backflow prevention device tester certified by the commonwealth. 
(6)  The department, or its designated agent, will begin initial premises inspections to determine the nature of existing or potential hazards, following the approval of this program by the D.E.P., during calendar year 1990. Initial focus will be on high-hazard industries and commercial premises. 
(b)  Owner: 
(1)  The owner shall be responsible for the elimination or protection of all cross connections on his or her premises. 
(2)  The owner shall be responsible for applying for and obtaining all necessary approvals and permits for the cross connections and installation of backflow prevention devices, and applying annually for the renewal of each permit. 
(3)  The owner shall have any device that fails an inspection or test repaired or replaced by a licensed plumber. 
(4)  The owner shall inform the department of any proposed or modified cross connection, also any existing cross connections which the owner is aware of but have not been found by the department, or its designee. 
(5)  The owner shall not install a bypass around any backflow preventer unless there is a backflow preventer of the same type on the bypass. Owners who cannot shut down operation for testing of the device(s) must supply additional devices necessary for testing to take place. 
(6)  The owner shall install backflow preventers in a manner approved by the D.E.P. and by the department. 
(7)  The owner shall install only reduced pressure backflow preventers and double check valve assemblies approved by the state D.E.P. 
(8)  Any owner of industrial, commercial or institutional premises having a private well or other private water source must have a permit if the well or source is cross connected to the department's system. Permission to cross connect may be denied by the department. The owner may be required to install a backflow preventer at the service entrance if private water source is maintained even if it is not cross connected to the department's system. 
(9)  The owner of any residential premises having a private well or other private water source will not be allowed a physical connection with the public water supply system. 
(10)  The owner shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for surveys, permits, device testings, retesting in the case that the device fails to operate correctly, and second reinspections for noncompliance with department or D.E.P. requirements. 
(11)  The owner shall be responsible for providing labor on the premises necessary to allow inspections and testing of devices by the department or its designated agent. 
(12)  The owner shall be responsible for having spare parts and repair tools for the backflow devices on the premises at all times. If the backflow device is not able to be repaired, the owner is responsible for supplying a replacement device. 
(Ord. No. 1991-5, § 1.6, 2-14-91)  
Sec. 11-187. - Contaminant devices. 
The department recognizes the threat to the public water system arising from the cross connections. As such, the department, whereas it is responsible for the quality of the public water supply, may require a contaminant device on the water service entrance to any customer who, as a result of unprotected cross connections, could contaminate the public water supply system. 
(Ord. No. 1991-5, § 1.7, 2-14-91)  
Sec. 11-188. - Enforcement. 
The department shall not allow a cross connection to exist with the public water supply system unless it is considered necessary and all appropriate approvals and permits have been issued. 
(Ord. No. 1991-5, § 1-8, 2-14-91)  
Sec. 11-189. - Backflow preventers. 
Any existing backflow preventer shall be allowed by the department to continue in service unless the degree of hazard is such as to supersede the effectiveness of the present backflow preventer or as result in an unreasonable risk to the public health. Where the degree of hazard has increased, as in the case of a residential installation converting to a business establishment, any existing backflow preventer or reduced pressure backflow preventer must be installed in the event that no backflow device was present. 
(Ord. No. 1991-5, § 1.9, 2-14-91)  
Sec. 11-190. - Backflow preventer tests and inspections. 
(a)  Reduced pressure backflow preventers and double check valve assemblies shall be tested and inspected at least semiannually by the department, or its designated agent. 
(b)  Periodic testing shall be performed by the department's certified tester or his or her designated agent, who shall be a certified tester. 
(c)  The testing shall be conducted during the department's regular business hours. Exceptions to this, when at the request of the owner, may require additional charges to cover the increased costs to the department, or its designated agent. 
(d)  Reduced pressure backflow preventers and double check valve assemblies must be tested annually by the owner, independent of the semiannual test by the water supplier; and said test must be conducted by a certified tester. 
(e)  Any backflow preventer which fails during a periodic test must be repaired or replaced by a licensed plumber. When repairs are necessary, upon completion of the repair, the device will be tested at the owner's expense to ensure proper operation. High-hazard situations will not be allowed to continue unprotected if the backflow preventer fails the test and cannot be repaired immediately. In other situations, a compliance date of not more than 14 days after the test date will be established. The owner is responsible for spare parts, repair tools, or a replacement device. Parallel installation of two devices is an effective means of the owner ensuring that the uninterrupted water service remains during testing or repair of devices and is strongly recommended when the owner desires such continuity. 
(f)  Backflow prevention devices will be tested more frequently than specified previously in subsection (a) of this section in cases where there is a history of test failures and the department feels that due to the degree of hazard involved, additional testing is warranted. Cost of the additional tests will be borne by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 1991-5, § 1.10, 2-14-91)  
Sec. 11-191. - Records and reports. 
(a)  Records: The department will initiate and maintain the following: 
(1)  Master files on customers' cross connection tests and/or inspections. 
(2)  Master files on approved cross connection installations. 
(3)  Copies of lists and summaries supplied to the D.E.P. 
(b)  Reports: The department will submit the following to the D.E.P.: 
(1)  Initial listing of high-hazard cross connections. 
(2)  Initial listing of low-hazard cross connections. 
(3)  Annual update lists of items (1) and (2) above. 
(4)  Annual summary of cross connection inspections and surveys. 
(Ord. No. 1991-5, § 1.11, 2-14-91)  
Sec. 11-192. - Dual check devices and double check valves. 
(a)  Residential dual check: 
(1)  Effective as of the date of acceptance of the cross connection control program for the city, all new residential buildings will be required to install a residential dual check device immediately downstream of the water meter. Installation of this dual check device on a retrofit basis on existing service lines will be instituted at the time and at a potential cost to the homeowner as deemed necessary by the department. 
(2)  The owner must be aware that installation of a residential dual check valve results in a potential closed plumbing system within his or her residence. As such, provisions may have to be made by the owner to provide for thermal expansion devices and/or pressure relief valves. 
(b)  Strainers: The department strongly recommends that all new and retrofit installations of reduced pressure backflow preventers and double check valve assemblies include the installation of strainers located immediately upstream of the backflow device. The installation of strainers will preclude the fouling of backflow devices due to both foreseen and unforeseen circumstances occurring to the water supply system such as water main repairs, water main breaks, fires, periodic cleaning and flushing of mains, etc. These occurrences may stir up debris within the water main that will cause fouling of backflow devices installed without the benefit of strainers. 
(Ord. No. 1991-5, Addendum, 2-14-91)  
Chapter 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Tables listing the location, length and width of public and private streets and tables listing the former names of certain streets in the City of Somerville are listed in Appendix C. 
Charter reference— Power of city council to lay out, locate, alter, etc., streets, § 17(3); department of public works, § 40; powers and duties of commissioner of public works, § 40A; security required for excavation of streets and sidewalks, § 42. 
Cross reference— Emergency management, Ch. 4; burning in public places, § 5-1; housing, Ch. 7; tables for vendors on public streets and sidewalks, § 8-8; opening and repairing drains and sewers, sidewalk repair, § 8-41 et seq.; licenses for nonprofit organizations, § 8-91 et seq.; musicians and street performers, § 8-121 et seq.; door-to-door solicitors and canvassers, § 8-146 et seq.; marathons, walkathons and other endurance exhibitions, § 8-186 et seq.; alcoholic beverages in public areas, § 9-1; vandalism and damage to public property, § 9-46; graffiti and damage to public property, § 9-47; signs and posters on public property, § 9-48; trash and litter removal from sidewalks, § 9-54; trash and litter removal from storefronts and businesses, § 9-55; weeds and grass on sidewalks, § 9-56; repairing and storing motor vehicles on public and private property, § 9-57; public works, Ch. 11; taxicabs, taxi stands and taxi operators, Ch. 13; list of city streets, App. C. 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of cities over highways, M.G.L.A. c. 82, § 17 et seq.; regulations relative to sidewalks, M.G.L.A. c. 83, § 25 et seq.; regulations relative to public ways generally, M.G.L.A. c. 85; authority to regulate use of ways for certain purposes, M.G.L.A. c. 85, § 10. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Street names. 
No street when laid out shall be given the same name as that by which any other street, public or private, is known in this city. 
(Code 1963, § 8-9)  
Sec. 12-2. - Water run-off and washing cars. 
(a)  No person shall suffer his or her building or awning or other projection thereon to shed water on any sidewalk or street to the injury or inconvenience of travelers. 
(b)  No person shall wash or clean an automobile or horse in any street, or cause it to be there washed or cleaned, and no person using water for washing automobiles or for other purposes shall so use it, or cause or allow it so to be used, thrown, discharged, or so to escape, as to flow or collect upon any street, or to flow upon or across the surface of any sidewalk. 
(Code 1963, § 12-3) 
Cross reference— Interference with water system, § 11-121 et seq.  
Sec. 12-3. - Littering and dumping trash and rubbish on public property. 
No person, unless thereto duly authorized by ordinance, or by permission of the city council or of the commissioner of public works, shall drop, place, or throw and allow to remain, or cause to be dropped, placed, or thrown, and allowed to remain, in or on any catch basin, street, sidewalk, park, or other public place; any ashes, cinders, glass, crockery, scrap iron, nails, tacks, stones, gravel, sand, paper, sawdust, wood, lumber or other building material, pole, post, shrub or tree or trimmings thereof, wire, hair, manure, card, handbill, shavings, dirt, earth, brine, salt or mixture of salt, oyster shell, clam shell, lobster shell, fish, fruit, vegetable, meat, or any other rubbish or filth or offensive matter or substance, liquid or solid or any kind whatsoever. 
(Code 1963, § 12-4) 
Cross reference— Disturbing trash containers before collection, § 9-52; placing trash in public trash containers, § 9-53; collection of ashes and offal, § 11-30; household trash and rubbish collection, § 11-31; rubbish or trash picking, collecting or disturbing, § 11-32; trash and rubbish on streets and sidewalks, § 12-12.  
Sec. 12-4. - Leafleting and handbills. 
(a)  No person, unless thereto duly authorized by law or ordinance, shall drop, place or throw and allow to remain, or cause to be dropped, placed or thrown and allowed to remain, on a step, piazza or other place, from which it is likely to be blown upon a street or public park, any card, handbill, circular or other paper, except a newspaper or magazine. 
(b)  Nothing contained in section 12-3 or this section shall be construed to deny to anyone the right to, nor to require authorization or permission to, distribute handbills or other printed matter upon any street, sidewalk, park or other public place. 
(Code 1963, §§ 12-4, 12-5) 
Cross reference— Signs and posters on public property, § 9-48.  
Sec. 12-5. - Blocking sidewalks. 
No person shall place or cause to be placed upon the footpath or sidewalk of a street any wood, coal or other article for more than two hours, or suffer it to remain there more than one hour after being notified to remove the same by the superintendent of highways or a police officer of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 12-6)  
Sec. 12-6. - Gaming and games of chance. 
No person shall expose, in any street or other public place, any table or device of any kind by or upon which any game of hazard or chance to be played; nor shall any person play any such game at such table or device in any street or other public place. 
(Code 1963, § 12-7) 
State Law reference— Gaming generally, M.G.L.A. c. 137.  
Sec. 12-7. - Vehicles on sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall cause or allow a horse or vehicle to be driven over or across a sidewalk in any public street, nor shall any person drive a horse or vehicle over or across any sidewalk in any public street; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit any person from driving a vehicle over a private driveway now existing or hereafter laid out over a public sidewalk by authority of the commissioner of public works or by order of the city council; nor shall it prohibit any person acting under any permit issued by the commissioner of public works. 
(b)  The commissioner of public works for good cause shown may issue a permit to any person to drive a vehicle across a public sidewalk where no private driveway exists, but such permit or renewals thereof shall state the purpose, duration of and conditions under which the permit is issued. 
(Code 1963, §§ 11-13, 12-9)  
Sec. 12-8. - Snow and ice on sidewalks. 
(a)  No owner, occupant, tenant, or agent in charge of any land or building abutting a sidewalk in the City of Somerville shall place or suffer to remain on such sidewalk any snow and/or ice for more than six hours between sunrise and sunset on any day. All sidewalks shall be cleared to the surface of the sidewalk, or, where it is impractical to do so, the sidewalk shall be treated with sand or other suitable material. Sidewalks shall be cleared to provide a minimum passage of 36 inches. The city may extend the deadlines set forth above in its discretion. 
(b)  Whoever violates any of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be fined in accordance with section 1-11. 
(c)  Upon neglect or violation of the duty imposed by the provisions of this section such duty may be performed by the superintendent of highways at the expense of the person liable to perform the same and the city may place a lien against the property for expenses incurred. 
(d)  The city treasurer with the approval of the mayor may in civil actions prosecute and adjust claims inuring to the city under the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1963, § 12-10; Ord. No. 2008-03, 3-13-2008; Ord. No. 2014-12, §§ C, D, 12-11-2014 ; Ord. No. 2015-03 , § B, 3-26-2015) 
State Law reference— Removal of snow from sidewalks, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 21(3), (4); ordinances authorized, M.G.L.A. c. 85, § 5.  
Sec. 12-9. - Shoveling snow on streets. 
(a)  No owner, tenant or occupant of land or a building, or any agent thereof, in this city shall cause any snow or ice from said land or building to be placed in any public way in this city unless said snow or ice is broken up and spread evenly, to a thickness of no more than three inches, during daylight hours, when the mean temperature for that day is above 40 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(b)  Whoever violates any of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be fined in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Code 1963, § 8-20; Ord. No. 1990-6, 3-22-90)  
Sec. 12-10. - Coasting on streets with a sled. 
No person shall coast with a sled in any street or other public place, except as authorized by the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 12-11) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate, M.G.L.A. c. 85, § 10A.  
Sec. 12-11. - Loitering on sidewalks. 
No person shall saunter or loiter for more than five minutes upon a sidewalk in any street after being directed by a police officer to move on, nor shall any person willfully or negligently obstruct the free passage of foot travelers on such sidewalk, nor shall any person congregate with others and loaf upon any such sidewalk or in any street or other public place of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 12-12)  
Sec. 12-12. - Trash and rubbish on streets and sidewalks. 
No person shall suffer his or her fuel, dirt, ashes, or other rubbish, or any other material to remain on any sidewalk or any street during any part of the nighttime, or in any other manner obstruct any sidewalk or street crossing, without a permit from the commissioner of public works. 
(Code 1963, § 12-26) 
Cross reference— Disturbing trash containers before collection, § 9-52; placing trash in public trash containers, § 9-53; collection of ashes and offal, § 11-30; household trash and rubbish collection, § 11-31; rubbish or trash picking, collecting or disturbing, § 11-32; littering and dumping trash and rubbish on public property, § 12-3.  
Sec. 12-13. - Playing ball on streets. 
No person shall play baseball or football in any public street; and no person shall throw a ball, stone, or other missile, to the annoyance or intimidation of any traveler, or of any abutter on a public street. 
(Code 1963, § 12-22)  
Sec. 12-14. - Signs, awnings, outdoor seating and other items on or over streets and sidewalks. 
No person shall, except in accordance with a permit from the city council or as otherwise duly authorized, place, make or maintain any gate, table, stall, booth or other erection, signs, goods, wares, outdoor seating, doorstep, portico, porch, bow window, entrance or passageway to a cellar or basement, opening or area for admitting light or air, or any other article or structure on any street or sidewalk, or maintain such articles or structures in such a manner as to project or swing into or over any street or sidewalk. Any permit granted under this section for the purpose of placing and maintaining adjacent to a licensed establishment outdoor seating on a public sidewalk shall expire on the 31st day of December in the year in which it is granted. No permit shall be granted unless the petitioner files with the city clerk a bond in the sum of $5,000.00 to indemnify and save the city harmless from all liability and loss arising out of such permit or, in the alternative, designate the city as an additional insured on the petitioner's general liability, property and casualty insurance coverage. However, with the written permission of the mayor, in accordance with the terms of such permission, any person may suspend the flag of the United States of America or the flag of any country allied with the United States of America or any flag indicating military or naval services of the United States of America over any street or sidewalk. 
(Code 1963, § 11-7; Ord. No. 2001-8, 6-14-2001; Ord. No. 2006-09, § M, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 2008-05, 4-24-2008) 
Cross reference— Dogs in outdoor seating areas of restaurants, § 6-24; pipes, sewer, conduit, poles or other structures on, above, or under streets, § 11-142. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate structures projecting into ways, M.G.L.A. c. 85, § 8.  
Sec. 12-15. - Signs over streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  No permit shall be granted to place or maintain or cause or allow to be placed or maintained over a public way any sign or advertising device more than six feet in its greatest length or extending more than six feet from the street line over the public way or extending from the street line beyond four feet with the outer line of the sidewalk or at a height of less than nine feet at the lowest part thereof above the sidewalk. 
(b)  A fine in accordance with section 1-11 shall be levied upon any person guilty of violating the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1963, § 11-8; Ord. No. 2001-9, 6-14-2001; Ord. No. 2006-09, § N, 4-11-2006) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 8; pipes, sewer, conduit, poles or other structures on, above, or under streets, § 11-142.  
Sec. 12-16. - Awnings over streets and sidewalks. 
No person shall place or maintain, or allow to be placed or maintained, over any sidewalk in front of any building, any awning or shade less than seven feet in height at the lowest part thereof, or any awning or shade extending beyond the line of the sidewalk. 
(Code 1963, § 11-9; Ord. No. 2006-09, § O, 4-11-2006)  
Sec. 12-17. - Posts and supports on streets and sidewalks. 
No person shall erect a post in any street or sidewalk for the support of an awning, or for any other purpose, without permission of the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 11-10)  
Sec. 12-18. - Obstacles in streets or sidewalks at night. 
(a)  No person shall leave any vehicle or any other obstacle or article on any sidewalk or in any public or private way, or place any obstruction in any street at any time, without first obtaining a permit from the commissioner of public works and causing such obstacle, article or obstruction to be lighted and guarded to his or her satisfaction. 
(b)  Any person to whom a permit is given may be required by the commissioner of public works to furnish security by a bond as provided in section 12-14 for not less than $1,000.00 to protect the city against all liability and loss arising out of such obstruction. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall result in a fine in accordance with the provisions of section 1-11. Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate and new violation. This section may be enforced by the commissioner of public works or his or her designee or by any police officer. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to construction dumpsters. Construction dumpsters are regulated in section 12-77 of this Code. 
(Code 1963, § 12-8; Ord. No. 2003-12, 7-10-2003; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 26, 7-14-2005; Ord. No. 2006-09, § P, 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 2009-15, § A, 11-12-2009) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 8.  
Sec. 12-19. - Removal of signs, awnings, outdoor seating and other items on or over streets and sidewalks. 
The superintendent of the highway division of the department of public works shall remove any shade, awning, gate, doorstep, sign or other structure placed or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1963, § 11-12) 
Cross reference— Superintendent of highways duties, § 11-21.  
Sec. 12-20. - Asphalt street and sidewalk openings. 
[The following regulations govern asphalt street and sidewalk openings:] 
(1)  Fees: 
a.  A $50.00 nonrefundable application fee is required. 
b.  A $500.00, certified check refundable deposit is required. Trenches not inspected due to the failure of the permittee to properly notify the highway superintendent shall be subject to loss of deposit and repeat of the trench backfilling. 
c.  A $5,000.00 performance and payment bond is required for each street opening permit granted. 
d.  The contractor must furnish the city with a certificate of insurance for general liability in the amount of $500,000.00. 
(2)  The superintendent of the highway department must be notified 24 hours before commencement of any work. 
Dig Safe must be notified. 
(3)  The pavement shall only be disturbed within the area requiring excavation for repair, replacement or new installation. 
(4)  The area to be excavated shall be precut in straight lines with 90-degree angles at the point of intersection. 
(5)  In the backfill process, the backfill shall be comprised of suitable material (subject to approval of the commissioner of public works or his or her authorized representative) and compacted in six-inch layers to within four inches of pavement surface or the thickness of the pavement structure (bituminous concrete, concrete, cobblestones, etc.), whichever is greater. Each layer shall be 90 percent compacted by mechanical means. Saw or pneumatically cut edges shall have a clean vertical face. All structure shall be leveled to the adjacent surfaces. 
Concrete should be used around all electric conduit in trenches. 
(6)  The excavation will then be properly barricaded to ensure safety to the traveling public and immediately reported to the department of public works. Temporary patching will be done by a contract representative of the city and will be the financial responsibility of the permittee. The permittee's barricade shall be immediately removed from the vicinity of the patched area upon completion of the temporary bituminous patching application. 
Any open hole does not alleviate the permittee from liability associated with that excavation. 
(7)  The permittee shall be responsible for the street openings and protection thereof and for any settlement of the street opening for a period of three years from the date of the final infra-red permanent repair. Any settlement of a street opening will be corrected by the city's contract representative and charged to the permittee. 
(8)  After a proper settling period, the excavating shall be infra-red heat treated by the contract representative of the city. This work shall be the financial obligation of the permittee. 
(9)  Any improperly prepared excavations and/or those left less than four inches or the thickness of the street (whichever is greater) will be temporarily filled and charged to the permittee (temporary patching). At a later date, the patch will be reexcavated and properly prepared by the permittee, as per above items and recharged to the permittee. 
(10)  All street excavations shall be made permanent by the infra-red heat process and will be the financial responsibility of the permittee. 
(11)  The installation of permanent patch does not alleviate the permittee from the responsibility for trench settlement for a period of three years from the date of the final infra-red permanent repair as per item (5). 
(12)  Excavations opened without a permit may be subject to cancellation and refusal of existing and future permits, license revocation, and associated fines. 
(13)  Police protection, if required, shall be paid by the permittee either directly or billed by the city contract representative at cost, plus handling charges. 
(14)  The contract representative of the city shall bill the permittee for the above-mentioned services. All invoices will be paid within 30 days. On past-due invoices a service charge of one and one-half percent per month will be allowed on accounts 30 days past due provided the rate does not exceed that which is permitted by law. Invoices exceeding 90 days shall be paid by the city, at which point the city shall fine the permittee the appropriate amount as prescribed by law, and continue to accrue the service charges together with all costs of collection, including attorney's fees. 
On 90-day past-due invoices, the city will revoke existing and future permits until the payment of such invoices, including all service charges and fines. 
If the account is found to be uncollectible, there shall be a lien upon such real estate in the manner provided in Chapter 40, Sections 42A to 42F of the General Laws. 
(15)  The below listed fees will be effective April 1, 1991: 
a.  Street opening, per week ..... $ 50.00 
Plus, refundable deposit ..... 500.00 
b.  Sidewalk opening, per week ..... 50.00 
Plus, refundable deposit ..... 500.00 
c.  Occupy street and/or sidewalk ..... 50.00 
Plus, refundable deposit ..... 500.00 
(Ord. No. 1991-4, 2-14-91)  
Sec. 12-20.1. - Parking lot sweeping hours. 
(a)  No parking lots may be swept between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays. On Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, no parking lots may be swept between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall be enforced by a noncriminal disposition pursuant to G.L.c. 40, § 21D. Each day on which a violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be punished by a fine specified in subsection 1-11(b) of this Code of Ordinances. Nothing in this provision shall be deemed to limit the use of other lawful methods of abating violations of this section, including, but not limited to, application for equitable relief from a court of law. The city may seek costs and attorney's fees from a court of competent jurisdiction for any enforcement action taken. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05 , 4-28-2016)  
ARTICLE II. - BILLBOARDS AND OTHER FORMS OF OUTDOOR ADVERTISING 
 
Sec. 12-21. - Regulating billboards and other forms of outdoor alcohol advertising. 
The primary purposes of this section is to promote the welfare and temperance of persons under 21 years of age by reducing their exposure to certain publicly visible advertisements of alcoholic beverages and to promote wholesome, family-oriented social settings when children are present that reject the purchase, consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages by persons less than 21 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, 3-27-2008)  
Sec. 12-22. - Definitions. 
Alcoholic beverage means alcohol, or any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, which is capable of use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted. 
Alcoholic beverage outdoor advertisement means any sign, poster, placard, device, graphic display, or any other form of advertisement bearing a word, mark, description, or other device that is used to advertise an alcoholic beverage or the business of a person who manufacturers, sells, or distributes an alcoholic beverage in publicly visible locations. "Alcoholic beverage outdoor advertisement" does not include (i) advertisements inside licensed premises, (ii) any advertisement that contains the name or slogan of the licensed premises that has been placed for the purpose of identifying the licensed premises, (iii) any neon or electronically charged sign, if otherwise allowed by the Somerville Zoning Ordinance, on licensed premises that is provided as part of promotion of a particular brand of alcoholic beverage, (iv) any advertisement on property adjacent to an interstate highway, (v) advertisements appearing on radio or television, or (vi) advertisements in a public vehicular conveyance for hire, on a race car while participating at a professional racing event or at a permanent motorized racetrack facility, on a boat participating in a racing event or a boat show, on an aircraft, on a bicycle or on the clothing of a member of a bicycle team participating in an organized bicycle race, or in a newspaper, magazine, or other literary publication published periodically. For the purpose of this definition, the word "sign," with respect to a retailer, does not include an identifying label affixed to a container as authorized by law. 
Publicly visible locations include, but are not limited to, outdoor billboards, awnings, electric signs, sides of buildings, screens, benches, barriers, stages, fences, signs attached to poles, posts or other figures, and freestanding signboards, wherever located, whether indoor or outdoor, however manufactured, and comprising whatever materials. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, 3-27-2008)  
Sec. 12-23. - Alcoholic beverage outdoor advertisements. 
(a)  No person or business entity may erect or maintain an alcoholic beverage outdoor advertisement within 500 feet of any public playground, private playground, playground area in a public park, elementary school or secondary school, place of worship, or childcare facility. 
(b)  Any person or entity seeking to place an alcoholic beverage outdoor advertisement within the 500-foot limit established in subsection (a) may apply for an exemption with the City of Somerville in which the exemption would apply. The City of Somerville shall grant the exemption if the applicant demonstrates that the 500-foot limit denies the applicant a reasonable opportunity to communicate truthful information regarding alcoholic beverages to adult consumers who reside and work in the City of Somerville. In determining whether the applicant has been denied such an opportunity, the City of Somerville may consider: (1) potential locations for outdoor advertising that are outside the 500-foot limit and the percentage of the adult population that resides or works in these areas; (2) the availability of other forms of advertising to reach adult audiences and their relative cost; (3) the extent to which adults within the City of Somerville are familiar with the applicant's alcoholic beverage products; (4) any advertising practices codes with which the applicant voluntarily has agreed to comply; (5) any other relevant evidence. 
(c)  No person may place any advertisement of any alcoholic beverage product on any property owned or controlled by the City of Somerville. 
(d)  Every agreement for lease to a private party of property owned or controlled by the City of Somerville shall include a provision prohibiting the placement on such property of any advertisement for any alcoholic beverage product. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, 3-27-2008)  
Sec. 12-24. - Public service advertising. 
This statute shall not be construed to prohibit the display of public service messages designed to communicate the hazards of alcoholic beverages or to encourage minors to refrain from consuming or purchasing alcoholic beverages. However, this section shall not be construed to permit such a message when it is made in conjunction with the positive display of a representation, image, artwork, photograph, logo, graphic, device, display, regalia, insignia, indicia, design, slogan, trade name, brand name, product name, permittee or licensee name used for marketing or promotion of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, 3-27-2008)  
Sec. 12-25. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the inspectional services division by a noncriminal disposition pursuant to G. L. c. 40, s. 21D. Each violation shall be deemed a separate offense. Fines are specified in section 1-11(b) of this section. Nothing in this provision shall be deemed to limit the use of other lawful methods of abating violations of this section, including but not limited to application for equitable relief from a court of law. The city may seek costs and attorney's fees from a court of competent jurisdiction for any enforcement action taken. 
(Ord. No. 2008-04, 3-27-2008; Ord. No. 2008-06, 4-24-2008)  
Secs. 12-26—12-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND SCHOOL GROUNDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— School committee, Title 5. 
Cross reference— Recreation commission, § 2-246 et seq.; alcoholic beverages in public areas, § 9-1. 
State Law reference— Parks and playgrounds generally, M.G.L.A. c. 45. 
 
Sec. 12-46. - Activities on certain public property prohibited. 
(a)  Restrictions. A person may not play baseball, football, or any other games, or operate a skateboard at any time on all property owned, maintained, and controlled by the city located within the following area: the intersection of Walnut Street and Highland Avenue, heading south easterly on Highland Avenue to the intersection of School Street and Highland Avenue, turning north easterly down School Street to the B&M railroad bridge on School Street, turning south westerly along the railroad tracks back toward Walnut Street and continuing south westerly onto Medford Street to the intersection of Medford and Walnut Street, and turning south westerly back to the intersection of Walnut Street and Highland Avenue. 
(b)  Enforcement and penalties. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine as set forth in section 1-11(b) of the Somerville Code of Ordinances in the manner provided by G. L. c. 40, § 21D. The police department is the enforcing authority for this section. Each day a violation occurs shall be a separate violation subject to another fine. This section shall not be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action or other legal remedy available to the city. 
(Code 1963, § 12-23; Ord. No. 2004-03, 2-12-2004)  
Sec. 12-47. - Playing on Western Junior High School grounds. 
No person shall play ball or other games except basketball in or on the basketball courts at the Western Junior High School premises. 
(Code 1963, § 12-24)  
Sec. 12-48. - Closing time of parks and playgrounds. 
Parks and playgrounds shall be closed to the public except city personnel conducting city business therein daily between hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Code 1963, § 12-78; Ord. No. 2019-02 , 1-24-2019)  
Sec. 12-49. - Use of parks and playgrounds during closed times. 
Whenever any group, association or organization desires to use park or playground facilities between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. for a particular purpose such as, but not limited to, athletic events, a representative of said group, association or organization shall first obtain a permit from the city council for such purpose. In granting such permission, the city council shall make allowances for persons, other than said group, association or organization, to view any particular event or program. Person participating in or viewing duly-organized events continuing beyond 10:00 p.m. shall not be subject to the requirements set forth in this section. 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 8.  
Sec. 12-50. - Interfering with the use of parks and playgrounds. 
No person shall enter onto or cause anything under his or her control to enter onto any city park, playing field, or court so as to interfere with or obstruct in any way the full use and enjoyment of the park, playing field or court by a person or group with a valid permit to use said park, playing field or court issued by the commissioner of public works. 
(Code 1963, § 12-1A)  
Sec. 12-51. - Dogs in parks and playgrounds. 
(a)  When the commissioner of public works, in his or her discretion, shall determine that any park, playground, schoolyard, or other public area in the control of the city is inappropriate for the allowance of entry by dogs, due to usage by small children, or landscaping considerations, or any other reason sufficient to him or her, he or she shall cause such place to be posted with appropriate and sufficient signs reading, "No Dogs Allowed." No person shall permit, suffer or allow any dog owned by him or her, or in his or her custody or control, whether restrained or unrestrained, to enter upon any park, playground, schoolyard, or other public area in the control of the city so posted as aforesaid. 
(b)  For purposes of sections 3-35 and 3-36, any violation of this section shall be treated by the dog officer as a violation of section 3-34. 
(c)  The commissioner of public works may, in his or her discretion, designate specific off-leash areas for use by dogs to run loose, and shall promulgate regulations for the use thereof. Such areas shall be properly enclosed to such specifications as the commissioner may determine. Such designated off-leash recreational areas, dog parks or dog runs shall be utilized exclusively for the use of dogs off leash. No dog under any order of restraint or muzzling in accordance with section 3-32, and no dog identified in accordance with section 3-33, shall be permitted to utilize such designated off-leash area. The commissioner shall make and post these regulations at every entry to such designated off-leash areas. The commissioner may, at his or her discretion, make additional rules and regulations, which shall be posted in a like manner. Any designation of off-leash areas, or any rules and regulations enacted by the commissioner hereunder shall become effective within 45 days of the meeting of their submission to the city council, unless the city council orders otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1975-12, §§ 1, 2, 2-26-76; Ord. No. 2005-12, 7-14-2005)  
Secs. 12-52—12-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PLACEMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF NEWSRACKS 
 
Sec. 12-66. - Definitions. 
When used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Certificate holder shall mean the holder of a certificate of compliance issued by the superintendent in accordance with the provisions of this section. A certificate holder is responsible for the installation and maintenance of newsracks encompassed by any certificate of compliance issued pursuant to the provisions of this section and for compliance with all provisions contained herein. 
Certificate of compliance shall mean the certificate of compliance issued by the superintendent to the certificate holder in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
Newsrack shall mean any type of unmanned device for the vending or free distribution of newspapers, periodicals or printed material of whatever nature. 
Newsrack sticker shall mean a sequentially numbered sticker issued by the commissioner for placement on individual newsracks in accordance with the provisions of section 12-67. 
Operator shall mean any natural person or other legal entity including, but not limited to, corporations, partnerships, joint ventures and the like who either own, operator or are otherwise in control of a newsrack. 
Superintendent shall mean the superintendent of inspectional services of the department of public works of the city or such person as said superintendent may from time to time designate. 
(Ord. No. 1998-2, 12-2-98)  
Sec. 12-67. - Newsracks on public property. 
(a)  Requirement. No person shall place, affix, erect, construct or maintain a newsrack in or on any part of a public way without first obtaining a certificate of compliance from the superintendent in accordance with the provisions of this section. The certificate of compliance must be renewed annually on April 1 by application to the superintendent of inspectional services. 
(b)  Limit. Only one certificate of compliance shall be required for each operator of a newsrack or series of newsracks notwithstanding the number of newsracks or similar devices dispensing such newspapers, periodicals or newsracks or similar devices dispensing such newspapers, periodicals or printed material. 
(c)  Issuing authority. The superintendent shall be the issuing authority and coordinator of the application process and administration of this section. 
(d)  Approving authorities. The approving authorities shall be the Somerville Traffic Commission, Somerville Fire Department, the director of the office of traffic and parking and the Chief of the Somerville Fire Department, or his/her designee. These approvals shall be submitted to the superintendent who shall coordinate and review the application. 
(e)  Application process. Applicants must complete a written application on a form provided by the superintendent. 
(f)  Application. The application shall describe in sufficient detail, the number location and type of newsracks for which the certificate of compliance is sought and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant who is the owner/operator or other person who is the principal responsible person in charge of the newsrack(s); and 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of a natural person (if different from the applicant) whom the city may notify and/or contact at any time concerning the applicant's newsracks. This person would be responsible for receiving complaints and notices of violations when a certificate of compliance is issued and for providing information relating to the application during the application process. 
(3)  The number of newsracks and a written description specifying the proposed approximate location of each; and 
(4)  A certificate of insurance naming the City of Somerville as an additional insured in an amount sufficient to indemnify the city and hold it harmless from any and all claims or judgments for personal and bodily injury, including death, or property damage and from costs and expenses to which the city may be subjected or which it may suffer or incur by reason of the design, placement, installation, operation or maintenance of any of the applicant's newsracks. Reasonable evidence of self-insurance coverage may be substituted by the applicant for the certificate of insurance. Insurance under this section shall run continuously with the presence of the applicant's newsrack in the city's public ways and any termination or lapse of such insurance shall be a violation of this article, subject to appropriate remedy under subsection 12-73 of this section; and 
(5)  A certificate from the applicant stating that the proposed locations for all of the newsracks listed in the application are in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(g)  Issuance of a certificate of compliance. Upon a finding by the superintendent that the applicant is in compliance with the provisions of this section, the superintendent shall issue a certificate of compliance. The superintendent shall issue a partial certificate of compliance upon a finding that some of the proposed newsrack locations are in compliance with the provisions of this section. Upon issuance of a certificate of compliance or a partial certificate of compliance, the superintendent shall issue the appropriate number of newsrack stickers for the locations that have been approved. A certificate of compliance or a partial certificate of compliance shall designate the applicant as the certificate holder. The superintendent shall issue a certificate of compliance within ten days of the superintendent's receipt of the completed application. 
(h)  Denial of certificate of compliance. If an application for some newsrack location shall be denied, the superintendent shall notify the applicant within 30 days of the superintendent's receipt of the completed application. The superintendent shall state the specific reasons for denial and suggest alternative locations. The applicant may reapply for a substitute alternative location without having to pay an additional application fee. An applicant who has been denied a certificate of compliance under this section may appeal within 30 days of receiving notice of the denial by requesting in writing to the superintendent to appear before the commissioner of the department of public works to review said denial. The commissioner of the department of public works shall hear the appeal within 30 days of receipt of the appeal. The commissioner shall send his or her decision to the applicant within ten days after the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1998-2, 12-2-98; Ord. No. 2005-03, § A, 2-24-2005)  
Sec. 12-68. - Fees for newsrack certificates of compliance. 
(a)  There shall be a certificate of compliance fee in the amount of $50.00. This fee shall be due upon initial application and upon each annual renewal. 
(b)  In addition to the certificate of compliance fee, an annual fee of $25.00 per newsrack authorized shall be paid to the city to offset the costs of the city's monitoring compliance with this ordinance. 
(c)  Additional certificate of compliance . If at any time after the superintendent has issued a certificate of compliance, a certificate holder proposes to install additional newsracks, then the provisions of subsection 12-67 are to be repeated. No additional certificate of compliance fees shall be charged. 
(Ord. No. 1998-2, 12-2-98; Ord. No. 2005-03, § B, 2-24-2005)  
Sec. 12-69. - Newsrack placement and location. 
Placement. Subject to the prohibitions contained in this section newsracks shall be placed parallel to and not less than 18 inches nor more than 24 inches from the edge of the curb. Newsracks placed near the wall of a building or other structure must be placed parallel to and not more than six inches away from the wall. 
No more than four newsracks shall be located per cluster on any public way. The distance of newsracks is at the discretion of the superintendent of inspectional services, to address public safety concerns. No newsrack shall be affixed, erected, installed, placed, used or maintained: 
(1)  At any location whereby the clear space for the passage of pedestrians is reduced to less than four feet in width; or 
(2)  Within five feet of any marked, or unmarked crosswalk; or 
(3)  Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire lane, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility, mail box, telephone booth or stand; or 
(4)  Within five feet of any part of a curb return of a curb ramp or driveway, or in the case of a curb ramp or driveway without a curb return, within five feet of the point where the curb edgestone or edging begins a change in grade toward the driveway or ramp on each side thereof, or in the case of a termination of the curb, edgestone or edging without a change in grade or a turn, within five feet of the point of the same terminates on each side of the ramp or driveway; or 
(5)  Within five feet of any traffic control signal or traffic sign; or 
(6)  Within five feet of a bicycle rack; or 
(7)  Within five feet ahead or 15 feet to the rear of any designated bus stop, taxi stand, valet parking area, loading zone or fire lane, unless such newsrack is placed against a wall that is within four feet of a designated bus stop, taxi stand, valet parking area, loading zone or fire land and the newsrack so placed does not project into or otherwise interfere with the unobstructed flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; or 
(8)  Which in any way protrudes onto a street. 
(Ord. No. 1998-2, 12-2-98; Ord. No. 2005-03, § C, 2-24-2005)  
Sec. 12-70. - Attaching newsracks to trees, signs and other posts. 
(a)  Attachment to trees and other objects prohibited. Except to the extent permitted by regulations promulgated by the superintendent, no operator shall place or cause to be placed and no operator shall suffer to remain any newsrack chained or otherwise attached to any tree, street light post, traffic signal or sign. 
(b)  Attachment to other newsracks. Newsracks, when placed side by side, may be chained or otherwise attached to one another, provided that no group of newsracks shall extend for a distance of more than ten feet along a curb, and a space of not less than five feet shall separate each group of newsracks. 
(Ord. No. 1998-2, 12-2-98)  
Sec. 12-71. - Advertising on newsracks. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator to use a newsrack for advertising or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the publications dispensed therein. 
(Ord. No. 1998-2, 12-2-98)  
Sec. 12-72. - Newsrack specifications. 
Newsracks shall be of study material and installed or otherwise placed in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Each newsrack shall prominently display the newsrack sticker issued by the superintendent pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Each newsrack shall be: 
a.  Installed or placed on the pavement in an upright, sufficiently weighted and secure position; and 
b.  Of a type that is completely enclosed, with a self-closing door that is either self-latching or otherwise requires manual or mechanical release at each use; and 
c.  Maintained in a state of good repair and in a neat and clean condition; and 
d.  Maintained in a condition that is free of accumulations of outdated printed materials, trash, rubbish or debris. 
(3)  Each newsrack shall be regularly serviced so that: 
a.  It is kept reasonably free of graffiti; and 
b.  It is kept reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas thereof; and 
c.  It is kept reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal areas thereof; and 
d.  The clear glass or plastic parts thereof, if any, are not broken and are kept reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading; and 
e.  The structural parts of the newsrack are not broken or unduly misshapen. 
(Ord. No. 1998-2, 12-2-98)  
Sec. 12-73. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Nonconforming newsracks. Any newsrack found not to be in compliance with this section shall be subject to the enforcement provisions contained herein. 
(b)  Abandonment. In the event that any newsrack installed pursuant to the provisions of this section does not contain the printed material being dispensed therein for a period of seven days after the release of the current issue, the director of operations, director of traffic and parking, highway superintendent or the superintendent of inspectional services, may deem the newsrack abandoned and take appropriate action under this section. A newsrack shall otherwise be deemed abandoned if no printed material is found in the newsrack for a period of more than 15 consecutive days. In the event that a certificate holder voluntarily abandons a newsrack location, the certificate holder shall so notify the superintendent, completely remove the newsrack and restore the public way to a safe condition. 
(c)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Enforcement of the provisions of this section shall be carried out by the superintendent. Upon a determination that a violation of any provision of this section exists, the superintendent shall notify the certificate holder of the violation in writing by first class mail. The notice shall include: 
a.  The newsrack sticker and location of the newsrack; and 
b.  The date of the incident or other cause giving rise to the violation; and 
c.  A brief and concise statement of the facts causing the violation. 
(2)  The notice shall inform the certificate holder that at the expiration of ten days from the receipt of the violation notice, the newsrack will be removed by the superintendent, unless the violation is corrected. 
(3)  Upon removal of a newsrack, the superintendent shall send, by first class mail, written notice of such removal to the certificate holder. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the provisions of the foregoing paragraphs (1)—(3) of this subsection, the superintendent may order the immediate removal of any newsrack(s) that the superintendent determines prevents an imminent threat or peril to public safety, provided that the certificate holder shall be notified of such removal as soon as practicable thereafter, and further provided that any newsrack so removed shall be stored for a period of 30 days in order to allow the certificate holder to retrieve the newsrack. If the superintendent removes a newsrack under this subsection (c)(4), which does not have a certificate of compliance, the superintendent shall dispose of the newsrack at the end of the 30-day period as abandoned property. 
(Ord. No. 1998-2, 12-2-98)  
Sec. 12-74. - Penalties. 
(a)  A newsrack removed pursuant to this section may be retrieved by the certificate holder at any time within 30 days of its removal upon payment of a removal fee of $25.00 plus a storage fee of $5.00 per day, to a maximum combined removal and storage fee of $100.00. 
(b)  After 30 days, any newsracks removed by the superintendent pursuant to section 12-73 shall be deemed "abandoned property" and become the property of the city. 
(c)  Failure of a certificate holder to retrieve a newsrack within the specified 30-day period shall not operate to dismiss any fees owned to the city for removal and storage of such newsrack. Unpaid fees accrued pursuant to this subsection shall be considered a debt payable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1998-2, 12-2-98)  
Sec. 12-75. - Additional regulations. 
The superintendent may, after public hearing, promulgate such rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this section and the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts as shall carry out the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1998-2, 12-2-98)  
Sec. 12-76. - Provisions for other regulations. 
Nothing in this section shall affect the adoption of regulations affecting newsracks by other governmental bodies, such as historic district commissions, to the extent such bodies are authorized to adopt such regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1998-2, 12-2-98)  
Sec. 12-77. - Construction dumpsters. 
It shall be unlawful to place any construction dumpster on any public or private street in the city without first obtaining a permit for such placement from the superintendent of inspectional services. Violations of any conditions of the permit by a homeowner and/or permittee shall be deemed a violation of this section. Violations of this section are subject to penalties in accordance with section 1-11(b) of the Code of Ordinances. Each consecutive day that a violation exists shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, § B, 11-12-2009)  
Secs. 12-78—12-87. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SHOPPING CARTS 
 
Sec. 12-88. - Definitions. 
The following terms, whenever used or referred to in this article, shall have the following respective meanings, which definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of such sections unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context. 
Business day shall mean any day the owner is open for business. 
Cart shall mean any rolling or non-rolling basket or container commonly used in supermarkets, grocery stores, department stores, retail business establishments and other stores frequented by customers. 
City shall mean the City of Somerville. 
Owner shall mean the person, store or company that owns, leases or is otherwise primarily responsible for control of the cart in question. 
Public property shall mean any property owned or controlled by the City of Somerville, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the United States of America, which is open to the public for use and enjoyment, and shall include but not limited to bridges, bus stops, parks, playgrounds, streets and subway stops. 
Store shall mean any individual store, chain store, supermarket, grocery store, department store, or other business establishment frequented by patrons that owns, leases or controls shopping carts. 
Street shall mean any street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, private way or other public way, including pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks and other places within the street lines used by the general public, and public parking lots and areas. 
Superintendent shall mean the superintendent of inspectional services. 
(Ord. No. 2004-07, 6-24-2004)  
Sec. 12-89. - Retrieval plan. 
Each store furnishing shopping carts to patrons to transport items purchased from the store, is hereby required to develop and implement a specific plan to retrieve its shopping carts that are found on public property. Two or more stores may collaborate and submit to the superintendent of inspectional services ("superintendent") a single plan. 
Plans must be submitted to the superintendent within 60 days of the effective date of this article, and must include an effective and specific method of retrieving the store's shopping carts found on public property. Failure to submit a cart retrieval plan in a timely manner shall initially result in a written warning, and if not addressed within five business days of the date of said warning then in a fine in accordance with section 1-11(b). 
(Ord. No. 2004-07, 6-24-2004; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 27, 7-14-2005)  
Sec. 12-90. - Plan submission, amendment and review. 
The superintendent of inspectional services shall determine whether a store's plan for retrieving its shopping carts is reasonably calculated to result in the prompt removal of the store's shopping carts found on public property. 
Based on the above-referenced criteria, the superintendent shall approve, reject or recommend modification of the plan, within 60 days of when the plan is submitted. 
If a plan is approved, the proposed measures shall be implemented no later than 30 days after approval. 
If a plan is rejected, the superintendent shall provide the store with written notice of the basis for said rejection. The store shall modify the plan and resubmit it to the superintendent no later than 30 days after the date of its rejection. 
Following the approval of a plan, a store may file a written request with the superintendent to amend its plan. The proposed amended plan is subject to the same criteria and review process as an original plan. 
If a store's original or amended plan is approved by the superintendent and subsequently, the superintendent determines in writing that the store's plan for retrieving its shopping carts is ineffective, the superintendent may place on the city council's agenda a hearing for the purpose of modifying the store's plan. The city council shall provide the store with at least ten days' written notice of such hearing, along with a copy of the superintendent 's recommendation. After consideration of the matter and after permitting the store to be heard, the city council may modify or leave the plan unchanged. 
(Ord. No. 2004-07, 6-24-2004)  
Sec. 12-91. - Identification of carts. 
All shopping carts shall have a sign affixed to it that clearly identifies the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the cart. 
(Ord. No. 2004-07, 6-24-2004)  
Sec. 12-92. - Removal from store property prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a shopping cart from the premises of a store. 
(Ord. No. 2004-07, 6-24-2004)  
Sec. 12-93. - Responsibility of owner. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any cart to permit any cart to be removed from the store premises and left unattended or abandoned on any street or public place with the city. Any owner who shall directly or indirectly permit or suffer his customers to take such carts off the business premises of said owner shall be responsible if such cart is abandoned or left unattended on a public street or public property. 
(Ord. No. 2004-07, 6-24-2004)  
Sec. 12-94. - Notification. 
If a cart is located on public property and identification of the owner of such cart is affixed thereto, prior to the city removing or impounding any cart the owner shall be notified of the location of the cart and required to retrieve the cart as soon as practicable but in no event later than the end of the current business day. For purposes of this section, notification includes, but is not limited to either of the following: 
(1)  Telephone communication from a city employee or other agent to the owner or an employee, servant or other agent of the owner. 
(2)  Written notice sent by regular, first class mail to the business address affixed to the cart, if any, otherwise to the address last known by the city to be the address of the owner. 
If a cart is abandoned or left unattended in a location such that it may impede emergency services, obstruct vehicular traffic, or create a hazard to public safety on a public right-a-way, the city may remove or impound or cause the removal and impoundment of the cart immediately. 
By the end of the second business day following the day of the shopping cart's impoundment, the city shall notify the owner of the shopping cart's impoundment and the location where the cart may be reclaimed. The city shall record that notification was given. 
(Ord. No. 2004-07, 6-24-2004)  
Sec. 12-95. - Retrieval of carts. 
All stores providing carts for its customers shall immediately retrieve any cart abandoned on public property. 
The city shall remove or cause to be removed any cart found abandoned or left unattended on any street or other public property and shall take the same to city property where the cart shall be held for 30 days after notice or until reclaimed. 
(Ord. No. 2004-07, 6-24-2004)  
Sec. 12-96. - Reclamation of carts. 
Whenever the city shall take any cart containing the owner's identification, the cart's owner shall be notified by the city and the cart may be reclaimed upon payment of an administrative fee to the city at anytime prior to the sale, dismantling or destruction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2004-07, 6-24-2004; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 28, 7-14-2005)  
Sec. 12-97. - Disposal of unclaimed carts. 
If a cart is not reclaimed within 30 days, the cart may be disposed of as abandoned and unclaimed property in any manner provided by law, and the owner shall reimburse the city for any and all reasonable disposal fees that result. 
Failure of an owner to retrieve a shopping cart within the specified 30-day period shall not operate to dismiss any fees owned to the city for removal and storage of such shopping cart. Unpaid fees accrued pursuant to this section shall be considered a debt payable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-07, 6-24-2004)  
Sec. 12-98. - Severability. 
If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid, such section, phrase, sentence or portion of this article shall be deemed separate, distinct and independent provision and shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-07, 6-24-2004)  
Sec. 12-99. - Mandatory implementation and ongoing use of measures to prevent removal of shopping carts. 
(a)  In addition to complying with sections 12-89 through 12-98, to the extent applicable, each and every shopping cart owner shall implement and enforce, on an ongoing basis and at all times, measures to contain its shopping carts within the premises of its business establishment and/or to prevent any unauthorized person from removing one or more shopping carts from such premises. Permitted measures include any or all of the following: 
(1)  A wheel locking mechanism installed on all shopping carts and used in conjunction with an electronic barrier along the perimeter of the premises, which is activated when a shopping cart crosses the electronic barrier; 
(2)  Shopping carts equipped with a protruding arm or similar device prohibiting a cart from being removed from the interior of a business establishment; or 
(3)  Any other similar method that prevents the removal of shopping carts from the premises. 
(b)  Each and every shopping cart owner shall post a sign having a minimum dimension of 12 inches by 18 inches in a conspicuous location at each entrance to the premises notifying shopping cart users of the containment measures put into place pursuant to this section. 
(c)  Each and every shopping cart owner shall implement shopping cart containment measures and otherwise come into compliance with the requirements of this section within 120 days of final approval of this section. 
(d)  The provisions of this article may be enforced by the superintendent of inspectional services or the police department by a noncriminal disposition pursuant to G. L. c. 40, § 21D. Each day on which a violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person, firm, corporation, association or other entity violating any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine in accordance with section 1-11(b). 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, 3-8-2007)  
ARTICLE VI. - TREE PRESERVATION ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 12-100. - Establishment of the urban forestry committee. 
(a)  Purpose . Sustainability and environmental stewardship are important values to the Somerville community as is clearly articulated in SomerVision, the city's comprehensive plan. The urban forestry committee will be charged with advising with respect to the management and maintenance of all existing and new trees and shrubs on all public grounds and public ways of the City of Somerville. 
(b)  Duties . The urban forestry committee shall review planting policies for trees and shrubs on public grounds and public ways of the City of Somerville, appraise the appropriateness of such plantings, their placement, and the type of maintenance necessary. The urban forestry committee shall also review those planting proposals which it deems significant for trees and shrubs on public grounds and public ways of the City of Somerville. 
This committee shall have the ability to comment during any City of Somerville permitting review processes. 
This committee may elect to review issues related to the health, effective maintenance, and protection of existing trees and shrubs on public grounds and public ways of the City of Somerville, recommend solutions to any problems identified with such plantings, update the tree inventory with detailed information, and support all public education and outreach by: 
(1)  Promoting knowledge and awareness of the benefits of trees in the City; 
(2)  Developing and maintaining a website; 
(3)  Developing and maintaining a noteworthy tree program; 
(4)  Developing educational materials regarding best management practices for tree care; 
(5)  Supporting city staff in establishing a volunteer adopt-a-tree program; and 
(6)  Supporting City staff during Arbor Day Celebrations. 
(c)  Membership . This committee shall consist of the following members: 
(1)  The urban forestry and landscape planner; 
(2)  The tree warden; and 
(3)  Nine members of the public, with at least one member demonstrating expertise in the field of urban forestry, at least one member demonstrating expertise in the field of landscape design, and two members shall be between the ages of 14 and 17 at the time of their appointment or re-appointment, each serving a term of three years, selected by the mayor, and subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(d)  The urban forestry committee shall have no authority to interfere with the operations or conduct of business by the tree warden, the urban forestry and landscape planner, or the parks and open space division of the office of strategic planning and community development. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 4-23-2009; Ord. No. 2009-08, 6-11-2009; Ord. No. 2017-12 , 10-12-2017; Ord. No. 2018-19 , 11-8-2018)  
Sec. 12-101. - Criteria for removal. 
A public hearing may not be initiated under G.L. c. 87, s. 3 to remove a healthy public shade tree, unless the tree warden finds in writing that there is a public health, safety, or welfare basis for removing the public shade tree, including, but not limited to, hardship to a property owner, economic development, facilitating the development of affordable housing, pedestrian access enhancement, transportation improvement, or public project development. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the cutting, trimming, or removal of trees in accordance with G. L. c. 87, s. 5. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 4-23-2009; Ord. No. 2009-08, 6-11-2009)  
Sec. 12-102. - Notice requirements. 
In addition to notice under G.L. c. 87, s. 3 for removal of a public shade tree, notice shall be given by the city by electronic notification, when feasible, and first class mail to all owners of real property located within 150 feet of the public shade tree proposed to be removed at least 14 days before the public hearing. Notice shall also be given by placing notice on the city website and cable wheel at least 14 days before the public hearing. In the event that a public hearing is initiated under G.L. c. 87, s. 3 at the request of anyone other than the city, the requesting party shall pay for all costs of mailing and advertising, such costs to be determined by the city clerk. The city clerk may waive the costs if the requesting party demonstrates to the city clerk that payment of the fee would cause financial hardship. Guidelines for determining financial hardship shall be established by the city clerk. Applications for financial hardship shall be provided by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 4-23-2009; Ord. No. 2009-08, 6-11-2009)  
Sec. 12-103. - Tree replacement. 
Any healthy public shade tree removed at the request of a property owner, or agent thereof, shall be replaced within one year from date of removal. The replacement tree shall be of such size and species as specified by the tree warden. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 4-23-2009; Ord. No. 2009-08, 6-11-2009)  
Sec. 12-104. - Tree replacement fund. 
(a)  Establishment. There shall be established a tree replacement fund which shall be held in a separate identifiable account and administered in accordance with applicable provisions of General Laws. Any payments into the tree replacement fund required by this article shall be deposited in the tree replacement fund and shall be used in accordance with subsection (c) hereof. 
(b)  Payment for planting replacement tree. Where a healthy public shade tree is removed at the request of a property owner, or agent thereof, for the purposes of economic development, as determined by the tree warden, the requesting party shall make a contribution to a tree replacement fund in an amount deemed equal to the cost to replace the tree, which cost shall be determined by the tree warden or his or her designee, based on standards set forth by council of tree and landscape appraisers, plus the value of the tree to be replaced, which value shall be determined by the tree warden or his or her designee, based on standards set forth by the council of tree and landscape appraisers. 
(c)  Maintenance of tree replacement fund. The tree replacement fund shall be maintained in a separate account in accordance with state law. All sums deposited into such fund shall be used solely for the purpose of buying, planting and maintaining trees in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 4-23-2009; Ord. No. 2009-08, 6-11-2009)  
Sec. 12-105. - Compliance with state law. 
All public shade tree hearings shall comply with the applicable requirements set forth in G.L. c. 87, s. 3. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 4-23-2009; Ord. No. 2009-08, 6-11-2009)  
Sec. 12-106. - Trees on city-owned property. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to extend the public notice and public hearing requirements of the Massachusetts Public Shade Tree Law, M.G.L. chapter 87, to trees on City of Somerville owned property. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section shall have the following meanings ascribed to them: 
Capital improvement project. A major, non-recurring expenditure that generally meets all of the following criteria: M.G.L. c. 44, sections 7 and 8, permit the city to issue bonds to finance the expenditure; the expenditure is a facility, object or asset costing more than $50,000.00; and the expenditure will have a useful life of ten years or more for infrastructure, buildings, and parks. 
Park project. A project involving the renovation and maintenance of existing parks and city-owned open spaces, and the development of new parks and open spaces within the City of Somerville. The phrase "city-owned open spaces" includes parks, community gardens, playgrounds, school yards, library lawns, cemeteries, public plazas, triangles, and squares. 
Tree on city-owned property . Any tree located on land owned by the City of Somerville. This does not include any tree that fits the definition of a public shade tree under M.G.L. c. 87. 
(c)  Applicability. This section shall apply exclusively to trees on City-owned property as defined above in section (b). Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to public shade trees within the City of Somerville, whose care, maintenance, trimming, planting, and removal are governed by The Public Shade Tree Law, M.G.L. chapter 87, and the City of Somerville Code of Ordinances. The public notice and meeting requirements for public shade trees shall remain in full force and effect and are entirely unaffected by the language of this section. 
(d)  Cutting down or removal of trees. No person, including but not limited to city employees, the tree warden and his or her deputies, shall cut down or remove any tree on city-owned property, without first holding a public hearing. 
The tree warden or his or her deputy shall post notice of the time and place of the public hearing in two or more public places in the city, and upon the tree in question, at least seven days prior to the public hearing. This notice shall identify the size, type and location of the tree to be cut down or removed, and include a brief statement of the reason for the proposed action. Notice of this public hearing shall be sent to each councilor, all members of the Urban Forestry Committee, and published on the city's website. 
No later than 48-hours prior to the cutting down or removal of any tree on city-owned property, a notice on brightly colored paper, will be placed upon the tree, stating the anticipated date on which the action is expected to occur. 
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the tree warden and his or her deputies from cutting down or removing any tree which in his or her opinion is dead or dying or constitutes a threat to public health or safety. 
(e)  Exceptions to the public notice and hearing requirements. No public hearing shall be necessary prior to the tree warden or his or her deputies cutting down or removing trees measuring less than one and one-half inches in diameter one foot from the ground, and all bushes on city-owned property. 
The following types of public projects, which have undergone a public process that includes public notification and public meetings shall be exempt from the requirements of section d) above: 
(1)  Park projects; and 
(2)  Capital improvement project. 
This exemption shall only apply to a public project of the type listed in (1) and (2) above, if such public process included all of the following: 
(1)  All public meetings at which cutting down or removal of trees is discussed were duly noticed and advertised, including but not limited to notice sent to all members of the Urban Forestry Committee; 
(2)  The size, type, and location of all tree(s) to be cut down or removed, and any planting proposals for the location of such tree(s), were clearly identified at a public meeting; 
(3)  The public was provided reasonable opportunity to provide input regarding each tree to be cut down or removed; and 
(4)  Reasonable notice was posted on or around any trees to be cut down or removed at least two weeks prior to such action taking place. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , 4-27-2017; Ord. No. 2018-09 , 5-10-2018)  
Secs. 12-107—12-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - COMPLETE STREETS ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 12-116. - Complete streets ordinance. 
(a)  The City of Somerville shall enhance the safety, access, convenience and comfort of all users of all ages and abilities, providing for equality in use between pedestrians (including people requiring mobility aids), bicyclists, transit users, motorists and freight drivers, through the design, operation and maintenance of the transportation network so as to create a connected network of facilities accommodating each mode of travel that is consistent with and supportive of the local community, recognizing that all streets are different and that the needs of various users will need to be balanced in a flexible manner to achieve complete streets. 
(b)  The City of Somerville will incorporate complete street elements into public transportation projects in order to provide appropriate accommodation for bicyclists, pedestrians, transit users and persons of all abilities, while promoting safe operation for all users, in comprehensive and connected networks in a manner consistent with, and supportive of, the surrounding community. 
(c)  As feasible, City of Somerville shall incorporate complete streets infrastructure into existing streets to improve the safety and convenience of users, construct and enhance the transportation network for each category of users, and foster economic development and new employment. 
(d)  The City of Somerville recognizes that complete streets may be achieved through single elements incorporated into a particular project or incrementally through a series of smaller improvements or maintenance activities over time. 
(e)  The City of Somerville shall approach every transportation project and program as an opportunity to improve streets and the transportation network for all users, including conducting, once per year, a "rules of the road" education campaign to better inform cyclists of city/state traffic regulations. This work shall be done by the office of strategic planning and community development, with approval from communications, traffic and parking, DPW, and in cooperation with other departments, agencies, jurisdictions and associations. 
(f)  City of Somerville shall follow the most current version of the National Association of City Transportation Officials Street Design Guide. 
(g)  Bicycle, pedestrian, and transit facilities shall be incorporated, when applicable and practical, in all street projects, reconstruction, repaving, and rehabilitation projects, with only the following exceptions: 
• Bicycles or pedestrians are prohibited by law from using the facility. 
• The cost of establishing bikeways or walkways as part of the project would be disproportionate in cost or to anticipated future use (not the current use). 
• The existing right-of-way is constrained in a manner that inhibits simple addition of transit, bicycle, or pedestrian improvements. In this case, the city shall consider alternatives such as lane reduction, lane narrowing, on-street parking relocation or reduction, shoulders, signage, traffic calming, or enforcement. 
• Where such facilities would constitute a threat to public safety or health in the determination of the city traffic engineer in consultation with the department of transportation and infrastructure. 
(h)  All initial planning and design studies, health impact assessments, environmental reviews, and other project reviews for projects requiring funding or approval by City of Somerville shall (1) evaluate the effect of the proposed project on safe travel by all users, and (2) identify measures to mitigate any adverse impacts on such travel that are identified. 
(i)  In design guidelines, City of Somerville shall coordinate templates with street classifications and revise them to include complete streets infrastructure, such as bicycle lanes and cycle tracks, sidewalks, street crossings, curb geometries, and planting strips. The design of new or reconstructed facilities should anticipate and support likely future demand for bicycling, walking and transit facilities. 
(j)  Nothing in this article is intended to impose any additional civil liability upon the City of Somerville other than that which is imposed by existing law. 
( Ord. No. 2014-03, 5-8-2014 )  
ARTICLE VIII. - ORDINANCE TO SAFEGUARD VULNERABLE ROAD USERS 
 
Sec. 12-117. - Purpose. 
Vehicles covered by this ordinance shall be so constructed and/or equipped as to offer effective protection to vulnerable road users against the risk of falling under the sides of the vehicle and being caught under the wheels, and against the risk of being struck due to limited visibility from the operator's viewpoint and the lack of side-visible turn signals. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05 , § 1, 5-11-2017)  
Sec. 12-118. - Definitions. 
The words defined in this section shall have the meanings set forth below whenever they appear in this ordinance unless the context in which they are used clearly requires a different meaning, or a different definition is prescribed for a particular paragraph or provision. 
(1)  Approval of a vehicle means the approval of a complete vehicle type with regard to its lateral protection. 
(2)  City means the City of Somerville. 
(3)  Conventional cab means a large vehicle configuration in which at least more than half of the engine length is forward of the foremost point of the windshield base, and the steering wheel hub is in the forward quarter of the vehicle length. 
(4)  Convex mirrors mean door-mounted, wide-angle mirrors that enable the operator to see objects along the left and right sides of the truck in accordance with subsection 12-121(b). 
(5)  Cross-over mirrors and cross-view mirrors are equivalent terms that mean either fender- or hood-mounted mirrors that enable the operator to see objects in the area immediately in front of a conventional cab hood in accordance with subsection 12-121(c) and optionally also on the left and right sides of the truck cab. 
(6)  Department(s) shall mean those City of Somerville departments, authorities, agencies, commissions and any other instrumentality acting on behalf of another ("awarding authorities") under the supervision of the mayor or persons appointed by him/her. 
(7)  Contract means the written agreement between a vendor and a department to do any work or to make any purchase. 
(8)  Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) means the gross vehicle weight rating established by a manufacturer when applied to a motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer or semi-trailer unit, including the gross combination weight rating, if any, when applied to a semi-trailer unit or to a tractor-trailer combination, pursuant to MGL Chapter 90, Section 1. 
(9)  Large vehicle means any Class 3 or above motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer or semi-trailer unit, with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) exceeding 10,000 pounds, except an ambulance, fire apparatus, low-speed vehicle with maximum speed under 15 miles per hour, or agricultural tractor. 
(10)  Lateral protective device, side underride guard, and side guard are equivalent terms that mean an apparatus installed on large vehicles between the front and rear wheels to help prevent injuries to vulnerable road users, particularly from falling underneath the vehicle. 
(11)  Mayor means the mayor or persons designated by him/her. 
(12)  Otherwise qualified means any vendor that meets all other criteria for the award of a contract. 
(13)  Vulnerable road users mean pedestrians, bicyclists, wheelchair users, moped riders, motorcyclists, maintenance, utility, police, and emergency first-responder workers, or other persons using the road in such a way that they are liable to fall under the sides of the vehicle or to be caught under the wheels. 
(14)  Vendor means any firm, vendor, contractor, or supplier of goods and/or services to the City of Somerville, and any of its agents or subcontractors. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05 , § 2, 5-11-2017)  
Sec. 12-119. - Requirements. 
When any officer or board in charge of a department or other awarding agency of the city issues requests for proposals or other invitations for bids to do any work or make any purchase, such request for proposal or other invitation for bids must require any response to contain a representation acknowledging that a prospective vendor has installed (or will install prior to commencing work for the contract) side guards, cross-over mirrors or equivalent blind spot countermeasures, convex mirrors or equivalent blind spot countermeasures, side-visible turn signals, and appropriate warning signage, in accordance with this ordinance, on all large vehicles it uses or will use within the City of Somerville in connection with the contract. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05 , § 3, 5-11-2017)  
Sec. 12-120. - Policy implementation. 
Every large vehicle used by a vendor in connection with a contract must be equipped with convex mirrors or equivalent blind spot countermeasures, side-visible turn signals, decals, and side guards affixed to the sides of such vehicles in a manner consistent with this section and with rules and regulations further promulgated by the office of strategic planning and community development. Every large vehicle with a conventional cab configuration used by a vendor in connection with a contract shall furthermore be equipped with cross-over mirrors or equivalent blind spot countermeasures. As future technical innovations to improve safety for vulnerable road users become available, the city will make efforts to test and update these requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05 , § 4, 5-11-2017)  
Sec. 12-121. - Technical specifications. 
(a)  Lateral protective devices. Large vehicles must be constructed or equipped in such a way as to offer, throughout their length, effective protection to vulnerable road users against the risk of falling under the side of the vehicle and being caught under the wheels. This requirement will be considered satisfied either: 
(1)  If the vehicle is equipped with side guards in accordance with the current requirements, as may be amended, of the US Department of Transportation Volpe Side Guard Standard (the "Volpe Side Guard Standard"); or 
(2)  If the vehicle is so designed and/or equipped at the side that, by virtue of its shape and characteristics, its component parts can be incorporated and/or regarded as replacing the side guards in accordance with the current Volpe Side Guard Standard, as may be amended. 
Components whose combined function satisfies the above requirements are considered to form a lateral protective device. 
(b)  Convex mirrors. Either through convex mirrors or equivalent blind spot countermeasures, large vehicles must be equipped so as to enable, the operator of the large vehicle to see all points on an imaginary horizontal line which: 
(1)  Is three feet above the road; and 
(2)  Is one foot directly forward from the midpoint upon the longitudinal axis of the front of such large vehicle; and extends the full width of such large vehicle. 
(c)  Cross-over mirrors. Either through cross-over mirrors or equivalent blind spot countermeasures, large vehicles must be equipped so as to enable the operator of any large vehicle with a conventional cab to see: 
(1)  Any person or object three feet tall passing one foot in front of the vehicle; and 
(2)  The area from the front bumper to where direct vision is possible. 
(d)  Side-visible turn signals. Large vehicles must be equipped with at least one turn signal lamp on each of the left and right vehicle sides that is visible from any point to the left and right of such large vehicle along the vehicle's full length. 
(e)  Safety decals. Large vehicles must be equipped with a minimum of three reflective safety decals on the rear and sides that warn pedestrians and cyclists of blind spots: 
(1)  Decals should be "safety yellow" in color; 
(2)  Decals should include language or images warning of the blind spot locations on the vehicle. The signage should warn of the hazard and advise other road users to take appropriate action, for example "Blind Spot - Take Care"; and 
(3)  Decals should be placed, when possible, on or near the side guards. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05 , § 5, 5-11-2017)  
Sec. 12-122. - Compliance and enforcement. 
(a)  Non-compliance with the provisions of this ordinance by a vendor shall be enforced in accordance with Somerville Code of Ordinances section 1-11(b). Furthermore, non-compliance with the provisions of this ordinance by a vendor shall be grounds for termination of the contract. 
(b)  This ordinance shall be enforced by the fleet division in the department of public works and the Somerville Police Department. The Somerville Police Department and the fleet division shall determine non-compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and any applicable regulations and may make recommendations, if any, to the contracting department. 
(c)  The fleet division shall issue, for a vendor's large vehicles, a compliance certification through a vehicle inspection of convex mirrors, cross-over mirrors, lateral protective devices, side-visible turn signals, and decals prior to the date vendor begins work on a contract. A fee to cover the costs associated with inspection will be determined by the fleet division and passed on to the vendor. 
(d)  Vehicle compliance will be certified with a sticker denoting the year of inspection. Inspections must be updated biennially. Non-compliant vehicles must be reinspected prior to being used by a vendor in connection with a contract. 
(e)  The fleet division shall issue an annual report to be filed with the mayor and the city clerk and transmitted by the clerk to the city council on the actions undertaken by the fleet division on enforcement of this ordinance no later than May 31 of each year. The annual written report shall include, but not be limited to, the following items for the 12-month period prior to the report's due date: 
(1)  The number of vehicles this ordinance applied to; 
(2)  The total number of inspections performed by inspectors and any subsequent violations of this ordinance; 
(3)  The number of waivers and exemptions requested, the number granted, and the justification for each waiver or exemption requested or approved; 
(4)  Evaluation of safety performance on equipped vehicles from Somerville Police Department reports of incidents; and 
(5)  Any financial costs to the city associated with this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05 , § 6, 5-11-2017)  
Sec. 12-123. - Severability. 
The provisions of this ordinance are severable and if any provision, or portion thereof, should be held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions, which shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05 , § 7, 5-11-2017)  
Sec. 12-124. - Waiver/exemptions. 
If a vendor determines that extenuating circumstances exist which prevent the vendor from complying with this ordinance, then such vendor may request an exemption from compliance with its provisions. Waivers are issued at the sole discretion of both the fleet division and purchasing department of the City of Somerville. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05 , § 8, 5-11-2017)  
Sec. 12-125. - Effective date. 
(a)  This ordinance shall take effect 180 days after passage and shall apply to all new contracts awarded, to all renewal terms of existing contracts executed after that date, and to all contracts amended to include the applicability of this ordinance. This ordinance applies to any subcontractors under such contracts. 
(b)  City of Somerville fleet vehicles that are large vehicles as defined herein will be required to comply with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(c)  The office of strategic planning and community development shall issue rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this ordinance, including, without limitation, a process by which waivers may be granted, upon its taking effect. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05 , § 9, 5-11-2017)  
Chapter 13 - TAXICABS, TAXI STANDS AND TAXI OPERATORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 8; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 12. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 22, common carriers generally, M.G.L.A. c. 159; common carriers of passengers by motor vehicles, M.G.L.A. c. 159A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Taxi definition. 
Every vehicle used or to be used for the conveyance of persons for hire or fixed payment from place to place within the city, such conveyance being either the primary purpose or offered in connection and/or conjunction with the provision of any other service, shall be deemed to be a taxicab within the meaning of this chapter, except: (i) a street railway car or a trackless trolley vehicle within the meaning of Chapter 163, Section 2 of the General Laws: or (ii) a motor vehicle, commonly known as a jitney, operated in a manner and for the purposes stated in Chapter 159A of the General Laws; or (iii) a sight-seeing automobile, as defined in Acts of 1913, Chapter 592, Section 1; or (iv) a motor vehicle used for funeral and/or wedding purposes only. 
(Code 1963, § 10-1; Ord. No. 1992-8, 10-8-92) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-4.  
Sec. 13-2. - Taxi bureau. 
(a)  A taxi bureau is hereby established to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Said bureau shall consist of a sergeant or officer of higher rank of the traffic division of the police department as designated by the chief of police, who shall be its head, and the sealer of weights and measures. They may appoint such assistants as may be necessary from time to time for the proper operation of the bureau. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall in any way abridge or impair the enforcement powers of the chief of police or the officers and patrolmen of the police department with respect to motor vehicles in general and taxicabs in particular, as may be set forth by law or ordinance. 
(Code 1963, § 10-36) 
Cross reference— Police, Ch. 10.  
Sec. 13-3. - Taxi stands. 
(a)  The city council will designate certain places to be used as assigned stands by taxicabs not exceeding at any time the number specified for each place. 
(b)  No such stand shall be designated until the chief of police has given his or her written approval thereto, nor until the chief of police or a police officer appointed under section 13-2 has certified in writing that: 
(1)  Notice has been given to the owner or his or her resident agent, and the occupant of the premises fronting upon the location to be designated, that such designation has been applied for; and 
(2)  That such persons have consented thereto. 
(c)  Owners or drivers of taxicabs shall not trespass upon stands to which they have not been assigned. 
(d)  All such taxicab stands shall be properly marked by painted lines, and signs erected showing the number of taxicabs for which the space is reserved, and said lines and signs shall be made by the highway division of the public works department. 
(Code 1963, § 10-12)  
Sec. 13-4. - Taxi identification. 
Every motor vehicle to be used as a taxicab in the city shall have the words, "Taxi," "Cab" or "Taxicab" printed on the body of the vehicle in letters not less than three inches in height, and shall have a number, commencing with the numeral 01 painted in letters in sequential order up to 93, not less than three inches in height under the window on the back of each taxicab. 
(Code 1963, § 10-13; Ord. No. 1990-14, § 1, 11-8-90) 
State Law reference— Identification of taxicabs, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 22.  
Sec. 13-5. - Cooperation with police. 
Licensed taxicab drivers will answer fully and civilly any questions put to them by police officers in the performance of their duty. 
(Code 1963, § 10-14) 
Cross reference— Police, Ch. 10.  
Sec. 13-6. - Taxi driver responsibilities. 
(a)  Every person having charge of a taxicab within the city shall at all times carry with him or her his or her taxicab license, issued by the city, a copy of the rates of fare established and a copy of the rules and regulations, and shall exhibit them to any passenger or police officer on demand. He or she shall not demand from any passenger more than the established rate of fare. When in a public place he or she shall not refuse, unless previously engaged or unless the conditions are such as those described in section 13-7, to carry any passenger lawfully entitled to be carried in a taxicab. 
(b)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting a driver of a taxicab licensed outside the city from driving through said city, dropping off a passenger, passengers or other merchandise within the city, or from accepting within the city a passenger, passengers, packages or other merchandise if summoned by or at the request of said passenger or client by telephone, or by radio dispatch from the owner or operator's principal place of business outside the city provided that the name, pick-up address, and destination of said passenger or client are immediately supplied by the driver to any inquiring police officer. 
(Code 1963, § 10-15; Ord. No. 2003-07, 5-22-2003)  
Sec. 13-6.1. - Rates and fares. 
(a)  Rate. $1.75 for the first one-eighth of a mile; 
$0.45 for each additional one-eighth of a mile. 
Waiting time—$24.00 per hour. 
(b)  New multiple passenger situation. Multiple loadings of passenger, with their consent, shall be allowed at the following food markets: 
(1)  Demoulas 
(2)  Star at Porter Square 
(3)  Stop & Shop 
When multiple loadings occur, each party shall be charged the fare recorded on the meter less $1.00. Minimum charge shall be $2.50. 
(c)  New fare regulations. Passengers going to the airport shall be responsible for all tolls, both ways, for the Mystic Tobin Bridge, Callahan Tunnell, or Ted Williams Tunnel, and any airport charges, if applicable. 
(Code 1963, § 10-27; Ord. No. 1967-3; Ord. No. 1969-11; Ord. No. 1973-14; Ord. No. 1976-9; Ord. No. 1979-16; Ord. No. 1982-14; Ord. No. 1989-2; § 1, 2-9-89; Ord. No. 1999-2, 4-22-99; Ord. No. 2002-17, 12-12-2002; Ord. No. 2006-11, 6-8-2006; Ord. No. 2012-01, 2-23-2012)  
Sec. 13-7. - Nonpayment of fares. 
Any person refusing to pay, or attempting to avoid payment of a taxicab fare, shall forfeit and pay a fine in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Code 1963, § 10-16)  
Sec. 13-8. - Additional fares and passengers. 
(a)  No person having the charge, care or ordering of any taxicab, except an omnibus, shall take up or carry any passenger after the cab has been occupied or engaged by any prior passenger without the consent of the prior passenger or until such prior passenger shall have discharged said carriage. Any such prior passenger shall not be obligated or requested to pay any extra fare or fee for refusing such consent. 
(b)  Subject to the aforesaid consent requirements, no taxicab driver shall collect a double fare for the carriage of more than one passenger. As to passengers engaging the taxicab at different origins, the first passenger so engaging the taxicab shall be responsible for the fare to his or her destination, and the subsequent passenger shall be responsible for the fare from that point to the point of his or her destination. As to passengers engaging the taxicab at the same origin, the passenger arriving at his or her destination first shall be responsible for the full fare from that point to the point of his or her destination. As to passengers engaging the taxicab at the same origin and proceeding to the same destination, each passenger shall be responsible for an equal share of one fare. 
(Code 1963, § 10-19)  
Sec. 13-9. - Lost items. 
Every person having charge of a taxicab shall immediately after delivering any passenger, search said cab for any property which may have been left therein by any person having the care or ordering of any taxicab, and when not restored to the owner thereof within 48 hours, the property shall be delivered by the finder thereof to the police department. 
(Code 1963, § 10-20)  
Sec. 13-10. - Solicitation, pickup of passengers, and use of front seat. 
(a)  Only a driver of a Somerville licensed taxicab may pick up a passenger on a public way who has hailed a taxicab. No vehicle without a licensed Somerville taxicab medallion shall pick up a person in response to a street hail, or may stand in a taxi stand. 
(b)  Each Somerville licensed taxicab shall be authorized to pick up passengers in Somerville pursuant to a telephone, digital request, radio call, or by any other type of pre-arrangement. 
(c)  No person having charge of a taxicab shall suffer any person to ride in the front seat of the taxicab, except when the seats inside the cab are fully occupied, and then only when the person so riding is a genuine passenger. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this section shall be interpreted to limit the rights available to any persons under the Americans with Disability Act, the Massachusetts Public Accommodation Law (M.G.L. c. 272, §§ 92A, 98, and 98A) or any other applicable federal or state law. 
(Code 1963, § 10-21; Ord. No. 2016-11 , 7-14-2016)  
Sec. 13-11. - Taxi parking. 
No owner, driver or other person having the care or ordering of any licensed taxicab shall suffer the same to stop in any street, square, lane or alley of this city more than five minutes, without some proper person to take care of the same, or more than 20 minutes in any case; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be taken to apply to licensed taxicabs rightfully standing upon assigned stands. 
(Code 1963, § 10-22)  
Sec. 13-12. - Taxi availability. 
Every driver of any licensed taxicab shall remain near to such vehicle while it is unemployed, or standing in the streets or squares of the city, unless he or she shall be necessarily absent therefrom in the course of his or her duty and business as such driver; and he or she shall so keep his or her vehicle that it shall not obstruct said streets or squares or other public passages, or in any other manner violate the law or the ordinances of the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 10-23)  
Sec. 13-13. - Directions of police officers. 
Every person having charge of a taxicab shall obey the directions of any police officer respecting the standing of such vehicle while waiting for passengers and the route to be taken in going to or from the place of standing. 
(Code 1963, § 10-24) 
Cross reference— Police, Ch. 10.  
Sec. 13-14. - Passengers with contagious diseases. 
No person having charge of any taxicab shall receive or permit to be placed therein, nor convey in or upon the same, any person sick or infected with any contagious disease, or the body of any person deceased from such disease. 
(Code 1963, § 10-25) 
Cross reference— Health, Ch. 6.  
Sec. 13-15. - Recordkeeping. 
The owner of a licensed taxicab must keep on a form approved by the police chief and produce upon demand of the police chief a record showing time of all trips made by said vehicle and containing all information requested on a form approved by the police chief for a period of each calendar day, said forms to be held for 90 days. 
(Code 1963, § 10-28)  
Sec. 13-16. - Charge for luggage. 
Hand baggage may be carried by passenger without charge. The charge of trunks shall be optional with the person in charge of the vehicle; but, if carried, the charge shall be set from time to time and such charge shall be on file in the city clerk's office.  
Sec. 13-17. - Rates for trips beyond city limits or by the hour. 
When a motor taxicab is hired by the hour or for a trip wholly or in part outside the limits of the city, the person in charge may suspend, with the consent of the passenger, the use of the taximeter as a means of determining the price to be paid. In such cases the price shall be agreed upon between the persons in charge of the automobile and the passenger. 
(Code 1963, § 10-30)  
Sec. 13-18. - Painting taxis. 
No owner of a licensed taxicab shall paint his or her vehicle in colors or designs to so closely resemble other licensed taxicabs as to mislead the public to its identity. 
(Code 1963, § 10-34)  
Sec. 13-19. - Taxi maintenance and cleanliness. 
All taxicabs shall be kept in good condition, suitable for occupancy and mechanically fit for the safety of its passengers. The interior and exterior shall be clean, safe and sanitary at all times. At any time, the head of the taxi bureau may stop a taxicab and order it out of service until necessary repairs are made to said taxicabs as will render it in his or her discretion, safe for use and occupancy. 
(Code 1963, § 10-35)  
Sec. 13-20. - Garaging of taxis. 
Taxicabs licensed by the city council shall be licensed and registered in accordance with Chapter 90 of the General Laws, from their principal place of garaging, which place shall be within the geographical confines of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 10-7)  
Sec. 13-21. - Availability of taxi ordinance. 
Upon the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter derives the city clerk shall have printed in booklet form a copy of this chapter and the most recent amendments thereto. Said booklet shall be made available at no cost to those persons coming within the scope of the provisions of this chapter and shall be brought up-to-date annually. 
(Code 1963, § 10-39)  
Sec. 13-22. - Complaints and punishments. 
All complaints and violations of the provisions of this chapter against taxicab drivers and owners, by the public or police officers, shall be brought before the chief of police who shall hear the facts, and if the taxicab driver or owner is found guilty of the complaint or violation, the chief of police may recommend to the city council, that the said license of owner or driver shall be suspended or revoked. If the owner of any taxicab is found guilty of the offense charged while he or she is driving the said taxicab, the chief of police may recommend that the license of the said taxicab shall be suspended or revoked, in addition to any action that may be taken in regard to his or her driver's license, and said taxicab shall not be used during said period of suspension or revocation. 
(Code 1963, § 10-37)  
Sec. 13-23. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to the penalty prescribed in section 1-11. In addition, any person holding a license issued under this chapter shall, upon conviction for a violation of this chapter, thereby forfeit his or her license or licenses, and no license under this chapter shall thereafter be issued to such person, except by leave of the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 10-3)  
Secs. 13-24—13-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 8. 
 
Sec. 13-36. - Taxi and hackney carriage license. 
(a)  No person shall drive or have charge of a taxicab, nor shall any person set up and use a taxicab unless licensed thereto by the city council. 
(b)  No owner or person having the care of ordering of a taxicab shall suffer or allow any person other than a driver licensed by the city council to drive such taxicab. 
(Code 1963, § 10-2) 
State Law reference— License required for operators of common carriers of passengers by motor vehicle, M.G.L.A. c. 159A, § 1.  
Sec. 13-37. - Taxi license conditions. 
Taxicab licenses and taxicab driver's licenses may be issued subject to such terms, conditions and regulations as the city council may from time to time prescribe by order. No such license shall be issued until the fee therefor has been paid. 
(Code 1963, § 10-4)  
Sec. 13-38. - Taxi license applications. 
(a)  An applicant for a license as owner of a taxicab shall present to the city clerk for examination in the case of each vehicle, a valid certificate of registration issued by the registry of motor vehicles of the state, the date of which, together with the vehicle license number shall be entered upon the application and also upon the license of the city council, if granted. 
(b)  Upon any change in the certificate of registration of a taxicab issued by the state registry of motor vehicles, licensed owners shall forthwith present such certificate, together with the taxicab license, to the city clerk. 
(c)  Applications for taxicab licenses, taxicab driver's licenses or for permits for taxi stands may be filed with the city council at any time, but applications for renewal of said licenses or permits already in force shall be filed annually in April, except in the case of taxicab driver's licenses which shall be filed biannually in April. They shall be made on official forms provided by the city council and shall contain all the information therein required. All licenses and permits shall become void on the first day of May annually, except for taxicab driver's licenses which shall expire on the first day of May biannually; provided, however, that such as are granted in April shall be valid for the year beginning on the next succeeding first day of May. 
(Code 1963, § 10-5)  
Sec. 13-39. - Taxi license transfers. 
(a)  No license or permit provided for in this article shall be leased, sold, assigned or transferred without the prior consent of the city council in writing. When any such lease, sale, assignment or transfer is to take place, the then current licensee shall submit to the city council in advance, a duly certified copy of the lease, purchase and sale or other appropriate agreement which shall set forth in detail the terms and conditions of the proposed transaction. Any licensee who shall cease to be the owner or driver of a taxicab shall at once surrender his or her license to the city council. 
(b)  The fee for the transfer, lease, or assignment of a taxicab license for each such license transferred, leased or assigned shall be set from time to time and such fee is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1963, § 10-8)  
Sec. 13-40. - Taxi license renewals. 
All renewals for a license to operate a taxicab and all licenses and taxicab permit cards issued to owners shall be done before the first day of May of each year. 
(Code 1963, § 10-44)  
Sec. 13-41. - Taxi owners licenses. 
(a)  The city council may issue taxicab licenses to suitable owners of motor vehicles, to set up and use such vehicles as taxicabs. 
(b)  Such license shall be issued in the form of decal which shall be affixed to the rear of said vehicles so as to be plainly visible to the public at all times. Said decal shall be firmly fastened to the body of the vehicle in such a manner that it will not easily become detached therefrom; and under no conditions shall decal be attached to the vehicle's state license plate or to its bumper. The head of the taxi bureau shall specify the location on every vehicle where said decal is to be affixed. 
(c)  The fee for taxicab licenses shall be set from time to time and such fee is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1963, § 10-4; Ord. No. 1991-9, 5-23-91)  
Sec. 13-42. - Taxi drivers licenses. 
(a)  The city council may issue taxicab driver's licenses for a period not to exceed two years from the date of issuance, to persons qualified as drivers and otherwise suitable, to drive and have charge of taxicabs. The fee for such licenses shall be set from time to time and such fee is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the chief of police may issue a temporary taxicab driver's license to an applicant, pending issuance of his or her license by the city council, for a period not exceeding 21 days; provided, however, that no such temporary license shall be issued to any person who has forfeited a license under section 13-23 or who has been denied a license under this article by the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 10-4)  
Sec. 13-43. - Taxi drivers license photo and display. 
(a)  Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license under section 13-42 shall present himself or herself to the chief of police, or to an officer designated under section 13-2, during such times as shall be designated by said chief, and shall be photographed. This requirement shall apply to applications for new and renewal licenses, and to requests for replacement of lost licenses. 
(b)  One copy of such photograph shall be filed with the application and shall be retained by the chief of police or his or her designee under section 13-2. 
(c)  One copy of such photograph shall be incorporated onto the taxicab driver's license in a permanent manner, rendering it nonremovable without destruction of the license. 
(d)  Every taxicab driver, while on duty, shall display his or her license on the left breast of his or her outer clothing, or on his or her left collar, upright and readily visible from the front. 
(Code 1963, § 10-18)  
Sec. 13-44. - Taxi owner and driver English language requirement. 
No person shall be licensed to be a driver or an owner of a taxicab under the provisions of this article, unless he or she can read, write and speak the English language intelligently. 
(Code 1963, § 10-6)  
Sec. 13-45. - Taxi dispatch and out-of-town taxi restrictions. 
(a)  No taxicab licensee shall use the physical facilities, radio-dispatching service or goodwill of any other licensee without prior notification to the city council in writing. 
(b)  No licensee, association of licensees, nor agents thereof, shall be allowed to dispatch a taxicab or taxicabs in response to a request for a Somerville licensed taxicab, by whatever means such request is received, unless: (i) such taxicab or taxicabs are licensed in the city; and (ii) the operator or operators thereof possess (a) hackney carriage license(s) issued in accordance with this article. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting a driver of a taxicab licensed outside of the city from driving through the city, or from accepting or delivering within the city a passenger, passengers, packages or other items for transport, if summoned by or at the request of a client, by telephone or by radio dispatch, from within the geographic boundaries of the city, but not by direct on-street solicitation. 
(Code 1963, § 10-8; Ord. No. 1992-9, §§ 1—3, 12-10-92)  
Sec. 13-46. - Taxicab licenses and taxi medallions. 
(a)  Not more than one taxicab license shall be granted for each 1,000 inhabitants, or fraction thereof, of the city, as determined by the most recent federal decennial census; provided, however, that renewal licenses may be granted notwithstanding the above limitation, but further provided that no new license shall be granted while the number of licenses is in excess of the above limitation. Any license for which a renewal application is not filed during the month of June in any year shall lapse as of the first of July in such year, and any further application therefor shall be treated as an application for a new license for all purposes of this chapter, including the limitation provisions of this section. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section relative to limitations on the number of taxicab licenses, and in order to correct certain inequities, the city council may grant three additional new taxicab licenses in its discretion. Immediately upon the issuance of said additional licenses, they shall again become subject to all provisions of this section. 
(Code 1963, § 10-9; Ord. No. 1990-13, § 1, 11-8-90)  
Sec. 13-47. - Licensee changes of address. 
When a licensed owner changes his or her address or the place at which a taxicab owned by him or her is kept, or when a licensed driver changes his or her home address, his or her place of employment or his or her employer, he or she shall, within three days of such change, notify the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 10-10)  
Sec. 13-48. - Immoral or disorderly passengers. 
(a)  The city council will hold as unsuited to hold a license any driver of a taxicab who gives direction, information or service to a man or woman seeking a place or a person for immoral purposes, or any driver who offers such direction, information or service. 
(b)  The city council will regard as unsuited to hold a license any driver of a taxicab who continues to convey from place to place a person who is noisy or otherwise disorderly, or who conveys a person who is intoxicated, even though not disorderly, except directly to the place where the driver has reason to believe is the passenger's house, lodging or other abiding place; but this provision shall not apply to cases in which persons are conveyed at direction of a police officer. 
(c)  When a passenger becomes noisy or otherwise disorderly while in a taxicab and persists in such conduct, after warning, the driver may appeal to any policeman who shall assist him or her in any lawful way and, if in the possession of the necessary evidence, shall prosecute the offending passenger. The police shall observe with particular care the matters to which this section relates and report thereon. 
(Code 1963, § 10-17)  
Sec. 13-49. - Motor vehicle taxi requirements. 
The owners and drivers of taxicab propelled by mechanical motors shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter, and shall be subject also to the following special provisions: 
(1)  An applicant for a license as owner of a motor taxicab shall present for examination in the case of each car a valid certificate of registration issued by the state registrar of motor vehicles, the date of which together with the car number shall be entered on the application and also on the license of the city council, if granted. 
(2)  An applicant for a license to drive a motorized taxicab shall present for examination a valid license as a chauffeur issued to him or her by the state registrar of motor vehicles, and the date and the number thereof shall be entered on the application, and also on the license of the city council. 
(3)  Notice in writing shall be given to the city council by licensed owners and chauffeurs, as the case may be, immediately upon any change in residence or employment, or in the place at which a car is kept, or upon any change in the certificate of registration, the license to operate or the car number as issued by the state registrar of motor vehicles. 
(4)  Owners and drivers of motorized taxicabs shall be subject in their equipment and operation to all provisions of the state statutes relating to automobiles now or hereafter in effect. 
(5)  All licensed taxicabs shall be equipped with electronic credit card processing capability (which includes the processing of an ATM/debit card used as a credit card). Such equipment shall allow the passenger to swipe the card in the rear compartment of the taxicab without handing the card to the driver. Such equipment shall list fare, tolls, fees, and tips separately for processing purposes. Such equipment will also provide a printed receipt which includes the taxicab license number, date, time, and charge amount. Such equipment shall have the ability to electronically authorize the credit card transaction in a timely manner and be fully functioning at all times. If a licensed taxicab does not have a fully functioning credit card reader, it shall be deemed unfit for service as a taxicab. 
(Code 1963, § 10-26; Ord. No. 2016-10 , 7-14-2016)  
Sec. 13-50. - Taximeters. 
Every motor vehicle licensed as a taxicab, except motor vehicles used for funeral and wedding purposes only, shall have affixed thereto a device which shall be used for determining the cost of transportation by such taxicab and shall be known as a taximeter. Said taximeter shall be of a size and design approved by the city council. 
(Code 1963, § 10-31)  
Sec. 13-51. - Taximeter inspections. 
No vehicle shall be licensed as a taxicab and no taxicab license shall be renewed until the taximeter attached thereto shall have been inspected by the taxi bureau and found to be accurate in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 98, Section 45 of the General Laws and section 13-2 of this chapter. The fee for affixing a seal to any taximeter or for replacing any such seal shall be set from time to time and such fee is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1963, § 10-31)  
Sec. 13-52. - Taximeter inspections and accuracy. 
The members of the taxi bureau and their assistants may, in the performance of their duties, stop and enter without a warrant any taxicab for the purpose of inspecting its taximeter and may direct the driver to proceed to a specified place for such an inspection. Notwithstanding any inspection or testing of such taximeter, the holder of a taxicab license shall be solely responsible for maintaining an accurate taximeter. Any of the aforesaid members of the taxi bureau or assistants may recommend the suspension of the taxicab license to the city council of any taxicab containing a taximeter which fails to register within the tolerance allowed by the state director of standards. Such suspension shall be for a period not to exceed 14 days. 
(Code 1963, § 10-31)  
Sec. 13-53. - Taxi owner trade names. 
(a)  All trade names used by licensed taxicab owners shall be approved by the city council and recorded in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Any licensee who shall cease to be the owner of a taximeter shall at once surrender his or her license to the city clerk. 
(Code 1963, § 10-32)  
Sec. 13-54. - License revocation. 
The chief of police may recommend refusal of a license for, or if already issued, recommend revocation or suspension of the license of any taxicab found by him or her in his or her sound discretion to be unfit or unsuited for public patronage. 
(Code 1963, § 10-33)  
Sec. 13-55. - Taxi permit cards. 
(a)  All licensed taxicabs shall be issued a permit card from the city clerk's office, of such size and form as may be required by the city council. This card will show the license number assigned to said vehicle, the state registration plate license and meter number assigned to said vehicle. This permit card shall be placed permanently on the rear of the front seat, in a slot provided for this purpose by the owners. 
(b)  This permit card may not be removed for any purpose except it may be transferred to another vehicle in cases of emergency, upon written permission from the chief of police. This permission shall not exceed three weeks or 21 days unless such transfer is permanent in nature. 
(Code 1963, § 10-40)  
Sec. 13-56. - Taxi permit card transfers. 
Taxicab permit cards are not transferable for any reason whatsoever, unless approved by the city council. Applicants for taxicab permit cards and owner's licenses must first have said vehicle inspected by the police department and receive clearance in written form which must presented to the city clerk's office before he or she may receive such owner's license and permit card. If the applicant does not comply with said inspection within 60 days of filing of the application, his or her license or request shall automatically be revoked. 
(Code 1963, § 10-41)  
Sec. 13-57. - Taxi owners license and taxi permit card board of directors requirement. 
All applicant's for owner's licenses and taxicab permit cards must list the names of the board of directors of such corporation with each application submitted to the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1963, § 10-43)  
Sec. 13-58. - Taxi inspections. 
(a)  Before a taxicab shall be licensed, it shall be thoroughly inspected as required by Chapter 90, Section 7 of the General Laws relative to equipment. Any replacement vehicle shall be allowed to operate for a period of ten days, provided written notification of such change is made to the taxi bureau, and that such vehicle shall be inspected by an officer of the taxi bureau within the same ten-day period. 
(b)  Each taxicab shall be inspected by the police department for cleanliness and general appearance periodically. 
(Code 1963, § 10-42)  
Sec. 13-59. - Taxi inspections and suspensions. 
(a)  Every taxicab shall be inspected by the taxi bureau at least once every six months, to ensure its fitness for use. An inspection certificate, approved as to form by the city council, shall be completed in triplicate at the time of inspection; one copy each shall be retained by the licensee and the taxi bureau respectively, and one copy shall be filed with the city council. The fee for such inspection shall be set from time to time and such fee is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Upon the failure of any taxicab to pass a semiannual inspection, the license for said vehicle shall be immediately suspended for a period of seven days and the head of the taxi bureau shall forthwith notify the city council of such suspension; and if, after a second inspection held not more than seven days thereafter, such taxicab shall again fail of inspection, its license shall be revoked in the manner provided by law. No taxicab shall have its license renewed until the proper inspection certificates have been filed with the city council, as prescribed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1963, § 10-35)  
Sec. 13-60. - Taxi driver moving violation. 
(a)  Upon having been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of a moving violation wherein a taxicab was being operated at the time of the offense, a taxicab driver shall receive a written warning from the head of taxi bureau to the effect that future convictions will subject said driver to possible license suspension by the city; and if, within the same calendar year, a taxicab driver is convicted of a second moving violation he or she shall have his or her operator's license suspended for a period of not less than three days. 
(b)  A third or subsequent conviction within the same calendar year shall subject the taxicab driver to an immediate suspension of his or her operator's license for a period of not less than 30 days. 
(c)  Any suspension shall be subject to appeal to the chief of police, in writing, within three days of the notice of suspension which shall also be in writing and shall specify the incident which forms the basis for the suspension. The chief of police shall affirm or reverse any suspension of license, in writing, within three days of any hearing given. For the purpose of this section a waiver of trial and payment of fine shall be considered a guilty finding. 
(Code 1963, § 10-24)  
Sec. 13-61. - Complaints. 
All cabs in the city will be required to display on the right side of the right rear window a four-inch by eight-inch sign with half-inch letters that will be provided by the taxi company stating the following: 
      TAXI NO. _____ 
"For any complaints concerning the service provided, including but not limited to fares, elderly discounts, driver courtesy, or lack of credit card processing capability, please contact your City Police Taxi Bureau at 625-1600, Monday through Friday 9AM to 4PM. Please note the date, time and Cab Number." 
(Ord. No. 1989-1, § 1, 2-9-89; Ord. No. 2016-10 , 7-14-2016)  
Secs. 13-62—13-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LIVERY VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 13-71. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases whenever they occur in this article shall be construed as herein defined: 
Applicant: Any person or persons, or in the case of a corporation, any director or officer. 
Chauffeur: Any person authorized to operate a livery vehicle. 
Chauffeur's license: A license issued by the city through its appropriate officers authorizing the person therein named to drive any licensed livery vehicle within the city. 
Livery license: A license issued by the city through its appropriate officers authorizing the operation and control of a livery vehicle or fleet of livery vehicles in the city in the manner as provided in this article. 
Livery vehicle: Any passenger vehicle operated by a chauffeur licensed by the city transporting passengers for hire at a charge or fee for each passenger per trip or for each vehicle per trip as a result of individual contract on a trip or hourly basis fixed by agreement in advance, which does not pick-up or hail fares in the street and does not contain a rate meter. 
Livery vehicle license: A license issued by the city through its appropriate officers authorizing the operation on the streets of the city of a livery vehicle. Said license shall apply only to the vehicle described in the application for said license. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-72. - Livery license. 
It shall be unlawful to operate a business in Somerville or directly solicit or promote in Somerville a business of transporting persons for hire in a livery vehicle from a location in the city without first having obtained a livery license from the city council authorizing such business and designating the number of such vehicles that may be used under such permit. A livery license shall be issued by the city clerk pursuant to the direction of the city council. All livery vehicles owned by funeral homes in the city, and used exclusively for funeral business shall be exempt from this article. All livery vehicles owned by applicants that operate under state or federal contracts that require periodic CORI and driving record checks of all chauffeurs shall be exempt from this article. No livery license shall be issued to or held by any person who is not of legal age. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-73. - Application for livery license. 
Application for livery license shall be made in writing to the city clerk and shall state thereon the name of the applicant, the intended place of business, the number of vehicles to be operated, and such other information as may be required by the city council. Each application for a livery license shall be accompanied by a fee, to be established by the city council and on file with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-74. - Considerations for issuance of livery license. 
In considering the issuance of the proposed livery license, the city council shall consider the following: 
(1)  Experience of the applicant; 
(2)  Public need for operators; 
(3)  Type of service proposed by the applicant; 
(4)  Financial responsibility of the applicant; 
(5)  Inventory of vehicles; 
(6)  Current demand and anticipated future demand for service; 
(7)  Number of vehicles in operation; 
(8)  Statement from the building inspector that the use conforms to the applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance; 
(9)  Recommendation of the police chief; and 
(10)  Other facts considered relevant by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-75. - Issuance of livery license. 
In the event that the city council determines that the proposed livery license be issued, it shall specify the maximum number of vehicles to be operated. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-76. - Term of livery license. 
A livery license authorized by the city council shall remain in full force until the following October 1, unless sooner terminated in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-77. - Livery license nontransferable. 
A livery license shall be nonassignable and nontransferable. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-78. - Revocation of livery license. 
A livery license may be revoked by action of the city council; provided, however, that no such revocation shall be made without cause and without notice to the licensee and a hearing before the city council. Cause for revocation of a livery license shall be the violation by the operator of the statutes, rules, and regulations of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, the United States or any ordinances, rules, or regulations of the city, the violations of which reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the operator to offer public transportation, the violation of the operator of any provisions of this article, proof of fraud or misrepresentation in obtaining the livery license, or failure to comply with the terms of the livery license or any agreement therein contained. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-79. - Access to equipment, books by city council. 
For the purpose of enabling the city council to inform itself as to the character and quality of service rendered the public, and for determination of whether the operator is maintaining adequate insurance to meet personal injury, death and property damage claims, the city council and the police chief shall have access to the equipment, apparatus and other property, and the inventories, books, papers, accounts and records of all property and operations of the operator at all reasonable times. Every operator at all times shall keep in the city complete and accurate books and records of all property, operations, receipts and disbursements, in such form and detail as may be prescribed from time to time by the city council or the police chief. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-80. - Filing of address; notice. 
Every operator shall file with the city clerk an address in the city to which all notices required to be given to the operator under this article may be addressed. All such notices shall be deemed good and sufficient for all purposes when deposited in the United States mail in a postpaid envelope addressed to the operator at the address on file with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-81. - Chauffeur's license. 
No person shall drive a livery vehicle or provide livery service for which a fee is charged, unless he shall have secured a chauffeur's license. The fee for the issuance and renewal of a chauffeur's license shall be as established by the police chief and such license shall expire on November 1, up to two years following the date of issue. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-82. - License requirements. 
Any person desiring to secure a chauffeur's license or renewal thereof shall make application in writing to the police chief. Such application shall set forth the name of the applicant, his residence and occupation, and shall be endorsed by at least two responsible citizens of the city who shall certify that the applicant is of good character and a fit person to drive or operate a public passenger vehicle. 
(1)  Every applicant shall be 21 years of age or over. 
(2)  Hold a valid driver's license. 
(3)  Provide a letter of intent from the livery owner who intends to hire this person. 
(4)  Have at least one year of driving experience. 
Upon such application, the police chief shall make a careful and diligent inquiry as to the character and record of the applicant and if it shall be found that such applicant is lacking in any of such respects, such license shall be refused. If the police chief shall be satisfied that the applicant is a fit person to be licensed, such application shall be recommended for approval to the city council. If then approved by the city council, the license shall be issued by the police chief. Such license shall have affixed thereon a picture of the licensee, and shall contain such other descriptive matter of the licensee as may be prescribed by the police chief. A duplicate of the picture and the applicant's fingerprints shall be kept on file in the police department. Such license shall be displayed at all times in the livery vehicle in plain view of the passenger. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-83. - Suspension or revocation of chauffeur's license. 
The police chief or city council may suspend any chauffeur's license for violation of traffic laws or ordinances, or any ordinance or law regulating the conduct of such chauffeur; provided, however, that upon the suspension of any chauffeur's license by the police chief, the chauffeur shall have the right to appeal the decision of the police chief to the city council. Upon receipt of such an appeal, the city council shall consider evidence presented by the chauffeur and the city council may affirm or reverse the decision of the police chief suspending the chauffeur's license. A chauffeur's license may be revoked by action of the city council; provided, however, that no such revocation shall be made without cause and without notice to the licensee and a hearing before the city council. Cause for revocation of a livery license shall be the violation by the operator of the statutes, rules, and regulations of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, the United States or any ordinances, rules, or regulations of the city, the violations of which reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the operator to offer public transportation, the violation of the operator of any provisions of this article, proof of fraud or misrepresentation in obtaining the livery license, or failure to comply with the terms of the livery license or any agreement therein contained. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-84. - Conduct of chauffeur. 
It shall be unlawful for any chauffeur of a livery vehicle while on duty to carry or possess intoxicating liquor or any narcotic or dangerous drug in a livery vehicle or be under the influence of intoxicating liquor or dangerous drugs whether or not such chauffeur possesses a prescription for such narcotic or dangerous drug, or to use any profane or obscene language, to blow horn, shout or call to solicit prospective passengers, or to disturb the peace in any way. It shall be the duty of every chauffeur of a livery vehicle to obey all traffic rules established by Commonwealth of Massachusetts or local laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-85. - Livery vehicle license. 
It shall be unlawful to operate a livery vehicle in the city without first having secured an annual livery vehicle license for each vehicle from the police chief. No livery vehicle license shall be issued to any person other than the holder of a currently valid livery license. Application for such license shall be made in writing to the police chief and shall state thereon the name of the applicant and a description of the vehicle to be licensed, name of manufacturer and vehicle identification number. Licenses shall expire each November 1 following the date of issue unless sooner terminated by the police chief. License fee shall be as established by the police chief. The police chief shall issue a suitable sticker or tag which shall be displayed as specified by the police chief. The license shall not be transferred to any other livery vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-86. - Revocation of license. 
The revocation of the livery license shall automatically revoke all livery vehicle licenses authorized for said livery license. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-87. - Condition of vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for the holder of a livery license to permit any vehicle to operate under said livery license unless and until each vehicle is equipped with proper heating and air conditioning, brakes, tires, lights, horn, muffler, rear vision mirror, and windshield wipers in good condition, and such other equipment as required by the statutes, rules and regulations of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. It shall be unlawful to operate a livery vehicle that is marked with identifying information of the owner or operator. No vehicle shall be operated unless it has passed any and all city and state inspections as may be required. It shall be the duty of the police chief to inspect every vehicle so often as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-88. - Inspection of vehicles. 
No livery vehicle shall be operated unless it has been inspected by the police chief and found to be in safe condition for the transportation of passengers, clean, of good appearance and all of the provisions of this article have been complied with. All livery vehicles shall be inspected prior to renewal of the livery vehicle license, or at other times as specified by the police chief. If any licensed livery vehicle shall become unsafe for the transportation of passengers or shall become unclean in appearance, such license may be suspended by the police chief or designee, until the vehicle and all its appurtenances shall be put in fit condition for public use. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-89. - Unlawful to operate unsafe livery vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful, for the purpose of transporting passengers, for any person to drive, or move or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved in the city any livery vehicle which does not contain those parts or is not at all times equipped with such equipment as is required under the terms of this article or the statutes of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts relating to passenger vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-90. - Insurance. 
No livery vehicle shall be operated unless it be insured in the amount of no less than $500,000.00 combined single limit against liability for injuries or death. Said insurance shall require ten days' notice of termination to the city and shall name the city as a certificate holder. In the event that the operator of a livery vehicle fails to maintain such currently valid certificate or policy of insurance, the license herein provided for the operation of the livery vehicle shall likewise terminate forthwith and without further notice. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-91. - Use in perpetration of crime. 
It shall be unlawful to knowingly permit any livery vehicle to be used in the perpetration of a crime or misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-92. - Livery vehicles coming into city. 
No person shall be solicited or accepted in said vehicle for transportation from any place within the city unless prearranged as indicated above. Any person in control or possession of said vehicle who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the penalties as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-93. - No smoking in livery vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke any tobacco at any time in any livery vehicle. Every livery vehicle shall be posted with a "No Smoking" sign in a conspicuous location within the passenger compartment. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-94. - Livery dispatch. 
(a)  No livery licensee shall use the physical facilities, radio-dispatching service or goodwill of any other licensee without prior notification to the city council in writing. 
(b)  No licensee, association of licensees, nor agents thereof, shall be allowed to dispatch a livery vehicle in response to a request for a Somerville licensed taxicab, by whatever means such request is received. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting a driver of a livery vehicle licensed outside of the city from driving through the city, or from accepting or delivering within the city a passenger, passengers, packages or other items for transport, if summoned by or at the request of a client, by telephone or by radio dispatch, from within the geographic boundaries of the city, but not by direct on-street solicitation. 
(d)  No licensee, association of licensees, nor agents thereof, shall be allowed to dispatch a livery vehicle in response to a request for a Somerville licensed livery vehicle, by whatever means such request is received, unless such vehicles are licensed in the city and the operator thereof possesses a chauffeur license issued in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-95. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a livery service within the city to do any of the following acts. 
(1)  Equip a limousine with a taximeter; 
(2)  Wait at a taxicab stand for passengers; 
(3)  Cruise the streets or in any way attempt to solicit business on the streets. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Sec. 13-96. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this shall be fined in accordance with section 1-11(b) of the Somerville Code of Ordinances. Each occurrence of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. The police chief is the enforcing authority for this section. This section shall not be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action or other legal remedy available to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, 5-12-2005)  
Chapter 14 - VETERANS' AID AND PENSIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Veterans' benefits generally, M.G.L.A. c. 115; local departments of veterans' services, M.G.L.A. c. 115, § 10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Veterans aid and pensions department. 
There shall be a veterans' aid and pensions department under the supervision of a commissioner to be known as commissioner of veterans' aid and pensions. 
(Code 1963, § 9-1)  
Sec. 14-2. - Veterans aid beneficiaries and investigations. 
The commissioner of the veterans' aid and pensions department shall investigate and report to the veterans' aid and pensions committee of the city council upon all applicants and beneficiaries under and subject to all statutes pertaining to veterans' aid and pensions. He or she shall investigate, at least as often as once a year, the cases of all such beneficiaries and report thereon to said committee. 
(Code 1963, § 9-2)  
Sec. 14-3. - Approval of veterans aid and pensions. 
Veterans' aid and pensions shall be given to beneficiaries when authorized by said committee of the city council and, when required, with the approval of the commissioner of veterans' aid and pensions of the commonwealth. 
(Code 1963, § 9-3)  
Chapter 15 - CODE OF CONDUCT, ETHICS AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 15-1—15-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ETHICS 
 
Sec. 15-31. - Definitions. 
Whenever used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context requires otherwise: 
Adjudicatory proceeding means a formal, confidential investigation conducted by the commission, in which all parties in interest have an opportunity to be heard; 
Affinity means related by marriage; 
Amount means a category of value, rather than an exact dollar figure, as set forth in M.G.L.A. c.268B, § 1(a); provided, however, that the commission may adopt different categories by a roll call vote of the commission; and provided, further, that the mayor, city council and school committee shall be notified, in writing, of any such action of the commission along with reasons for such action; 
Application means a proposal or similar document written to apply for any grant and/or trust fund program. 
Business means any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm, franchise, association, organization, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, business trust, or other legal entity organized for profit or charitable purposes; provided, however, any relationship which would appear to be a business association to an objective, reasonable person, regardless of the formal relationship, shall be considered a "business" for the purposes of this chapter; and provided, further, that this term shall include any fee splitting arrangement with a person subject to the requirements of this chapter; 
Candidate for public office means any individual who seeks nomination or election to the office of mayor, councilors or school committee; 
City means the City of Somerville; 
City agency or department shall have the same meaning as municipal body. 
City Charter means the Charter of the City of Somerville; 
City official or employee means any person performing services for the city or holding an office, position, employment or membership in a city agency, whether by election, appointment, contract of hire or engagement, whether serving with or without compensation, on a full, regular, part-time, intermittent, or consultant basis. 
City solicitor means the city solicitor for the city; 
Commission means the ethics commission created pursuant to this chapter; 
Consanguinity means related by blood; 
Designated municipal official means any of those city employees who hold the positions specified on a list submitted by the mayor to the commission by January 31 of each year; provided, however, such list shall include only those employees whose total compensation from the city for the reporting period is amongst the top 150 and who hold major policy making positions and in addition, any city employee(s) in the title of "project manager," who shall have the responsibility for managing projects of building construction or any other public works where the total expenditure for such project is estimated or expected to exceed $1,000,000.00; provided, further, that the commission may request the mayor to add a specific position to the list and, if the mayor declines, may request the city council to add such position by a two-thirds roll call vote; 
Direct and substantial interest in a particular matter shall be applied as interpreted under M.G.L.A. c. 268A, commonly known as the Conflict of Interest and Code of Conduct Law; 
Elected official means the mayor, aldermen and school committee of the city; 
Election commission means the election commission of the city; 
Equity means any stock or similar ownership interest in a business; 
Gift means a payment, entertainment, subscription, advance, services or anything of value, unless consideration of equal or greater value is received; provided, however, "gift" shall not include a political contribution reported as required by law, a commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business, or anything of value received by inheritance; 
Grant and/or grant funds means city funds disbursed as part of a federal or state pass-through or direct grant program by a city agency or department. 
Grantee means a non-city entity that receives grant and/or trust funds from a city agency or department. 
Immediate family includes a spouse and any dependent children residing in the reporting person's household; 
Income means income from whatever source derived, whether in the form of a fee, salary, allowance, forbearance, forgiveness, interest, dividend, royalty, rent, capital gain, or any other form of recompense or any combination thereof; provided, however, that interest from savings accounts or from governmental obligations other than those of the commonwealth or any political subdivision thereof or any public agency or authority created by the general court, alimony and support payments, proceeds from a life insurance policy, retirement or disability benefits, and social security payments shall not be considered income for the purposes of this chapter; 
Municipal body means any agency, authority, board, bureau, commission, committee, council, department, division, school department, or other legal entity within the government of the city; 
Municipal election means any preliminary, final or special election where the name of the relevant party shall appear on the ballot; 
Person means a business, individual, corporation, union, association, firm, partnership, committee, or other organization or group of persons; 
Preliminary inquiry means an informal, confidential investigation conducted by the commission, which may or may not accept written or verbal testimony; 
Relative means any person related within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity; and 
Reporting person means any person required to file a statement pursuant to this chapter. 
Subgrantee means a non-city entity that receives city grant and/or trust funds from a grantee or from another subgrantee. 
Trust and trust funds means city funds disbursed from a municipally established trust fund. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, 10-22-97; Ord. No. 2004-02, 2-12-2004; Ord. No. 2012-10, 11-20-2012)  
Sec. 15-32. - Ethics commission. 
(a)  There is hereby established a Somerville Ethics Commission composed of five members. Two members shall be appointed by the mayor and subject to approval of the city council, one member shall be appointed by the city council and subject to approval of the mayor, one member shall be appointed by the elected school committee members, exclusive of the ex-officio members, and subject to approval of the city council, and one member shall be the election commissioner. The chair of the commission shall be elected by the members annually and the commission may select other officers from amongst its members as it deems necessary and appropriate, including but not limited to a vice chair and clerk. 
(b)  With the exception of the election commissioner, members of the commission shall serve for terms of three years. The election commissioner shall serve ex-officio as a voting member. 
(c)  No member of the commission shall receive compensation for service on the commission. However, any reasonable expenses may be reimbursed in a manner similar to and subject to the same rules for reimbursement as all other municipal employees. 
(d)  Not less than 30 days prior to making any appointment to the commission, with the exception of the election commissioner, the appointing authority shall give public notice that a vacancy on the commission exists. 
(e)  No member or employee of the commission shall: 
(1)  Hold or be a candidate for any elected office which represents any portion of Somerville while a member or employee or for one year thereafter; 
(2)  Hold office in any political party or political campaign; or 
(3)  Participate in or contribute to the political campaign of any candidate for elected office which represents any portion of Somerville. 
(f)  With the exception of the election commissioner, members of the commission may be removed by a two-thirds roll call vote of the city council, two-thirds roll call vote of the elected school committee members, exclusive of the ex-officio members, and approval of the mayor; provided, however, that reasons for said removal are filed, in writing, with the city clerk and the chair of the commission; and provided, further, that such filing is signed by each elected official voting in favor of said removal; and provided, further, that acceptable reasons for such removal shall include, but are not limited to, substantial neglect of duty, inability to discharge the powers and duties of office, violations of subsection (e) of this section, gross misconduct and conviction of a felony. 
(g)  Any vacancy shall be filled within 90 days by the relevant appointing authority. The person appointed shall serve the unexpired portion of the original term. 
(h)  Three members of the commission shall constitute a quorum and at least three affirmative votes shall be required for any action or recommendation of the commission, unless otherwise specified in this chapter. The chair or any three members may call a meeting. 
(i)  The commission shall annually report to the mayor, city council and school committee concerning all matters pertaining to its mission. The annual report shall be filed within 30 days after the filing deadline, as set forth in section 15-7 of this chapter. 
(j)  The commission may request the administrative support and cooperation of any municipal agency or department. Each such agency and department shall endeavor to meet any such request and any reasonable request shall not be denied. Any refusal to provide such support must be stated in writing to the commission with reasons for such denial. 
(k)  The election commissioner shall be the custodian of all records for the commission. 
(l)  In order to provide the commission with stability and independence, the terms of the original members, except for the election commissioner, shall be staggered as follows: 
(1)  The original term of mayor's first appointee shall expire on June 30, 1998; 
(2)  The original term of the mayor's second appointee shall expire on June 30, 1999; 
(3)  The original term of the city council's appointee shall expire June 30, 2000; 
(4)  The original term of the school committee's appointee shall expire June 30, 1999. 
(m)  Each member of the commission is hereby designated a special municipal employee for the purposes of M.G.L.A. c. 268A. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, 10-22-97; Ord. No. 2000-9, 10-23-2000; Ord. No. 2012-10, 11-20-2012)  
Sec. 15-33. - Ethics commission duties. 
(a)  The ethics commission may request funding from the mayor and city council which shall be subject to appropriation in the ordinary manner. 
(b)  The commission may request the appointment of special counsel or other employees to enforce this chapter; provided, however, that any such request must state the reason why current city employees are unable, unwilling or inappropriate to perform the relevant duties. Any such appointment is subject to approval by the mayor and confirmation by the city council. 
(c)  The commission shall: 
(1)  Prepare and publish rules and regulations to carry out the purposes of this chapter, including but not limited to rules of procedure governing the commission; 
(2)  Prepare and publish, after giving the public an opportunity to comment, forms for the statements and reports required to be filed by this chapter, such forms to be made available to the public for comment at least 60 days prior to the official publication of any revision of such forms made after January 1, 2000; 
(3)  Make such forms and instructions for same available to any and all persons required to file pursuant to this chapter; 
(4)  Prepare and publish methods of accounting and reporting to be used by persons required to file forms pursuant to this chapter; 
(5)  Make statements and reports filed with the commission available for public inspection and copying during regular office hours upon the written request of any individual who provides identification acceptable to the commission, including affiliations, if any, at a charge not to exceed the actual administrative and material costs required in reproducing said statements and reports; provided, however, that the commission shall forward a copy of said request to the person whose statement has been examined; 
(6)  Compile and maintain an index of all reports and statements filed with the commission; 
(7)  Inspect all statements and reports filed with the commission in order to ascertain whether the requirements of this chapter and relevant rules and regulations have been fulfilled; 
(8)  If the commission determines that a statement or report is deficient in any way, the commission shall, in writing, notify the filer of the details of said deficiency and the penalties for failure to comply with this chapter within ten days of receipt of such notification; 
(9)  Upon written request from a person who is or may be subject to the requirements of this chapter, render a written advisory opinion on the application of the chapter to a specific situation; provided, however, if the commission determines the request is frivolous, it may decline to render such an advisory; provided, further, an opinion rendered by the commission, until and unless amended or revoked, shall be a defense to any subsequent action brought against the person under this chapter and shall be binding on the commission concerning the person who requested the opinion and acted in good faith in reliance upon said opinion, unless material facts were omitted or misstated by the person in the request for the opinion; provided, further, such request shall be confidential; and provided, further, the commission may publish such opinions, but the name of the requesting person and any other identifying information shall not be included in such publication; 
(10)  Preserve all statements and reports filed with the commission for a period of six years from the date of receipt; 
(11)  Make copies of M.G.L.A. c. 268A readily available to all municipal employees and provide assistance in compliance with same; and 
(12)  Act as the primary enforcement agency for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, 10-22-97; Ord. No. 1999-3, § 1, 6-29-99)  
Sec. 15-34. - Ethics commission investigations. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a sworn statement signed under the penalty of perjury, or upon the receipt of evidence which is deemed sufficient by the affirmative vote of at least three members of the commission or by a vote of no less than four commissioners, the commission may initiate a preliminary inquiry into any alleged violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Within three business days of the commencement of a preliminary inquiry into an alleged violation of this chapter, the commission shall notify the person who is the subject of such inquiry of the existence of same, the general nature of the alleged violation and copies of the sworn statement, if any, filed with the commission; provided, however, no preliminary investigation shall be commenced by the commission within 30 days prior to a municipal election unless specifically authorized by a vote of no less than four commissioners. 
(c)  If the preliminary inquiry fails to indicate reasonable cause for belief that this chapter has been violated, the commission shall immediately terminate the inquiry and so notify, in writing, the complainant, if any, and the person who has been the subject of the inquiry within three business days of such termination; provided, however, that such notification shall include a notice about the confidentiality of the proceedings and the penalties for violating such confidentiality. 
(d)  If the preliminary inquiry indicates reasonable cause for belief that this chapter has been violated, the commission may initiate an adjudicatory proceeding to determine whether there has been such a violation. The commission shall notify, in writing, the complainant, if any, and the person who has been the subject of the inquiry of its action pursuant to this subsection within three business days of such initiation; provided, however, that such notification shall include a notice about the confidentiality of the proceedings and the penalties for violating such confidentiality. 
(e)  All commission proceedings and records relating to all investigations shall be confidential until such time as the matter is finalized; provided, however, that the commission may turn over to any duly authorized authority any documents or evidence it deems necessary and appropriate to enforce this chapter. All adjudicatory proceedings and all discussion of preliminary inquiries by the commission shall be held in executive session, unless the person subject to such proceeding requests, in writing, that it be open to the public. Once an investigation is finalized, if a violation is found, the commission may determine which, if any, documents, records and actions shall be made public. If no violation is found, all documents, records and actions of the commission shall remain confidential, unless otherwise requested by the person who has been the subject of the investigation. 
(f)  The commission may hear testimony or receive other evidence in its proceedings. All testimony in such proceedings shall be under oath, subject to the penalties of perjury. All parties shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross examine witnesses who testify, to submit evidence, and to be represented by counsel. Before testifying, all witnesses shall be given a copy of the regulations governing commission proceedings. All parties and witnesses shall be entitled to be represented by counsel. 
(g)  Any person whose name is mentioned during an adjudicatory proceeding of the commission and who may be adversely affected thereby may appear personally before the commission on their own behalf, with or without counsel, to give a statement in opposition to such adverse mention or file a written statement of such opposition for incorporation into the record of the proceeding. 
(h)  Within 30 days after the end of an adjudicatory proceeding, the commission shall make a determination whether a violation of this chapter occurred and what, if any, penalty shall be imposed. Within ten business days after said determination, the commission shall publish a written report of its findings and shall forward said report to the person who has been the subject of the inquiry, the mayor, the city council and the school committee. The commission may vote to delete any specific information it may deem appropriate from these reports, including but not limited to names, addresses and other information which may identify a specific person who has not violated this chapter or other federal, state or local laws. 
(i)  Upon a finding pursuant to an adjudicatory proceeding that there has been a violation of this chapter, the commission may issue an order requiring the violator to: 
(1)  Cease and desist such violation; 
(2)  File any statement or report as required by this chapter; 
(3)  Pay a fine; or 
(4)  Take any other action deemed appropriate by the commission. 
(j)  The commission may file a civil action in superior court to enforce any orders pursuant to this chapter. 
(k)  Any final action by the commission shall be subject to review in superior court upon petition of any party in interest which is filed within 30 days after the action for which review is sought. The court may enter a judgment enforcing, modifying or setting aside the action of the commission or it may remand the matter back to the commission for such further action as the court may direct. If the court modifies or sets aside the commission's order or remands the proceedings to the commission, the court shall determine whether such modification, set aside or remand is substantial. If the court does find such modification, set aside or remand to be substantial, the person who has been the subject of the inquiry may request the court to award a reimbursement from the city for reasonable attorney's fees and costs incurred in the defense of the charges contained in the proceeding. No reimbursement shall exceed $10,000.00 per person, per case. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, 10-22-97)  
Sec. 15-35. - Ethical conduct and improper influence. 
No elected official or designated municipal official shall make, participate in making or in any way attempt to use their office or the authority of their office to influence or affect any city governmental decision or action in which such official knows or has reason to know that the official or any member of the official's immediate family has any economic interest. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to preclude any elected official from voting on ordinary and reasonable salary or budgetary items that do not violate state law and have been properly disclosed pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. 
All municipal officials covered by the chapter shall at all times in the performance of, and within the scope of, their public duties owe a fiduciary duty to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, 10-22-97)  
Sec. 15-36. - Ethical conduct and disclosure of confidential information. 
No current or former elected official or other municipal employee shall use or disclose, other than in the performance of his official duties and responsibilities, or as may be required by law, confidential information gained in the performance of their office. For the purposes of this section, "confidential information" means any information that is not generally available to the general public or could not be obtained from public records pursuant to M.G.L.A. c. 66, § 10 commonly known as the Freedom of Information Act. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, 10-22-97)  
Sec. 15-37. - Statement of financial interests. 
(a)  Beginning in calendar year 1999, every elected official shall file a statement of financial interests for the preceding calendar year with the commission. In even numbered years, the statement of financial interests shall be filed no later the last Tuesday in May. In odd numbered years, the statement shall be filed no later than the last day for filing nomination papers for the municipal election. Such statements shall be filed during the year in which said official first enters elected office, during each year said official holds such office, and during the first year after said official leaves such office; provided, however, that no elected official shall be required to file a statement of financial interests for a year in which such office was held for less than 30 days. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the filing of a statement of financial interests by any person who is an elected official during calendar year 1998 but is not a candidate for elected office during that year. 
(b)  Beginning in calendar year 1999, every candidate for elected office shall file a statement of financial interests for the preceding calendar year with the commission. The statement of financial interests shall be filed no later than the last day for filing nomination papers for the relevant election. At the time any person first receives nomination papers for elected office subject to this chapter, the election commission shall provide a copy of this chapter and any other related material deemed appropriate. 
(c)  Beginning in calendar year 1999, if a person does not file nomination papers on or before the last day they are due, yet any member of the election commission has reason to believe the person may be a "write in" or "sticker" candidate, said election commission shall meet to determine whether such person is, in fact, a candidate. If the election commission schedules a meeting to determine whether a person is a candidate pursuant to this subsection, it shall notify said person, in writing, at least seven days prior to the meeting and said person shall have the right to be heard in a manner consistent with the election commission's rules of procedure. The election commission shall find that a person is a candidate if the person or any person acting on behalf of that person has taken any public action to advance the person's chances to be elected to an office, including but not limited to public statements of candidacy or seeking support for such candidacy, public advertisements, distribution of campaign brochures, filed campaign finance documents, or taken any action that will require the filing of such documents at a later time pursuant to the requirements of the M.G.L.A. c. 55. Upon determination that a person has become a candidate for elected office and, therefore, subject to this section, the election commission shall notify the candidate, in writing, of the requirements of this section and shall notify the ethics commission, in writing, of the name and address of said candidate and the date the person was notified of being considered a candidate. Any person determined to be a candidate pursuant to this section shall file a statement of financial interests for the preceding calendar year with the commission within ten days after receiving notice of the vote of the election commission; provided, however, no statement shall be required earlier than the last day nomination papers for the relevant office are due. 
(d)  Beginning in calendar year 1999, every designated municipal official shall file a statement of financial interests for the preceding calendar year with the commission; provided, however, that no designated municipal official shall be required to file a statement of financial interests for a year in which such position was held for less than 30 days. In even numbered years, the statement of financial interests shall be filed no later the last Tuesday in May. In odd numbered years, the statement shall be filed no later than the last day for filing nomination papers for the municipal election. The commission may vote to delay the implementation of this subsection; provided, however, the reasons for such delay are stated, in writing, to the mayor, city council and school committee no later than December 31, 1998. 
(e)  Any person who is required to file a statement of financial interests pursuant to this chapter and is also required to file a statement of financial interest pursuant to M.G.L.A. c. 268B shall be deemed to have complied with the requirements of this chapter if the person files a certified copy of the state report with the commission either by the dates required pursuant to said M.G.L.A. c. 268B or those required pursuant to this chapter, whichever is later. 
(f)  Upon receipt of a statement of financial interests filed pursuant to this chapter, the commission shall issue to the person filing such statement a receipt verifying the fact that a statement of financial interests has been filed and a receipted copy of such statement. 
(g)  The statement of financial interests filed pursuant to the requirements of this chapter shall be on a form prescribed by the commission and shall be signed under the penalty of perjury by the reporting person. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, 10-22-97)  
Sec. 15-38. - Content of statement of financial interests. 
Reporting persons shall disclose, to the best of their knowledge, the information required in this section for themselves and members of their immediate family. Whenever this section specifies a requirement of the reporting person, such requirement shall be equally applicable to that reporting person's immediate family as well, unless otherwise specified in the text. The information required by this section is as follows: 
(1)  The name and address of, the nature of association with, the share of equity in, if applicable, and the amount of income if greater than $1,000.00 derived from each business with which the reporting person is associated or from which the reporting person or reporting person's immediate family received a salary; provided, however, that the reporting person need not report an ownership or equity interest in a business in which the reporting person or the reporting person's immediate family owns or otherwise controls five percent or less of the business; 
(2)  The identity of all securities and other investments with a fair market value of greater than $1,000.00 as of the last date held during the reporting period which are beneficially owned by the reporting person, not otherwise reportable hereunder, and the amount of income if greater than $1,000.00 from any such security; provided, however, that such securities need not be reported if the beneficial interest represents five percent or less of the total interest held in the related entity; and provided, further, that such securities need not be reported if they are held as part of a mutual fund, deferred compensation fund, individual retirement fund, certificate of deposit, or some other generalized fund which is open to public investment; 
(3)  The name and address of each creditor to whom more than $1,000.00 was owed by the reporting person at anytime during the reporting period and the original amount, the amount outstanding, the terms of repayment, and the general nature of the security pledged for each such obligation, except the original amount and the amount outstanding need not be reported for a mortgage on the reporting person's primary residence; provided, however, that obligation arising out of retail installment transactions, educational loans, medical and dental expenses, debts incurred in the ordinary course of an active and ongoing business, and any obligation to make alimony or support payments, shall not be reported; and provided, further, that such information need not be reported if the creditor is a relative of the reporting person or any member of said person's immediate family within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity; 
(4)  The name and address of the source, and cash value of any reimbursements for expenses aggregating more than $100.00 in the calendar year if the source of such reimbursement is a person having a direct and substantial interest in a particular matter before a municipal body; provided, however, that this subsection shall apply only to those situations that are not in violation of M.G.L.A. c. 268A; 
(5)  The name and address of the donor, and fair market value, if determinable, of any gift aggregating more than $100.00 in the calendar year, if the source of any such gift is a person having a direct interest in any matter before a municipal body; provided, however, that no such gifts need be reported if the person making the gift is a relative of the reporting person or any member of said person's immediate family within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity; and provided further, that this subsection shall apply only to those situations that are not in violation of M.G.L.A. c. 268A; 
(6)  The description and value, as appearing on the most recent property tax bill, of all real property with an assessed value greater than $1,000.00 as of the last date held during the reporting period which is beneficially owned by the reporting person; provided, however, that such real property need not be reported if the beneficial interest represents five percent or less of the total interest held in the related property; and provided, further, if the property was transferred during the reporting period, the name and address of the person furnishing consideration to the reporting person or the reporting person's immediate family or receiving consideration from same in respect to the transfer; 
(7)  The name and address of the source, and the fair market value, of any honoraria aggregating more than $100.00 if the source of such honoraria is a person having a direct and substantial interest in a particular matter before a municipal body; provided, however, that this subsection shall apply only to those situations that are not in violation of M.G.L.A. c. 268A; 
(8)  The name and address of any creditor who has voluntarily forgiven an indebtedness of over $1,000.00, and the amount forgiven; provided, however, that no such information need be reported if the creditor is a relative of the reporting person or any member of said person's immediate family within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity; 
(9)  The name and address of any business from which the reporting person or any member of the reporting person's immediate family is taking a leave of absence; 
(10)  The identity of any equity in a business with which the reporting person or any member of the reporting person's immediate family is associated which has been transferred to another person during the year; provided, however, that items need not be reported if the beneficial interest represents five percent or less of the total interest held in the related entity; 
(11)  The date, nature, and amount or value of any commercial or business transaction, including but not limited to loans, equal to or exceeding $250.00 between any municipal official and the reporting person; 
(12)  The name, address and nature of association of any clients and customers of the reporting person or the reporting person's immediate family who have a direct and substantial interest in a particular matter before a municipal body; provided, however, this information need not be reported if the amount paid, owed or accrued by the client or customer during the reporting period does not exceed $250.00; and provided, further, this subsection shall apply only to those situations that are not in violation of the M.G.L.A. c. 268A; 
(13)  The name, address and nature of association of any clients and customers of any business associate of the reporting person or the reporting person's immediate family; provided, however, that said client or customer has a direct and substantial interest in a particular matter before a municipal body; provided, further, this information need not be reported if the amount paid, owed or accrued by the client or customer during the reporting period does not exceed $250.00; and provided further, that this subsection shall apply only to those situations that are not in violation of the M.G.L.A. c. 268A; 
(14)  The name, address, job title, any change in title, job description or pay, and year of original hire of any relative of the reporting person or the reporting person's immediate family who received pay from the city as an employee during the reporting period; provided, however, that such information need not be reported if the relative is not within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity; and provided, further, that any relative who is retired and receiving no pay from the city other than retirement pay for more than six months during the reporting period need not be included in the statement; 
(15)  The name, address, amount of payments received during the reporting period, and year of original agreement of any relative of the reporting person or the reporting person's immediate family who received payment from the city as a contractor during the reporting period; provided, however, that such information need not be reported if the relative is not within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity; 
(16)  The name, address, job title, any change in title, job description or pay, and year of original hire of any relative of any business associate of the reporting person or the reporting person's immediate family who received pay from the city as an employee during the reporting period; provided, however, that any person who is retired and receiving no pay from the city other than retirement pay for more than six months during the reporting person need not be included in the statement; and 
(17)  The name, address, amount of payments received during the reporting period, and year of original agreement of any relative of any business associate of the reporting person or the reporting person's immediate family who received payment from the city as a contractor during the reporting period. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the disclosure of information which is privileged by law; provided, however, that the statement of personal financial interests includes a notice that there is information being withheld pursuant to this paragraph and the category such information would have fallen into if it had been reported. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, 10-22-97; Ord. No. 1999-3, § 2, 6-29-99)  
Sec. 15-39. - Retribution. 
No person shall be subject to any municipal action of any sort for filing a complaint with or providing information to the commission or testifying in any commission proceeding. Any person determined to have engaged in such prohibited retribution by the commission shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $300.00 per violation per day and other disciplinary action as may be appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, 10-22-97; Ord. No. 2012-10, 11-20-2012)  
Sec. 15-40. - Interest in city business. 
No city official, elected or appointed, or employee shall hold or acquire a financial or beneficial interest, direct or indirect, personally or through a member of his or her immediate family, in any contract, work, grant or business of the city's purchase of any property, real or personal, whenever the expense, price or consideration of the contract, work, grant, business or sale is paid with funds belonging to or administered by the city, or is authorized by ordinance. Compensation for property taken pursuant to the city's eminent domain power shall not constitute a financial interest within the meaning of this section. This section shall be interpreted consistent with Massachusetts General Laws and regulations of the State Ethics Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, 11-20-2012)  
Sec. 15-41. - Conflicts of interest; appearance of impropriety. 
City officials and employees shall not make or participate in the making of any decision with respect to any matter in which he or she, or in which an immediate family member, has an economic interest distinguishable from that of the interest of the general public, pursuant to applicable Massachusetts General Laws and regulations of the State Ethics Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, 11-20-2012)  
Sec. 15-42. - Grant and trust funds: administration, oversight and reporting requirements. 
(a)  Conflict of interest prohibited. No employee, officer or agent of the grantee shall participate in any particular matter, including, but not limited to, the selection, or in the award or administration of a contract, grant or subgrant, or employment agreement administered by way of funds received by the city if a conflict of interest, real or apparent, would arise. Such a conflict would arise when: 
(1)  An employee, officer or agent; or 
(2)  Any member of his or her immediate family; or 
(3)  A business organization in which he is serving as officer, director, trustee, partner or employee; or 
(4)  Any person or organization with whom he is negotiating or has any arrangement concerning prospective employment, has a financial or other interest in the person or entity selected for an award, or a contract, grant, subgrant or employment agreement of the grantee or the funds for which originate from or are awarded through the city. 
The intent of this section is that all grantees, and their employees, officers or agents are hereby subject to this ethics ordinance and the conflict of interest law and its prohibitions, and exceptions thereto, as set out in the conflict of interest law, Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 268A, and State Ethics Commission regulations. The city's ethics commission may by regulation provide additional requirements relative to real, apparent, or potential conflicts of interest. 
(b)  Written disclosure required. Applicants for grant and/or trust funds administered by the city must fully disclose, as part of its application submission, any conflict of interest or potential conflict of interest arising from or relating to the proposed grant or trust disbursement, whether real or apparent. In addition, every grantee shall disclose: (1) the identity and association of all officers, employees, contractors, subgrantees or other persons providing any type of service in relation to the proposed grant activity, the nature of the service provided, the value of said service, and the extent to which city funds support said service; and (2) whether the grantee or any of the persons or entities identified in subsection (1) has had any grant, contract, or other agreement with a federal, state and/or local agency terminated within the last three years. 
This disclosure requirement shall be a continuing obligation for all grantees of city funds during the term of any grant, and grantees are required to make a written disclosure to the city immediately as to any circumstances which constitute a potential or actual conflict of interest. The city will include a relevant provision in its application materials. 
(c)  Conflict of interest policy. Every grantee shall file with the city agency or department disbursing funds to the grantee a copy of that grantee's policy addressing conflicts of interest that may arise involving the grantee's management, employees and the members of its board of directors or other governing body. The policy shall address situations in which any of these individuals may directly or indirectly benefit, except as the grantee's employees or members of its board or other governing body, from the grantee's disbursing of city funds, and shall include actions to be taken by the grantee or the individual, or both, to avoid conflicts of interest and the appearance of impropriety. To the extent permitted by law, such standards of conduct will provide for penalties, sanctions, or other disciplinary actions for violations of such standards by the grantee's officers, employees, or agents, or by contractors or their agents. The policy shall be filed with the city as part of the grant application, prior to the parties executing an agreement to disburse the grant funds. Should the policy be revised during the grant term, a copy of the revised policy shall be submitted to the city within 30 days of being revised. 
(d)  Suspension and recovery of funds to grant recipients for noncompliance. The city, after consultation with the administering city agency or department, may suspend disbursement of grant or trust funds to grantees or subgrantees, to prevent further use of grant or trust funds already disbursed, and to recover grant or trust funds already disbursed for noncompliance with this section or any rules adopted pursuant thereto, as well as report any nonfeasance, malfeasance or misfeasance to the funding source. 
(e)  Audit oversight. The city auditor has audit oversight, with respect to grant and/or trust funds received by the grantee or subgrantee, of every grantee or subgrantee that receives, uses, or expends city grant and/or trust funds. A grantee or subgrantee must, following receipt of a reasonable request, furnish to the city auditor for audit all books, records, and other information necessary for the city auditor to account fully for the use and expenditure of grant or trust funds received by the grantee or subgrantee. The grantee or subgrantee must furnish any additional financial or budgetary information requested by the city auditor, including audit work papers in the possession of any auditor of a grantee or subgrantee directly related to the use and expenditure of grant and/or trust funds no later than 21 days after the date of request. In addition, the following audit requirements shall apply: 
(1)  Audit requirement for grants of $25,000 or more. A grant recipient must submit, to the city auditor, annual financial statements inclusive of the grant, audited by a certified public accountant licensed in Massachusetts within 120 days of the grantee's fiscal year-end. The audit report must be accompanied by a management letter, if one is prepared by the auditor, and a copy of the organization's final budget for the period. 
(2)  Audit requirement for grants of less than $25,000. An audit is recommended but not required by the city. If a grant recipient does receive an audit, however, the audit and any management letter shall be submitted to the city within 120 days following the end of the grantee fiscal year. If the grant recipient does not receive an audit, the city shall have the right to request an accounting of grant funds if in the opinion of the city auditor, or other financial officer, it is reasonable to request same. 
(f)  Accounting procedures. A grant or subgrant recipient must maintain accounting systems, preferably in electronic form, that follow generally accepted accounting principles. Accounting systems shall at a minimum comply with the following requirements: (1) maintain accurate, current and complete records in a form that is satisfactory to the city, including, but not limited to, records of all types of expenses and income or other funds relating to the grant; (2) have adequate internal controls to assure protection of all assets; and (3) designed and able to show in detail the organization's assets, liabilities, equities, actual and budgeted revenues, and expenditures. 
(g)  Consistent with applicable laws. This section shall be interpreted consistent with any federal, state or local laws and regulations and grant conditions and terms. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, 11-20-2012)  
Sec. 15-43. - Conflict with other laws. 
In the event of any conflict or inconsistency of the ordinance [from which this section derives] with any state law or regulation, the provision of broadest or most strict coverage shall control. No provision of the ordinance [from which this section derives] shall be construed so as to be inconsistent with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, 11-20-2012)  
Sec. 15-44. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  If the commission determines that a person has failed to file a statement of personal financial interests, the commission shall notify, in writing, the person of the findings within ten days of such finding. The notice shall state the penalties for failure to file a correct statement pursuant to this chapter and shall include a copy of this chapter, necessary forms and any other documents the commission deems appropriate. The commission shall convene to consider whether all required forms have been filed and any other matters no later than ten days after the filing deadline each year. 
(b)  Failure of a reporting person to file a statement of personal financial interests which complies with the requirements of this chapter within ten days after receiving notice pursuant to subsection (a), above, or subsections 15-3(c)(8) of this chapter, shall constitute a violation of the chapter and the commission shall commence enforcement action as it deems appropriate; provided, however, that the commission may grant an extension to comply with the chapter if the reporting person so requests, in writing, within the ten-day period; provided, further, that any extension of time so granted shall not exceed 30 days unless such longer extension is supported by a unanimous vote of the commission and, if so supported, such longer extension shall be to a time certain and may not be further extended; and provided, further, the commission's reasons for granting an extension beyond the original ten-day period shall be placed in the reporting person's file, in writing. 
(c)  Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $300.00 per violation per day. Violations shall include, but are not limited to, violations of subsection (b), above, violations of the confidentiality of the commission, and any person who willfully affirms or swears falsely in regard to any material matter before a commission proceeding or who files a false statement of personal financial interests. 
(d)  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter in connection with any municipal action or decision may be grounds for revocation, suspension or reversal of such municipal action or decision. 
(e)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the city from commencing a civil action in an appropriate court of the commonwealth to enforce the provisions of this chapter or to collect any fines assessed under its provisions. 
(f)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any duly authorized governmental agency from commencing a civil or criminal action in an appropriate court of the commonwealth to enforce the provisions of this chapter, to collect any fines assessed under its provisions or to enforce the provisions of any related state or federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 1997-5, 10-22-97; Ord. No. 2012-10, 11-20-2012)  
Secs. 15-45—15-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PAY TO PLAY AND CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 15-71. - Definitions. 
(a)  Applicant means a person who has filed an application with the City of Somerville or any city-related agency in any of the following situations: 
(1)  Seeking to enter into a contract; 
(2)  Seeking approval for a special permit with site plan review or approval of a planned unit development as set forth in section 15-72 herein; 
(3)  Seeking to acquire real estate from, or dispose of real estate to, the city or any city-related agency; or 
(4)  Seeking financial assistance from the city. 
(b)  City-related agency means all departments of the city, as well as any authorities and quasi-public corporations that receive appropriations from the city, such as the Somerville Redevelopment Authority. 
(c)  Contractor means a person who has entered into a contract with the city or any city-related agency. 
(d)  Contribution means a donation of money or of in-kind goods and services as further defined in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 55, Section 1. 
(e)  Financial assistance means any grant, loan, tax incentive, bond financing proceeds used to purchase land or fund expenses for improvements made to land or real estate, or other form of assistance that is realized by or provided to a person in the amount of $50,000.00 or more through the authority or approval of the city or a city-related agency, including, but not limited to, tax increment financing aid, district improvement financing aid, industrial development bonds, or community development block grant aid. 
(f)  Contract means a signed written contract in excess of $25,000.00 for goods or services to which the city or a city-related agency is a party, except where the agreement is required by law to be awarded pursuant to a competitive bidding process under applicable law, or where the agreement constitutes a sole source procurement under Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 30B, Section 7. 
(g)  Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, joint venture, or any other legal entity. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12 , § I, 7-14-2016)  
Sec. 15-72. - Mandatory disclosure for applicants. 
(a)  Before the city may enter into any contract with an applicant as defined in subsection 15-71(a)(1), the applicant must file a complete mandatory disclosure form with the contracting entity. 
(b)  At the time that an applicant seeks approval for a special permit with site plan review or approval of a planned unit development, as those terms are defined in the Somerville Zoning Ordinance, with respect to new construction or renovation in excess of 15,000 square feet, the applicant must file a complete mandatory disclosure form with the board hearing the application. 
(c)  At the time that an applicant submits a bid or submits a response to a request for proposals in connection with the acquisition of real estate owned by, or disposition of real estate to, the city or a city-related agency, the applicant must file a complete mandatory disclosure form with the city agency seeking to dispose of or acquire the property. If the applicant is otherwise seeking to acquire real estate from, or dispose of real estate to, the city or from a city-related agency, then the applicant must submit a complete mandatory disclosure form prior to obtaining title to such real estate. 
(d)  At the time the applicant files an application for financial assistance, the applicant must file a complete mandatory disclosure form with the city agency that would provide such financial assistance. 
(e)  Such mandatory disclosure form shall be open to and available for inspection to the public. Such form shall be signed under the pains and penalties of perjury by the applicant and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, email address, telephone number of the applicant and of all of its principals, chief executive officer, president, chief financial officer, treasurer, chief operating officer, chief procurement officer, directors, or persons performing similar functions, or shareholders in excess of ten percent and managing agent to the extent applicable; 
(2)  All contributions made by the applicant during the 12 months prior to the application to any person who was a candidate for elective office of the City of Somerville by stating the name of the person who made the contribution, the candidate who received the contribution, and the date and amount of each such contribution. The attribution rules of section 15-73 below shall apply to the contributions that must be disclosed. For purposes of this article, elected office of the City of Somerville shall mean the mayor, aldermen, and school committee of the city. Contributions made before the adoption of this article are not required to be disclosed on this form. 
(3)  The names, business addresses and phone numbers of all subcontractors that the applicant intends to use on the contract and the amount or percentage to be paid to such subcontractor. 
(4)  A certification by the applicant that if the applicant is awarded the item that is applied for under subsections (a), (b), (c), or (d) above in this section, that the applicant and anyone attributed to the applicant or any subcontractor used on the contract shall not make any contribution in any calendar year in an amount in excess of $500.00 to any individual incumbent or to any individual candidate for elective office of the City of Somerville for the next four calendar years following the award of the item, or for the duration of the term of any contract, whichever is longer. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12 , § II, 7-14-2016)  
Sec. 15-73. - Attribution rules. 
(a)  Where a person is an individual, any contributions made by the individual, any spouse of the individual, and any children of the individual. 
(b)  Where a person is not an individual but a corporation, partnership or limited liability corporation, then any contributions made by any of its chief executive officer, president, chief financial officer, treasurer, chief operating officer, chief procurement officer, directors, members, managers, principals, or persons performing similar functions, or shareholders in excess of ten percent, and their spouses and children. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12 , § III, 7-14-2016)  
Sec. 15-74. - Eligibility. 
(a)  No applicant shall be entitled to obtain the award of any of the items applied for as referenced in section 15-72, if such applicant, including those who would be attributed to the applicant under section 15-73 above or any subcontractor used on a contract, has made a total contribution of more than $500.00 to any individual candidate for elected office of the City of Somerville or incumbent in either the calendar year of the application or the calendar year preceding the application, provided, however, that the restriction of eligibility with regard to contributions made prior to the year preceding the application shall not apply to any contributions made in the calendar year preceding the adoption of this article and shall only go forward beginning with the year of adoption of the article. No contribution made prior to the effective date of this article shall be deemed to give rise to a violation or penalty under this article. 
(b)  No contract may be renewed, extended, or materially amended, unless the resulting renewal, extension, or amendment, would be allowable under the provisions of this article if it were an initial contract. 
(c)  The applicant and anyone attributed to the applicant under section 15-73 and any subcontractor used on the contract shall not make any contribution to any incumbent or to any candidate for elective office of the City of Somerville in excess of $500.00 per year for the next four calendar years following the award of the item, or for the duration of the term of any contract, whichever is longer. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12 , § IV, 7-14-2016)  
Sec. 15-75. - Penalties. 
The city shall deny the award of any of the items referenced in section 15-72 as sought by an applicant if it is found that an applicant made a material misstatement on the mandatory disclosure form or if the applicant fails to comply with the provisions of subsection 15-72(e)(4) above. If a contract is awarded, it shall be a material breach of the terms of any contract where an applicant which is a party to such contract made any contribution in violation of this article. For all other violations, the applicant shall be fined for each violation of this article in accordance with section 1-11. The enforcing authority shall be the ethics commission or auditor. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12 , § V, 7-14-2016)  
Sec. 15-76. - Refund of contribution. 
An applicant may cure a contribution which violates this article if, within 30 days after the date on which an applicable office of campaign and political finance report is required to be filed which contains a contribution in violation of this article, the applicant requests a refund in writing from the candidate or incumbent who received the contribution, and within 30 days of the request, the applicant receives a refund of a contribution from the incumbent or any candidate for elective office in the City of Somerville, or political committee for such incumbent or candidate. Notwithstanding the above, if there is a contribution in violation of this article, the candidate or incumbent shall refund the contribution within 30 days of receipt of a request for refund, provided that funds are otherwise available in the campaign account of the candidate or incumbent. This article shall be interpreted and applied consistent with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12 , § VI, 7-14-2016)  
Sec. 15-77. - Effective date. 
This article shall take effect on January 1, 2017. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12 , § VI, 7-14-2016)  
APPENDIX B - RULES OF THE CITY COUNCIL[1] 
Adopted February 28, 2019 
Meetings 
Rule 1. Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the second and fourth Thursday evenings of each month at 7 pm except when the Thursday falls on a holiday, in which case the meeting shall be held on the preceding Tuesday evening at 7 pm. Special meetings of the city council may be convened by the mayor, by the president of the city council, or by six members at any time upon such notification as the General Laws may provide. 
Rule 2. The city clerk shall schedule an annual caucus at 6:30 pm on the Tuesday preceding Thanksgiving to conduct a poll of the members and members-elect, as the case may be, to express their preference as to the election of the president and vice president of the city council for the upcoming year. 
Rule 3. The seats of the members of the city council shall be numbered and assigned by drawing the names of the members and the numbers of the seats simultaneously, annually, at the first meeting of the city council. The president and vice president shall sit in the last two seats, respectively. 
Rule 4. The city clerk shall prepare the agenda for a meeting, post it, and distribute it to all members in accordance with MGL c. 30A §§ 18-25 as amended, with regulations promulgated thereunder, hereinafter called the open meeting law. Any matter submitted by a non-member shall only appear on the agenda if it is in the hands of the city clerk by the close of business four workdays before the meeting (Friday for a regular Thursday meeting). Any matter submitted by a member shall only appear on the agenda if it is in the hands of the city clerk by the close of business three workdays before the meeting (Monday for a regular Thursday meeting). Any item submitted after these times but by the close of business one workday before the meeting (Wednesday for a regular Thursday meeting) shall be added to the agenda as a supplemental item, subject to the requirements of the open meeting law. The agenda and supplement shall be made available to all members of the city council by 3 pm on the day of the meeting. Any additional item not included in the agenda or supplement that the city clerk presents, if challenged, shall be accepted only by a two-thirds vote of the city council. 
Rule 5. A majority of the entire membership shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The presiding officer shall take the chair at the hour fixed or to which the city council has recessed, and shall convene the meeting. If a quorum is not present at such time, then the presiding officer shall recess such meeting until a quorum is in attendance, but if a quorum fails to materialize within thirty minutes of the time originally set forth, then the presiding officer shall adjourn such meeting forthwith. 
Rule 6. No employee of the city government, except the city solicitor, shall be required to appear before the city council unless one week's written notice shall have been given to the employee, following approval by a majority vote of the city council. Such notice shall be prepared by the city clerk and shall describe the matter that the city council is interested in discussing. 
Rule 7. Written minutes of the city council meeting, which shall include a record of the proceedings, describing the disposition of each agenda item and any votes taken, and a synopsis of the discussion, shall be maintained by the city clerk and approved by the city council, as prescribed by the most recent edition of Robert's Rules of Order and the requirements of the open meeting law. 
Rule 8. Each meeting of the city council or any of its committees shall be video recorded whenever video recording equipment is available and operable. In the absence of video recording equipment, an audio recording shall be made whenever audio recording equipment is available and operable. The city clerk shall ensure that the recording is made available for public review on the city council's web portal. Subject to direction from the city solicitor, executive session meetings shall not be recorded by video or audio, but minutes for such meetings shall be kept by the city clerk. 
Rule 9. Minutes of executive sessions shall be recorded by a recorder of the city council's choosing. The recorder shall obtain the written preliminary approval of the minutes by the presiding officer within twenty-four hours, and shall then seal the minutes and present them to the city clerk, who shall thereafter maintain them. All executive session minutes shall remain confidential until the city council votes in open session to release them. The city clerk and city solicitor shall regularly prepare a recommendation to the city council as to which minutes should be released pursuant to the open meeting law. 
Presiding Officer 
Rule 10. The president of the city council or in his/her absence, the vice president, shall take the chair and preside at the meeting. At any meeting of the city council, in the absence of the president and vice president the oldest in age of members present shall preside until a president pro tempore is elected. 
Rule 11. The presiding officer shall preserve decorum and order and may speak to points of order in preference to other members. The presiding officer shall be entitled to call a recess of up to five minutes in duration when deemed appropriate. The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order and shall be the determinant on all interpretations of these rules. If any member wishes to appeal such decision or determination, he/she shall make a motion, and if it is seconded, then no other business shall be in order until the question on appeal is decided by a majority vote of the city council. 
Rule 12. The presiding officer may refuse to allow any items which in his/her opinion do not have a direct bearing on the business of the city council. These items shall be placed on file and shall not be further considered. 
Rule 13. The president may express his/her opinion on any subject under debate, but in such case he/she shall leave the chair and the vice president shall preside. He/she may state facts and give his/her opinion on questions of order without leaving his/her place. 
Rule 14. The presiding officer shall declare all votes, but if any member doubts the vote, the chair, without further debate, shall require the members to vote in the affirmative or negative by roll call. He/she shall declare the result only after all members present have voted. No member shall be recorded on any vote unless he/she is physically situated within the city council's chambers. 
Rule 15. The presiding officer shall name the member who shall first be heard, whenever two or more members address the chair at the same time. 
Rule 16. When a question is under debate before the city council or a committee of the city council, the presiding officer shall entertain no motion but: 
1)  to adjourn, 
2)  to lay on the table, 
3)  for the previous question, 
4)  to postpone to a day certain, 
5)  to refer to a committee, 
6)  to amend, 
7)  to postpone indefinitely, or 
8)  to recess. 
These motions shall take precedence in the order in which they are arranged, and the first two shall be decided without debate. On a motion for the previous question no more than five minutes shall be allowed for debate and no member shall speak except in opposition to the motion or for more than two minutes. All questions of order arising after a motion for the previous question shall be decided without debate, except on appeal, and on appeal no member shall speak more than two minutes or more than once. The adoption of the previous question shall put an end to all debate and bring the city council to a direct vote upon pending amendments, if any, and then upon the main question. 
Rights and Duties of Members 
Rule 17. Every member when about to speak, shall address the chair as "Mister/Madame President", and shall confine himself/herself to the question under debate, avoiding personal remarks at all times. 
Rule 18. Any member may sponsor an employee of city government to address the city council on any matter properly before the city council, or request the reading of any item in full, unless such sponsorship or reading is objected to by any member. Upon such objection, the address or reading shall occur only by majority vote of the city council. 
Rule 19. Any member of the city council, or a committee of the city council, may sponsor a member of the public to address the city council, or committee, on any matter properly before the city council, or committee, as the case may be, unless such sponsorship is objected to by any member. Upon such objection, the address shall occur only by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the city council, or by a majority vote of the committee members present. 
Rule 20. In accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 233, § 8, the city council is hereby authorized to issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses and/or the production of books and papers as to matters within their authority at a hearing of the city council or any committee thereof. If any member of the city council wishes to have such a subpoena issued to compel the appearance of a witness and/or the production of books and papers to a meeting of the city council, or a committee thereof, the member shall move to have such a subpoena issued. Upon the approval of a majority of the members of the city council, the city clerk shall issue such subpoena. 
Rule 21. No member shall speak on the same question more than once unless all other members who wish to speak have already spoken. No member shall speak on any subject for more than five consecutive minutes without having first relinquished the floor to any other member who wishes to speak on the subject. No member shall interrupt another, except on a point of order, a request for information, or a question of personal privilege. 
Rule 22. No member shall vote or serve on any committee where the subject under debate concerns his/her private as opposed to the public interest. Otherwise, every member who is present when a question is put shall vote in the affirmative or negative unless excused from doing so by the city council. Application to be so excused shall be made before the vote is taken. 
Rule 23. No member shall represent the city council unless he/she is appointed to do so by the president. 
Committees 
Rule 24. The president shall annually, as soon after the organization of the city council as may be convenient, appoint the members to the following standing committees, and any special committees he/she may choose to create. The president may, at any time, change the membership of any committee. The president shall not serve as chair or vice chair of any standing committee. The president and vice president shall be members of the committees on finance and legislative matters. 
1)  Confirmation of Appointments and Personnel Matters (five members) 
2)  Finance (five members) 
3)  Housing and Community Development (three members) 
5)  Land Use (five members) 
6)  Legislative Matters (five members) 
7)  Licenses and Permits (three members) 
8)  Open Space, Environment and Energy (five members) 
9)  Public Health and Safety (three members) 
10)  Public Utilities and Works (three members) 
11)  Senior Services (three members) 
12)  Traffic and Parking (three members) 
13)  Veteran and Public Services (three members) 
14)  Youth Services (three members) 
Rule 25. The member first named on each committee shall be its chair; and in the case of his/her resignation, inability to serve or absence, the other members in the order in which they are named shall call meetings of the committee and act as chair, subject to the provisions of Rule 24 The most recent edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall be the authority on all questions of debate in committee wherever they do not conflict with the several rules of the city council that apply to committees. 
Rule 26. A majority of a committee shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The chair shall take the chair at the hour fixed or to which the committee has recessed, and shall convene the meeting. If a quorum is not present at such time, then the chair shall recess such meeting until a quorum is in attendance, but if a quorum fails to materialize within thirty minutes of the time originally set forth, then the chair shall adjourn such meeting forthwith, and shall prepare a report of the committee indicating such. 
Rule 27. The chair of any committee may call and preside at a meeting of the committee of the whole, to include all members of the city council, pursuant to the notice requirements of the open meeting law, whenever in his or her judgment such meeting shall facilitate the consideration of an item before the committee. In such case, a majority of the entire membership shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. In other respects, the provisions of Rule 26 shall apply to these meetings. 
Rule 28. The chair of each committee shall determine the agenda for each committee meeting, and shall include in said agenda any items that the committee previously voted to include on the agenda for the meeting in question. The clerk of committees shall prepare the agenda and the report of the meeting, which shall include the disposition of each agenda item and any roll call votes taken. Any document submitted to the members of the committee in connection with the main item under discussion during the committee meeting shall be identified in the report. The clerk shall insure that all such items are readily available for viewing during searches of the main item on the web portal for the city council. The report shall be approved by the chair and submitted to the city council for action at its next meeting. In no case shall this preclude a member not in agreement from submitting a minority report. The clerk shall also prepare the minutes of the meeting, which shall consist of the committee's actions, decisions, and votes, with a summary of any discussions, as prescribed by the most recent edition of Robert's Rules of Order and the requirements of the open meeting law. The minutes shall be approved by the committee at a subsequent meeting. No committee shall act by separate consultation and no report shall be received by the city council unless the subject thereof shall have been considered in committee actually assembled. 
Rule 29. All items of business reported adversely by a committee shall contain the endorsement, "should not be approved" on such order, ordinance, resolution, petition or other matter, and if the report is accepted, the matter shall be disposed of. 
Rule 30. Pursuant to the Open Meeting Law, if less than a quorum of the full city council attends a committee meeting, the visiting members may participate in full discussion. However, if a quorum of the full city council is present at the committee meeting, the visiting members must sit in the audience and participate as members of the public and may not deliberate. 
Order Of Business 
Rule 31. At every meeting of the city council the order of business shall be as follows: 
1) Call of the meeting, with a prayer, salute to the Flag of the United States of America and a call of the roll of members. 
2) Approval of the minutes of the previous meeting. 
3) Citations. 
4) Public hearings. 
5) Ordinances, orders, resolutions and motions of members. 
6) Unfinished business. 
7) Reports of committees. 
8) Communications of the mayor. 
9) Communications of city officers. 
10) New business. 
11) Supplemental items. 
Rule 32. All items on the agenda shall be acted upon in the order in which they are read by the city clerk, unless the city council shall otherwise direct by majority vote of the members present. All items shall be read by their titles only, unless any member requests a reading pursuant to Rule 18. 
Rule 33. No report of a committee shall be acted upon by the city council unless it is printed on the agenda of a meeting. 
Rule 34. After a motion or item is stated or read before the city council it shall be deemed to be in possession of the city council and shall be disposed of by vote, but the mover may withdraw it at any time before a decision or amendment if no objection is made. 
Rule 35. Every motion shall be reduced to writing if the presiding officer so directs or if any member so requests. A motion need not be seconded, either before the city council or a committee of the city council, except as provided in Rule 11. 
Rule 36. A question containing two or more propositions may be divided whenever such division can clearly be made, and such division shall be determined by a majority vote of the members present. A member may sever an item from a committee report in order to separately vote on that item from the remainder of the report if determined favorably by a majority vote of the members present. 
Rule 37. Every item shall, after its passage, remain in the possession of the city clerk until 12 noon of the second weekday (Saturdays and holidays excepted) following the day of the meeting at which final action was taken. If, during that time, notice of intent to move for reconsideration is filed with the city clerk, then such item shall be considered unfinished business before the city council. If, during that time, no notice of intent to move for reconsideration is filed with the city clerk, then such item shall be considered as having passed out of the custody of the city council. 
Rule 38. A motion for reconsideration shall only be made by a member on the prevailing side. No motion for reconsideration shall be made upon any of the following motions: to adjourn, for a roll call vote, to lay on the table, or for the previous question. On a motion for reconsideration no more than twenty minutes shall be allowed for debate, and no member shall speak more than two minutes. No motion for reconsideration shall be made during a meeting at which final action on a matter has been taken except by two-thirds vote of the entire membership. No motion shall be twice reconsidered, but this shall not prevent the city council from reconsideration of any matter vetoed by the mayor. 
Rule 39. Petitions for licenses or permits shall, upon their receipt by the city council, be referred to the committee on licenses and permits unless a motion to approve without referral to committee is approved by two-thirds of the entire membership. 
Rule 40. Appointments and reappointments subject to confirmation and personnel matters shall, upon receipt by the city council, be referred to the committee on confirmation of appointments and personnel matters unless a motion to approve without referral to committee is approved by two-thirds of the entire membership. 
Rule 41. Mayor's requests for direct appropriations, transfers, tax levies or loans shall, upon receipt by the city council, be referred to the committee on finance unless a motion to approve without referral to committee is approved by two-thirds of the entire membership. 
Rule 42. Proposed ordinances relating to pedestrians or vehicular traffic, the parking of vehicles on the public ways, or to taxicabs shall, upon receipt by the city council, be referred to the committee on traffic and parking. 
Rule 43. Proposed ordinances relating to zoning shall, upon receipt by the city council, be referred to the committee on land use and to the planning board. 
Rule 44. Proposed ordinances not above described shall, upon receipt by the city council, be referred to the committee on legislative matters. 
Rule 45. On all matters not described in Rule 39 through Rule 44, the presiding officer shall determine how the matter shall be disposed of, unless a majority of members present shall vote otherwise. 
Rule 46. No endorsement of any kind, except reports of committees, shall be made upon any items referred to committee. 
Rule 47. Any item referred to a committee and not acted on within sixty days of such referral may be ordered for discharge from that committee by any member upon a vote of a majority of the entire membership. 
Orders, Ordinances and Resolutions 
Rule 48. All orders, ordinances and resolutions shall be submitted by the member who presents them, or by an authorized representative. Any member may solicit more than a quorum of the city council to co-sponsor an order, ordinance, resolution, or citation, but any discussion or deliberation which reaches a quorum of the members must occur in open session. The solicitation should instruct that questions or discussions be withheld until the city council next meets in open session. 
Rule 49. Up to a subquorum of the city council (one to no more than five members) may sponsor an order, resolution or ordinance and request the clerk of committees to email the remaining members as to whether they wish to co-sponsor that item. The names of the members who originally sponsor the item may be identified in that communication from the clerk of committees. The remaining members may only respond to the clerk of committees directly as to whether they wish to co-sponsor the item, and may not notify any members of their decision. Any agendas published for the meeting at which the item will appear shall only reveal the names of the original member(s) who sponsored the item. The names of any additional co-sponsors who favorably responded to the communication from the clerk of committees shall only be disclosed when the city clerk reads the item at the meeting at which the item is on the agenda. The sponsorship of an item does not commit a member to ultimately vote in favor of the item. 
Rule 50. In all votes, when the city council expresses an action by way of command the form of expression shall be, "ordered"; and when the city council expresses an opinion, principles, facts or request, the form shall be "resolved." 
Rule 51. Every order and resolution shall be read a single time before the question on final adoption is taken, unless it is referred to a committee. 
Rule 52. Every proposed ordinance and home rule petition shall be printed and a copy made available to each member at the start of the meeting at which its approval is expected to be under consideration. 
Rule 53. Every ordinance, before being enrolled, shall be printed and a copy made available to each member. No ordinance once enrolled shall be amended. No ordinance shall be passed through all its stages of legislation at the same session, except by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership taken by roll call. 
Rule 54. Any order, ordinance, resolution or final vote may be passed through all its stages of legislation at one session, provided that no member objects thereto; but if a single member objects, the measure shall be postponed for that meeting, and if when it is next brought up, three or more members object to its passage, a second postponement of at least one week shall take place. The invocation of a member's rights under this rule or under Section 15 of the City Charter shall automatically halt discussion of the matter. Any matter postponed under this rule shall be considered unfinished business at subsequent meetings, but shall remain on the table until removed by a majority vote of the city council. 
Rule 55. Every order, ordinance, resolution or final vote of the city council, except as relates to its internal affairs, shall be presented to the mayor. If he/she approves, he/she shall so signify in accordance with state law; but if he/she does not approve, he/she shall return it with his/her objections to the city council. The matter shall then be considered not approved, unless the city council proceeds to reconsider it, and two-thirds of the entire membership vote to pass it notwithstanding the objections of the mayor, in which case it shall be finally approved. In all cases, the vote to reconsider shall be by roll call. If such order, ordinance, resolution of final vote is not returned to the city council within ten days after it has been presented to the mayor, it shall be considered approved. 
Rule 56. After an order or resolution is adopted by the city council, the city council, by a majority vote, may refer such item to a committee of the city council for further action. In that event, the clerk shall note on the item that it was adopted by the city council and referred to a committee for further action. Whenever the committee discusses such item at a committee meeting, the committee report for that meeting shall list the item number and report on the action taken by the committee on that item. When the committee, by a majority vote at a committee meeting, has determined that it has completed its work on the item, the committee report shall note that it is the recommendation of the committee that the item be returned to the full city council. If the committee's recommendation is accepted by the city council, then the clerk shall note on the item that it was returned by the committee to the city council with the date. No item shall be referred by the city council to more than one committee. 
Rule 57. Whenever any order, ordinance, resolution or other matter shall have been finally rejected by vote of the city council, no measure embodying substantially the same subject matter shall be acted upon by the city council, by any committee or member within six months of the date of its rejection. 
Duties Of The Clerks 
Rule 58. The city clerk shall have charge of all journals, records and documents of the city council and shall attest all warrants. He/she shall be the clerk of the city council, shall attend all meetings, shall record the names of the members present and shall keep a record of all votes and proceedings. He/she may make changes to correct the form of an item once acted on by the city council but prior to its presentation to the mayor, provided that its substance is not thereby affected. He/she shall maintain the papers and all documents for which no other provision has been made by law or ordinance. He/she shall also keep and submit minutes of every meeting of the city council, which shall become the official record of the city council's actions upon acceptance by the city council. In his/her absence, the assistant city clerk shall serve as clerk of the city council pro tempore, who shall be sworn to the faithful performance of his/her duties. 
Rule 59. The clerk of committees or in his/her absence the assistant clerk of committees shall keep a list of committees and their respective memberships posted in a convenient place in the committee room of the city council. He/she shall also prepare correspondence for each committee, and keep a record of every item of business before each committee. The clerk of committees shall notify every member of the city council of all committee meetings and shall prepare the agenda and minutes of each committee meeting. The clerk of committees shall also prepare and deliver to the city clerk all orders, ordinances and resolutions. The clerk of committees and his/her assistants shall be directly responsible to the president of the city council. He/she shall conduct research, prepare reports and perform such other functions and have such other duties as the president or any committee, by majority vote, shall from time to time direct. 
Rule 60. The city clerk shall schedule usage of the council chambers and committee room for the city council or other city boards, committees, commissions, or departments. The committee room, however, shall only be scheduled business days between the hours of 8:30 am and 4:30 pm. The city council reserves the right to use the rooms at any time, even if they had previously been scheduled by another entity. The rooms may be used if available, but may not be scheduled, by individuals for a wedding ceremony licensed by the city clerk's office. The rooms may not be used by other entities without the expressed consent of the president. Use of the rooms may be withheld from any group that, in the opinion of the president or city clerk, does not leave them in a clean and orderly condition. 
Suspension Or Alteration Of the Rules, Parliamentary Authority 
Rule 61. No standing rule of the city council shall be suspended unless either two-thirds of the entire membership consents or the rule to be suspended specifies otherwise. No objection to suspension of the rules shall be deemed as an objection under Rule 54 or Section 15 of the City Charter. 
Rule 62. Every amendment to a rule, proposed new rule or repeal of a rule shall be forwarded to each member of the city council and shall be referred to the committee on legislative matters, or any appropriate special committee, which shall recommend its adoption or rejection. Two-thirds vote of the entire membership shall be required to amend, add or repeal a rule of the city council. 
Rule 63. The rules of parliamentary procedure, as contained in the most recent edition of Robert's Rules of Order and interpreted by the city clerk, shall be the authority on all questions of debate or parliamentary usage wherever they do not conflict with the rules of the city council. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are the rules of the City Council of the City of Somerville as the rules appear in the Municipal Register as authorized by section 11 of the Charter. Adopted February 28, 2019 , enacted a new Appendix B as set out herein. The former Appendix B pertained to similar subject matter and derived from rules of the City Council adopted January 10, 2019 . 
Cross reference— Councilors salary adjustments, § 2-41 et seq. 
 
APPENDIX C - CITY STREETS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are lists of city streets, giving the location, length and width of public and private streets, and the former names of certain streets. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - LOCATION, LENGTH AND WIDTH OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE STREETS 
Street 	From 	To 	Public or Private 	Width 
(Feet) 	Length 
(Feet) 
					Public 	Private 
Abdell St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Southwesterly 	Private 	25 	— 	203 
Aberdeen Rd. 	Cedar St. 	Highland Ave. 	Public 	40 	432 	— 
Acadia Pk. 	Somerville Ave. 	Northeasterly 	Public 	40 	256 	— 
Adams St. 	Broadway 	Medford St. 	Public 	40 	907 	— 
Adelaide Rd. 	Somerville Ave. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	20 	— 	138 
Adrian St. 	Marion St. 	Joseph St. 	Public 	40 	579 	— 
Albion Ct. 	Albion St. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	16 	— 	116 
Albion Pl. 	Albion St. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	10 	— 	166 
Albion St. 	Central St. 	Cedar St. 	Public 	40 	2,733 	— 
Albion St. 	Broadway 	Medford line 	Private 	50 	— 	100 
Albion Ter. 	Albion St. 	Southwesterly 	Public 	25 	100 	— 
Aldersey St. 	Walnut St. 	Vinal Ave. 	Public 	40 	508 	— 
Aldrich St. 	McGrath Hwy. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Public 	40 	417 	— 
Alewife Brook Pkwy. 1 	Mystic Valley Pkwy. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	— 	4,775 	— 
Alfred St. 	Broadway 	Medford line 	Private 	50 	— 	50 
Alfred A. Lombardi Way 1 	Broadway 	Mystic Ave. 	Public 	80 to 210 	328 	— 
Allen Ct. 	Park St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	20 	— 	150 
Allen St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Charlestown St. 	Public 	25 	640 	— 
Alpine St. 	Cedar St. 	Southeasterly 	Public 	30 	667 	— 
Alpine St. 	Alpine St. 	Lowell St. 	Public 	40 	688 	— 
Alston St. 	Cross St. 	McGrath Hwy. 	Public 	40 to 30 	757 	— 
Ames St. 	Bartlett St. 	Robinson St. 	Public 	40 	580 	— 
Appleton St. 	Willow Ave. 	Liberty Ave. 	Public 	40 	668 	— 
Arlington St. 	Franklin St. 	Lincoln St. 	Public 	40 	452 	— 
Arnold Ave. 	Porter St. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	15 	— 	127 
Arnold Ct. 	Beacon St. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	10 	— 	115 
Artisan Way 	Grand Union Blvd. 	Great River Road 	Public 	40 to 70 	778 	— 
Artisan Way 5 	Great River Road 	Great River Road 	Public 	55 	130 	— 
Ash Ave. 	Meacham St. 	East Albion St. 	Public 	40 	554 	— 
Ash Ave. 	East Albion St. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	40 	— 	151 
Ashland St. 	Summer St. 	Sartwell Ave. 	Public 	30 	478 	— 
Assembly Row 	Great River Rd. 	Foley St. 	Public 	40 to 65 	1,010 	— 
Assembly Row 	Foley St. 	Revolution Drive 	Private 	70 	— 	375 
Atherton St. 	Central St. 	Spring St. 	Public 	40 	741 	— 
Auburn Ave. 	Cross St. 	Northwesterly 	Public 	30 	479 	— 
Austin St. 	Broadway 	Maine Ter. 	Public 	40 	475 	— 
Autumn St. 	Broadway 	Bonair St. 	Public 	20 	408 	— 
Avon Pl. 	Cross St. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Private 	25 	— 	150 
Avon St. 	School St. 	Central St. 	Public 	40 	1,360 	— 
Bailey Rd. 	Ten Hills Rd. 	Shore Drive 	Public 	40 	1,710 	— 
Bailey St. 	North St. 	West Adams St. 	Public 	40 	420 	— 
Banks St. 	Elm St. 	Summer St. 	Public 	40 	639 	— 
Bartlett St. 	Vernon St. 	Broadway 	Public 	40 	1,550 	— 
Barton St. 	Broadway 	Hamilton Rd. 	Public 	40 	382 	— 
Bay State Ave. 	Broadway 	Foskett St. 	Public 	40 	1,240 	— 
Beach Ave. 	Webster Ave. 	Columbia St. 	Private 	20 	— 	200 
Beacon Pl. 	Beacon St. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	15 	— 	200 
Beacon St. 	Cambridge line 	Somerville Ave. 	Public 	66 	6,079 	— 
Beacon Ter. 	Somerville Ave. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	24 	— 	110 
Beckwith Cir. 	Beacon St. 	Southwesterly 	Private 	28 	— 	112 
Bedford St. 	South St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	30 	165 	— 
Beech St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Atherton St. 	Public 	40 	327 	— 
Belknap St. 	Broadway 	Hamilton Rd. 	Public 	40 	449 	— 
Bellevue Ter. 	Albion St. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	20 	— 	90 
Belmont Pl. 	Belmont St. 	Southeasterly 	Public 	25 	177 	— 
Belmont Sq. 	Belmont St. 	Southeasterly 	Public 	30 	75 	— 
Belmont Sq. 	End of above 	Northeast and southwest 	Public 	20 	145 	— 
Belmont St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Highland Ave. 	Public 	40 	2,176 	— 
Belmont Ter. 	Belmont St. 	Easterly 	Private 	15 	— 	137 
Benedict Ave. 	Broadway 	Benedict St. 	Private 	20 	— 	200 
Benedict St. 	Austin St. 	Easterly 	Public 	40 	264 	— 
Bennett Ct. 	Bennett St. 	Prospect St. 	Private 	10 	— 	100 
Bennett St. 	Prospect St. 	Bennett Ct. 	Private 	40 to 25 	— 	400 
Benton Rd. 	Summer St. 	Hudson St. 	Public 	40 	1,208 	— 
Berkeley St. 	School St. 	Central St. 	Public 	40 	1,360 	— 
Berwick St. 	Hinckley St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	20 	— 	170 
Bigelow St. 	Boston St. 	Munroe St. 	Public 	50 	208 	— 
Billingham St. 	Broadway 	William St. 	Public 	40 	563 	— 
Bishop's Pl. 	Glen St. 	Easterly 	Private 	10 	— 	75 
Blakeley Ave. 	Cross St. 	McGrath Hwy. 	Private 	40 	— 	605 
Bleachery Ct. 	Somerville Ave. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Private 	30 	— 	450 
Bolton St. 	Oak St. 	Houghton St. 	Public 	40 	476 	— 
Bonair St. 	Cross St. 	Walnut St. 	Public 	40 	1,427 	— 
Bond St. 	Broadway 	Jaques St. 	Public 	40 	662 	— 
Bonner Ave. 	Washington St. 	Columbus Ave. 	Public 	40 	376 	— 
Boston Ave. 	Medford line 	Mystic River 	Public 	60 	915 	— 
Boston Ave. 	Broadway 	Medford line 	Public 	50 	80 	— 
Boston Ave. 	Broadway 	Highland Rd. 	Public 	65 	287 	— 
Boston Ave. 	Highland Rd. 	Angle 	Public 	50 	655 	— 
Boston Ave. 	Angle 	Morrison Ave. 	Public 	40 	1,025 	— 
Boston St. 	Washington St. 	Prospect Hill Ave. 	Public 	45 	640 	— 
Boston St. 	Prospect Hill Ave. 	Walnut St. 	Public 	40 	1,242 	— 
Bow St. 	Union Sq. 	Wesley Sq. 	Public 	60 	658 	— 
Bow St. 	Wesley Sq. 	Somerville Ave. 	Public 	50 	570 	— 
Bow St. Pl. 	Bow St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	40 	— 	300 
Bowdoin St. 	Washington St. 	Lincoln Pk. 	Public 	40 	341 	— 
Bowers Ave. 	Cottage Ave. 	Elm St. 	Private 	24 	— 	288 
Bradford Ave. 	School St. 	Southeasterly 	Public 	37 	162 	— 
Bradley St. 	Pearl St. 	Walter St. 	Public 	40 	762 	— 
Braemore Rd. 	Broadway 	Medford line 	Private 	40 	— 	2 
Brastow Ave. 	Lowell St. 	Porter St. 	Public 	40 	686 	— 
Bristol Rd. 	Broadway 	Medford line 	Public 	40 	146 	— 
Broadway 	Charlestown line 	Cross St. 	Public 	100 	2,500 	— 
Broadway 	Cross St. 	Marshall St. 	Public 	100 to 200 	2,060 	— 
Broadway 	Marshall St. 	Main St. 	Public 	100 	1,570 	— 
Broadway 	Main St. 	Top of hill 	Public 	100 to 90 	1,030 	— 
Broadway 	Top of hill 	Albion St. 	Public 	90 	2,540 	— 
Broadway 	Albion St. 	Willow Ave. 	Public 	90 to 70 	1,030 	— 
Broadway 	Willow Ave. 	Paulina St. 	Public 	70 	3,250 	— 
Broadway 	Paulina St. 	Arlington line 	Public 	65 to 60 	3,220 	— 
Broadway Pl. 	Broadway 	Southwesterly 	Private 	22 	— 	250 
Bromfield Rd. 	Warner St. 	Dearborn Rd. 	Public 	40 	1,262 	— 
Brook St. 	Glen St. 	Cross St. 	Public 	40 	504 	— 
Browning Rd. 	Sycamore St. 	Central St. 	Public 	40 	679 	— 
Buckingham St. 	Beacon St. 	Dimick St. 	Public 	40 	292 	— 
Buena Vista Rd. 	Holland St. 	Meacham Rd. 	Private 	35 	— 	505 
Burnham St. 	Broadway 	Powder House Blvd. 	Public 	40 	543 	— 
Burnside Ave. 	Elm St. 	Summer St. 	Public 	40 	720 	— 
Cady Ave. 	Simpson Ave. 	Westside Corinthian Rd. 	Public 	40 	158 	— 
Cady Ave. 	Corinthian Rd. 	Dead end 	Private 	40 	— 	45 
Caldwell Ave. 	Washington St. 	Southerly 	Private 	20 	— 	210 
Calvin St. 	Beacon St. 	Dimick St. 	Public 	40 	263 	— 
Calvin St. 	Dimick St. 	Washington St. 	Public 	30 	392 	— 
Cambria St. 	Central St. 	Benton Rd. 	Public 	40 	488 	— 
Cameron Ave. 	Holland St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	60 	1,065 	— 
Campbell Pk. 	Meacham Rd. 	Kingston St. 	Public 	40 	399 	— 
Campbell Pk. Pl. 	Kingston St. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Private 	20 	— 	84 
Canal Ln. 	Memorial Rd. 	River Rd. 	Private 	25 to 40 	— 	604 
Canal St. 	Grand Union Blvd. 	Assembly Row 	Public 	45 	390 	— 
Canal St. 	Assembly Row 	Easterly 	Private 	45 to 75 	— 	280 
Capen Ct. 	Capen St. 	Northerly 	Private 	20 	— 	250 
Capen St. 	Mystic Valley Pkwy. 	Easterly 	Private 	40 	— 	210 
Carlton St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Lake St. 	Public 	40 	300 	— 
Carter Ter. 	Summer St. 	Easterly 	Public 	40 	171 	— 
Carver St. 	Porter St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	40 	— 	156 
Cedar Ave. 	Cedar St. 	Linden Ave. 	Public 	22 	293 	— 
Cedar St. 	Elm St. 	Broadway 	Public 	40 	4,137 	— 
Cedar St. Pl. 	Murdock St. 	Southwesterly 	Private 	20 	— 	378 
Cedar St. Pl. 	Cedar St. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	12 	— 	80 
Central Rd. 	Central St. 	Easterly and northerly 	Public 	40 	377 	— 
Central Rd. 	Central Rd. 	Sycamore St. 	Public 	30 to 15 	221 	— 
Central St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Summer St. 	Public 	33 	1,043 	— 
Central St. 	Summer St. 	Medford St. 	Public 	40 	2,534 	— 
Central St. 	Medford St. 	Broadway 	Public 	45 	1,072 	— 
Centre St. 	Albion St. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Private 	35 	— 	200 
Century St. 	Meacham St. 	Dead end 	Public 	40 	431 	— 
Chandler St. 	Park Ave. 	Broadway 	Public 	40 	1,232 	— 
Chapel St. 	College Ave. 	Chandler St. 	Public 	40 	273 	— 
Charles E. Ryan Rd. 	Broadway 	Cedar St. 	Private 	45 	— 	980 
Charles E. Ryan Rd. 	Broadway 	Southwesterly 	Private 	45 	— 	920 
Charlestown St. 	Allen St. 	Merriam St. 	Private 	15 	— 	400 
Charnwood Rd. 	Willow Ave. 	Hancock St. 	Public 	40 	589 	— 
Cherry St. 	Elm St. 	Highland Ave. 	Public 	45 	1,400 	— 
Cherry St. 	Highland Ave. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	45 	— 	110 
Chester Ave. 	Cross St. 	McGrath Hwy. 	Public 	20 	472 	— 
Chester Pl. 	Chester St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	40 	— 	200 
Chester St. 	Elm St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	885 	— 
Chestnut St. 	Poplar St. 	Southeasterly 	Public 	40 	537 	— 
Chetwynd Rd. 	Curtis St. 	West Adams St. 	Public 	40 	852 	— 
Church St. 	Summer St. 	Lake St. 	Public 	40 	964 	— 
Claremon St. 	Holland St. 	Mead St. 	Public 	40 	560 	— 
Clarendon Ave. 	Broadway 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	1,217 	— 
Clark St. 	Newton St. 	Lincoln Pkwy. 	Public 	35 	552 	— 
Cleveland St. 	Central St. 	Harvard St. 	Public 	40 	459 	— 
Clifton St. 	Appleton St. 	Morrison Ave. 	Public 	40 	240 	— 
Clifton St. 	Morrison Ave. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Private 	40 	— 	220 
Clyde St. 	Cedar St. 	Murdock St. 	Public 	30 	664 	— 
College Ave. 	Davis Sq. 	Medford line 	Public 	60 	3,894 	— 
College Hill Rd. 	Conwell Ave. 	North St. 	Public 	40 	449 	— 
Columbia St. 	Webster Ave. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	816 	— 
Columbus Ave. 	Washington St. 	Walnut St. 	Public 	40 	1,481 	— 
Concord Ave. 	Prospect St. 	Wyatt St. 	Public 	40 	1,497 	— 
Concord Ave. 	Wyatt St. 	Beacon St. 	Public 	30 	472 	— 
Conlon Ct. 	Columbia St. 	Easterly 	Private 	20 	— 	200 
Connecticut Ave. 	Marginal Rd. 	Pennsylvania Ave. 	Public 	40 	316 	— 
Conwell Ave. 	Curtis St. 	North St. 	Public 	40 	1,346 	— 
Conwell St. 	Highland Ave. 	Southwesterly 	Public 	35 	363 	— 
Cooney St. 	Beacon St. 	Line St. 	Public 	30 	241 	— 
Corinthian Rd. 	Broadway 	Cady Ave. 	Public 	40 	580 	— 
Cottage Ave. 	Russell St. 	Chester St. 	Public 	40 	550 	— 
Cottage Cir. 	Cottage Ave. 	Southwesterly 	Private 	25 	— 	87 
Craigie St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Summer St. 	Public 	50 	1,280 	— 
Craigie Ter. 	Craigie St. 	Westerly 	Private 	25 	— 	126 
Crescent St. 	Charlestown line 	Hadley St. 	Public 	30 to 22 	387 	— 
Crescent St. 	Hadley St. 	Pearl St. 	Public 	30 	174 	— 
Crest Hill Rd. 	Ten Hills Rd. 	Shore Drive 	Public 	40 	250 	— 
Crocker St. 	Highland Ave. 	Crown St. 	Public 	40 	528 	— 
Cross St. 	Broadway 	McGrath Hwy. 	Public 	45 	2,556 	— 
Cross St. East 	Broadway 	Pennsylvania Ave. 	Public 	40 	808 	— 
Cross St. Pl. 	Cross St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	24 	— 	150 
Crown St. 	Lowell St. 	Porter St. 	Public 	25 	686 	— 
Cummings St. 	Marginal Rd. 	Middlesex Ave. 	Public 	40 	164 	— 
Curtis Ave. 	Curtis St. 	Hillsdale Rd. 	Public 	40 	654 	— 
Curtis St. 	Broadway 	Medford line 	Public 	40 	2,276 	— 
Cutler St. 	Hinckley St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	20 	— 	170 
Cutter Ave. 	Summer St. 	Highland Ave. 	Public 	40 	480 	— 
Cutter Pk. 	Cutter Ave. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	12 	— 	83 
Cutter St. 	Broadway 	Webster St. 	Public 	40 	730 	— 
Cypress St. 	Central St. 	Beech St. 	Public 	40 	262 	— 
Dana St. 	Pearl St. 	Bonair St. 	Public 	35 	732 	— 
Dane Ave. 	Dane St. 	Leland St. 	Public 	30 	569 	— 
Dane St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Washington St. 	Public 	40 	1,341 	— 
Dante Ter. 	Craigie St. 	Westerly 	Private 	25 	— 	125 
Dartmouth St. 	Medford St. 	Broadway 	Public 	40 	1,465 	— 
Day St. 	Elm St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	908 	— 
Dearborn Rd. 	Boston Ave. 	College Ave. 	Public 	50 	469 	— 
Delaware St. 	Pearl St. 	McGrath Hwy. 	Public 	40 	352 	— 
Dell St. 	Glen St. 	Tufts St. 	Public 	40 	466 	— 
Derby St. 	Temple St. 	Wheatland St. 	Public 	40 	991 	— 
Dexter St. 	Broadway 	Medford line 	Private 	50 	— 	25 
Dickinson St. 	Springfield St. 	Beacon St. 	Public 	40 	772 	— 
Dickson St. 	Broadway 	Fairmount Ave. 	Public 	40 	271 	— 
Dimick St. 	Concord Ave. 	Calvin St. 	Public 	40 	957 	— 
Direnzo Ter. 	Vernon St. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	20 	— 	128 
Douglas Ave. 	Edgar Ave. 	Southeasterly 	Public 	30 	162 	— 
Dover St. 	Elm St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	975 	— 
Dow St. 	Powder House Blvd. 	Ware St. 	Public 	40 	257 	— 
Downer St. 	Nashua St. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	20 	— 	120 
Dresden Cir. 	Cutter Ave. 	Westerly 	Private 	30 	— 	133 
Durham St. 	Beacon St. 	Hanson St. 	Public 	40 	423 	— 
Earle St. 	South St. 	Northerly 	Public 	40 	267 	— 
Earle St. 	End of above 	B. & M. R.R. 	Private 	15 	— 	115 
East Albion St. 	Mt. Vernon Ave. 	East of Moreland St. 	Private 	25 	— 	188 
East Albion St. 	East of Moreland St. 	Moreland St. 	Private 	40 	— 	77 
East Albion St. 	Moreland St. 	Westside Fremont St. 	Public 	40 	283 	— 
East Albion St. 	Fremont St. 	Medford line 	Private 	40 	— 	128 
Eastman Rd. 	Highland Ave. 	Southwesterly 	Public 	40 	296 	— 
Edgar Ave. 	Main St. 	Meacham St. 	Public 	50 	850 	— 
Edgar Ct. 	Edgar Ave. 	Century St. 	Public 	40 	118 	— 
Edgar Ter. 	Edgar Ave. 	Century St. 	Public 	40 	118 	— 
Edmands St. 	Broadway 	Bonair St. 	Public 	35 	450 	— 
Electric Ave. 	Mason St. 	Curtis St. 	Public 	40 	1,314 	— 
Eliot St. 	Vine St. 	Park St. 	Public 	40 	291 	— 
Ellington Rd. 	Highland Ave. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	35 	— 	120 
Ellington Rd. 	Ellington Rd. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	30 	— 	265 
Ellsworth St. 	Cross St. 	Rush St. 	Public 	40 	230 	— 
Elm Ct. 	Villa Ave. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	18 	— 	70 
Elm Pl. 	Harvard St. 	Westerly 	Private 	30 	— 	190 
Elm St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Cherry St. 	Public 	63 	1,657 	— 
Elm St. 	Cherry St. 	White St. 	Public 	63 to 60 	205 	— 
Elm St. 	White St. 	Banks St. 	Public 	60 	526 	— 
Elm St. 	Banks St. 	Beech St. 	Public 	60 to 77 	347 	— 
Elm St. 	Beech St. 	Tenney St. 	Public 	77 to 60 	665 	— 
Elm St. 	Tenney St. 	Davis Sq. 	Public 	60 	1,429 	— 
Elmwood St. 	Holland St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	1,057 	— 
Elmwood Ter. 	Elmwood St. 	Easterly 	Private 	20 	— 	190 
Elston St. 	Elm St. 	Summer St. 	Public 	40 	396 	— 
Emerson St. 	Everett St. 	Newton St. 	Private 	30 	— 	170 
Endicott Ave. 	Broadway 	Hooker Ave. 	Public 	40 	878 	— 
Essex St. 	Medford St. 	Richdale Ave. 	Public 	40 	232 	— 
Eustis St. 	Beacon St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	30 	146 	— 
Everett Ave. 	Cross St. 	McGrath Hwy. 	Public 	40 	736 	— 
Everett St. 	Webster Ave. 	Newton St. 	Private 	30 	— 	350 
Evergreen Ave. 	Marshall St. 	Sycamore St. 	Public 	40 	1,180 	— 
Evergreen Sq. 	Porter St. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	22 	— 	179 
Fairfax St. 	North St. 	Alewife Brook Pkwy. 	Public 	40 	945 	— 
Fairlee St. 	Cherry St. 	Northwesterly 	Public 	30 	144 	— 
Fairmount Ave. 	Curtis St. 	Northwesterly 	Public 	40 	679 	— 
Fairview Ter. 	Sycamore St. 	Southwesterly 	Private 	15 	— 	173 
Farragut Ave. 	Broadway 	Hooker Ave. 	Public 	40 	875 	— 
Fellsway 1 	Mystic Ave. 	Mystic River 	Public 	70 to 130 	2,500 	— 
Fellsway West 1 	Broadway 	Mystic Ave. 	Public 	50 	1,324 	— 
Fennell St. 	Hinckley St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	20 	— 	175 
Fenwick St. 	Broadway 	Jaques St. 	Public 	40 	601 	— 
First Ave. 	Inner Belt Rd. 	Southwesterly 	Private 	30 	— 	335 
Fisk Ave. 	Lowell St. 	Hinckley St. 	Public 	40 	484 	— 
Fitchburg St. 	Linwood St. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Private 	40 	— 	410 
Flint Ave. 	Flint St. 	Northerly 	Public 	40 	202 	— 
Flint St. 	Franklin St. 	McGrath Hwy. (dead end) Northwesterly 	Public 	40 	1,658 	— 
Florence St. 	Washington St. 	Perkins St. 	Public 	40 	1,248 	— 
Florence Ter. 	Jaques St. 	Southwesterly 	Private 	20 	— 	90 
Foley St. 	Middlesex Ave. 	Great River Road 	Public 	50 to 60 	1,510 	— 
Forest St. 	Beacon St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	117 	— 
Forster St. 	Sycamore St. 	Central St. 	Public 	30 	451 	— 
Foskett St. 	Willow Ave. 	Liberty Ave. 	Public 	40 	668 	— 
Fountain Ave. 	Cross St. 	Glen St. 	Public 	30 	578 	— 
Francis St. 	Porter St. 	Conwell St. 	Public 	30 	180 	— 
Franey Rd. 	Charles E. Ryan Rd. 	Cedar St. 	Private 	50 	— 	670 
Franklin Ave. 	Washington St. 	Franklin St. 	Public 	20 	575 	— 
Franklin Pl. 	Franklin St. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	15 	— 	100 
Franklin St. 	Broadway 	Washington St. 	Public 	40 	2,301 	— 
Fransesca Ave. 	College Ave. 	Liberty Ave. 	Public 	40 	762 	— 
Fremont Ave. 	Bowdoin St. 	Lincoln Park 	Public 	30 	232 	— 
Fremont St. 	Main St. 	Near E. Albion St. 	Public 	40 	1,072 	— 
Fremont St. 	Near E. Albion St. 	E. Albion St. 	Private 	40 	— 	59 
Fremont St. 	E. Albion St. 	Northerly 	Public 	40 	183 	— 
Garden Ct. 	Somerville Ave. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Private 	25 	— 	370 
Garfield Ave. 	Broadway 	Blakeley Ave. 	Public 	40 	447 	— 
Garfield Ave. 	Blakeley Ave. 	Middlesex Ave. 	Private 	40 	— 	982 
Garrison Ave. 	Broadway 	Hooker Ave. 	Public 	40 	871 	— 
George St. 	Broadway 	Lincoln Ave. 	Public 	30 	275 	— 
Gibbens St. 	Central St. 	Benton Rd. westerly 	Public 	40 	625 	— 
Giles Pk. 	Walnut St. 	Northwesterly 	Public 	33 	167 	— 
Gilman St. 	Cross St. 	Walnut St. 	Public 	40 	1,430 	— 
Gilman Ter. 	Pearl St. 	Northeasterly 	Public 	40 	360 	— 
Gilson Ter. 	Linden Ave. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	20 	— 	124 
Glen St. 	Broadway 	Tufts St. 	Public 	40 	2,207 	— 
Glendale Ave. 	Cameron Ave. 	Yorktown St. 	Public 	40 	410 	— 
Glenwood Rd. 	Vernon St. 	Broadway 	Public 	40 	1,514 	— 
Glover Cir. 	Meacham Rd. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	20 	— 	110 
Gordon St. 	North St. 	Alewife Brook Pkwy. 	Public 	40 	1,254 	— 
Gorham St. 	Holland St. 	Howard St. 	Public 	40 	763 	— 
Gould Ave. 	Porter St. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	16 	— 	156 
Gove Ct. 	Cedar St. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	18 	— 	144 
Governor Winthrop Rd. 	Ten Hills Rd. 	Shore Dr. 	Public 	40 	1,527 	— 
Governor Winthrop Rd. 	Fellsway 	Ten Hills Rd. Ext. 	State land 	40 	83 	— 
Grand View Ave. 	Walnut St. 	Vinal Ave. 	Public 	40 	542 	— 
Grand Union Blvd. 	Mystic Ave. 	Foley St. 	Public 	60 	2,472 	— 
Granite St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Osgood St. 	Public 	40 	411 	— 
Grant St. 	Broadway 	Mystic Ave. 	Public 	40 	1,364 	— 
Great River Rd. 	Grand Union Blvd. 	Assembly Row 	Public 	30 to 40 	350 	— 
Great River Rd. 	Assembly Row 	Artisan Way 	Private 	23 to 40 	470 	— 
Great River Rd. 5 	Artisan Way 	Foley St. 	Public 	45 to 60 	500 	— 
Great River Rd. 	Foley St. 	Revolution Drive 	Public 	50 	400 	— 
Greene St. 	Summer St. 	Laurel St. 	Public 	40 	555 	— 
Greenville Ct. 	Greenville St. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	10 to 25 	— 	105 
Greenville St. 	McGrath Hwy. 	Munroe St. 	Public 	40 	651 	— 
Greenville Ter. 	Greenville St. 	Northerly 	Private 	20 	— 	250 
Greenwood Ter. 	Beacon St. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	25 	— 	165 
Grove St. 	Elm St. 	Morrison Ave. 	Public 	40 	943 	— 
Gussie Ter. 	Porter St. 	Linden Ave. 	Private 	10 	— 	312 
Hadley Ct. 	Franklin St. 	Westerly 	Private 	16 	— 	74 
Hall Ave. 	College Ave. 	Liberty Ave. 	Public 	40 	926 	— 
Hall St. 	Cedar St. 	Cherry St. 	Public 	30 	456 	— 
Hamilton Rd. 	Russell Rd. 	North St. 	Public 	40 	560 	— 
Hamlet St. 	Highland Ave. 	Boston St. 	Public 	30 	616 	— 
Hammond St. 	Dickenson St. 	Concord Ave. 	Public 	40 	267 	— 
Hancock St. 	Elm St. 	Highland Ave. 	Public 	40 	1,302 	— 
Hancock St. 	Highland Ave. 	Lexington Ave. 	Public 	50 	376 	— 
Hanson Ave. 	Hanson St. 	Easterly 	Private 	20 	— 	252 
Hanson St. 	Washington St. 	Skehan St. 	Public 	30 	454 	— 
Hanson St. 	Skehan St. 	Vine St. 	Public 	35 	366 	— 
Hardan Rd. 	Powder House Blvd. 	Southerly 	Public 	40 	183 	— 
Hardan Rd. 	End of above 	Ware St. 	Private 	20 	— 	100 
Harding St. 	North of Ward St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	30 	465 	— 
Harold Rd. 	Gordon St. 	Medford line 	Private 	40 	— 	48 
Harold St. 	Dimick St. 	Marion St. 	Public 	40 	316 	— 
Harrison Rd. 	Elmwood St. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	40 	— 	210 
Harrison St. 	Ivaloo St. 	Kent St. 	Public 	40 	644 	— 
Harvard Pl. 	Harvard St. 	Westerly 	Private 	35 	— 	200 
Harvard St. 	Summer St. 	Beech St. 	Public 	40 	717 	— 
Hathorn St. 	Broadway 	Arlington St. 	Public 	40 	339 	— 
Hawkins St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Washington St. 	Public 	40 	330 	— 
Hawthorne St. 	Willow Ave. 	Cutter Ave. 	Public 	30 	807 	— 
Hayden Ter. 	Linden Ave. 	Easterly 	Private 	20 	— 	120 
Heath St. 	Temple St. 	Bond St. 	Public 	45 	1,043 	— 
Heath St. 	Bond St. 	Moreland St. 	Public 	40 	754 	— 
Henderson St. 	Richardson St. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Public 	20 	569 	— 
Henry Ave. 	Highland Ave. 	Lexington Ave. 	Public 	40 	290 	— 
Herbert St. 	Chester St. 	Day St. 	Public 	40 	337 	— 
Hersey St. 	Berkeley St. 	Oxford St. 	Private 	40 	— 	230 
Higgins Ct. 	Mt. Vernon St. 	Westerly 	Private 	16 	— 	149 
High St. 	North St. 	Alewife Brook Pkwy. 	Public 	40 	689 	— 
Highland Ave. 	Medford St. 	Davis Sq. 	Public 	60 	9,062 	— 
Highland Rd. 	Morrison Ave. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Public 	70 	107 	— 
Highland Rd. 2 	Morrison Ave. 	Boston Ave. 	Public 	30 (70) 	1,499 	— 
Hill St. 	Broadway 	Fairmount Ave. 	Public 	40 	284 	— 
Hillside Ave. 	Pearl St. 	Southwesterly 	Private 	30 	— 	150 
Hillside Cir. 	Craigie St. 	Westerly 	Private 	16 	— 	151 
Hillside Pk. 	Walnut St. 	Northwesterly 	Public 	40 	196 	— 
Hillsdale Rd. 	Conwell Ave. 	Sunset Rd. 	Public 	40 	632 	— 
Hinckley St. 	Broadway 	B. & M. R.R. 	Public 	30 to 35 	1,081 	— 
Hodgdon Pl. 	Dane Ave. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	20 	— 	150 
Holden Green 	Cambridge line 	Northeasterly 	Private 	70 	— 	120 
Holland St. 	Davis Sq. 	Broadway 	Public 	60 	2,607 	— 
Holts Ave. 	Oak St. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	10 	— 	100 
Holyoke Rd. 	Elm St. 	Elm St. 	Public 	40 	637 	— 
Homer Sq. 	Bonner Ave. 	Northwesterly 	Public 	30 	204 	— 
Hooker Ave. 	Endicott Ave. 	Victoria St. 	Public 	40 	685 	— 
Horace St. 	South St. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Public 	30 	517 	— 
Houghton St. 	Springfield St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	653 	— 
Howard St. 	Thorndike St. 	Gorham St. 	Public 	40 	431 	— 
Howe St. 	Marshall St. 	School St. 	Public 	40 	447 	— 
Hudson St. 	Central St. 	Cedar St. 	Public 	40 	2,758 	— 
Hunting St. 	South St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	30 	117 	— 
Ibbetson St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Lowell St. 	Public 	40 	802 	— 
Illinois Ave. 	Broadway 	Pennsylvania Ave. 	Public 	40 	427 	— 
Indiana Ave. 	Broadway 	Pennsylvania Ave. 	Public 	40 	384 	— 
Inner Belt Rd. 1 	Washington St. 	New Washington St. 	Public 	80 	500 	— 
Inner Belt Rd. 	New Washington St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	50 to 77 	— 	2,900 
Irving St. 	Holland St. 	Broadway 	Public 	40 	1,176 	— 
Irvington Rd. 	Mystic Valley Pkwy. 	Irvington Rd. 	Public 	40 	484 	— 
Irvington Rd. 	Irvington Rd. 	Boston Ave. 	Private 	20 	— 	157 
Irvington Rd. 1 	Irvington Rd. 	Boston Ave. 	Public 	20 	195 	— 
Ivaloo St. 	Beacon St. 	Park St. 	Public 	40 	690 	— 
Jackson Rd. 	Walnut St. 	Northwesterly 	Public 	40 	548 	— 
James St. 	Pearl St. 	Radcliffe Rd. 	Public 	40 	317 	— 
Jaques St. 	Fellsway West 	Temple St. 	Public 	40 	1,134 	— 
Jaques St. 	Temple St. 	Bond St. 	Public 	45 	1,037 	— 
Jaques St. 	Bond St. 	Edgar Ave. 	Public 	40 	395 	— 
Jasper Pl. 	Walnut St. 	Easterly 	Private 	20 	— 	80 
Jasper St. 	Pearl St. 	Gilman St. 	Public 	40 	283 	— 
Jay St. 	Holland St. 	Howard St. 	Public 	40 	534 	— 
Jerome Ct. 	Sycamore St. 	Jerome St. 	Private 	10 	— 	150 
Jerome St. 	Montrose St. 	Jerome Ct. 	Private 	20 	— 	125 
Joseph St. 	Newton St. 	Lincoln Pkwy. 	Public 	40 	458 	— 
Josephine Ave. 	Morrison Ave. 	Broadway 	Public 	45 	1,679 	— 
Joy St. 	McGrath Hwy. 	Poplar St. 	Public 	52 	1,121 	— 
Kenneson Rd. 	Broadway 	Walnut Rd. 	Private 	30 	— 	338 
Kensington Ave. 	Broadway 	Blakely Ave. 	Public 	40 	455 	— 
Kensington Ave. 	Marginal Rd. 	Middlesex Ave. 	Private 	40 	— 	120 
Kent Ct. 	Kent St. 	Northerly 	Private 	25 	— 	420 
Kent St. 	Somerville Ave. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Public 	40 	292 	— 
Kent St. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Beacon St. 	Public 	25 	386 	— 
Kenwood St. 	College Ave. 	Billingham St. 	Public 	40 	322 	— 
Kidder Ave. 	College Ave. 	Boston Ave. 	Public 	40 	2,344 	— 
Kilby St. 	Somerville Ave 	Southwesterly 	Private 	20 	— 	180 
Kilsyth Rd. 	Broadway 	Medford line 	Private 	40 	— 	5 
Kimball St. 	Lowell St. 	Craigie St. 	Private 	40 	— 	303 
Kingman Rd. 	Washington St. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Private 	25 	— 	400 
Kingston St. 	Meacham Rd. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	647 	— 
Knapp St. 	School St. 	Granite St. 	Public 	40 	379 	— 
Knowlton St. 	Tufts St. 	Northeasterly 	Public 	40 	461 	— 
Knowlton St. 	Oliver St. 	Southwesterly 	Private 	40 	— 	130 
Lake St. 	Hawkins St. 	Church St. 	Public 	40 	825 	— 
Landers St. 	School St. 	Westerly 	Public 	40 	228 	— 
Langmaid Ave. 	Broadway 	Heath St. 	Public 	30 	353 	— 
Latin Way 	Professors Row 	Talbot Ave. 	Private 	60 	— 	250 
Laurel Ave. 	Laurel St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	18 	— 	125 
Laurel St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Summer St. 	Public 	40 	983 	— 
Laurel Ter. 	Laurel St. 	Southeasterly 	Public 	23 	256 	— 
Lawson Ter. 	Putnam St. 	Easterly 	Private 	15 	— 	200 
Lee St. 	Medford St. 	Richdale Ave. 	Public 	40 	387 	— 
Leland St. 	Washington St. 	Dane Ave. 	Public 	40 	359 	— 
Leon St. 	Concord Ave. 	Dickinson St. 	Public 	40 	155 	— 
Leonard St. 	Broadway 	Powder House Blvd. 	Public 	40 	450 	— 
Lesley Ave. 	Highland Ave. 	Lexington Ave. 	Public 	40 	333 	— 
Lester Ter. 	Meacham Rd. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	20 	— 	190 
Lewis St. 	Magnus Ave. 	Dead end 	Public 	40 	416 	— 
Lexington Ave. 	Willow Ave. 	Hancock St. 	Public 	50 	624 	— 
Lexington Ave. 	Hancock St. 	Angle 	Public 	45 to 40 	147 	— 
Lexington Ave. 	Angle 	Cedar St. 	Public 	40 	578 	— 
Liberty Ave. 	Broadway 	Appleton St. 	Public 	40 	1,453 	— 
Liberty Rd. 	Morrison Ave. 	Liberty Ave. 	Private 	16 	— 	200 
Lincoln Ave. 	Lincoln St. 	Mt. Vernon St. 	Public 	30 	478 	— 
Lincoln Pkwy. 	Clark St. 	Perry St. 	Public 	40 	1,520 	— 
Lincoln Pl. 	Lincoln Ave. 	Northerly 	Private 	9 	— 	120 
Lincoln St. 	Broadway 	Perkins St. 	Public 	40 	545 	— 
Linden Ave. 	Elm St. 	Cedar Ave. 	Public 	45 	1,379 	— 
Linden Cir. 	Linden Ave. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	24 	— 	120 
Linden Pl. 	Linden Ave. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	20 	— 	160 
Linden St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Charlestown St. 	Public 	33 	587 	— 
Line St. 	Washington St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	33 	1,727 	— 
Linwood St. 	McGrath Hwy. 	Fitchburg St. 	Public 	50 	2,053 	— 
Loring St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Osgood St. 	Public 	40 	413 	— 
Louisburg Pl. 	Autumn St. 	Easterly 	Private 	13 	— 	90 
Lovell St. 	Broadway 	Electric Ave. 	Public 	40 	385 	— 
Lowden Ave. 	Broadway 	Foskett St. 	Public 	40 	1,247 	— 
Lowell Cir. 	Lowell St. 	Westerly 	Private 	11 to 27 	— 	143 
Lowell St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Summer St. 	Public 	36 	1,259 	— 
Lowell St. 	Summer St. 	Medford St. 	Public 	40 	3,320 	— 
Lowell Ter. 	Lowell St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	20 	— 	150 
Lower Campus Rd. 	196 College Ave. 	43 Latin Way 	Private 	20 		1,285 
Madison St. 	School St. 	Sycamore St. 	Public 	40 	891 	— 
Magnus Ave. 	Washington St. 	Lewis St. 	Public 	40 	429 	— 
Magnus Ave. 	Lewis St. 	Southerly 	Private 	40 	— 	80 
Main St. 	Broadway 	Medford line 	Public 	50 	973 	— 
Maine Ave. 	Marginal Rd. 	Pennsylvania Ave. 	Public 	40 	211 	— 
Maine Ter. 	Maine Ave. 	Austin St. 	Public 	32 	317 	— 
Mallet St. 	Willow Ave. 	Liberty Ave. 	Public 	40 	617 	— 
Malvern Ave. 	Cameron Ave. 	Yorktown St. 	Public 	40 	410 	— 
Mansfield St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Washington St. 	Public 	40 	735 	— 
Maple Ave. 	School St. 	Southeasterly 	Public 	40 	319 	— 
Maple Pl. 	Marshall St. 	Maple Ave. 	Private 	5 	— 	125 
Mardel Cir. 	Spring St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	8 	— 	140 
Marginal Rd. 	Cummings St. 	Kensington Ave. 	Public 	26 	345 	— 
Marion St. 	Concord Ave. 	Dimick St. 	Public 	40 	1,147 	— 
Marshall St. 	Broadway 	Pearl St. 	Public 	40 	1,650 	— 
Mason St. 	Broadway 	Powder House Blvd. 	Public 	40 	681 	— 
MacArthur St. 	Broadway 	Bonair St. 	Public 	40 	438 	— 
Msgr. McGrath Highway 1 	Cambridge line 	Middlesex Ave. 	Public 	100 to 120 	9,164 	— 
McGregor Ave. 	Wigglesworth St. 	Walnut St. 	Private 	13 	— 	302 
Meacham Rd. 	Dover St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	1,060 	— 
Meacham St. 	Edgar Ave. 	Medford line 	Public 	40 	777 	— 
Meacham St. 	Edgar Ave. 	Northeasterly 	Public 	40 	242 	— 
Mead St. 	Moore St. 	Near Cameron Ave. 	Public 	40 	345 	— 
Mead St. 	End of above 	Cameron Ave. 	Private 	40 	— 	95 
Medford St. 	Central St. 	Broadway 	Public 	55 	1,985 	— 
Medford St. 	Cambridge line 	McGrath Hwy. 	Public 	50 	1,538 	— 
Medford St. 	McGrath Hwy. 	Central St. 	Public 	50 	3,937 	— 
Melville Rd. 	Ten Hills Rd. 	Shore Drive 	Public 	40 	281 	— 
Melvin St. 	Broadway 	Bonair St. 	Public 	40 	486 	— 
Memorial Rd. 	Butler Dr. 	Mystic Ave. 	Private 	18 to 24 	— 	1,146 
Merriam St. 	Washington St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Public 	40 	360 	— 
Merriam St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Charlestown St. 	Public 	30 	510 	— 
Michigan Ave. 	Broadway 	Pennsylvania Ave. 	Public 	40 	470 	— 
Middlesex Ave. 	Mystic Ave. 	Fellsway 	Public 	80 	2,354 	— 
Milk Pl. 	Somerville Ave. 	Southwesterly 	Private 	30 	— 	100 
Miller St. 	Sacramento St. 	Beacon St. 	Public 	30 to 33 	466 	— 
Milton St. 	Orchard St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	223 	— 
Miner St. 	Vernon St. 	Ames St. 	Public 	40 	244 	— 
Minnesota Ave. 	Broadway 	Pennsylvania Ave. 	Public 	40 	525 	— 
Mondamin Ct. 	Ivaloo St. 	Harrison St. 	Private 	25 	— 	250 
Monmouth St. 	Central St. 	Westerly 	Public 	40 	267 	— 
Monmouth St. 	End of above 	Harvard St. 	Private 	35 	— 	200 
Montgomery Ave. 	Broadway 	Wellington Ave. 	Public 	40 	265 	— 
Montrose Ct. 	Montrose St. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Private 	12 	— 	110 
Montrose St. 	School St. 	Sycamore St. 	Public 	40 	886 	— 
Moore St. 	Holland St. 	Mead St. 	Public 	40 	695 	— 
Moreland St. 	Main St. 	Mystic Ave. 	Public 	40 	1,471 	— 
Morgan St. 	Beacon St. 	Park St. 	Public 	40 	377 	— 
Morrison Ave. 	Cedar St. 	Willow Ave. 	Public 	50 	1,366 	— 
Morrison Ave. 	Willow Ave. 	College Ave. 	Public 	40 	1,690 	— 
Morrison Pl. 	Morrison Ave. 	Northerly 	Private 	20 	— 	190 
Morrison Pl. 	Morrison Pl. 	Easterly 	Private 	15 	— 	175 
Mortimer Pl. 	Marshall St. 	Easterly 	Private 	20 	— 	172 
Morton St. 	Glen St. 	Knowlton St. 	Public 	40 	287 	— 
Mossland St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Elm St. 	Public 	40 	377 	— 
Mountain Ave. 	Porter St. 	Near Linden Ave. 	Public 	22 	280 	— 
Mt. Pleasant Ct. 	Perkins St. 	Southwesterly 	Private 	35 	— 	260 
Mt. Pleasant St. 	Broadway 	Perkins St. 	Public 	33 	584 	— 
Mt. Vernon Ave. 	Meacham St. 	Mystic Ave. 	Private 	50 	— 	764 
Mt. Vernon St. 	Washington St. 	Pearl St. 	Public 	40 	600 	— 
Mt. Vernon St. 	Pearl St. 	Perkins St. 	Public 	50 	473 	— 
Mt. Vernon St. 	Perkins St. 	Broadway 	Public 	40 	590 	— 
Munroe St. 	Walnut St. 	Easterly 	Public 	40 	375 	— 
Munroe St. 	End of above 	Boston St. 	Public 	50 	1,214 	— 
Murdock St. 	Cedar St. 	Clyde St. 	Public 	30 	853 	— 
Museum St. 	Beacon St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	164 	— 
Myrtle Ct. 	Myrtle St. 	Easterly 	Private 	10 	— 	100 
Myrtle Pl. 	Myrtle St. 	Westerly 	Private 	20 	— 	120 
Myrtle St. 	Washington St. 	Perkins St. 	Public 	40 	1,423 	— 
Mystic Ave. 	Charlestown line 	West line Connecticut Ave. 	Public 	52 to 60 	2,227 	— 
Mystic Ave. 1 	West line Connecticut Ave. 	Medford line 	Public 	66 	4,869 	— 
Mystic Valley Pkwy. 1 	Medford line 	Arlington line 	Public 	60 	2,530 	— 
Nashua St. 	Richardson St. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Public 	35 	637 	— 
Nevada Ave. 	Village St. 	Hanson St. 	Private 	20 	— 	200 
New Washington St. 	Washington St. 	Inner Belt Rd. 	Public 	50 	— 	1,679 
Newberne St. 	Appleton St. 	Morrison Ave. 	Public 	40 	200 	— 
Newberne St. 	Morrison Ave. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Private 	40 	— 	173 
Newbury St. 	Holland St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	1,260 	— 
New Hampshire Ave. 	Marginal Rd. 	Pennsylvania Ave. 	Public 	40 	264 	— 
Newman Pl. 	Cedar St. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	15 	— 	100 
Newton St. 	Prospect St. 	Webster Ave. 	Public 	25 	470 	— 
Newton St. 	Webster Ave. 	Concord Sq. 	Public 	40 	637 	— 
Norfolk St. 	Webster Ave. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	283 	— 
North St. 	Broadway 	Medford line # 17 	Public 	40 	1,861 	— 
North St. 	Medford line # 17 	Medford line # 18 	Public 	37 to 42 	649 	— 
North Union St. 	Mystic Ave. 	Northeasterly 	Public 	35 to 40 	431 	— 
Norton St. 	Nashua St. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	20 	— 	200 
Norwood Ave. 	Broadway 	Medford St. 	Public 	40 	350 	— 
Oak St. 	Prospect St. 	Angle 	Public 	40 	665 	— 
Oak St. 	Angle 	Cambridge line 	Public 	30 	563 	— 
Oak St. Pl. 	Oak St. 	Northerly 	Private 	4 	— 	85 
Oak Ter. 	Elm St. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	10 	— 	90 
Oakland Ave. 	Marshall St. 	School St. 	Public 	40 	430 	— 
Oakland St. 	Cambridge line 	Northerly 	Private 	30 	— 	35 
Olive Ave. 	Linden Ave. 	Peterson Ter. 	Private 	25 	— 	155 
Olive Sq. 	Lake St. 	Southerly 	Private 	15 	— 	100 
Oliver St. 	Franklin St. 	Cross St. 	Public 	40 	1,085 	— 
Orchard St. 	Cambridge line 	Meacham Rd. 	Public 	40 	1,407 	— 
Osgood St. 	Granite St. 	Easterly and westerly 	Private 	40 	— 	450 
Ossipee Rd. 	Mason St. 	Curtis St. 	Public 	40 	1,315 	— 
Otis St. 	Cross St. 	Wigglesworth St. 	Public 	40 	1,049 	— 
Oxford St. 	School St. 	Central St. 	Public 	35 	1,361 	— 
Oxford St. 	Beacon St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	50 	90 	— 
Packard Ave. 	Broadway 	Professors Row 	Public 	60 	1,676 	— 
Packard Ave. 	Professors Row 	Medford line 	Private 	60 	— 	240 
Palmer Ave. 	Franklin St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	20 	— 	200 
Park Ave. 	College Ave. 	Wallace St. 	Public 	40 	467 	— 
Park Pl. 	Laurel St. 	Easterly 	Private 	30 	— 	522 
Park Pl. 	Park Pl. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	20 	— 	120 
Park St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Beacon St. 	Public 	50 	1,222 	— 
Parkdale St. 	Washington St. 	Lewis St. 	Public 	40 	500 	— 
Parker Pl. 	Porter St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	20 	— 	150 
Parker St. 	Washington St. 	Fremont Ave. 	Public 	35 	203 	— 
Partridge Ave. 	Vernon St. 	Broadway 	Public 	40 	1,452 	— 
Paulina St. 	Broadway 	Holland St. 	Public 	40 	769 	— 
Pearl St. 	Crescent St. 	Mt. Vernon St. 	Public 	37 	341 	— 
Pearl St. 	Mt. Vernon St. 	Franklin St. 	Public 	50 	957 	— 
Pearl St. 	Franklin St. 	Cross St. 	Public 	40 	1,065 	— 
Pearl St. 	Cross St. 	Medford St. 	Public 	50 	2,253 	— 
Pearl St. Pl. 	Pearl St. 	Northeasterly 	Public 	20 	166 	— 
Pearl Ter. 	Pearl St. 	Northerly 	Private 	23 	— 	161 
Pearson Ave. 	Morrison Ave. 	Boston Ave. 	Public 	45 	1,279 	— 
Pearson Rd. 	Broadway 	Dearborn Rd. 	Public 	40 	1,713 	— 
Pembroke Ct. 	Pembroke St. 	Southwesterly 	Private 	25 	— 	130 
Pembroke St. 	Central St. 	Sycamore St. 	Public 	40 	430 	— 
Pennsylvania Ave. 	Broadway 	Wisconsin Ave. 	Public 	50 	1,112 	— 
Pennsylvania Ave. 	Wisconsin Ave. 	Cross St. 	Public 	40 	350 	— 
Perkins Pl. 	Perkins St. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	20 	— 	200 
Perkins St. 	Franklin St. 	Charlestown line 	Public 	40 	1,328 	— 
Perry St. 	Washington St. 	Lincoln Pkwy. 	Public 	40 	606 	— 
Peterson Ter. 	Porter St. 	Olive Ave. 	Private 	7 	— 	155 
Phillips Pl. 	Spring St. 	Westerly 	Private 	15 	— 	100 
Pinckney Pl. 	Pinckney St. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	24 	— 	125 
Pinckney St. 	Washington St. 	Perkins St. 	Public 	40 	1,136 	— 
Pitman St. 	Beech St. 	Spring St. 	Public 	30 	381 	— 
Pitman St. 	Spring St. 	Belmont St. 	Private 	26 	— 	390 
Pleasant Ave. 	Walnut St. 	Vinal Ave. 	Public 	40 	543 	— 
Poplar St. 	McGrath Hwy. 	Joy St. 	Public 	52 	480 	— 
Porter Ave. 	Porter St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	20 	— 	220 
Porter St. 	Elm St. 	Mountain Ave. 	Public 	45 	1,573 	— 
Porter St. 	Mountain Ave. 	Highland Ave. 	Public 	40 	415 	— 
Powder House Blvd. 4 	Powder House Sq. 	Alewife Brook Pkwy. 	Public 	80 	4,560 	— 
Powder House Ter. 	Kidder Ave. 	Liberty Ave. 	Public 	40 	585 	— 
Prentiss St. 	Beacon St. 	Cambridge line 	Private 	35 	— 	150 
Prescott St. 	Summer St. 	Highland Ave. 	Public 	50 	1,102 	— 
Preston Rd. 	School St. 	Summer St. 	Public 	40 	839 	— 
Prichard Ave. 	Morrison Ave. 	Boston Ave. 	Public 	40 	1,151 	— 
Princeton St. 	Alpine St. 	Lowell St. 	Public 	40 	648 	— 
Professors Row 	College Ave. 	Curtis St. 	Public 	40 	2,000 	— 
Properzi Way 	Somerville Ave. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Public 	40 	540 	— 
Properzi Way 	B. & M. R.R. 	Hanson St. 	Private 	40 	— 	222 
Properzi Way 	Hanson St. 	Beacon St. 	Public 	30 	662 	— 
Prospect Hill Ave. 	McGrath Hwy. 	Munroe St. 	Public 	40 	548 	— 
Prospect Hill Pkwy. 	Munroe St. 	Stone Ave. 	Public 	40 	400 	— 
Prospect St. 	Washington St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	50 	2,020 	— 
Puritan Rd. 	Ten Hills Rd. 	Shore Drive 	Public 	40 	1,344 	— 
Puritan Rd. 	Fellsway 	Ten Hills Rd. Ext. 	State land 	40 	83 	— 
Putnam Rd. 	Ten Hills Rd. 	Shore Drive 	Public 	40 	1,141 	— 
Putnam St. 	Summer St. 	Highland Ave. 	Public 	50 	1,262 	— 
Quincy St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Summer St. 	Public 	40 	781 	— 
Radcliffe Rd. 	Walnut St. 	Bradley St. 	Public 	35 	392 	— 
Radcliffe Rd. 	Bradley St. 	Marshall St. 	Public 	40 	261 	— 
Randolph Pl. 	Cross St. 	Westerly 	Private 	15 	— 	244 
Raymond Ave. 	Curtis St. 	North St. 	Public 	40 	1,347 	— 
Record Ct. 	Broadway 	Southwesterly 	Private 	10 	— 	110 
Reed Ct. 	Oliver St. 	Southwesterly 	Private 	20 	— 	71 
Remick Ct. 	Cutter St. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	10 	— 	100 
Revolution Dr. 	Great River Rd. 	Mystic Ave. 	Public 	60 to 80 	1,260 	— 
Rhode Island Ave. 	Marginal Rd. 	Pennsylvania Ave. 	Public 	40 	460 	— 
Richardson St. 	Lowell St. 	Hinckley St. 	Public 	35 	467 	— 
Richardson Ter. 	Richardson St. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	20 	— 	135 
Richdale Ave. 	School St. 	Sycamore St. 	Public 	40 	875 	— 
River Rd. 	Memorial Rd. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	40 	— 	1,015 
Roberts St. 	Hinckley St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	20 	— 	170 
Robinson St. 	Central St. 	Bartlett St. 	Public 	40 	582 	— 
Rogers Ave. 	Morrison Ave. 	Boston Ave. 	Public 	45 	1,642 	— 
Roland St. 	Waverly St. 	Boston line 	Private 	40 	— 	100 
Rose St. 	Washington St. 	Lewis St. 	Public 	40 	450 	— 
Roseland St. 	Beacon St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	121 	— 
Rossmore St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Washington St. 	Public 	40 	534 	— 
Royce Pl. 	Bonair St. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	15 	— 	175 
Rush St. 	Broadway 	Flint St. 	Public 	40 	1,406 	— 
Russell Rd. 	Broadway 	North line Hamilton Rd. 	Public 	40 	559 	— 
Russell Rd. 	North line Hamilton Rd. 	Northerly 	Private 	40 	— 	75 
Russell St. 	Elm St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	742 	— 
Sacramento St. 	Somerville Ave. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Public 	40 	80 	— 
Sacramento St. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Beacon St. 	Public 	40 	294 	— 
Sacramento St. 	Beacon St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	154 	— 
Sanborn Ave. 	Warren Ave. 	Walnut St. 	Public 	40 	278 	— 
Sanborn Ct. 	Washington St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	30 	— 	176 
Sargent Ave. 	Broadway 	Walnut St. 	Public 	40 	1,069 	— 
Sartwell Ave. 	Cedar St. 	Cherry St. 	Public 	35 	427 	— 
Sawyer Ave. 	Packard Ave. 	Curtis St. 	Private 	40 	— 	690 
School St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Highland Ave. 	Public 	40 	1,869 	— 
School St. 	Highland Ave. 	Broadway 	Public 	50 	2,454 	— 
Sellon Pl. 	Marshall St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	12 	— 	120 
Seven Pines Ave. 	Cameron Ave. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	92 	— 
Sewall Ct. 	Sewall St. 	Southwesterly 	Private 	25 	— 	190 
Sewall St. 	Grant St. 	Temple St. 	Public 	40 	615 	— 
Sherman Ct. 	Sargent Ave. 	Marshall St. 	Private 	10 	— 	250 
Shore Dr. 1 	Mystic Ave. 	Fellsway 	Public 	50 	2,081 	— 
Silvey Pl. 	Craigie St. 	Lowell St. 	Private 	23 to 25 	— 	264 
Simpson Ave. 	Broadway 	Holland St. 	Public 	40 	1,018 	— 
Skehan St. 	Dane St. 	Hanson St. 	Public 	30 	306 	— 
Skehan St. 	Hanson St. 	Durham St. 	Private 	30 	— 	405 
Skilton Ave. 	Pearl St. 	Pearl St. 	Private 	40 	— 	540 
Smith Ave. 	Beacon St. 	Line St. 	Public 	23 	213 	— 
Snow Ter. 	Jaques St. 	Southwesterly 	Private 	16 	— 	120 
Somerville Ave. 	McGrath Hwy. 	Union Sq. 	Public 	75 	1,812 	— 
Somerville Ave. 	Union Sq. 	North Cambridge line 	Public 	70 	6,729 	- 
South St. 	WindsorSt. 	Medford St. 	Private 	30 to 55 	— 	1,340 
Spencer Ave. 	Cedar St. 	Hancock St. 	Public 	40 	727 	— 
Spring St. 	Somerville Ave. 	Summer St. 	Public 	40 	1,220 	— 
Springfield St. 	Concord Ave. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	788 	— 
Spring Hill Ter. 	Highland Ave. 	Belmont St. 	Public 	20 	673 	— 
Stanford Ter. 	Beacon St. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	25 	— 	200 
Steeves Cir. 	Cherry St. 	Easterly 	Private 	15 	— 	120 
Sterling St. 	North St. 	Alewife Brook Pkwy. 	Public 	40 	802 	— 
Stickney Ave. 	Marshall St. 	School St. 	Public 	40 	458 	— 
St. James Ave. 	Elm St. 	Summer St. 	Public 	40 	488 	— 
St. James Ave. Ext. 	Summer St. 	Northeasterly 	Public 	30 	125 	— 
Stone Ave. 	Union Sq. 	Columbus Ave. 	Public 	40 	676 	— 
Stone Ave. 	Columbus Ave. 	Prospect Hill Pkwy. 	Public 	38 	107 	— 
Stone Pl. 	Stone Ave. 	Southeasterly 	Public 	30 	142 	— 
Strathmore Rd. 	Broadway 	Medford line 	Private 	40 	— 	15 
Summer St. 	Bow St. 	Elm St. 	Public 	45 	7,870 	— 
Summit Ave. 	Walnut St. 	Vinal Ave. 	Public 	45 	532 	— 
Summit St. 	College Ave. 	Billingham St. 	Public 	40 	262 	— 
Sunnyside Ave. 	Walnut St. 	Wigglesworth St. 	Public 	25 to 35 	306 	— 
Sunset Rd. 	Curtis St. 	Hillsdale Rd. 	Public 	40 	656 	— 
Sycamore St. 	Broadway 	Medford St. 	Public 	45 	1,245 	— 
Sycamore St. 	Medford St. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Public 	40 	639 	— 
Sycamore St. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Highland Ave. 	Public 	35 	722 	— 
Sycamore Ter. 	Sycamore St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	12 	— 	130 
Sydney St. 	Grant St. 	Temple St. 	Public 	40 	679 	— 
Talbot Ave. 	Packard Ave. 	College Ave. 	Private 	50 	— 	1,409 
Tannery Brook Row 	Howard St. 	Elmwood St. 	Private 	16 to 20 	— 	353 
Tannery Brook Row 	Elmwood St. 	Cameron Ave. 	Private 	22 	— 	200 
Taunton St. 	Wyatt St. 	Angle 	Private 	30 	— 	170 
Taunton St. 	Angle 	Marion St. 	Private 	20 	— 	95 
Taylor St. 	Mystic Ave. 	Sydney St. 	Public 	40 	309 	— 
Teele Ave. 	Packard Ave. 	Curtis St. 	Public 	40 	685 	— 
Temple Rd. 	Mystic Ave. 	Shore Drive 	Public 	40 	1,420 	— 
Temple St. 	Broadway 	Mystic Ave. 	Public 	66 	1,628 	— 
Ten Hills Rd. 	Bailey Rd. 	Shore Drive 	Public 	25 to 40 	1,886 	— 
Tennyson St. 	Forster St. 	Pembroke St. 	Public 	40 	869 	— 
Third Ave. 	Inner Belt Rd. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	50 	— 	507 
Thorndike St. 	Holland St. 	Kingston St. 	Public 	40 	584 	— 
Thorndike St. 	Underpass 	B. & M. R.R. 	Public 	20 	88 	— 
Thorpe St. 	Highland Ave. 	Southwesterly 	Public 	30 	468 	— 
Thurston St. 	Broadway 	Richdale Ave. 	Public 	40 	1,689 	— 
Tower Ct. 	Tyler St. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	25 	— 	150 
Tower St. 	Crown St. 	Highland Ave. 	Public 	40 	559 	— 
Tremont Pl. 	Tremont St. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	10 	— 	75 
Tremont St. 	Webster Ave. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	589 	— 
Trull Lane 	Highland Ave. 	Oxford St. 	Private 	15 	— 	200 
Trull St. 	Vernon St. 	Medford St. 	Public 	40 	1,050 	— 
Tufts St. 	Washington St. 	Cross St. 	Public 	40 	982 	— 
Turner Ct. 	Franklin St. 	Westerly 	Private 	20 	— 	150 
Tyler St. 	Properzi Way 	Dane St. 	Public 	40 	404 	— 
Upland Pk. 	Main St. 	Southwesterly 	Private 	20 	— 	175 
Upland Rd. 	Curtis St. 	Hillsdale Rd. 	Public 	40 	655 	— 
Vermont Ave. 	Marginal Rd. 	Pennsylvania Ave. 	Public 	40 	433 	— 
Vernon St. 	Central St. 	Glenwood Rd. 	Public 	40 	764 	— 
Vernon St. 	Glenwood Rd. 	Partridge Ave. 	Public 	40 to 30 	190 	— 
Vernon St. 	Partridge Ave. 	Lowell St. 	Public 	30 	434 	— 
Victoria St. 	Broadway 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	1,036 	— 
Villa Ave. 	Winslow Ave. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Private 	35 	— 	200 
Village St. 	Dane St. 	Vine St. 	Private 	25 	— 	370 
Village Ter. 	Village St. 	Northerly 	Private 	10 	— 	162 
Vinal Ave. 	Summer St. 	Highland Ave. 	Public 	45 	1,425 	— 
Vinal St. 	Richardson St. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	19 	— 	200 
Vine Ct. 	Properzi Way 	Northwesterly 	Private 	25 	— 	140 
Virginia St. 	Aldrich St. 	Jasper St. 	Public 	40 	403 	— 
Wade Ct. 	Cedar St. 	Westerly 	Private 	20 	— 	116 
Waldo Ave. 	Beacon St. 	Dimick St. 	Public 	40 	277 	— 
Waldo St. 	Highland Ave. 	Hudson St. 	Public 	40 	287 	— 
Walker St. 	Broadway 	Leonard St. 	Public 	40 	713 	— 
Wallace St. 	Holland St. 	Broadway 	Public 	40 	1,342 	— 
Walnut Rd. 	Walnut St. 	Kenneson Rd. 	Public 	40 	270 	— 
Walnut St. 	Bow St. 	Broadway 	Public 	40 	3,753 	— 
Walter Ter. 	Jackson Rd. 	Southwesterly 	Public 	40 	222 	— 
Ward St. 	Medford St. 	Harding St. 	Public 	30 	433 	— 
Ware St. 	Curtis St. 	Russell Rd. 	Public 	40 	735 	— 
Warner St. 	Powder House Sq. 	Medford line 	Public 	60 	500 	— 
Warren Ave. 	Union Sq. 	Columbus Ave. 	Public 	40 	663 	— 
Warren St. 	Medford St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	30 to 40 	109 	— 
Warwick St. 	Cedar St. 	Clyde St. 	Public 	30 to 40 	935 	— 
Washington Ave. 	Washington St. 	Northerly 	Private 	18 	— 	350 
Washington St. 	Charlestown line 	Franklin Ave. 	Public 	75 	1,060 	— 
Washington St. 	Franklin Ave. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Public 	60 to 100 	4,009 	— 
Washington St. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	60 	2,272 	— 
Washington Ter. 	Washington St. 	Northerly 	Private 	30 to 40 	— 	— 
Washington Ter. 	End of above 	Westerly and easterly 	Private 	40 	— 	269 
Waterhouse St. 	Broadway 	Cambridge line 	Public 	40 	987 	— 
Watson St. 	Broadway 	Fairmount Ave. 	Public 	40 	236 	— 
Webster Ave. 	Union Sq. 	Cambridge line 	Public 	49 	1,880 	— 
Webster St. 	Franklin St. 	Cross St. 	Public 	40 	997 	— 
Wellington Ave. 	Walnut St. 	Montgomery Ave. 	Public 	40 	215 	— 
Wellington Ave. 	Montgomery Ave. 	Easterly 	Private 	40 	— 	85 
Wesley Pk. 	Wesley Sq. 	Northeasterly 	Public 	40 	403 	— 
Wesley St. 	Pearl St. 	Otis St. 	Public 	40 	515 	— 
West St. 	Hawthorne St. 	Highland Ave. 	Public 	30 	192 	— 
West St. 	Highland Ave. 	B. & M. R.R. 	Private 	30 	— 	266 
West Adams St. 	Conwell Ave. 	Medford line 	Public 	40 	710 	— 
Westminster St. 	Broadway 	Electric Ave. 	Public 	40 	376 	— 
Weston Ave. 	Clarendon Ave. 	Broadway 	Private 	40 	— 	525 
West Quincy St. 	Bailey St. 	Medford line 	Public 	40 	292 	— 
Westwood Rd. 	Central St. 	Benton Rd. 	Public 	40 	489 	— 
Wheatland St. 	Broadway 	Mystic Ave. 	Public 	40 	1,325 	— 
Wheeler St. 	Pinckney St. 	Mt. Vernon St. 	Public 	40 	269 	— 
Whipple St. 	Willow Ave. 	Highland Ave. 	Private 	30 	— 	431 
White St. 3 	Elm St. 	Cambridge line 	Public 		307 	— 
White St. Pl. 	White St. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	20 	— 	200 
Whitfield Rd. 	Packard Ave. 	Curtis St. 	Public 	40 	687 	— 
Whitman St. 	Mason St. 	Packard Ave. 	Public 	40 	632 	— 
Wigglesworth St. 	Pearl St. 	Bonair St. 	Public 	40 	744 	— 
William St. 	College Ave. 	Chandler St. 	Public 	40 	381 	— 
William St. 	Broadway 	Medford line 	Private 	50 	— 	50 
Williams Ct. 	Porter St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	30 	— 	154 
Willoughby St. 	Central St. 	Sycamore St. 	Public 	40 	427 	— 
Willow Ave. 	Elm St. 	Broadway 	Public 	50 	3,450 	— 
Willow Pl. 	Cambridge line 	South St. 	Public 	25 	125 	— 
Wilson Ave. 	Broadway 	B. & M. R.R. 	Public 	20 	307 	— 
Wilton St. 	Lowell St. 	Hinckley St. 	Public 	35 	415 	— 
Winchester St. 	Broadway 	Medford line 	Private 	40 	— 	65 
Windom St. 	Elm St. 	Summer St. 	Public 	40 	300 	— 
Windsor Pl. 	Columbia St. 	Windsor St. 	Public 	37 	471 	— 
Windsor Rd. 	Willow Ave. 	Hancock St. 	Public 	40 	575 	— 
Windsor St. 	Cambridge line 	Northerly 	Public 	38 	40 	— 
Windsor St. 	End of above 	Windsor Pl. 	Public 	27 to 44 to 51 	490 	— 
Winslow Ave. 	College Ave. 	Clifton St. 	Public 	40 	1,087 	— 
Winter St. 	College Ave. 	Holland St. 	Public 	30 	402 	— 
Winter Hill Cir. 	Broadway 	Northeasterly 	Private 	25 	— 	177 
Wisconsin Ave. 	Broadway 	Pennsylvania Ave. 	Public 	50 	499 	— 
Woodbine St. 	Centre St. 	Westerly 	Private 	30 	— 	461 
Woodbine St. Ext. 	End of above 	Lowell St. 	Private 	35 	— 	212 
Woods Ave. 	North St. 	Alewife Brook Pkwy. 	Public 	40 	1,152 	— 
Woodstock 	Victoria St. 	Alewife Brook Pkwy. 	Public 	40 to 32 	361 	— 
Wyatt Cir. 	Wyatt St. 	Wyatt St. 	Private 	20 	— 	315 
Wyatt St. 	Concord Ave. 	Lincoln Pkwy. 	Public 	40 	505 	— 
Yorktown St. 	Cambridge line 	Northeast line Malvern Ave. 	Public 	40 	294 	— 
Yorktown St. 	Northeast line Malvern Ave. 	Northerly 	Private 	40 	— 	110 
Unnamed Court 	39 Adams St. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	8 	— 	90 
Unnamed Court 	Albion St. 	Central St. 	Private 	12 	— 	216 
Unnamed Court 	11 Albion St. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	9 	— 	178 
Unnamed Court 	21 Albion St. 	Northeasterly 	Private 	10 	— 	100 
Unnamed Court 	292 Broadway 	Southwesterly 	Private 	15 	— 	90 
Unnamed Court 	612 Broadway 	Southwesterly 	Private 	20 	— 	188 
Unnamed Court 	Cambria St. 	Northerly 	Private 	9 	— 	59 
Unnamed Court 	12 Carlton St. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	25 	— 	75 
Unnamed Court 	112 Central St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	10 	— 	168 
Unnamed Court 	113 Central St. 	Southeasterly 	Private 	20 	— 	150 
Unnamed Court 	227 Columbia St. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	10 	— 	117 
Unnamed Court 	Conlon Ct. 	Windsor St. Ext. 	Private 	20 	— 	240 
Unnamed Court 	36 Craigie St. 	Westerly 	Private 	25 	— 	126 
Unnamed Court 	58 Dane St. 	Easterly 	Private 	10 	— 	70 
Unnamed Court 	20 Dimick St. 	Southwesterly 	Private 	39 	— 	136 
Unnamed Court 	91 Franklin St. 	Westerly 	Private 	12 	— 	171 
Unnamed Court 	35 Lexington Ave. 	Northerly 	Private 	21 	— 	90 
Unnamed Court 	66 Lowell St. 	Westerly 	Private 	25 	— 	101 
Unnamed Court 	101 Medford St. 	Easterly 	Private 	8 	— 	75 
Unnamed Court 	335 Somerville Ave. 	Northerly 	Private 	15 	— 	60 
Unnamed Court 	10 Stone Ave. 	Northwesterly 	Private 	20 	— 	113 
Unnamed Court 	Windsor St. Ext. 	Easterly and westerly 	Private 	20 	— 	370 
Unnamed Court 	Washington Ave. 	Franklin St. 	Private 	6 	— 	95 
 
1 Mass. Dept. of Transportation 
2 Roadway (only) accepted 30 feet wide, full width of street 70 feet wide. 
3 Sidewalk in Somerville. 
4 Scenic Road. 
5 Mass. Dept. of Conservation and Recreation with City Easement  
ARTICLE 2. - CURRENT AND FORMER NAMES OF STREETS  
DIVISION 1. - FORMER NAMES OF CURRENT STREETS 
Current Name 	Former Name 
Aberdeen Road 	Gurney Street 
Addison Place 	Tube Works Court 
Albion Street 	Franklin Street 
	Forest Avenue or Street (easterly end) 
	Hobbs Street 
Aldrich Street 	Ruby Street 
	Eglantine Street 
Ash Avenue 	Minnie Avenue 
Ashland Street 	Maple Street 
Atherton Street 	Beech Street (westerly end) 
Avon Place 	Middle Lane 
	Barberry Lane 
	Cross Lane 
Bartlett Street (Ward 5) 	Earle Street 
Beacon Place 	Taggard Court 
Beacon Street 	Road to West Cambridge 
	Middlesex Turnpike 
	Hampshire Street 
Beech Street 	Oak Street 
Benedict Avenue 	Lovell Street 
Benton Road 	Benton Avenue 
Berwick Road 	Holland Street 
Bigelow Street 	High Street 
	D Street 
Bond Street 	Park Street 
Bonner Avenue 	Bonner Place 
	Warren Avenue 
Boston Avenue (southerly end) 	Southwick Avenue 
	Cypress Street 
	Orange Street 
Boston Street 	A Street 
Bow Street 	Charlestown Lane 
	Milk Row Road 
	Milk Row 
Broadway 	Road to Menotomy 
	Menotomy Road 
	Medford Road 
	Road from Menotomy to Boston 
	Medford Road over Winter Hill 
	Great Road from Charlestown to Menotomy 
	Winter Hill Road or Street 
	West Cambridge Road 
	Charlestown Road 
	Broadway Street 
	Main Street 
Butler Drive 	Ten Hills Street 
Calvin Street 	Dimick Street 
Cameron Avenue 	Cameron Street 
Carlton Street 	Bow Street 
Cedar Street 	Rangeway 
	Seventh Rangeway 
	Rangeway to Medford 
	Second Rangeway from Central Street 
	Leland Street 
	Rose Lane 
	Milk Lane 
Central Street 	Fifth Rangeway 
	Tufts Rangeway 
	Rangeway from Winter Hill to Milk Row 
	Centre Street 
	Old Road 
	Rand's Lane 
Centre Street 	Forest Place 
Charles E. Ryan Road 	City Road 
Chester Avenue 	Chester Street 
	Middle Lane 
	Cross Lane 
	Barberry Lane 
Church Street 	New Church Street 
Claremon Street 	Carmel Street 
	Claremont Street 
Cleveland Street 	Elm Place 
Clifton Street 	Appleton Street 
College Avenue 	Elm Street (Davis Square to Powder House Square) 
Columbia Street 	Glass House Court (westerly end) 
Columbus Avenue 	Highland Street 
	Warren Avenue 
	Probation Path 
	Windham Road (southeasterly end) 
Concord Avenue 	Brick Yard Lane (Newton Street to Beacon Street) 
	Lincoln Street (Beacon Street easterly) 
	Garden Street (Beacon Street easterly) 
Cooney Street 	Hanson Lane 
Cottage Avenue 	Cottage Place 
Crescent Street 	Mt. Vernon Street 
Cross Street 	Second Rangeway (Broadway to Medford Street) 
	Runey's Lane 
	Three Pole Lane 
Crown Street 	Rand Street 
Curtis Avenue 	Pleasant Avenue 
	Mt. Pleasant Avenue 
Curtis Street 	Second Rangeway 
	South Street 
Cutter Avenue 	Russell Street 
Dane Avenue 	Dane Court 
Dane Street 	Union Street 
Dartmouth Street 	Fruit Street 
Dearborn Road 	Professors Row (College Avenue to Boston Avenue) 
Derby Street 	Temple Street 
	Winthrop Street 
Dickinson Street 	John Street 
Dimick Street 	Rollins Street (southeasterly end) 
	Calvin Street 
Dover Street 	Willow Street 
Dow Street 	Weare Street 
Eastman Road 	Eastman Terrace or Place 
Elm Court 	Elm Street 
Ellington Road 	Cutter Avenue Extension 
Elm Street 	Charlestown Lane 
	Milk Lane 
	Road from Medford to Cambridge 
	Road from Medford to Cambridge over Quarry Hill 
	Powder House Road 
	Milk Row or Road 
	Cambridge Road 
Elmwood Street 	Elmwood Avenue 
	Davis Street 
Emery Street 	Harding Street 
Eustis Street 	Eustis Court 
Everett Avenue 	Everett Street 
Fairlee Street 	Graham Street 
Fanning Avenue 	Dexter Street 
Fellsway East 	Winthrop Avenue 
Fellsway West 	Chauncey Avenue or Street 
Fennell Street 	Sumner Street 
Fenwick Street 	Thurston Street 
Flint Avenue 	Runey Place 
Flint Street 	Runey Street (Cross Street to Aldrich Street) 
Forster Street 	Linwood Street 
	Federal Street 
Franklin Street 	First Rangeway 
	Second Poleway 
	Two Pole Lane 
Fremont Street 	Tremont Street 
Giles Park 	Giles Place 
Gilman Street 	Cross Street Place 
	Clarendon Street 
Gilson Terrace 	Gilson Park 
Glendale Avenue 	Holmes Street 
Glenwood Road 	Jenny Lind Avenue 
Gould Avenue 	Gould Court 
Grand Union Boulevard 	Assembly Square Drive 
	Sturtevant Street 
Greenville Street 	C Street 
Hamilton Road 	Russell Road 
Hammond Street 	Dickinson Place 
	Benefit Street 
Hancock Street 	Gordonia Road (Summer Street to Highland Avenue) 
	Fanning Avenue (Highland Avenue to Lexington Avenue) 
Harding Street 	Rideout Street 
Harrison Street (Ward 6) 	Ivaloo Place 
Harvard Place 	Chestnut Street or Court 
Hawkins Street 	Hawkins Court 
	Milton Street 
Hawthorne Street 	Graves Street 
	Evans or Evon Street 
Henry Avenue 	Ayer Street 
Highland Avenue 	Middle Lane 
	Cross Lane 
	Barberry Lane 
	Church Street (Medford Street to Central Street) 
Highland Park 	Dale Avenue 
	Ayer Avenue 
Hillside Park 	Marritt or Marrett Place 
Hinckley Street 	Lawrence Street (southerly end) 
Holland Street 	New Street to Arlington 
Ivaloo Street 	Auburn Court 
	Wood Street 
Jackson Street 	Walter Street 
Jaques Street 	Bond Street (Temple Street to Bond Street) 
Josephine Avenue 	Arnold Street 
Kensington Avenue 	Kensington Street 
	Kenilworth Avenue 
Kingman Road 	Kingman Court or Street 
	Warren Avenue or Street 
Kingston Street 	Campbell Park (angle to Cambridge line) 
Lake Street 	Hawkins Court 
Langmaid Avenue 	West Street 
Lesley Avenue 	Alton Street 
Lexington Avenue 	Lexington Street 
Lincoln Avenue 	George Street 
Linden Avenue 	Brackett's Row 
	Leland Street 
Line Street 	Lynde Street 
Linwood Street 	Linden Street 
London Street 	Lowell Street 
Lowell Street 	Rangeway 
	Old Rangeway 
	Sixth Rangeway 
	Charles Adams' Rangeway 
	White Street 
	Highland Road 
Main Street 	Road from Medford to Boston 
	Medford Road 
Malvern Avenue 	Hollis Street 
Maple Avenue 	Parterre Square 
Maple Street 	Jackson Street 
Marion Street 	Cook Street (Adrian Street to north of Wyatt Street) 
	Harcourt Street (North Wyatt Street to Dimick Street) 
McGrath Highway 	North Traffic Artery, parts Somerville Avenue, Medford Street, Shawmut Street, Aldrich Street, Dana Street, Edmands Street, Fellsway East, Winthrop Avenue 
Meacham Road 	Meacham Street 
	Brooks Street 
Medford Street 	Road from Medford to Lechmere Point 
	Road from Canal Bridge to Medford 
	New Road from Medford to Cambridge bridge 
	Craigie's Road to Medford 
	Road to Medford 
	Craigie Road 
	Gore Street (easterly end) 
Merriam Street 	Myrtle Street 
Miller Street 	Pierce's Court 
Milton Street 	Mason Avenue 
Monmouth Street 	York Terrace (easterly end) 
	Chestnut Street 
	Chestnut Court (westerly end) 
	Harvard Place 
Moreland Street 	Brooks Street (Main Street to Meacham Street) 
Morrison Avenue 	Morrison Street 
Munroe Street 	Prospect Street 
	Mt. Pisgah Avenue 
	High Street 
	B Street 
Myrtle Street 	Warren Street 
Mystic Avenue 	Mystic Turnpike or Road 
Mystic Street (Ward 2) 	Myrtle Street 
Newton Street 	Way by Bullard's bridge Road to Cambridgeport Brick Yard Lane 
North Street 	Proprietor's Way 
	Cook's Lane 
	Third Rangeway 
North Union Street 	Canal Street 
Norwood Avenue 	Magoun Street 
Oakland Avenue 	Oakman Avenue 
Oliver Street 	Broom Street 
Oxford Street 	High Street (westerly end) 
	Trull Street 
Park Street 	Baldwin Street 
	Showhill Street 
Paulina Street 	James Street 
Pearson Avenue 	Orient Street 
Perkins Street 	Proprietor's Way (part) 
Perry Street 	North Wyatt Street 
Pitman Street 	Walnut Street 
Poplar Street 	Walnut Street (Linwood Street to Joy Street) 
Powder House Boulevard 	Barnett Street (North Street easterly) 
Prentiss Street 	Harris Street 
Preston Road 	Preston Street 
Pritchard Avenue 	Orient Street 
Prospect Hill Avenue 	Cross Street 
Prospect Street 	Road from Cambridgeport to Charlestown 
	Pine Street 
Radclife Road 	Veazie Street 
	Hawes Avenue 
Properzi Way 	Reverend Nazareno Properzi Way 
Vine Street 
Revolution Drive 	New Road, New Street 
Richardson Street 	Appleton Street (Lowell Street westerly) 
River Road 	Connors Drive 
Sacramento Street 	Union Street 
Sargent Avenue 	Mills Street (Walnut Street to angle) 
Sartwell Avenue 	Chestnut Street 
	Maple Street 
Sawyer Avenue 	Sawyer Street 
School Street 	Fourth Rangeway 
	Ireland's Lane (Somerville Avenue northerly) 
Seven Pines Avenue 	Stiles Street 
Sewall Street 	Heath Street 
Shawmut Street 	Three Pole Lane 
	Second Rangeway 
Somerville Avenue 	Charlestown Lane (Union Square westerly) 
	Milk Row Road (Union Square westerly) 
	Milk Row (Union Square westerly) 
	Kent's Street (Union Square westerly) 
	Road from West Cambridge to Charlestown 
	County Road 
	Bridge Street 
	Milk Street 
Spring Court 	Spring Hill Court 
Spring Street 	Spring Hill Street 
St. James Avenue 	Melburn Place 
Sycamore Street 	Lyceum Street 
Sycamore Terrace 	Chapel Court 
Tannery Brook Row 	Right-of-way from Cameron Ave. to Howard Street 
Teele Avenue 	Teele Street 
Temple Street 	Derby Lane or Street 
Thorpe Street 	Thorpe Place 
Vernon Street 	Taylor Street 
	Euston Street 
Virginia Street 	Eglantine Avenue 
Walnut Street 	Third Rangeway 
	Hazeltine's Lane 
Warner Street 	Elm Street 
Warwick Street 	Angle northerly Warwick Place 
Washington Street 	Highway to Newtowne 
	Road from Cambridge to Charlestown 
	Road to old Cambridge 
	Road from the colleges to Charlestown 
	Charlestown Road 
	Milk Row (Charlestown to Union Square) 
	Kirkland Street (Union Square to Cambridge) 
	Cambridge Street (Union Square to Charlestown) 
Water Street 	Willow Street 
Webster Avenue 	Medford Street 
Webster Street 	Lime Street 
	Sullivan Street 
Wesley Park 	Hawkins Park 
Wesley Street 	Prince Street 
Wheatland Street 	Walnut Street 
	New Walnut Street 
Whipple Street 	Dynamo Street 
	Howard Street 
White Street 	Cottage Street 
	Maple Street 
White Street Place 	Cottage Court 
Willow Avenue 	Rangeway 
	Eighth Rangeway 
	Irving Street 
	Willow Street 
Winchester Street 	Charles Street 
Windsor Place 	Glasshouse Court 
Windsor Road 	Minot Street 
	Willow Dale Street 
Wyatt Street 	Wyatt's Lane 
Yorktown Street 	Albro Street 
  
DIVISION 2. - CURRENT NAMES OF FORMER STREETS 
Former Name 	Current Name 
A Street 	Boston Street 
Albro Street 	Yorktown Street 
Alton Street 	Lesley Avenue 
Angle northerly Warwick Place 	Warwick Street 
Appleton Street (Lowell Street westerly) 	Richardson Street 
Appleton Street 	Clifton Street 
Arnold Street 	Josephine Avenue 
Assembly Square Drive 	Grand Union Boulevard 
Auburn Court 	Ivaloo Street 
Ayer Avenue 	Highland Park 
Ayer Street 	Henry Avenue 
B Street 	Munroe Street 
Baldwin Street 	Park Street 
Barberry Lane 	Avon Place 
	Chester Avenue 
	Highland Avenue 
Barnett Street (North Street easterly) 	Powder House Boulevard 
Beech Street (westerly end) 	Atherton Street 
Benefit Street 	Hammond Street 
Benton Avenue 	Benton Road 
Bond Street (Temple Street to Bond Street) 	Jaques Street 
Bonner Place 	Bonner Avenue 
Bow Street 	Carlton Street 
Brackett's Row 	Linden Avenue 
Brick Yard Lane (Newton Street to Beacon Street) 	Concord Avenue 
Bridge Street 	Somerville Avenue 
Broadway Street 	Broadway 
Brooks Street (Main Street to Meacham Street) 	Moreland Street 
Brooks Street 	Meacham Road 
Broom Street 	Oliver Street 
C Street 	Greenville Street 
Calvin Street 	Dimick Street 
Cambridge Road 	Elm Street 
Cambridge Street (Union Square to Charlestown) 	Washington Street 
Cameron Street 	Cameron Avenue 
Campbell Park (angle to Cambridge line) 	Kingston Street 
Canal Street 	North Union Street 
Carmel Street 	Claremon Street 
Centre Street 	Central Street 
Chapel Court 	Sycamore Terrace 
Charles Adams' Rangeway 	Lowell Street 
Charles Street 	Winchester Street 
Charlestown Lane (Union Square westerly) 	Somerville Avenue 
Charlestown Lane 	Bow Street 
Charlestown Lane 	Elm Street 
Charlestown Road 	Broadway 
Charlestown Road 	Washington Street 
Chauncey Avenue or Street 	Fellsway West 
Chester Street 	Chester Avenue 
Chestnut Court (westerly end) 	Monmouth Street 
Chestnut Street or Court 	Harvard Place 
Chestnut Street 	Monmouth Street 
	Sartwell Avenue 
Church Street (Medford Street to Central Street) 	Highland Avenue 
City Road 	Charles E. Ryan Road 
Claremont Street 	Claremon Street 
Clarendon Street 	Gilman Street 
Connors Drive 	River Road 
Cook Street (Adrian Street to north of Wyatt Street) 	Marion Street 
Cook's Lane 	North Street 
Cottage Court 	White Street Place 
Cottage Place 	Cottage Avenue 
Cottage Street 	White Street 
County Road 	Somerville Avenue 
Craigie Road 	Medford Street 
Craigie's Road to Medford 	Medford Street 
Cross Lane 	Avon Place 
Cross Lane 	Chester Avenue 
	Highland Avenue 
Cross Street 	Prospect Hill Avenue 
Cross Street Place 	Gilman Street 
	Prospect Hill Avenue 
Cutter Avenue Extension 	Ellington Road 
Cypress Street 	Boston Avenue (southerly end) 
D Street 	Bigelow Street 
Dale Avenue 	Highland Park 
Dane Court 	Dane Avenue 
Davis Street 	Elmwood Street 
Derby Lane or Street 	Temple Street 
Dexter Street 	Fanning Avenue 
Dickinson Place 	Hammond Street 
Dimick Street 	Calvin Street 
Dynamo Street 	Whipple Street 
Earle Street 	Bartlett Street (Ward 5) 
Eastman Terrace or Place 	Eastman Road 
Eglantine Avenue 	Virginia Street 
Eglantine Street 	Aldrich Street 
Eighth Rangeway 	Willow Avenue 
Elm Place 	Cleveland Street 
Elm Street (Davis Square to Powder House Square) 	College Avenue 
Elm Street 	Elm Court 
	Warner Street 
Elmwood Avenue 	Elmwood Street 
Eustis Court 	Eustis Street 
Euston Street 	Vernon Street 
Evans or Evon Street 	Hawthorne Street 
Everett Street 	Everett Avenue 
Fanning Avenue (Highland Avenue to Lexington Avenue) 	Hancock Street 
Federal Street 	Forster Street 
Fifth Rangeway 	Central Street 
First Rangeway 	Franklin Street 
Forest Avenue or Street (easterly end) 	Albion Street 
Forest Place 	Centre Street 
Fourth Rangeway 	School Street 
Franklin Street 	Albion Street 
Fruit Street 	Dartmouth Street 
Garden Street (Beacon Street easterly) 	Concord Avenue 
George Street 	Lincoln Avenue 
Giles Place 	Giles Park 
Gilson Park 	Gilson Terrace 
Glass House Court (westerly end) 	Columbia Street 
Glasshouse Court 	Windsor Place 
Gordonia Road (Summer Street to Highland Avenue) 	Hancock Street 
Gore Street (easterly end) 	Medford Street 
Gould Court 	Gould Avenue 
Graham Street 	Fairlee Street 
Graves Street 	Hawthorne Street 
Great Road from Charlestown to Menotomy 	Broadway 
Gurney Street 	Aberdeen Road 
Hampshire Street 	Beacon Street 
Hanson Lane 	Cooney Street 
Harcourt Street (North Wyatt Street to Dimick Street) 	Marion Street 
Harding Street 	Emery Street 
Harris Street 	Prentiss Street 
Harvard Place 	Monmouth Street 
Hawes Avenue 	Radclife Road 
Hawkins Court 	Hawkins Street 
	Lake Street 
Hawkins Park 	Wesley Park 
Hazeltine's Lane 	Walnut Street 
Heath Street 	Sewall Street 
High Street (westerly end) 	Oxford Street 
High Street 	Bigelow Street 
	Munroe Street 
Highland Road 	Lowell Street 
Highland Street 	Columbus Avenue 
Highway to Newtowne 	Washington Street 
Hobbs Street 	Albion Street 
Holland Street 	Berwick Road 
Hollis Street 	Malvern Avenue 
Holmes Street 	Glendale Avenue 
Howard Street 	Whipple Street 
Ireland's Lane (Somerville Avenue northerly) 	School Street 
Irving Street 	Willow Avenue 
Ivaloo Place 	Harrison Street (Ward 6) 
Jackson Street 	Maple Street 
James Street 	Paulina Street 
Jenny Lind Avenue 	Glenwood Road 
John Street 	Dickinson Street 
Kenilworth Avenue 	Kensington Avenue 
Kensington Street 	Kensington Avenue 
Kent's Street (Union Square westerly) 	Somerville Avenue 
Kingman Court or Street 	Kingman Road 
Kirkland Street (Union Square to Cambridge) 	Washington Street 
Lawrence Street (southerly end) 	Hinckley Street 
Leland Street 	Cedar Street 
	Linden Avenue 
Lexington Street 	Lexington Avenue 
Lime Street 	Webster Street 
Lincoln Street (Beacon Street easterly) 	Concord Avenue 
Linden Street 	Linwood Street 
Linwood Street 	Forster Street 
Lovell Street 	Benedict Avenue 
Lowell Street 	London Street 
Lyceum Street 	Sycamore Street 
Lynde Street 	Line Street 
Magoun Street 	Norwood Avenue 
Main Street 	Broadway 
Maple Street 	Ashland Street 
	Sartwell Avenue 
	White Street 
Marritt or Marrett Place 	Hillside Park 
Mason Avenue 	Milton Street 
Meacham Street 	Meacham Road 
Medford Road over Winter Hill 	Broadway 
Medford Road 	Broadway 
	Main Street 
Medford Street 	Webster Avenue 
Melburn Place 	St. James Avenue 
Menotomy Road 	Broadway 
Middle Lane 	Avon Place 
	Chester Avenue 
	Highland Avenue 
Middlesex Turnpike 	Beacon Street 
Milk Lane 	Cedar Street 
	Elm Street 
Milk Row 	Bow Street 
Milk Row (Charlestown to Union Square) 	Washington Street 
Milk Row (Union Square westerly) 	Somerville Avenue 
Milk Row or Road 	Elm Street 
Milk Row Road (Union Square westerly) 	Somerville Avenue 
Milk Row Road 	Bow Street 
Milk Row 	Bow Street 
Milk Street 	Somerville Avenue 
Mills Street (Walnut Street to angle) 	Sargent Avenue 
Milton Street 	Hawkins Street 
Minnie Avenue 	Ash Avenue 
Minot Street 	Windsor Road 
Morrison Street 	Morrison Avenue 
Mt. Pisgah Avenue 	Munroe Street 
Mt. Pleasant Avenue 	Curtis Avenue 
Mt. Vernon Street 	Crescent Street 
Myrtle Street 	Merriam Street 
	Mystic Street (Ward 2) 
Mystic Turnpike or Road 	Mystic Avenue 
New Church Street 	Church Street 
New Road from Medford to Cambridge bridge 	Medford Street 
New Road, New Street 	Revolution Drive 
New Street to Arlington 	Holland Street 
New Walnut Street 	Wheatland Street 
North Traffic Artery, parts Somerville Avenue, Medford Street, Shawmut Street, Aldrich Street, Dana Street, Edmands Street, Fellsway East, Winthrop Avenue 	McGrath Highway 
North Wyatt Street 	Perry Street 
Oak Street 	Beech Street 
Oakman Avenue 	Oakland Avenue 
Old Rangeway 	Lowell Street 
Old Road 	Central Street 
Orange Street 	Boston Avenue (southerly end) 
Orient Street 	Pearson Avenue 
	Pritchard Avenue 
Park Street 	Bond Street 
Parterre Square 	Maple Avenue 
Pierce's Court 	Miller Street 
Pine Street 	Prospect Street 
Pleasant Avenue 	Curtis Avenue 
Powder House Road 	Elm Street 
Preston Street 	Preston Road 
Prince Street 	Wesley Street 
Probation Path 	Columbus Avenue 
Professors Row (College Avenue to Boston Avenue) 	Dearborn Road 
Proprietor's Way (part) 	Perkins Street 
Proprietor's Way 	North Street 
Prospect Street 	Munroe Street 
Rand Street 	Crown Street 
Rand's Lane 	Central Street 
Rangeway from Winter Hill to Milk Row 	Central Street 
Rangeway to Medford 	Cedar Street 
Rangeway 	Cedar Street 
	Lowell Street 
	Willow Avenue 
Reverend Nazareno Properzi Way 	Properzi Way 
Rideout Street 	Harding Street 
Right-of-way from Cameron Ave. to Howard Street 	Tannery Brook Row 
Road from Cambridge to Charlestown 	Washington Street 
Road from Cambridgeport to Charlestown 	Prospect Street 
Road from Canal Bridge to Medford 	Medford Street 
Road from Medford to Boston 	Main Street 
Road from Medford to Cambridge over Quarry Hill 	Elm Street 
Road from Medford to Cambridge 	Elm Street 
Road from Medford to Lechmere Point 	Medford Street 
Road from Menotomy to Boston 	Broadway 
Road from the colleges to Charlestown 	Washington Street 
Road from West Cambridge to Charlestown 	Somerville Avenue 
Road to Medford 	Medford Street 
Road to Menotomy 	Broadway 
Road to old Cambridge 	Washington Street 
Road to West Cambridge 	Beacon Street 
Rollins Street (southeasterly end) 	Dimick Street 
Rose Lane 	Cedar Street 
Ruby Street 	Aldrich Street 
Runey Place 	Flint Avenue 
Runey Street (Cross Street to Aldrich Street) 	Flint Street 
Runey's Lane 	Cross Street 
Russell Road 	Hamilton Road 
Russell Street 	Cutter Avenue 
Sawyer Street 	Sawyer Avenue 
Second Poleway 	Franklin Street 
Second Rangeway (Broadway to Medford Street) 	Cross Street 
Second Rangeway from Central Street 	Cedar Street 
Second Rangeway 	Curtis Street 
	Shawmut Street 
Seventh Rangeway 	Cedar Street 
Showhill Street 	Park Street 
Sixth Rangeway 	Lowell Street 
South Street 	Curtis Street 
Southwick Avenue 	Boston Avenue (southerly end) 
Spring Hill Court 	Spring Court 
Spring Hill Street 	Spring Street 
Stiles Street 	Seven Pines Avenue 
Sturtevant Street 	Grand Union Boulevard 
Sullivan Street 	Webster Street 
Sumner Street 	Fennell Street 
Taggard Court 	Beacon Place 
Taylor Street 	Vernon Street 
Teele Street 	Teele Avenue 
Temple Street 	Derby Street 
Ten Hills Street 	Butler Drive 
Third Rangeway 	North Street 
	Walnut Street 
Thorpe Place 	Thorpe Street 
Three Pole Lane 	Cross Street 
	Shawmut Street 
Thurston Street 	Fenwick Street 
Tremont Street 	Fremont Street 
Trull Street 	Oxford Street 
Tube Works Court 	Addison Place 
Tufts Rangeway 	Central Street 
Two Pole Lane 	Franklin Street 
Union Street 	Dane Street 
	Sacramento Street 
Veazie Street 	Radclife Road 
Vine Street 	Properzi Way 
Walnut Street (Linwood Street to Joy Street) 	Poplar Street 
Walnut Street 	Pitman Street 
	Wheatland Street 
Walter Street 	Jackson Street 
Warren Avenue or Street 	Kingman Road 
Warren Avenue 	Bonner Avenue 
	Columbus Avenue 
Warren Street 	Myrtle Street 
Way by Bullard's bridge Road to Cambridgeport Brick Yard Lane 	Newton Street 
Weare Street 	Dow Street 
West Cambridge Road 	Broadway 
West Street 	Langmaid Avenue 
White Street 	Lowell Street 
Willow Dale Street 	Windsor Road 
Willow Street 	Dover Street 
	Water Street 
	Willow Avenue 
Windham Road (southeasterly end) 	Columbus Avenue 
Winter Hill Road or Street 	Broadway 
Winthrop Avenue 	Fellsway East 
Winthrop Street 	Derby Street 
Wood Street 	Ivaloo Street 
Wyatt's Lane 	Wyatt Street 
York Terrace (easterly end) 	Monmouth Street 
  
ARTICLE 3. - NAMES OF SQUARES 
Current Name 	Former Name 
Ball Square 	
Central Square 	Prescott Square 
Concord Square 	
Cutter Square 	Russell Square 
Davis Square 	Clarendon Square 
Evergreen Square 	Cutter Square or Place 
Gerrior Square 	Metropolitan Square 
	Post Office Square 
Gilman Square 	
Homer Square 	
Magoun Square 	Pollard Square 
Powder House Square 	Tufts Square 
Teele Square 	Russell Square 
Union Square 	
Wesley Square 	
Wilson Square 	Oak Square 
 

S O M E R V I L L E ZONING O R D I N A N C E
S T R A T E G I C
P L A N N I N G &
C O M M U N I T Y
D E V E LO P M E N T
EFFECTIVE DECEMBER 12, 2019
SOMERVILLE, MASS.
MUNICIPAL FREEDOM GIVES NATIONAL STRENGTH
TOWN 1842 1872 CITY
HONORABLY PURCHASED FROM THE PAWTUCKETS 1639
JOSEPH A. CURTATONE
MAYOR

1 INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
1.1 GENERAL .................................................................3
Title 3
Authority 3
Applicability 3
Intent 3
Regulatory Scope 4
Compliance 4
Fines and Penalties 4
Conflicting Provisions 4
Meaning & Intent 4
Text & Graphics 5
Severability & Invalidity 5
1.2 ADOPTION & EFFECT .............................................5
Adoption Date 5
Applicability 5
Published Notice 5
Claim of Invalidity 5
1.3 OFFICIAL MAPS ......................................................6
Zoning Atlas 6
Zoning Districts Map 6
Transit Areas Map 6
Pedestrian Streets Map 6

12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 3
1. INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
General
1.1 GENERAL
1. Title
a. This Ordinance is known as the ‘Zoning Ordinance
of the City of Somerville’ and may also be cited and
referred to as ‘Somerville Zoning Ordinance’ and ‘SZO’.
2. Authority
a. This Ordinance is adopted under the authority granted
by Article 89 of the Amendments to the Constitution of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and enacted in
accordance with the provisions of the Massachusetts
General Laws (M.G.L.) Chapter 40A, as amended.
3. Applicability
a. Unless otherwise specified, this Ordinance is
applicable to all real property within the City of
Somerville except as follows:
i. Real property USEd or occupied by the City of
Somerville is exempt from the provisions of this
Ordinance.
ii. Real property USEd or occupied by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts in conducting its
essential government functions is exempt from the
provisions of this Ordinance.
b. All divisions, departments, commissions, boards, and
authorities of the City of Somerville shall comply with
the procedural requirements of this Ordinance.
4. Intent
a. Plan Implementation
i. To implement the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN of the City of
Somerville and enforce officially adopted plans and
policies.
ii. To permit DEVELOPMENT and reDEVELOPMENT according
to plans that are collaboratively developed with the
Somerville community.
b. Regulatory Context
i. To equitably balance the regulation of real property
with the interests of the community as a whole.
ii. To protect the health, safety, and general welfare.
c. Land DEVELOPMENT Pattern
i. To ensure the DEVELOPMENT of a well-connected
THOROUGHFARE network, composed of direct and
convenient routes that reinforce Somerville as a
walkable, human-scaled urban environment.
ii. To ensure that the limited land area of Somerville
is efficiently divided into a BLOCK and LOT pattern
consistent with the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN of the City
of Somerville.
iii. To preserve and expand the city’s walkable
network of human scaled THOROUGHFARES and the
small BLOCK and LOT pattern of land division.
iv. To protect the social, environmental, and economic
benefits provided by a walkable DEVELOPMENT
pattern.
v. To discourage THOROUGHFARES and intersections that
limit connectivity, discourage walking, induce traffic
congestion, and increase vehicular air pollutant
emissions by reducing the number of possible
routes of travel and adding unnecessary distance
between destinations.
vi. To require ALLEY-loaded BLOCKs that concentrate
“back-of-hoUSE” elements such as utility
infraSTRUCTURE, refUSE collection, and ACCESS to
parking and loading in the BLOCK interior, to the rear
of buildings.
vii. To require the platting of land so that LOTS have
frontage upon and buildings are properly oriented
toward the PUBLIC REALM of an ABUTTING THOROUGHFARE
or CIVIC SPACE.
d. Neighborhoods
i. To develop and maintain complete, mixed-USE,
walkable, transit-oriented, and environmentally
sustainable neighborhoods that foster a strong
sense of community throughout the city.
ii. To provide distinct physical habitats at different
scales, including the LOT, BLOCK, and neighborhood,
so that meaningful choices in living arrangement
can be provided to residents with differing physical,
social, and emotional needs.
iii. To provide a range of housing types, unit sizes, and
price points to accommodate the diverse hoUSEhold
sizes and life stages of Somerville residents at all
income levels,
iv. To provide and protect housing that is affordable to
hoUSEholds with low and moderate incomes.
v. To preserve and enhance the existing character
of Somerville’s traditional housing and respect
existing built form and DEVELOPMENT patterns.
e. PUBLIC REALM
i. To resolve design conflicts between vehicular and
pedestrian movement in favor of the pedestrian.
ii. To preserve and enhance the design of
Somerville’s PUBLIC REALM.
f. CIVIC SPACE
i. To ensure a variety of functional, well-designed
civic and recreation spaces that complement the
character of adjacent properties, contribute to a
comprehensive OPEN SPACE network, and increase
the livability of the city.
g. Transportation
i. To develop a comprehensive network of
THOROUGHFARES that accommodate multiple modes
of transportation, organized in a hierarchy defined
4 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
1. INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
General
by the character of each type.
h. Parking & Mobility
i. To ensure that off-STREET ACCESSory parking for motor
vehicles is provided in a manner consistent with
the objectives and policies of the COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN of the City of Somerville.
ii. To establish parking policies that support transitoriented
DEVELOPMENT and a walkable, human-scaled
urban environment.
iii. To un-bundle the cost of off-STREET parking from the
cost of housing, so that housing in Somerville is
more affordable.
iv. To encourage the USE of public transportation,
bicycling, and walking in lieu of motor vehicle USE
when a choice of travel mode exists.
v. To allow flexibility in how parking is provided
by allowing shared and/or off-SITE arrangements
in order to accommodate the parking of motor
vehicles in a manner that is less disruptive to the
urban environment.
vi. To balance the supply of off-STREET parking with
local THOROUGHFARE network capacity.
i. Buildings
i. To require a strong connection and gradual
transition between the PUBLIC REALM (sidewalks,
THOROUGHFAREs, and CIVIC SPACEs) and private realm
(yards and building interiors).
ii. To encourage contemporary architectural design for
new construction that compliments the established
character of existing buildings.
j. Economic DEVELOPMENT
i. To increase commercial tax base in support of the
fiscal health of the City.
ii. To permit the activities customary to daily life
within walking distance of most dwellings,
providing ACCESSibility to goods and services for
all residents of Somerville including the disabled,
elderly, young, low income, and those that do not
drive or choose not to own an automobile.
iii. To protect and promote a diverse mix of
businesses.
iv. To increase ACCESSibility to diverse employment
opportunities within Somerville.
v. To provide opportunities for businesses to remain
in Somerville as they develop and grow.
vi. To capture a fiscal return on investments made
in transportation infraSTRUCTURE by locating higher
intensity DEVELOPMENT, employment opportunities,
and a broad mix of USEs along major corridors and
within walking distance of transit stops.
5. Regulatory Scope
a. The provisions of this Ordinance are the minimum
necessary to achieve the stated purposes.
6. Compliance
a. No real property may be occupied or USEd; no USE
of an existing building or land may change; no SIGN
may be ERECTed, replaced, altered, refurbished, or
otherwise modified; and no building or STRUCTURE may
be constructed, reconstructed, altered, expanded, or
enlarged in whole or in part for any purpose except as
specifically authorized by this Ordinance.
b. This Ordinance does not restrict the USE of land or
STRUCTURES for activities protected by M.G.L. Chapter
40A, Section 3.
7. Fines and Penalties
a. The BUILDING OFFICIAL shall fine any person who violates
the provisions of this Ordinance three hundred dollars
($300.00) for each offense, where each day that a
violation is not corrected or abated constitutes a
separate offense.
b. In addition to procedure for enforcement described
above, the BUILDING OFFICIAL may enforce the ordinance
by a non-criminal disposition per MGL 4021d.
8. Conflicting Provisions
a. This Ordinance does not abrogate, annul, or otherwise
interfere with any EASEMENT, covenant, and/or other
private agreements.
b. Where the provisions of this Ordinance impose a
greater restriction than required by other ordinances,
regulations, resolutions, rules, EASEMENTs, covenants, or
agreements, the provisions of this Ordinance apply.
c. All DEVELOPMENT activity must comply with relevant
Federal and State law and regulations. Where the
provisions of this Ordinance imposes a greater
restriction than required by Federal or State law, the
provisions of this Ordinance apply unless otherwise
prohibited by law.
9. Meaning & Intent
a. Words, phrases, and terms USEd in this Ordinance are
defined in Article 2: Glossary & Overview .
b. Words, phrases, and terms not defined in Article 2:
Glossary & Overview are subject to the definitions of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts State Building
Code (780 CMR).
c. Words, phrases, and terms not defined by either
Article 2: Glossary & Overview or the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts State Building Code are defined
by the most recent edition of Webster’s Unabridged
Dictionary.
d. Words USEd or defined in one tense or form include
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 5
1. INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
Adoption & Effect
other tenses and derivative forms.
e. Words in the singular or plural include the other, unless
expressly excluded.
f. Words in the masculine or feminine include the other.
g. The words ‘must’, ‘shall’, ‘will’, and ‘may not’ are
mandatory.
h. The words ‘may’ and ‘should’ are permissive.
i. The words building, BUILDING TYPE, land, LOT, PARCEL,
premises, SITE, STRUCTURE, and THOROUGHFARE are
construed as though followed by the words ‘or any
portion thereof’.
j. The words ‘USEd’ or ‘occupied’ include designed,
arranged, intended, or offered for USE or occuPATIOn.
k. The terms ‘standards’, ‘regulations’, and ‘requirements’
are USEd to mandate a specific course of action or built
outcome. Compliance with standards, regulations, and
requirements is mandatory and indicated by USE of the
terms ‘must’, ‘shall’, ‘will,’ ‘may,’ and ‘may not’.
l. The term ‘guideline’ is USEd for actions or built
outcomes that are strongly encouraged to fulfill the
intent of specific sections of this Ordinance. Guidelines
are indicated by USE of the term ‘should’.
m. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of items
or examples that USE terms such as ‘for example’,
‘including’, and ‘such as’, or similar language, are
intended to provide examples and not as exhaustive
lists of all possibilities.
10. Text & Graphics
a. Figures and photos are intended only for illustrative
purposes and to help illustrate the intent and
requirements of the text. In the case of a conflict
between the text of this Ordinance and any figure or
photos, the text governs.
b. Photographs provided in the Ordinance have no
regulatory purpose and are intended only as examples.
11. Severability & Invalidity
a. If any provision of this Ordinance or the application
of any provision to real property, APPLICANT, or PROPERTY
OWNER is declared unconstitutional or otherwise held
invalid, the remaining provisions of this Ordinance and
their application to any other real property, APPLICANT, or
PROPERTY OWNER remains valid.
1.2 ADOPTION & EFFECT
1. Adoption Date
a. This Ordinance was adopted by the Somerville City
Council on Month, XX, 201X.
2. Applicability
a. This Ordinance is applicable on the date it is adopted.
b. Amendments to this Ordinance are applicable on the
date first publicly noticed in accordance with M.G.L.
40A.
c. All discretionary and administrative permits, excluding
Site Plan Approval, issued prior to the applicability
dates of §1.2.2.a and §1.2.2.b remain valid, subject
to the conditions of the permit(s), in accordance with
M.G.L. 40A.
3. Published Notice
a. Per M.G.L. 40 Section 32A, notice of the adoption of
this Ordinance, or any amendment to this Ordinance,
must be published at least two (2) times in a
newspaper of general circulation without delay upon its
adoption by the City Council and SIGNing into law by the
Mayor. Failure to publish this notice does not affect the
validity of this Ordinance or its amendments.
4. Claim of Invalidity
a. No claim of invalidity of this Ordinance may be made in
any legal proceeding after ninety (90) days have passed
following the publication of notice of adoption.
b. Appellants shall provide notice specifying the COURT,
parties, claim of invalidity, and date of filing to the
Office of the City Clerk within seven (7) days after
commencement of such action.
6 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
1. INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
Official Maps
1.3 OFFICIAL MAPS
1. Zoning Atlas
a. Zoning district boundaries and sub-district designations
are shown on maps of the “Official Zoning Atlas of the
City of Somerville”
b. This atlas and its maps may be cited and referred to as
the “Official Zoning Atlas”.
c. The Planning Director shall maintain the Official Zoning
Atlas in accordance with the most recent zoning map
amendment approved by the City Council.
d. The Official Zoning Atlas may be supplemented by
additional layers or separate maps to the atlas sheets
when the scale of the atlas sheets do not adequately
illustrate the details of boundaries or designations of a
particular area.
2. Zoning Districts Map
a. Establishment of Districts
i. Zoning districts are established as described in this
Ordinance and applied to real property as shown
on the maps of the Official Zoning Atlas or on maps
included within the text of this Ordinance.
b. Boundaries
i. Zoning district boundary lines are intended to
follow LOT LINEs, or be parallel or perpendicular to
them, and along the centerlines of private rightsof-
way, public ALLEYS, and railroad rights-of-way as
indicated on the maps of the Official Zoning Atlas.
ii. Where the maps of the Official Zoning Atlas
indicate a district boundary line that approximately
coincides with a LOT LINE, the LOT LINE is the official
boundary between districts.
iii. Where the maps of the Official Zoning Atlas
indicate a district boundary line that divides
a platted LOT or undivided PARCEL of land, the
boundary between districts is determined using
the scale of that map in the Official Zoning Atlas
and the provisions for each zoning district apply
to the portion of the LOT within the respective
districts.
c. Unmapped Land
i. Any THOROUGHFARE that is decommissioned may be
USEd or developed as if it is incorporated into the
adjacent zoning district.
ii. Any land not specifically included in any zoning
district on the maps of the Official Zoning Atlas
is subject to the provisions of Article 11: PUBLIC
REALM Standards and classified as the Civic district
unless rezoned according to the Map Amendment
procedures of Article 15: Administration.
3. Transit Areas Map
a. TRANSIT STATIONs and all LOTs located within one-quarter
(1/4) and one-half (1/2) mile walking distance to each
station are shown on the “Official TRANSIT AREA Map of
the City of Somerville”.
b. This map may be cited and referred to as the “TRANSIT
AREA Map”.
c. The TRANSIT AREA Map is part of the Official Zoning Atlas
as established in §1.C.1. Zoning Atlas.
4. Pedestrian Streets Map
a. PEDESTRIAN STREETs are shown on the “Official PEDESTRIAN
STREETs Map of the City of Somerville”.
b. This map may be cited and referred to as the
“PEDESTRIAN STREETs Map”.
c. The PEDESTRIAN STREETs Map is part of the Official Zoning
Atlas as established in §1.C.1. Zoning Atlas.
d. A PEDESTRIAN STREET designation is intended to include
the entirety of each designated BLOCK FACE. Where the
PEDESTRIAN STREETs Map indicates a designation that
identifies only part of BLOCK FACE, the length of the
designation is one hundred (100) feet of the FRONT LOT
LINE or combination of FRONT LOT LINES extending from
the corner of the BLOCK.
2 GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
2.1 GLOSSARY ..............................................................9
General 9
2.2 ZONING ATLAS OVERVIEW .................................22
Zoning Districts 22
Transit Areas 23
Pedestrian Streets 23
2.3 BUILDING TYPES OVERVIEW ..............................24
General 24
Building Assembly 24
Understanding the Building Type Pages 25
2.4 STANDARDS & MEASUREMENTS ......................26
General 26
Lot Standards 26
Building Placement 27
Massing & Height 28
Uses and Features 30
Building Components 32

12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 9
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Glossary
100% Affordable Housing Any building that is deed restricted so that all dwelling units are rented or sold to
households with incomes at or below one hundred and twenty percent (120%)
of the Median Family Income for the Boston-Cambridge-Quincy, MA-NH HUD
Metro FMR Area.
Abut or Abutting To physically touch or share a contiguous boundary or border, such as a common
lot line, or to be separated only by an alley or shared driveway.
Access The way or means to enter and leave.
Accessory Building A building or structure designed, used, or occupied in relation to the principal
use(s) of a given lot.
Accessory Use A use(s) of a lot, structure or portion thereof that is incidental and related to
a principal building or use of land and located on the same lot as the principal
building or use of land.
Affordable Dwelling Unit A dwelling unit sold, leased, or rented at a price affordable to a specific
household income. Affordable dwelling unit is abbreviated as ADU. (See Article
12)
Affordable Dwelling Unit, Existing An ADU subject to a covenant or deed restriction limiting its sale, lease, or rental.
Existing affordable dwelling unit is abbreviated as Existing-ADU. (See Article 12)
Albedo The amount of solar radiation reflected by a surface.
Alcohol Sales A specific use type of the Consumer Goods principal use category. See
§9.2.12.c.i Alcohol Sales.
Allee Objects placed in a straight line.
Alley A thoroughfare, located within a block and providing access to the rear of
buildings, loading facilities, service areas, trash storage, motor vehicle parking,
and usually containing easements for dry utilities.
Amenity Space A feature of a lot or building that provides outdoor social, recreational, and/or
leisure space for the comfort and/or convenience of the residents of a building.
Amenity Space, Private Features of a building and outdoor areas designed for the comfort and
convenience of residents.
Amenity Space, Shared Rooms and facilities designed for the comfort and convenience of residents of a
multi-unit building.
Ancillary Providing necessary support for the operation of a principal use.
Animal Services A Commercial Services principal use category. See §9.2.6.a Animal Services.
Antenna Equipment for wireless communication, including but not limited to panel
antennas, whip antennas, and satellite dishes that may be freestanding,
mounted inside a structure (such as a steeple, belfry, cupola, or other tower
or rooftop element), or side-mounted to the face of a building, penthouse,
smokestack, or chimney, to conceal its presence and reduce its visual impact.
Apiculture A specific use type of the Urban Agriculture accessory use category. See
§9.2.14.d.i Apiculture.
Applicant A person or entity who has submitted a development review application under
applicable provisions of this Ordinance; a petitioner in accordance with M.G.L.
40A; the legal or beneficial owner(s) of a lot or land included in a proposed
development, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or any
other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
Aquaculture The farming of aquatic organisms such as fish, crustaceans, molluscs, and
aquatic plants.
2.1 GLOSSARY
1. General
a. The following words, phrases, and terms identified by
capitalized lowercase typeface in this Ordinance are
defined in this Section.
10 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Glossary
Aquaponics The production of food using conventional aquaculture with hydroponics in a
symbiotic environment.
Arbor A structure with an open frame, freestanding or attached to another structure,
with horizontal or vertical latticework often used as a support for ornamental
vines and/or climbing plants.
Architectural Bay The vertically oriented area of a facade between two piers, pilasters, columns,
curtain wall mullions, spandrel glass, or other equivalent architectural features.
Articulate To form or have a joint.
Articulated/Articulation Two or more surfaces connected by a joint.
Articulation The state of being jointed.
Artisinal Production An Arts & Creative Enterprise principal use category. See §9.2.2.a Artisinal
Production.
Arts Center A multi-purpose facility dedicated to the expansion and practice of the arts by
providing recourses such as theatre space, gallery space, musical performance
venues, workshop areas, educational facilities, or access to equipment to
members of the community.
Arts Exhibition An Arts & Creative Enterprise principal use category. See §9.2.2.b Arts
Exhibition.
Arts Sales or Services An Arts & Creative Enterprise principal use category. See §9.2.2.c Art Sales &
Services.
Assembly or Entertainment A Commercial Services principal use category. See §9.2.6.b Assembly or
Entertainment.
Assembly Square Plan The following documents, as amended, constitute the Assembly Square Plan:
1. Assembly Square Planning Study: A Vision and Implementation Plan for
the Future, prepared for the Somerville Office of Housing and Community
Development (OHCD), dated October 2000;
2. Assembly Square Revitalization Plan: 2002 Major Plan Change, prepared by
the Somerville OHCD, dated May 2002;
3. Assembly Square: Design Guidelines for the Public Realm, prepared for the
Somerville OHCD, dated March 2002;
4. Assembly Square Transportation Plan (ASTP), prepared for the Somerville
OHCD in conjunction with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Highway
Department and the Executive Office of Transportation and Construction,
dated May 2003.
Automatic Sprinkler System As defined by the MA State Building Code.
Average Daily Trips The number of vehicles passing a point on a traffic way during a 24-hour period,
usually calculated as the average of two (2) or more measured days of traffic.
Average daily trips is abbreviated as ADT.
Average Grade The mean (average) of the finished ground level of a civic space at the corners of
the lot.
Average Ground Level The mean (average) of the finished ground level next to a building at the exterior
walls.
Aviculture A specific use type of the Urban Agriculture accessory use category. See
§9.2.14.d.ii Aviculture.
Banking or Financial Services A Commercial Services principal use category. See §9.2.6.c Banking & Financial
Services.
Bakery, Cafe, or Coffee Shop A Food or Beverage Service principal use category. See §9.2.7.a Bakery, Cafe, or
Coffee Shop.
Bar, Restaurant, or Tavern A Food or Beverage Service principal use category. See §9.2.7.a Bar, Restaurant,
or Tavern.
Basement Any story, in whole or in part, below the ground story of a building.
Bed & Breakfast A Lodging principal use category. See §9.2.9.a Bed & Breakfast.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 11
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Glossary
Bedroom A private room for sleeping, however named, planned, intended or used, which
is separated and can be closed off from other parts of the dwelling by walls and
a door.
Bicycle Parking, Long-Term Accommodations for the parking of a bicycle for two (2) or more hours.
Bicycle Parking, Short-Term Accommodations for the parking of a bicycle for two (2) hours or less.
Bike-Share Parking A specific use type of the Vehicle Parking principal use category. See §9.2.6.m.i
Bike-Share Parking.
Blank Wall A portion of any facade of a building that does not include a substantial material
change; windows, doors, columns, pilasters or other articulation.
Block The aggregate land area circumscribed by thoroughfares or other rights-of-way.
Block Face The aggregate of all front lot lines, and alleys, if present, on one side of a block.
Body Art Services A specific use type of the Personal Services principal use category. See §9.2.6.k.i
Body Art Services.
Broadcast or Recording Studio A Commercial Services principal use category. See §9.2.6.d Broadcast or
Recording Studio.
Building Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof or other covering,
and designed or used for the shelter or enclosure of any person, animal, or
property of any kind, including tents, awnings, or vehicles situated on private
property and used for purposes of a building.
Building or Home Supplies or
Equipment A Retail Sales principal use category. See §9.2.12.a Building or Home Supplies or
Equipment.
Building or Home Repair Services A Commercial Services principal use category. See §9.2.6.e Building or Home
Repair Services.
Building Components Accessory features that increase the habitable square footage or enhance the
usefulness of a building.
Building Official The Superintendent of Inspectional Services, Senior Building Inspector, Local
Building Inspector, Zoning Review Planner, or other person designated to enforce
this Ordinance.
Business Support Services A Commercial Services principal use category. See §9.2.6.f Business Support
Services.
Building Type A classification or kind of structure characterized and differentiated by its
placement on a lot, massing, composition, use, and features.
By Right Uses and structures that are permitted in a zoning district.
Caliper A measurement of the diameter of a tree trunk. For trees less than four (4)
inches in diameter, caliper is measured six (6) inches from the ground. For trees
between four (4) inches and twelve (12) inches in diameter, caliper is measured
twelve (12) inches from the ground.
Cannabis Cultivation A Cannabis Enterprise principal use category. See §9.2.4.b Cannabis Cultivation.
Cannabis Product Manufacturing A Cannabis Enterprise principal use category. See §9.2.4.c Cannabis Product
Manufacturing.
Cannabis Retail Sales A Cannabis Enterprise principal use category. See §9.2.4.d Cannabis Cultivation.
Cannabis Research & Development A Cannabis Enterprise principal use category. See §9.2.4.e Cannabis Research &
Development.
Cannabis Testing Laboratory A Cannabis Enterprise principal use category. See §9.2.4.f Cannabis Testing
Laboratory.
Carport A roofed structure, unenclosed on two (2) or more sides, used or designed for
the off-street parking of motor vehicles.
Car-Share Parking A specific use type of the Vehicle Parking principal use category. See §9.2.6.m.ii
Car-Share Parking.
Caterer or Wholesale Food
Production A Commercial Services principal use category. See §9.2.6.g Caterer or
Wholesale Food Production.
12 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Glossary
Change in Use A change in the use of real property, whether temporary or permanent, from one
use category to a different use category as defined by Article 9. Use Provisions.
Chicken A common domestic chicken (Gallus gallus domesticus).
Civic Space An open space designed to support civic, cultural, ecological, recreational,
or social activities. Civic space types are defined by a combination of
characteristics, including the interrelationship between the intended uses, size,
landscape design, and abutting real property.
Cladding The exterior material that covers or overlays another material or structure.
Clearance The height above the sidewalk or other surface, as specified, of the bottom edge
of an object or building component.
Co-Working An Arts & Creative Enterprise principal use category. See §9.2.2.d Co-Working.
Commercial A term collectively defining permitted uses from all non-residential use
categories, excluding parking.
Commercial Farming A specific use type of the Farming principal use category (See §9.2.13.a.i
Commercial Farming) and a specific use type of the Urban Agriculture accessory
use category (See §9.2.14.d.iii Commercial Farming).
Commercial Parking A specific use type of the Vehicle Parking principal use category. See §9.2.6.m.iii
Commercial Parking.
Vehicle Repair & Maintenance An Auto-Oriented principal use category. See §9.2.3.a Vehicle Repair or
Maintenance.
Community Center A Civic & Institutional principal use category. See §9.2.5.a Community Center.
Community Farming A specific use type of the Farming principal use category. See §9.2.13.a.ii
Community Farming.
Community Gardening An Urban Agriculture principal use category. See §9.2.13.b Community
Gardening.
Comprehensive Plan The City of Somerville's official plan providing guidance and direction for
future decision making that affects local government policy and community
development as approved by the Planning Board per M.G.L. 41, 81d.
Consumer Goods A Retail Sales principal use category. See §9.2.12.b Consumer Goods.
Corner Board Flat vertical exterior casings framing siding or shingles at inside and outside
corners.
Cornice The molded and projecting horizontal member that crowns an architectural
composition.
Community or Group Residence A specific use type of the Group Living principal use category. See §9.2.11.b.i
Community or Group Residence.
Cost Burden When a household pays more than thirty percent (30%) of its income for
housing.
Cost Burden, Severe When a household pays more than fifty percent (50%) of its income for housing.
Court An open, uncovered space, unobstructed to the sky, bounded on three or more
sides by exterior building walls or other enclosing devices.
Creative Incubator An organization providing startup and early-stage arts and creative enterprises
with shared facilities and often providing business planning, access to finance,
mentoring, and other business or administrative support services.
Creative Studio A specific use type of the Home Occupation accessory use category. See
§9.2.14.c.ii Creative Studio.
Culinary Incubator An organization providing start-up catering, retail, and wholesale food businesses
with shared kitchen facilities and often providing business planning, access to
finance, mentoring, and other business or administrative support services.
Cultivar A cultivated variety of tree; deliberately selected for its desirable physical
characteristics.
Curb Cut A section of sidewalk curbing removed to facilitate vehicular access to a
driveway or vehicular entrance to a parking structure.
Data Center An Industrial principal use category. See §9.2.8.b Data Center.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 13
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Glossary
Day Care Center, Adult A specific use type of the Day Care Services principal use category. See
§9.2.6.h.i Adult Day Care Center.
Day Care Center, Child A specific use type of the Commercial Services principal use category. See
§9.2.6.h.ii Child Day Care Center.
Day Care Services A Commercial Services principal use category. See §9.2.6.h Day Care Services.
Deck A roofless, raised platform accessible from a secondary entrance to a building
that provides outdoor amenity space.
Demolition The destruction or removal of fifty percent (50%) or more of the surface area of
the exterior walls and roof of a building or any exploratory demolition or internal
demolition that compromises the structural integrity of a building. Normal
maintenance is not demolition.
Demolition, Exploratory The removal of non-structural interior building materials prior to renovation,
rehabilitation, restoration, or remodeling in order to verify the existing conditions
present in otherwise unexposed areas.
Demolition, Internal The removal of non-structural interior building materials for the purpose of
renovating, rehabilitating, restoring, or remodeling interior space.
Design & Fabrication Center A facility providing individuals and small firms access to professional
manufacturing tools & equipment; classes & training; lab, workshop, and studio
space; and storage for tools and supplies.
Design Services An Arts & Creative Enterprise principal use category. See §9.2.2.e Design
Services.
Desire Line A route that pedestrians prefer to take to get from one location to another.
Development The construction or modification of any principal building type, accessory
building type, or other structure; the excavation, fill, or grading of land; and the
establishment, change, or expansion of any use of any structure or land.
Development Site The land area encompassed in a development proposal irrespective of the
number or configuration of lots, land ownership, or municipal boundaries.
Diameter at Breast Height The diameter of a tree trunk or the square root of the sum of each trunk squared
for a multi trunk tree, measured four and one-half (4.5) feet above ground.
Diameter at breast height is abbreviated as DBH.
Dispatch Service An Auto-Oriented principal use category. See §9.2.3.b Dispatch Services.
Driveway Apron A ramp that slopes down from the edge of the walkway of a sidewalk to the
roadway surface of an abutting thoroughfare.
Dry Cleaning or Laundry Services An Industrial principal use category. See §9.2.8.a Dry Cleaning or Laundry
Services.
Dormitory or Chapter House A specific use type of the Group Living principal use category. See §9.2.11.b.ii
Dormitory or Chapter House.
Dwelling Unit One (1) or more rooms providing separate, independent living space with lawful
cooking and sanitary facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants.
Easement A liberty, privilege, or advantage without profit, which a person(s) may have in
the lands of another person(s).
Educational Services A Commercial Services principal use category. See §9.2.6.i Educational Services.
Employer A person or business that employs one (1) or more people for wages or salary.
Encroach To break the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit with a structural
element, so that it extends into a setback or over the sidewalk of a public rightof-
way.
Encroachment Any structural element that encroaches.
Erect To construct, reconstruct, excavate, fill, drain, or conduct physical operations of
any kind in preparation for or in pursuance of construction or reconstruction, or to
move a building or structure upon a lot.
Fabrication Laboratory A high-tech workshop that fosters innovation and invention by providing
individuals with access to tools and machinery for “do-it-yourself” (DIY) digital
14 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Glossary
fabrication.
Facade Any exterior wall of a building oriented in whole or in part toward a front lot line,
or civic space, excluding the exterior walls of any roof elements.
Farm or Vendor Market A Retail Sales principal use category. See §9.2.12.e Farm or Vendor Market.
Farming An Urban Agriculture principal use category. See §9.2.13.a Farming.
Farm Stand A temporary structure for the display and sale of clean, whole, unprocessed
produce, eggs, or honey cultivated on site.
Fenestration The openings in the facade of a building, including windows and doors.
Firearms Sales A specific use type of the Consumer Goods principal use category. See
§9.2.12.c.ii Firearms Sales.
Floor Area, Gross The sum floor area of a building, in whole or on part, as measured to the face of
the exterior walls, with no deduction for corridors, stairs, closets, thickness of
walls, columns, or other features.
Floor Area, Leasable The floor area included in a commercial lease.
Floor Area, Net The sum floor area of a building, in whole or on part, measured to the face of the
interior walls.
Floor Plate The total gross floor area of a single story of a building, excluding balconies.
Forecourt An open space formed by a substantial recess in the central portion of a
building's facade.
Formula Business Any business, regardless of ownership or location worldwide, that chooses or
is required as a frachise to maintain two (2) or more of a standardized menu,
standardized merchandise, a standardized facade, a standardized decor or color
scheme, a standardized employee uniform, a standardized sign or signage, or a
trademark or a service mark along with nine (9) or more other businesses.
Fresh Food Market or Grocery Store A Retail Sales principal use category. See §9.2.12.d Fresh Food Market or
Grocery Store.
Frontage Area The area of a lot between the facade of a principal building and any front lot
line(s), extending fully to each side lot line(s).
Funeral Services A specific use type of the Personal Services principal use category. See
§9.2.6.k.iii Funeral Services.
Furniture Area An area of an amenity space that allows for the placement of furniture without
restricting the movement of pedestrians.
Gasoline Station An Auto-Oriented principal use category. See §9.2.3.c Gasoline Station.
General Office An Office principal use category. See §9.2.10.a General Office.
Green Score An performance-based environmental landscape standard measured as a ratio
of the weighted value of all landscape elements to the total land area (in square
feet) of a lot. See Section 10.4 Green Score for more information.
Group Living A Residential principal use category. See §9.2.11.b Group Living.
Health or Fitness Services A specific use type of the Personal Services principal use category. See
§9.2.6.k.ii Health or Fitness Services.
Habitable Spaces in a building for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet
rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces and similar areas are not
considered habitable spaces.
Heat Island The higher average air temperatures of the local micro-climate due to the
absorption, retention, and generation of heat by buildings, pavements, and
human activities.
Hen A female domestic chicken.
High-Rise Any building taller than seventy (70) feet above average ground level.
Hobby Kennel A specific use type of the Home Occupation Accessory Use category. See
§9.2.14.c.iii Hobby Kennel.
Homeless Shelter A specific use type of the Group Living principal use category. See §9.2.11.b.iii
Homeless Shelter.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 15
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Glossary
Home-Based Business A specific use type of the Home Occupation accessory use category. See
§9.2.14.c.iv Home-Based Business.
Home-Based Business
Vehicle Parking A specific use type of the Vehicle Parking accessory use category. See
§9.2.14.e.i Home-Based Business Vehicle Parking.
Home-Based Day Care A specific use type of the Home Occupation accessory use category. See
§9.2.14.c.v Home-Based Day Care.
Home Office A specific use type of the Home Occupation accessory use category. See
§9.2.14.c.vi Home Office.
Home Occupation An accessory use category. See §9.2.14.c Home Occupation.
Honeybee A common domestic honeybee (Apis mellifera).
Hospital A Civic & Institutional principal use category. See §9.2.5.b Hospital.
Hotel or Hostel A Lodging principal use category. See §9.2.9.b Hotel or Hostel.
Household Living A Residential principal use category. See §9.2.11.a Household Living.
Hydroculture The growing of plants in a soilless medium or an aquatic based environment.
Hydroponics A method of growing plants using a mineral-nutrient solution, without soil.
Junk Any discarded article or material, including unregistered motor vehicles, which is
ready for destruction or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to
some use.
Lamp The source of illumination in a lighting fixture.
Land Conveyance The transfer of legal title of real property from one person to another.
Landscape Area The area of a lot covered by turf grass or other groundcovers; planting beds;
paving stones, grass pavers, pervious concrete, or porous asphalt; or rock
surfacing such as stone, gravel, and other similar materials; excluding driveways,
parking spaces, and other surfaces intended for the manuevering of motor
vehicles.
Large Tree A woody plant with an expected mature height of thirty (30) feet or more.
Library A Civic & Institutional principal use category. See §9.2.5.c Library.
Light Source The lamp and all refractive, reflective, and translucent light transmitting parts of
an outdoor light fixture.
Local Historic District Real property designated by the City Council as historically or architecturally
significant in accordance with the Historic Districts Ordinance of the City of
Somerville. Local historic district is abbreviated as LHD.
Lot A bounded area of land undivided by a thoroughfare intended for use, sale,
legacy, or development at any time.
Lot Area The horizontal measurement of a lot in square feet, exclusive of any area in a
private way that is open to public use.
Lot, Corner A lot fronting two (2) or more thoroughfares at their intersection.
Lot Depth The horizontal distance from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of
the rear lot line of a lot or to the most distant point on any other lot line where
there is no rear lot line.
Lot, Flag A lot in the approximate configuration of a flag pole or sign post, with the pole or
post functioning primarily as an access way to the main area of the lot from the
thoroughfare providing access.
Lot, Interior A lot fronting one thoroughfare and abutting other lots at both sides.
Lot, Key A lot with a side lot line abutting the rear lot line of another lot.
Lot, Through A lot fronting on two (2) or more thoroughfares, including parallel thoroughfares
and thoroughfares that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
Lot Line A boundary that legally and geometrically demarcates a lot.
Lot Line Adjustment Reconfiguration of the boundary line between two abutting lots, whether they
are commonly owned or not, and whether the resulting shift of ground from one
parcel to another is minor or substantial.
16 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Glossary
Lot Line, Front Any lot line abutting a civic space or thoroughfare, excluding alleys.
Lot Line, Party A side lot line shared between two attached or semi-detached Building Types.
Lot Line, Primary Front Any front lot line abutting a pedestrian street.
Lot Line, Rear Any lot line which is parallel to or within forty-five (45) degrees of being parallel to
a front lot line, unless that lot line is a side lot line of an abutting lot.
Lot Line, Side Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
Lot Merger The consolidation of two (2) or more adjacent lots by eliminating the lot line that
previously separated them.
Lot Split The division of a lot into two (2) smaller lots.
Lot Width The length of the front lot line of a lot.
Lumen The unit of measure used to quantify the amount of light produced by a
lamp or emitted from a luminaire (as distinct from watt, a measure of power
consumption).
Luminaire A light unit or fixture including any bulb(s), tube(s), housing, reflective shield, lens
and/or ballast. The complete lighting unit (fixture), consisting of a lamp, or lamps
and ballasts, when applicable, together with the parts designed to distribute the
light (reflector, lens, diffuser), to position and protect the lamps, and to connect
the lamps to the power supply.
Luminaire, Fully Shielded: A luminaire constructed and installed in such a manner that all light emitted by
the luminaire, either directly from the lamp or a diffusing element, or indirectly
by reflection or refraction from any part of the luminaire, is projected below the
horizontal plane through the luminaire’s lowest light emitting part.
Maintenance or Repair Services A Commercial Services principal use category. See §9.2.6.j Maintenance or
Repair Services.
Major Utility Facility A Civic & Institutional principal use category. See §9.2.5.e Major Utility Facility.
Manufacturing An Industrial principal use category. See §9.2.8.c Manufacturing.
Market Rate Unit A dwelling unit developed and sold or rented on the open market.
Main Massing The primary massing of a Building Type, excluding building components.
Mezzanine An intermediate floor level between the floor and ceiling of a story.
Minor Utility Facility A Civic & Institutional principal use category. See §9.2.5.d Minor Utility Facility.
Mobility Management A broad range of strategies intended to reduce automobile trips. The alteration of
travel behavior through a program of incentives, services, and policies, including
encouraging the use of alternatives to single-occupant vehicles such as public
transit, cycling, walking, car-pooling/ van-pooling and changes in work schedule
that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether.
Mobility Management Association Organizations formed to help individual uses and property owners collectively
implement and administer the Mobility Management programs and services.
Motor Vehicle Parking An Auto-Oriented principal use category. See §9.2.3.d Motor Vehicle Parking.
Mounting Height The height of the center of a luminaire above ground level.
Moving or Storage Services An Industrial principal use category. See §9.2.8.d Moving or Storage Services.
Modification Construction that alters, expands, reconstructs, extends, or structurally changes
an existing structure or that changes the number of dwelling units within an
existing structure.
Monopole A free-standing (or wire-supported) tower for wireless telecommunications
facilities.
Mulch, Groundcover A protective above-ground dressing consisting of organic, non-recycled wood
or bark used for moisture control, weed control, erosion control, temperature
control, or other similar purposes.
Museum A Civic & Institutional principal use category. See §9.2.5.f Museum.
Mystic River Bank The portion of land surface abutting and confining the Mystic River, as defined by
310 CMR 10.54.2.C, as amended.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 17
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Glossary
Neighborhood Council As defined by Chapter 7, Article IX, Sec. 7-220 of The Code of Ordinances, City of
Somerville, Massachusetts.
Net Zero Ready Building Any building that 1) has no on-site combustion for HVAC system operation and
cooking equipment (all electric systems), excluding floor area Eating & Drinking
Establishment principal uses, and is certifiable as Zero Carbon or higher from the
International Living Future Institute, or PHIUS+ from the Passive House Institute
US.
Normal Maintenance Improvements intended to keep an existing structure in good physical condition
including, but not limited to, painting, roof replacement, re-siding, window
replacement, and other improvements that are deemed to be cosmetic or de
minimus in nature by the Building Official.
Nonconformity As defined by Article 14.
North-Facing Within 45 degrees of due north.
Nuisance That activity which arises from unreasonable, unwarranted, or unlawful use by
a person of their own property, which creates an obstruction or injury to the
rights of another, or to the public, or which produces annoyance, inconvenience,
disruption of work, and/or discomfort to an individual or the public.
Nursing Home or Assisted Living A specific use type of the Group Living principal use category. See §9.2.11.b.iv
Nursing Home or Assisted Living.
Off-Site Accessory Parking A specific use type of the Motor Vehicle Parking principal use category. See
§9.2.3.d.i Off-Site Accessory Parking.
Open Space A ground level or upper story outdoor landscaped area including, but not limited
to, natural woodlands, yards, forecourts, courtyards, green roofs and civic
spaces.
Outdoor Cafe Seating Outdoor seating located in a frontage or on a public sidewalk that is provided
with table service.
Outdoor Display The outdoor exhibition or presentation of products and merchandise available for
sale.
Outdoor Light Fixture Outdoor artificial illuminating devices, outdoor fixtures, lamps, and other devices,
permanent or portable, used for illumination or advertisement.
Outdoor Storage The storage of merchandise or material in boxes, in crates, on pallets or other
kinds of shipping containers, garden supplies, building supplies, plants, vehicles,
and other similar equipment, inventory, materials, merchandise, or supplies not
normally brought indoors overnight.
Parcel An area of land.
Parking Lot An uncovered area used or designed for the off-street parking of seven (7) or
more motor vehicles.
Parking Stacker An automoated or manually operated mechanical, multi-level lift system for
storing motor vehicles vertically.
Parking, Reserved A parking space for the exclusive use by a specific motor vehicle(s) and
unoccupied when not in use by that specific motor vehicle(s).
Parking, Shared Parking spaces shared by two (2) or more uses.
Parking Space, Off-street A storage area, meeting the requirements of Article 12, located in a parking lot or
driveway, for one (1) automobile, van, light truck, or other similar vehicle.
Parking Space, On-street A storage area located within the street right-of-way, for one (1) parked
automobile, van, light truck, or other similar vehicle.
Parking Structure Any structure used or designed for the off-street parking of motor vehicles,
excluding a carport and any outbuilding used a garage.
Party Wall A wall seperating two attached buildings.
Patio A hard-surfaced amenity space having no permanent roof coverings, usually
directly adjacent to a building, and constructed such that its finished walking
surface is laid or poured directly on finished grade.
18 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Glossary
Paving Stone Brick, stone, or concrete blocks with permeable joints.
Paver, Grass A type of open-cell paving stone filled with soil and planted with turf grass.
Pedestrian Street Any thoroughfare designated as a pedestrian street on the Pedestrian Streets
Map of the Somerville Zoning Atlas.
Permeable Area The landscaped area of a lot plus any area covered by porous asphalt, pervious
concrete, paving stones, or grass pavers.
Personal Services A Commercial Services principal use category. See §9.2.6.k Personal Services.
Personal Vehicle Repair or
Maintenance An Auto-Oriented principal use category. See §9.2.3.e Personal Vehicle Repair or
Maintenance.
Pervious Concrete Concrete made from cement and large aggregates that leave open voids
allowing for water to pass through the pavement.
Pet Store A specific use type of the Consumer Goods principal use category. See
§9.2.12.c.iii Pet Store.
Pier A section of a wall between fenestration.
Pilaster An upright rectangular architectural member that is structurally a pier, but
architecturally treated as a column, and usually projects a third of its width or
less from the wall.
Planter A soil area provided for the planting of street trees or other landcaping.
Planting Bed A soil area planted with grass and other groundcovers, trees, bushes, shrubs,
vines, flowers, and other horticultural materials with the remaining area covered
by mulch.
Podium The lower portion(s) of certain high-rise buildings.
Point Tower The upper stories of a high-rise building, composed of apartments surrounding a
central elevator core.
Porous Asphalt Concrete made from bitumen and large aggregates that leave open voids
allowing for water to pass through the pavement.
Principal Building A structure designed, used, or occupied for the principal use(s) of a given real
property.
Principal Entrance The main point of access for pedestrians into a building, upper story use, or
ground story tenant space.
Principal Use The main or primary purpose for which a structure, building, or lot is designed,
arranged, licensed or intended.
Private Non-Profit Club or Lodge A Civic & Institutional principal use category. See §9.2.5.g Private Non-Profit Club
or Lodge.
Property Owner An owner of land as identified on the most recent tax list maintained by the
Assessor’s Office of the City of Somerville.
Public Realm The urban environment visible and accessible to the public, inclusive of both
spaces and the building walls that frame them.
Public Service A Civic & Institutional principal use category. See §9.2.5.h Public Service.
Rail Right-of-Way The way for any rail service, including, but not limited to, the rail tracks,
guideways, overhead power lines, and shoulder. Rail right-of-way is abbreviated
as R-ROW.
Research & Development or
Laboratory An Office principal use category. See §9.2.10.b Research & Development or
Laboratory.
Recreation Services A Commercial Services principal use category. See §9.2.6.l Recreational
Services.
Recycling Collection An Industrial principal use category. See §9.2.8.e Recycling Collection.
Religious & Educational Uses
Protected by M.G.L. 40A. Sec. 3 A Civic & Institutional principal use category. See §9.2.5.i Religious & Educational
Uses Protected by M.G.L. 40A. Sec. 3.
Reserved Parking A parking space designed, arranged, or intended to be exclusivly used or
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 19
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Glossary
occupied by a specific motor vehicle(s) and held unoccupied when not in use
by that specific motor vehicle or any parking space not made available to hourly
users during the day and held unoccupied for any reason by a parking facility
operator.
Residential Gardening A specific use type of the Urban Agriculture accessory use category. See
§9.2.14.d.iv Residential Gardening.
Retaining Wall A structure designed to resist the lateral displacement of soil or other materials
in order to protect property or prevent erosion.
Ribbon Driveway A driveway with two parallel paved tracks separated by an unpaved area.
Ribbon Windows A series of windows set side by side to form a continuous horizontal band across
a facade.
Roof Line The highest point on any building or structure where an exterior wall or parapet
wall encloses roof or floor area, including floor area provided for housing
mechanical equipment.
Roof, Flat A roof with no slope greater than 2:12.
Roof, Gable A roof sloped on two sides from a central ridge with an exterior wall (gable)
enclosing each end.
Roof, Gambrel A compound, gabled roof with two slopes on each of its sides, where the lower
has a steeper slope or pitch than the upper, inclusive of English, Dutch, and
Jerkin Head gambrel roofs.
Roof, Hip A roof with four uniformly pitched or sloping sides, inclusive of kicked hip (witch’s
hat) and Hawaiian hip roofs.
Roof, Main The roof of the main massing of a principal building.
Roof, Mansard A compound, four sided roof where each side has two slopes, where the lower
has a very steep, almost vertical, slope or pitch, dormer windows, and eaves
extending with a radius or kick, rather than a flat projection.
Rooming House A specific use type of the Group Living principal use category. See §9.2.11.b.v
Rooming House.
Rooming Unit One (1) or more rooms providing separate, independent living facilities for use
by one (1) or two (2) human beings living together as a single household without
both lawful cooking and sanitary facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants
inside the rooming unit.
Runoff Coefficient A number relating the amount of storm water runoff to the amount of
precipitation received. A larger value indicates low permeability and higher storm
water runoff and a lower value indicates higher permeability and lower storm
water runoff.
Salvage Yard An Industrial principal use category. See §9.2.8.f Salvage Yard.
Sand-Based Structural Soil System Open graded crushed stone over sand-based structural soil.
Self-Storage A specific use type of the Moving or Storage Services principal use category.
See §9.2.8.d.i Self Storage.
Setback A horizontal distance from a particular point of reference to the location of a
principal or accessory building or an accessory structure.
Shared Workspace & Arts Education An Arts & Creative Enterprise principal use category. See §9.2.2.f Shared
Workspace & Arts Education.
Shrub A multi-stemmed, woody plant with a five-gallon container size when planted.
Sign Any permanent or temporary name, identification, description, emblem, logo,
structure, or device, that is illuminated or non-illuminated; visible or intended
to be visible from any public place; and directs attention to a person, product,
place, activity, institution, business, organization, activity, or service including any
letter, numeral, character, figure, emblem, painting, illustration, banner, pennant,
placard, or temporary sign designed to advertise, identify, solicit, or convey
information. Signs include devices designed to attract the eye by intermittent
or repeated motion and any permanently installed or situated merchandise,
including any banner, pennant, placard, or temporary sign, with the exception
20 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Glossary
of window displays. Flags of the United States and the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts are not signs.
Sign Band The area of a building, above a storefront, intended for the placement of a wall
sign.
Site A lot or parcel and the improvements thereon.
Small Tree A woody plant with an expected mature height of less than thirty (30) feet.-
Soil Volume An amount of soil provided for a tree, calculated as the horizontal area of open or
covered soil multiplied by three (3) feet of depth.
Solar Reflectance A measure of how strongly an object reflects sunlight. Solar reflectance is
measured on a scale of 0 to 1: from not reflective (0) to 100% reflective (1.0).
Solar Reflectance Index A combined measure of how well a surface reflects (reflectance) and releases
absorbed solar radiation (emittance). Solar reflectance index is measured on a
scale of 0 to 100: where a standard black surface (reflectance 0.05, emittance
0.90) is zero (0) and a standard white surface (reflectance 0.80, emittance 0.90)
is one hundred (100). Solar reflectance index is abbreviated as SRI.
Steep Slope Any change in elevation of twenty-five percent (25%) or greater over a horizontal
distance of thirty (30) feet or greater.
Step-back A recess of an upper story facade a set distance behind the facade of the story
below.
Story The portion of a building located between the surface of a habitable floor and the
surface of the habitable floor or roof next above.
Story, Ground The lowest story of a building with a finished floor at or above the finished
ground level next to a building at the facade.
Story, Upper Any story above the ground story of a building.
Street A thoroughfare, avenue, road, highway, boulevard, parkway, driveway, lane, court
or private easement for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic and providing
access to lots and civic spaces.
Street Tree A tree planted within the furnishing zone as a element of a thoroughfare.
Structured Parking Motor vehicle parking spaces located within a principal building, whether aboveground
or underground, or carriage house.
Structural Cells A subsurface system that supports the weight of sidewalks or other paved
surfaces and is filled with uncompacted soil.
Subdivision The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, building
sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale, legacy, or development at any
time, where a new thoroughfare or way is needed to provide access to the lots
which would otherwise be landlocked.
Substantial Renovation Any modification, interior renovation, or both of an existing principal building that
exceeds one hundred percent (100%) of the assessed value of the building, as
identified on the most recent tax list maintained by the Assessor’s Office of the
City of Somerville, within any twelve (12) month period.
Surface Parking Motor vehicle parking spaces provided at ground level, whether in a driveway,
a parking lot, under a carport, or sheltered by overhanging upper stories of a
building.
Suspended Pavement Pavement slabs spanning supports that allow soil under sidewalks and other
paved surfaces to remain uncompacted.
Terminated Vista A location at the axial conclusion of a thoroughfare.
Thoroughfare A public or private way for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic and providing
access to lots and civic spaces.
Tower Any portion of a high-rise building above seventy (70) feet.
Towing Service A specific use type of the Dispatch Service principal use category. See §9.2.3.b.i
Towing Service.
Transit Area All lots within one-quarter (1/4) mile of a transit station for commercial uses and
all lots within one-half (1/2) mile of a transit station for residential uses.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 21
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Glossary
Transit Station Any existing or planned station of the MBTA’s light rail and heavy rail rapid transit
lines within the City of Somerville.
Tree Guard A metal fence installed around the perimeter of a tree pit to protect a street tree.
Tree Pit A three (3) foot deep pit filled with soil for the planting and growth of a tree. Tree
pits have surface area open to air and water flow.
Trucking or Transportation Depot An Industrial principal use category. See §9.2.8.g Trucking or Transportation
Depot.
Urban Agriculture An Accessory use category. See §9.2.14.b Urban Agriculture.
Use The purpose or activity that land or structures is designed, arranged, or intended
to be occupied or used, or for which it is occupied, maintained, rented, or leased.
Vehicle Parking A Commercial Services principal use category (See §9.2.6.m Vehicle Parking) and
an Accessory use category (See §9.2.14.e Vehicle Parking).
Vehicle Sales An Auto-Oriented principal use category. See §9.2.3.e Vehicle Sales.
Visible Light Reflectance (VLR) The percent of total visible light that is reflected by a glazing system. The lower
the number, the less visible light reflected.
Visible Light Transmittance (VLT) The percent of total visible light that is transmitted through a glazing system. The
lower the number, the less visible light transmitted.
Waiver A predetermined type of deviation from specific provisions of this Ordinance as
specifically indicated elsewhere in this Ordinance.
Wholesale Trade or Distribution An Industrial principal use category. See §9.2.8.h Wholesale Trade or Distribution.
Wireless Communications The provision of the following types of services: cellular telephone service;
personal communications; and extended specialized mobile radio service. Such
essential services will be provided via wireless communications facilities, which
shall include monopoles, rooftop antennas, satellite dishes, and cell sites.
Wireless Communications Antenna An antenna, dish, or cell site attached to a wireless communications tower,
principal building, or other accessory structure that is used to transmit or receive
wireless communications signals.
Wireless Communications Tower A structure or structures intended to support equipment that is used to transmit
and/or receive wireless communications signals including towers, monopoles,
cell sites, and other guyed and lattice construction steel structures that are
freestanding and not attached to an principal building type or accessory
structure.
Work/Live Creative Stuido An Arts & Creative Enterprise principal use category. See §9.2.2.a Artisinal
Production.
22 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Zoning Atlas Overview
2.2 ZONING ATLAS OVERVIEW
1. Zoning Districts
a. Zoning districts established by §1.4.2 of this Ordinance
are summarized on Table 2.1.1 and example maps
showing how districts are mapped to real property are
shown in Figure 2.2.1 only for illustrative purposes.
b. The colors indicated for each zoning district on Table
2.1.1 can be USEd to cross reference the Somerville
Zoning Atlas with the applicable provisions for each
zoning district of this Ordinance.
Table 2.2.1 Zoning Districts
Residential Districts (Article 3) Commercial Districts (Article 6)
Neighborhood Residential (NR) Fabrication (FAB)
Urban Residential (UR) Commercial Core (CC)
Mid-Rise Districts (Article 4) Commercial Industry (CI)
Mid-Rise 3 STORY (MR3) Commercial Business (CB)
Mid-Rise 4 STORY (MR4) Special Districts (Article 7)
Mid-Rise 5 STORY (MR5) Civic (CIV)
Mid-Rise 6 STORY (MR6) Assembly Square (ASQ)
High Rise Districts (Article 5) North Point (NP)
High Rise (HR) PowderhoUSE School ReDEVELOPMENT (PSR)
Tufts University (TU)
Figure 2.2.1 Example Zoning Maps
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 23
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Zoning Atlas Overview
2. Transit Areas
a. An example map illustrating how the TRANSIT AREAS
established by §1.4.3 of this Ordinance are mapped
to real property is shown in Figure 2.2.2 only for
illustrative purposes.
3. Pedestrian Streets
a. An example map illustrating how the PEDESTRIAN STREETs
established by §1.4.4 of this Ordinance are mapped
to real property is shown in Figure 2.2.3 only for
illustrative purposes.
Figure 2.2.2 Example TRANSIT AREAs Map Map 2.2.3 Example Pedestrian STREETs Map
24 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Building Types Overview
2.3 BUILDING TYPES OVERVIEW
1. General
a. This Ordinance USEs 'BUILDING TYPEs' as a tool to regulate
DEVELOPMENT within each zoning district.
b. BUILDING TYPEs are defined by the combined disposition,
configuration, and function of a PRINCIPAL BUILDING and
are used in this Ordinance to establish the standards
for new construction, renovation of existing STRUCTURES,
and reDEVELOPMENT.
c. In contrast to applying generic dimensional standards
to all PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS, the USE of BUILDING TYPEs as a
regulatory tool allows dimensional standards to differ
from one class or kind of STRUCTURE to another within
the same district and is authorized by M.G.L. Chapter
40A, Section 4.
d. The selection of BUILDING TYPEs permitted within a zoning
district combine with the mix of permitted USEs to
define the intended character of each zoning district.
2. Building Assembly
a. BUILDING TYPEs are comprised of the MAIN MASSING of a
BUILDING and various additional BUILDING COMPONENTS.
b. The MAIN MASSING is the primary and the most important
portion defining a BUILDING TYPE's form and scale. The
MAIN MASSING of each BUILDING TYPE is regulated using
dimensional standards that differ for each type.
c. BUILDING COMPONENTS are ACCESSory elements attached
to the MAIN MASSING of a PRINCIPAL BUILDING that increase
the buildings USEfulness. Each BUILDING component has
dimensional standards that differ for each type.
d. BUILDING COMPONENTS provide an important means for
achieving variety and individuality in design and are
permitted as indicated for each BUILDING TYPE.
Figure 2.3.2 Building Assembly
MAIN MASSING of a BUILDING Additional BUILDING COMPONENTS
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 25
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Building Types Overview
42 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 43
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
11/26/19 11/26/19
3.1.8 Detached House (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Mass Facade Composition
FACADE Build Out (min) 50% A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 20% 50%
A Width (min/max) 22 ft 28 ft B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 20% 50%
B Depth (min/max) 28 ft 48 ft
GROUND STORY Elevation (min) 2 ft Use & Occupancy
C STORY Height (min/max) 10 ft 12 ft DWELLING UNITs per LOT (max) 3
D Number of STORIES (max) 2.5 DWELLING UNITs (max) 3
Roof Type
Flat, GABLE,
GAMBREL,
HIP, or
MANSARD
Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/ DU
3.1.8 Detached House (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) -- A Primary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
No Driveway ACCESS 32 ft B Secondary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 32 ft C Side SETBACK (min) --
Front Driveway ACCESS 34 ft No Driveway ACCESS 5 ft
B LOT DEPTH (min) 80 ft Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 5 ft
Front Driveway ACCESS 3 ft
Lot Development Sum of Side SETBACKs (min) --
C LOT Coverage (max) 60% No Driveway ACCESS 10 ft
D GREEN SCORE -- Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 10 ft
Minimum 0.35 Front Driveway ACCESS 12 ft
Ideal 0.40 D Rear SETBACK (min) 20 ft
E Building Separation (min) 10 ft
Parking Setbacks
F Primary Front SETBACK (min) 20 ft
G Secondary Front SETBACK (min) 10 ft
1 See §3.1.13.a Contextual Front SETBACKs
3. Understanding the Building Type Pages
a. The standards for BUILDING TYPEs identified in this
Ordinance are presented across four pages that are the
same for each BUILDING TYPE:
i. Description & Precedents. The first page for each
BUILDING TYPE provides a general description and
shows several images of typical buildings indicative
of the variety possible within the definition of each
type. The images are intended only for illustrative
purposes and do not fully exemplify all of the
requirements or possibilities for each type.
ii. Diagrams & Dimensional Tables. Page two
and three provide the key spread of dimensional
standards.
iii. Additional Standards. The fourth and final page
for each BUILDING TYPE identifies various provisions
applicable to the specific BUILDING TYPE, standards
linked to the dimensional table, and includes any
additional illustrative diagrams that are necessary.
b. Section 2.2 provides an explanation of each line item
in the BUILDING TYPE dimensional tables, defines how
to measure each requirement, and provides other
standards and reference information as necessary.
Zoning district labeled at the
top of every page
Illustrative building type
diagram
Tables of dimensional
standards & other
requirements
Color corresponds with
Zoning District
Badges indicate standards
that are illustrated in the
building type diagrams
Lot Standards Building Standards
26 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Standards & Measurements
2.4 STANDARDS & MEASUREMENTS
1. General
a. This section provides an explanation of dimensional
standards found in this Ordinance, defines how
to measure each requirement, and provides other
standards and reference information as necessary.
2. Lot Standards
a. LOT LINEs
i. Any LOT LINE ABUTTING a PEDESTRIAN STREET is a PRIMARY
FRONT LOT LINE.
ii. The FRONT LOT LINE of any INTERIOR LOT or KEY LOT is a
PRIMARY FRONT LOT LINE.
iii. CORNER LOTs have two FRONT LOT LINEs and two SIDE
LOT LINEs with no REAR LOT LINE.
a). Any FRONT LOT LINE of a CORNER LOT ABUTTING a
PEDESTRIAN STREET is a PRIMARY FRONT LOT LINE.
b). For all other CORNER LOTS, the PRIMARY FRONT LOT
LINE is designated by the PROPERTY OWNER, with
all remaining FRONT LOT LINES designated as
secondary FRONT LOT LINES.
b. LOT Dimensions
i. LOTWIDTH
a). LOT WIDTH is measured as the length of the
FRONT LOT LINE of a LOT, except as follows:
i). For a FLAG LOT, only the 'pole' or 'post'
portion of the LOT is USEd to measure LOT
WIDTH.
ii. LOT DEPTH
a). LOT DEPTH is measured as the horizontal
distance between the midpoint of the PRIMARY
FRONT LOT LINE and the midpoint of the REAR LOT
LINE or to the most distant point on any other
LOT LINE where there is no REAR LOT LINE.
c. LOT DEVELOPMENT
i. LOT Coverage
a). The maximum area of a LOT that is permitted
to be covered by STRUCTURES and impermeable
surfaces.
b). The lot coverage of a STRUCTURE is measured
from the outside of the exterior walls at the
GROUnd story, including covered porches and
other building components.
c). The lot coverage (and permeable area) of
porous asphalt, pervious concrete, paving
stones, or grass pavers is calculated using the
runoff coefficient provided by the manufacturer.
ii. Green Score
a). Green Score is landscape requirement
measured as a ratio of the weighted value of
various landscape elements to total lot area.
See §10.3 Green Score for more information.
iii. Open Space
a). The minimum area of a lot that must be
provided as open space.
b). When the open space requirement results in
eight thousand (8,000) square feet or less, an
in lieu payment in accordance with Section
12.3 Buyouts & Payments may be made for up
to one hundred percent (100%) of the required
open space, in whole or in part.
c). When the open space requirement results in
Figure 2.4.2 LOT Dimensions
Width
Depth
Figure 2.4.3 (a) Building SETBACKs
Min/Max
Front Setback
Rear
Setback
Side
Setback
Side
Setback
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 27
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Standards & Measurements
eight thousand (8,000) square feet or more,
the open space must be provided on the lot.
3. Building Placement
a. BUILDING SETBACKs
i. All principal and ACCESSORY BUILDINGS must be located
at or behind any required minimum front, side, or
rear SETBACK except as indicated in §2.2.3.c. SETBACK
ENCROACHMENTs.
ii. Minimum and maximum front SETBACKs are
measured as follows:
a). Parallel to any FRONT LOT LINE that intersects a
SIDE LOT LINE within five degrees (5º) of a right
angle.
b). Parallel to the tangent of a concave FRONT LOT
LINE or to the secant of a convex FRONT LOT LINE.
c). Perpendicular to the LOT DEPTH from the center
point of the FRONT LOT LINE.
iii. Side and rear SETBACKs are measured parallel to LOT
LINEs.
iv. The FACADE of a PRINCIPAL BUILDING must be built at or
in front of any maximum front SETBACK for each STORY
of a BUILDING. The FACADE of UPPER STORIES may not
project forward of the FACADE of the GROUND STORY
except through the USE of Building COMPONENTS and
BUILDING frontages.
v. Buildings and STRUCTURES are not permitted to
ENCROACH upon any EASEMENT or the right-of-way of
any public THOROUGHFARE.
vi. LOTs that cannot meet TOWER SETBACK requirements
on all sides are not appropriate for tall buildings.
b. Building Separation
i. Any principal or ACCESSORY BUILDING must be
separated from any other principal or ACCESSORY
BUILDING on the same LOT or on an ABUTTING LOT by
the building separation distance specified for each
BUILDING TYPE.
ii. Building separation is measured parallel from the
face of the exterior walls of a principal or ACCESSORY
BUILDING, excluding a PARTY WALL.
iii. Building components and the structural walls of
window wells are included in the calculation of
building separation.
c. Parking SETBACKs
i. Unless otherwise specified, all parking, excluding
underground STRUCTURED PARKING, must be located at
or behind any required parking SETBACK.
d. SETBACK ENCROACHMENTs
i. BUILDING COMPONENTS may ENCROACH into required
SETBACK as indicated for each type elsewhere in this
Ordinance.
ii. CORNICEs, belt courses, sills, PILASTERs and other
architectural features may ENCROACH up to two (2)
feet into a required SETBACK, provided that at least
two (2) feet is maintained from the vertical plane of
any SIDE LOT LINE.
iii. Chimneys and flues may ENCROACH up to four (4)
feet into a required SETBACK, provided that at least
two (2) feet is maintained from the vertical plane of
any LOT LINE.
iv. BUILDING eaves and roof overhangs may ENCROACH
into a required SETBACK, provided that at least two
(2) feet is maintained from the vertical plane of any
LOT LINE.
v. Mechanical equipment associated with residential
USEs, such as an HVAC unit, is not permitted in
Figure 2.4.2 (c) FRONTAGE AREA
No Parking
No driveway
& No parking
Parking
Setback
No Parking
Figure 2.4.3 (b) Parking SETBACKs
Secondary
parking
setback
Primary
parking
setback
28 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Standards & Measurements
the FRONTAGE AREA of a LOT, but may ENCROACH into
a required side or rear SETBACK, provided that at
least two (2) feet or the distance provided in the
manufacturer’s specifications, whichever is greater,
is maintained from the vertical plane of any LOT LINE.
a). Air heat pumps and other energy-saving
mechanical equipment with a day–night 24-hr
average noise level of 55 dB(A) or less may
fully ENCROACH into a required SETBACK.
vi. Exterior walls are permitted to ENCROACH into front,
side, and rear SETBACKs up to eight inches (8") only
for the purpose of adding insulating sheathing to
the exterior wall assembly, provided that at least
two (2) feet is maintained from the vertical plane of
any SIDE LOT LINE.
vii. Minor STRUCTURES ACCESSory to utilities, such as
hydrants, manholes, water meters, or gas meters,
may fully ENCROACH into a required front, side, or
rear SETBACK.
viii. Transformers and other cabinet STRUCTURES may fully
ENCROACH into a required side or rear SETBACK.
ix. Terraces, uncovered and unenclosed PATIOs, and
underground STRUCTURES may fully ENCROACH into a
required SETBACK.
x. Trellises or other STRUCTURES attached to a BUILDING
for the sole purpose of growing vines or other
vegetation may ENCROACH into a required SETBACK
provided that at least two (2) feet is maintained
from the vertical plane of any SIDE LOT LINE.
xi. ACCESSory STRUCTURES, fences and walls, SIGNs, and
landscape buffers may ENCROACH as indicated in
Article 10: DEVELOPMENT Standards.
e. FRONTAGE AREA
i. The area of a LOT between the FACADE of a PRINCIPAL
BUILDING and any FRONT LOT LINE(s) extending fully to
each SIDE LOT line(s) is the frontage area of a lot.
ii. Motor vehicle parking, excluding parking in the
drive aisle of a driveway, and parking spaces are
not permitted in the frontage area and driveways
are not permitted in the FRONTAGE AREA between a
BUILDING and the FRONT LOT LINE.
4. Massing & Height
a. General
i. The UPPER STORIES of a BUILDING may not project, in
any direction, beyond the exterior wall plane of the
stories below, except through the USE of Building
COMPONENTS.
b. MAIN MASSING
i. FACADE Build Out
a). Building façade(s) must be built parallel to the
FRONT LOT LINE for the minimum facade build out
specified for each BUILDING TYPE and is measured
as a percentage of the LOT width, measured at
the maximum front SETBACK line.
b). The review boards may permit buildings in
the Neighborhood Residence district to have
FACADEs that are not parallel to a FRONT LOT LINE
for any LOT where any SIDE LOT LINE intersects
with the FRONT LOT LINE at an acute angle.
c). For LOTs with frontage on three (3) sides, the
FACADE build out along a secondary frontage
is only applicable to the minimum number of
stories required for each BUILDING TYPE.
d). FORECOURTs are considered part of the BUILDING
for the purpose of measuring FACADE build out.
Figure 2.4.4 (a) FACADE BUILD-OUT
Build
To
Setback
MIN %
BUILD TO
LOT WIDTH (100%)
Figure 2.4.4 (b) Upward Slope
Half Story
Upper Story
Ground Story
Basement
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 29
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Standards & Measurements
ii. BUILDINGWIDTH
a). Width is measured parallel to the FACADE of a
BUILDING, from the exterior of each side wall.
iii. BUILDING Depth
a). Depth is measured perpendicularly from the
FACADE as the maximum length of any exterior
side wall of a BUILDING.
iv. FLOOR PLATE
a). FLOOR PLATE is measured as the total GROSS
FLOOR AREA of each STORY of a BUILDING, measured
at the exterior walls, but excluding BUILDING
COMPONENTS.
v. GROUND STORY Elevation
a). GROUND STORY elevation is measured as the
vertical distance from the average finished
ground level at the FACADE(s) to the top of the
finished floor of the GROUND STORY.
vi. STORY Height
a). STORY height is measured vertically from the
surface of the finished floor to the surface
of the finished floor above at all points.
When there is no floor above, STORY height is
measured from the surface of the finished
floor to the top of the structural beam or joists
above or the top of the wall plate, whichever is
more.
b). Minimum STORY height requirements are not
measured for half-stories.
vii. Number of Stories
a). The total number of stories of a BUILDING is
calculated as follows:
i). The GROUND STORY is counted as one (1)
STORY, except that a single GROUND STORY of
twenty-five (25) feet or more is counted as
two (2) stories.
ii). Each UPPER STORY is counted as one (1)
additional STORY, except that any UPPER STORY
with a MEZZANINE or loft is counted as two
(2) stories.
iii). Interstitial space between stories is
counted as an additional STORY if the space
has a walking surface, permanent lighting,
a ceiling height of seven feet six inches
(7’6”) or more, or is ACCESSed via a stairwell
or elevator door.
iv). BASEMENTs are not counted as one (1) STORY
unless the finished floor of the GROUND
STORY is five (5) feet or more above the
AVERAGE GROUND LEVEL of the LOT. See Figure
2.2 (g) and Figure 2.2 (h).
v). Each STORY of above ground STRUCTURED
PARKING is counted as one (1) STORY
regardless of its relationsHIP to HABITABLE
stories, except that up to two (2) stories
of above ground STRUCTURED PARKING may
be counted as one (1) STORY when those
stories are fully screened by a single
GROUND STORY with an equal or greater STORY
height.
b). HABITABle space located directly under a pitched
roof is counted as a half story. The following
standards apply to half stories:
i). The roof rafters must intersect the wall
plate or top of wall frame of the exterior
walls at a height up to two (2) feet above
the finished floor of the half-story of a
principal building type or four (4) feet above
the finished floor of the half-story of an
accessory building type.
ii). Ceiling height of a half STORY must not
exceed twelve (12) feet in height at any
point.
c). Non-HABITABLE attic space located under a
pitched roof is not counted as a half STORY.
viii. STEP-BACK
a). A required distance that certain upper stories
of a building must be recessed from the plane
of the facade of the stories below.
i). Required step backs must be provided for
all stories as indicated for each building
type.
ii). Buildings on any LOT less than sixty-five
(65) feet deep are exempt from the UPPER
STORY STEP-BACK requirement.
ix. BUILDING Height, Feet
a). BUILDING height in feet is measured as the
vertical distance from the average finished
Figure 2.4.4 (c) Downward Slope
Half Story
Upper Story
Ground Story
Basement
30 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Standards & Measurements
ground level at the FACADE(s) to the top of the
structural beam or joists of the upper most
STORY.
x. Roofs
a). Defined roof types are permitted as indicated
for each BUILDING TYPE. If this line item is not
identified on the BUILDING TYPE table, the roof is
not regulated.
xi. Roof Features
a). Roof DECKs are permitted only on FLAT ROOFS and
must be SETBACK at least five (5) feet from any
FACADE.
b). Mechanical & stairwell penthoUSEs; roof
mounted cellular, radio, and Internet
transmission equipment; vents or exhausts;
solar panels or skylights; flagpoles; belfries,
chimneys, cupolas, monuments, parapets,
spires, steeples, and other non-HABITABLE
architectural features are permitted on roofs.
xii. FORECOURTs
a). FORECOURTs must have a width and depth of at
least twelve (12) feet and a maximum height to
width ratio of two to one (2:1).
b). A FORECOURT must be enclosed by walls on
three sides.
c). BUILDING COMPONENTS may ENCROACH into a
FORECOURT.
d). Driveways, parking spaces, passenger dropoffs,
garage entrances, loading and service
areas, exhaust vents, mechanical equipment,
and refUSE or recycling storage are not
permitted in FORECOURTs.
5. Uses and Features
a. FACADE Composition
i. FENESTRATION
a). FENESTRATION must be provided as indicated
for each BUILDING TYPE and is calculated as a
percentage of the area of a FACADE.
i). For buildings with GROUND STORY commercial
spaces, GROUND STORY FENESTRATION is
measured between two (2) feet and twelve
(12) feet above the finished floor of the
GROUND STORY.
ii). For all other buildings and all other stories,
FENESTRATION is measured independently for
Figure 2.4.5 (a) FENESTRATION
Upper
Story
Upper
Story
Ground
Story
12 feet
2 feet
Blank
Wall
Blank
Wall
Figure 2.4.5 (b) Entrance Spacing
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 31
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Standards & Measurements
each STORY, from the top of a finished floor
to the top of the finished floor above.
b). FENESTRATION enclosed with glazing may be
included in the calculation if it meets the
following criteria:
i). For GROUND STORY FENESTRATION, glazing must
have at least sixty percent (60%) VISIBLE
LIGHT TRANSMITTANCE (VLT) and may have
up to fifteen percent (15%) VISIBLE LIGHT
REFLECTANCE (VLR).
ii). For UPPER STORY FENESTRATION, glazing must
have must at least forty percent (40%) VLT
and may have up to fifteen percent (15%)
VLR.
ii. BLANKWALL Area
a). BLANK WALL area is any portion of a FACADE
that does not include FENESTRATION (doors and
windows) and surface relief through the USE of
columns, CORNICEs, moldings, PIERs, PILASTERs,
sills, SIGN BANDS, other equivalent architectural
features that either recess or project from the
average plane of the FACADE by at least four (4)
inches.
b). BLANK WALL area limitations apply both vertically
and horizontally for all stories of a BUILDING for
any FACADE.
b. USE & Occupancy
i. Pedestrian ACCESS
a). Buildings must have at least one (1) PRINCIPAL
ENTRANCE. PRINCIPAL ENTRANCEs must be located
on the FACADE, provide both ingress and egress,
and be operable at all times.
b). Multi-STORY buildings with GROUND STORY
commercial spaces must have at least one (1)
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE for each commercial space in
addition to any PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE(s) necessary
for accessing the upper stories.
c). PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE spacing is measured as the
distance between center line of doors along a
FACADE.
d). All residential buildings developed after the
adoption date of this Ordinance must provide
at least one (1) zero step entrance at the front,
side, or rear of the building. Per Article VI of
the Code of Ordinances, City of Somerville,
Massachusetts, reasonable accommodation
may be requested to comply with this
standard.
e). Light wells may be provided within the
FRONTAGE AREA to provide light and ACCESS into
lower stories or to accommodate a change in
grade across the front of a BUILDING.
f). The FRONTAGE AREA of a LOT may be terraced
to accommodate pedestrian ACCESS where a
change in grade exists across the front of a
BUILDING.
ii. HABITABLE Space Depth
a). GROUND STORY DWELLING UNITs must have a
HABITABLE space at least twenty (20) feet in
depth, measured as the distance from the
FACADE towards the interior of the BUILDING.
iii. GROUND STORY Commercial Space
a). Any building fronting a PEDESTRIAN STREET must
provide GROUND STORY commercial space for
one hundred percent (100%) of the total width
of the building, excluding lobbies for UPPER
STORY USEs, means of egress, and any building
systems rooms.
b). Required commercial space may be
provided to one or more tenants and certain
BUILDING TYPEs may require more than one (1)
commercial space.
iv. Commercial Space Depth
a). At least seventy percent (70%) of the LEASABLE
FLOOR AREA of any GROUND STORY commercial
space must have the commercial space depth
indicated for each BUILDING TYPE, measured
as the distance from the FACADE towards the
interior of a building.
v. DWELLING UNITs per LOT
a). The total combined number of DWELLING UNITs,
that are permitted within a PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE
and ACCESSORY BUILDING TYPE on the same LOT.
vi. DWELLING UNITs
a). The minimum or maximum number of DWELLING
UNITs permitted for a BUILDING TYPE.
b). Existing structures may not be MODIFIED
Figure 2.4.5 (c) Commercial Space Depth
32 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
2. GLOSSARY & OVERVIEW
Standards & Measurements
to conflict with number of DWELLING UNITS
permitted for each BUILDING TYPE.
vii. GROSS FLOOR AREA per DWELLING UNIT (GFA/DU)
a). The maximum number of DWELLING UNITs
permitted for a BUILDING TYPE is equal to the
total gross floor area of the building, minus the
gross floor area of any underground structured
parking and minus the net floor area of any
above ground structured parking, divided by
the GFA/DU indicated for each BUILDING TYPE.
i). The GFA/DU permitted for each BUILDING
TYPE is different for buildings on different
sized LOTS, NET ZERO READY BUILDINGS, and
100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
viii. Outdoor AMENITY SPACE
a). When required for a BUILDING TYPE, outdoor
AMENITY SPACE must be provided as a balcony,
DECK, PATIO, porch, roof DECK, roof terrace, or
yard that is directly ACCESSible by a doorway
from a HABITABLE room within the DWELLING UNIT
the outdoor AMENITY SPACE is meant to serve.
b). Each outdoor AMENITY SPACE must provide an
unobstructed area of at least twenty-four (24)
square feet that may be USEd for seating.
c). Buildings with seven (7) or more DWELLING UNITs
may provide shared outdoor AMENITY SPACE,
provided that the space includes the total
seating area required for each DWELLING UNIT that
the shared space is meant to serve.
6. Building Components
a. Dimensions
i. Projection
ii. SETBACK ENCROACHMENT
a). The distance a component may ENCROACH into
a required SETBACK, provided that at least two
(2) feet is maintained from the vertical plane of
any SIDE LOT LINE.
iii. CLEARANCE
iv. Seating Area, Clear
b. Bays
c. Entry Canopys
d. Stoops
e. Porticos
f. Porchs
g. Engaged Porches
h. All Dormers
i. If the face wall of a dormer is oriented toward the
FRONT LOT LINE, the SETBACK requirements are similarly
oriented.
i. Window Dormers
j. Shed Dormers
k. Cross GABLEs
l. Projecting GABLEs
m. Side Wings
n. Rear Additions
3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
3.1 NEIGHBORHOOD RESIDENCE (NR) ....................35
Character Description 35
Intent 36
Purpose 36
Applicability 36
Development Review 36
Building Types 36
Building Components 61
Building Design Standards 68
Architectural Design Guidelines 69
Use Provisions 70
Development Standards 71
Parking & Mobility 72
Public Realm 73
3.2 URBAN RESIDENCE (UR) .....................................75
Character Description 75
Intent 76
Purpose 76
Applicability 76
Development Review 76
Building Types 76
Building Components 97
Building Design Standards 103
Architectural Design Guidelines 103
Use Provisions 104
Development Standards 105
Parking & Mobility 106
Public Realm 107

SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 35
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1 NEIGHBORHOOD RESIDENCE (NR)
1. Character Description
The Neighborhood Residence district is characterized by a variety of small and moderate FLOOR PLATE, one-, two-, and
three-unit PRINCIPAL BUILDINGs with minimal front and side SETBACKs to help prioritize rear yard space. The district is almost
entirely residential, with occasional neighborhood stores, schools, places of worsHIP, and arts related USEs and on
advantageous SITEs.
36 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
2. Intent
a. To implement the objectives of the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
of the City of Somerville.
b. To conserve already established areas of detached and
semi-detached residential buildings.
3. Purpose
a. To permit the DEVELOPMENT of one-, two-, and three-unit
detached and semi-detached residential buildings on
individual LOTs.
b. To permit contextual MODIFICATIONs to existing detached
and semi-detached residential buildings.
c. To permit the adaptive reUSE of certain existing
nonconforming buildings for arts & creative enterprise
and retail USEs compatible with residential areas.
d. To create DWELLING UNIT types, sizes, and BEDROOM counts
ideal for larger hoUSEholds in hoUSEs, semi-attached
hoUSEs, duplexes, and triple DECKers.
e. To create DWELLING UNIT types, sizes, and bedroom
counts ideal for smaller households in cottages and
backyard cottages.
4. Applicability
a. The section is applicable to all real property within
the Neighborhood Residence district as shown on
the maps of the Official Zoning Atlas of the City of
Somerville.
5. Development Review
a. DEVELOPMENT review is subject to the provisions of
Article 15: Administration of this Ordinance.
b. All DEVELOPMENT, excluding NORMAL MAINTENANCE, requires
the submittal of a development review application to
the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the issuance of a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance prior to the issuance of a BUILDING
Permit or Certificate of Occupancy.
c. Proposed DEVELOPMENT may or may not necessitate the
need for Subdivision Plan Approval, Site Plan Approval,
a Special Permit, or a Hardship Variance based on
the nature of the proposal. In such cases, additional
DEVELOPMENT review is required in accordance with
Article 15: Administration.
i. The Zoning Board of Appeals is the decision
making authority for all DEVELOPMENT that requires
Site Plan Approval, a Special Permit, or a Hardship
Variance in the Neighborhood Residence district.
d. Upon verification that no additional DEVELOPMENT review
is necessary, or completion of the required DEVELOPMENT
review, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall issue a Zoning
Compliance Certificate to certify compliance with the
provisions and procedures of this Ordinance.
6. Building Types
a. One (1) PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE and one (1) ACCESSORY
BUILDING TYPE are permitted on each LOT.
b. Unless otherwise specified, the following PRINCIPAL
BUILDING TYPEs are permitted in the Neighborhood
Residence district:
i. Cottage
ii. Detached HoUSE
iii. Semi-Detached HoUSE
iv. Duplex
v. Detached Triple DECKer
c. The detached triple DECKer BUILDING TYPE is permitted
only on a compliant LOT that is either ABUTTING at the
side or directly oppoSITE on any THOROUGHFARE from a LOT
with an existing triple DECKer BUILDING TYPE.
d. The following ACCESSORY BUILDING TYPEs are permitted
by Site Plan Approval in the Neighborhood Residence
district:
i. Backyard Cottage
e. ACCESSory STRUCTURES are regulated according to Article
10: DEVELOPMENT Standards of this Ordinance.
SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 37
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.7 Cottage
A small FLOOR PLATE, detached, PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE with
one (1) DWELLING UNIT. The cottage is the smallest type of
detached PRINCIPAL BUILDING in Somerville. Two variants exist,
one with a half-STORY under pitched roof and another with a
full height second STORY and a shallow pitched roof or a FLAT
ROOF.
The following images are examples from Somerville of the
cottage BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for illustrative
purposes.
38 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.7 Cottage (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) -- A Primary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
No Driveway ACCESS 32 ft B Secondary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 32 ft C Side SETBACK (min) --
Front Driveway ACCESS 34 ft No Driveway ACCESS 5 ft
B LOT DEPTH (min) 70 ft Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 5 ft
Front Driveway ACCESS 3 ft
Lot Development Sum of Side SETBACKs (min) --
C LOT Coverage (max) 60% No Driveway ACCESS 10 ft
D GREEN SCORE -- Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 10 ft
Minimum 0.35 Front Driveway ACCESS 12 ft
Ideal 0.40 D Rear SETBACK (min) 20 ft
E Building Separation (min) 10 ft
Parking Setbacks
F Primary Front SETBACK (min) 20 ft
G Secondary Front SETBACK (min) 10 ft
1 See §3.1.13.a Contextual Front SETBACKs
SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 39
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.7 Cottage (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Mass Facade Composition
FACADE Build Out (min) 60% A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
A Width (min/max) 22 ft 26 ft B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
B Depth (min/max) 24 ft 32 ft
GROUND STORY Elevation (min) 2 ft Use & Occupancy
C STORY Height (min/max) 10 ft 12 ft DWELLING UNITs per LOT (max) 1
D Number of Stories (max) 2 DWELLING UNITs (max) 1
Roof Type Flat, GABLE,
MANSARD
Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/ DU
40 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.7 Cottage (continued)
e. Reserved.
SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 41
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.8 Detached House
A moderate FLOOR PLATE, detached, PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE
with one (1) to three (3) vertically stacked DWELLING UNITs,
where each unit typically has its own front door. The hoUSE
is the most prevalent BUILDING TYPE in Somerville. When the
second floor is split between two DWELLING UNITs, this type
is referred to as a “Philly Style”.
The following images are examples from Somerville of
the hoUSE BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for illustrative
purposes.
42 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.8 Detached House (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) -- A Primary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
No Driveway ACCESS 32 ft B Secondary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 32 ft C Side SETBACK (min) --
Front Driveway ACCESS 34 ft No Driveway ACCESS 5 ft
B LOT DEPTH (min) 80 ft Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 5 ft
Front Driveway ACCESS 3 ft
Lot Development Sum of Side SETBACKs (min) --
C LOT Coverage (max) 60% No Driveway ACCESS 10 ft
D GREEN SCORE -- Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 10 ft
Minimum 0.35 Front Driveway ACCESS 12 ft
Ideal 0.40 D Rear SETBACK (min) 20 ft
E Building Separation (min) 10 ft
Parking Setbacks
F Primary Front SETBACK (min) 20 ft
G Secondary Front SETBACK (min) 10 ft
1 See §3.1.13.a Contextual Front SETBACKs
SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 43
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.8 Detached House (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Mass Facade Composition
FACADE Build Out (min) 50% A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
A Width (min/max) 22 ft 28 ft B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
B Depth (min/max) 28 ft 48 ft
GROUND STORY Elevation (min) 2 ft Use & Occupancy
C STORY Height (min/max) 10 ft 12 ft DWELLING UNITs per LOT (max) 3
D Number of STORIES (max) 2.5 DWELLING UNITs (max) 3
Roof Type
Flat, GABLE,
GAMBREL,
HIP, or
MANSARD
Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/ DU
44 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.8 Detached House (continued)
e. Housing
i. Multiple DWELLING UNITs within a detached hoUSE
BUILDING TYPE must be, generally, stacked one over
the other. Common examples are shown in Figure
3.1.8. DWELLING UNITs that are side-by-side or frontto-
back in orientation are not permitted.
f. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a detached hoUSE PRINCIPAL BUILDING
must provide AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITs as specified
on Table 3.1.8.
iii. Required ADUs must be priced as a Tier 3 ADU.
Figure 3.1.8 DU Orientation Examples
2
1
3
2
1
3
2
3
1
Table 3.1.8 Required ADUs
Dwelling Units per Lot Required ADUs
0 to 2 units None
3 units 1 unit
"Philly Style"
SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 45
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.9 Semi-Detached House
A moderate FLOOR PLATE, semi-detached, PRINCIPAL BUILDING
TYPE with one (1) to three (3) vertically stacked DWELLING
UNITs. A semi-detached hoUSE must be attached on one side
to another semi-detached hoUSE by a PARTY WALL.
The following images are examples from Somerville of the
semi-detached hoUSE BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for
illustrative purposes.
46 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.9 Semi-Detached House (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) -- A Primary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
No Driveway ACCESS 27 ft B Secondary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 27 ft C Side SETBACK (min) --
Front Driveway ACCESS 30 ft No Driveway ACCESS 5 ft
B LOT DEPTH (min) 80 ft Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 5 ft
Front Driveway ACCESS 8 ft
Lot Development Party Line SETBACK (min) 0 ft
C LOT Coverage (max) 60% Sum of Side SETBACKs (min) --
D GREEN SCORE -- No Driveway ACCESS 5 ft
Minimum 0.35 Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 5 ft
Ideal 0.40 Front Driveway ACCESS 8 ft
D Rear SETBACK (min) 20 ft
E Building Separation (min) 10 ft
Parking Setbacks
F Primary Front SETBACK (min) 20 ft
G Secondary Front SETBACK (min) 10 ft
1 See §3.1.13.a Contextual Front SETBACKs
SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 47
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.9 Semi-Detached House (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
FACADE Build Out (min) 50% A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
A Width (min/max) 22 ft 28 ft B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
B Depth (min/max) 28 ft 48 ft
GROUND STORY Elevation (min) 2 ft Use & Occupancy
C STORY Height (min/max) 10 ft 12 ft DWELLING UNITs per LOT (max) 3
D Number of Stories (max) 2.5 DWELLING UNITs (max) 3
Roof Type Flat, GABLE,
HIP, MANSARD
Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/ DU
48 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.9 Semi-Detached House (continued)
e. Housing
i. Multiple DWELLING UNITs within a semi-detached
hoUSE BUILDING TYPE must be, generally, stacked one
over the other. Common examples are shown in
Figure 3.1.9. DWELLING UNITs that are side-by-side or
front-to-back in orientation are not permitted.
f. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a detached hoUSE PRINCIPAL BUILDING
must provide AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITs as specified
on Table 3.1.9.
iii. Required ADUs must be priced as a Tier 3 ADU.
Table 3.1.9 Required ADUs
Dwelling Units per Lot Required ADUs
0 to 2 units None
3 units 1 unit
Figure 3.1.9 DU Orientation Examples
SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 49
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.10 Duplex
A moderate FLOOR PLATE, detached, PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE
with two (2) side-by-side DWELLING UNITs. When occupying a
CORNER LOT, the duplex my have DWELLING UNITs attached back
to side so that one (1) DWELLING UNIT is oriented toward each
frontage.
The following images are primarily examples from
Somerville of the duplex BUILDING TYPE and are intended only
for illustrative purposes.
50 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.10 Duplex (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) -- A Primary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
No Driveway ACCESS 50 ft B Secondary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 50 ft C Side SETBACK (min) --
Front Driveway ACCESS 52 ft No Driveway ACCESS 5 ft
B LOT DEPTH (min) 70 ft Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 5 ft
Front Driveway ACCESS 3 ft
Lot Development Sum of Side SETBACKs (min) --
C LOT Coverage (max) 60% No Driveway ACCESS 10 ft
GREEN SCORE -- Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 10 ft
Minimum 0.35 Front Driveway ACCESS 12 ft
Ideal 0.40 D Rear SETBACK (min) 20 ft
E Building Separation (min) 10 ft
Parking Setbacks
F Primary Front SETBACK (min) 20 ft
G Secondary Front SETBACK (min) 10 ft
1 See §3.1.13.a Contextual Front SETBACKs
SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 51
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.10 Duplex (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
FACADE Build Out (min) 50% A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
A Width (min/max) 40 ft 56 ft B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
B Depth (min/max) 30 ft 52 ft
GROUND STORY Elevation (min) 2 ft Use & Occupancy
C STORY Height (min/max) 10 ft 12 ft DWELLING UNITs per LOT (max) 2
D Number of Buildings (max) 2.5 stories DWELLING UNITs (max) 2
Roof Type Flat, GABLE,
HIP, MANSARD
Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/ DU
52 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.10 Duplex (continued)
e. Housing
i. The two (2) DWELLING UNITs within a duplex BUILDING
TYPE must be side-by-side and both must be
oriented toward the FRONT LOT LINE. On CORNER LOTs,
one DWELLING UNIT may be oriented toward each
FRONT LOT LINE resulting in units that are back-to-side
in orientation. See Figure 3.1.10. DWELLING UNITs that
are stacked one over the other or attached front to
back in orientation are not permitted.
Figure 3.1.10 DU Orientation Examples
SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 53
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.11 Detached Triple Decker
A moderate FLOOR PLATE, detached, PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE
with two (2) to three (3) vertically stacked DWELLING UNITs.
The following images are examples from Somerville of the
detached triple DECKer BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for
illustrative purposes.
54 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.11 Detached Triple Decker (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) -- A Primary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
No Driveway ACCESS 34 ft B Secondary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 34 ft C Side SETBACK (min) --
Front Driveway ACCESS 36 ft No Driveway ACCESS 5 ft
B LOT DEPTH (min) 80 ft Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 5 ft
Front Driveway ACCESS 3 ft
Lot Development Sum of Side SETBACKs (min) --
C LOT Coverage (max) 60% No Driveway ACCESS 10 ft
D GREEN SCORE -- Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 10 ft
Minimum 0.35 Front Driveway ACCESS 12 ft
Ideal 0.40 D Rear SETBACK (min) 20 ft
E Building Separation (min) 10 ft
Parking Setbacks
F Primary Front SETBACK (min) 20 ft
G Secondary Front SETBACK (min) 10 ft
1 See §3.1.13.a Contextual Front SETBACKs
SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 55
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.11 Detached Triple Decker (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
FACADE Build Out (min) 60% A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
A Width (min/max) 24 ft 30 ft B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
B Depth (min/max) 36 ft 50 ft
GROUND STORY Elevation (min) 2 ft Use & Occupancy
C STORY Height (min/max) 10 ft 12 ft DWELLING UNITs per LOT (max) 3
D Number of StorieS (max) 3 stories DWELLING UNITs (max) 3
Roof Type Flat Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/ DU
56 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.11 Detached Triple Decker (continued)
e. Housing
i. Multiple DWELLING UNITs within a detached triple
DECKer BUILDING TYPE must be, generally, stacked one
over the other. Common examples are shown in
Figure 3.1.11. DWELLING UNITs that are side-by-side or
front-to-back in orientation are not permitted.
f. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a detached triple DECKer must
provide AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITs as specified on
Table 3.1.11.
iii. Required ADUs must be priced as a Tier 3 ADU.
Table 3.1.11 Required ADUs
Dwelling Units per Lot Required ADUs
0 to 2 units None
3 units 1 unit
Figure 3.1.11 DU Orientation Examples
2
1
3
2
3
1
SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 57
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.12 Backyard Cottage
A small FLOOR PLATE, detached, ACCESSory building type
typically providing space for one (1) small dwelling unit,
a home occupation, a playhouse for children, or vehicular
parking on the same lot as a principal building type.
The following images are examples of the backyard
cottage accessory building type and are intended only for
illustrative purposes.
58 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.12 Backyard Cottage (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) -- A Primary Front SETBACK (min) 60 ft
No Driveway ACCESS 32 ft B Secondary Front SETBACK (min) 10 ft
Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 32 ft C Side SETBACK (min) 3 ft
Front Driveway ACCESS 34 ft E Rear SETBACK (min) 3 ft
B LOT DEPTH (min) 80 ft ALLEY 3 or 20 ft
No ALLEY 3 ft
Lot Development E Building Separation (min) 10 ft
C LOT Coverage (max) per PRINCIPAL
BUILDING
D GREEN SCORE (min) per PRINCIPAL
BUILDING
SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 59
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.12 Backyard Cottage (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
A Width (max) 24 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) --
B Depth (max) 32 ft Residential Use 15% 50%
C Floor plate (max) 576 sf Vehicular Parking 0% 50%
D Story Height (max) 12 ft B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
E Number of Stories (max) 1.5 stories
Roof Type Flat, Gable, Use & Occupancy
DWELLING UNITs per LOT (max) per PRINCIPAL
BUILDING
DWELLING UNITs (max) 1
60 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
3.1.12 Backyard Cottage (continued)
e. Housing
i. Reserved
f. Development Benefits
i. Development is subject to the provisions of Article
12: Development Benefits of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 12, the provisions of Article 12
apply.
ii. Development of a Backyard Cottage accessory
building may or may not require a dwelling unit
to be an affordable dwelling unit based on the
combined number dwelling units provided in the
principal building and the backyard cottage. See
the standards for each principal building type for
additional information.
iii. Required ADUs must be priced as a Tier 3 ADU.
g. Design Standards
i. A three (3) foot wide paved walkway capable of
allowing an ambulance cot to be wheeled to and
from the Backyard Cottage is required.
ii. Utility services for the Backyard Cottage must be
buried underground.
iii. By order of the Fire Prevention Bureau, Backyard
Cottages occupied by any permitted Residential
principal use must have an automatic sprinkler
system unless they are on a corner lot, a lot with a
driveway leading to the Backyard Cottage, or a lot
abutting an alley.
SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 61
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
13. Building Components
a. BUILDING COMPONENTS are ACCESSory elements attached to
the MAIN MASSING of a PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
b. BUILDING COMPONENTS are permitted as specified on Table
3.1.13.
c. Building components that are not identified on Table
3.1.13 are prohibited.
d. Unless otherwise specified, BUILDING COMPONENTS
may attach to other BUILDING COMPONENTS to create
assemblies of components.
Table 3.1.13 Building Components
Cottage
Detached House
Semi-Detached House
Duplex
Detached Triple Decker
Backyard Cottage
Entry Canopy P P P P P P
Stoop P P P P P P
Portico P P P P P P
Projecting Porch P P P P P P
Engaged Porch P P P P N N
Bay P P P P P N
Dormer P P P P N P
Shed Dormer P P P P N P
Cross Gable P P P P N P
Projecting Gable P P P P N N
Side Wing P P P P N N
Rear Addition P P P P N N
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
62 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
e. Entry Canopy
i. An entry canopy is a wall-mounted structure that
provides shade and weather protection over the
entrance of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Width (min) See
ii. Standards
B Projection (max) 3 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
D SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) --
Front 100%
Side & Rear 0 ft
ii. Standards
a). Entry canopies must be visually supported by
brackets, cables, or rods.
b). The width of an entry canopy must be equal
to or greater than the width of the doorway
surround, trim, or exterior casing it is mounted
above.
f. Stoop
i. A stoop is a set of stairs with a landing that
provides ACCESS to the entrance of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Landing Width (min) 4 ft
B Landing Depth (min) 4 ft
C SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) --
Front 100%
Side & Rear 0 ft
ii. Standards
a). Stairs may be recessed into the BUILDING FACADE
when the BUILDING is set back four (4) feet or
less.
b). Stairs are not permitted to ENCROACH onto any
ABUTTING sidewalk.
c). Stairs may be built perpendicular or parallel to
the BUILDING FACADE, but must lead directly to
ground level or an ABUTTING sidewalk.
SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 63
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
g. Portico
i. A portico is a raised platform with a roof supported
by columns, PIERs, or posts and set of stairs with
a landing that provides ACCESS to the entrance of a
BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Landing Width (min) 4 ft
B Landing Depth (max) 4 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
D SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) --
Front 100%
Side & Rear 0 ft
ii. Standards
a). Stairs are not permitted to ENCROACH onto any
ABUTTING sidewalk.
b). Stairs may be built perpendicular or parallel to
the BUILDING FACADE, but must lead directly to
ground level or an ABUTTING sidewalk.
h. Porch
i. A porch is a wide, raised platform with a roof
supported by columns, PIERs, or posts; an area
for seating; and set of stairs with a landing that
provides ACCESS to the entrance of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Width (min) 12 ft
B Projection (min) 6 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
D FURNITURE AREA, Clear (min) 6 ft x 6 ft
D SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) --
Front 100%
Side & Rear 0 ft
ii. Standards
a). Stairs are not permitted to ENCROACH onto any
ABUTTING sidewalk.
b). Porch railings must permit visual supervision of
the PUBLIC REALM through the posts and rails.
c). A porch may be screened provided the
percentage of window area to wall area is
seventy percent (70%) or greater. Permanent
enclosure of a porch to create year-round living
space is not permitted.
d). Porches projecting from upper stories are not
required to provide stairs and the upper most
porch is not required to have a roof.
64 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
i. Engaged Porch
i. An engaged porch is a porch attached to a BUILDING
at two sides, one to the FACADE and the other to a
mud room or entry foyer.
Dimensions
A Width (min) 12 ft
B Depth (min) 6 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
D FURNITURE AREA, Clear (min) 6 ft x 6 ft
Mud Room/Foyer Width (max) 40% of MAIN
BODY width
E SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) --
Front 100%
Side & Rear 0 ft
ii. Standards
a). Stairs are not permitted to ENCROACH onto any
ABUTTING sidewalk.
b). Porch railings must permit visual supervision of
the PUBLIC REALM through the posts and rails.
c). An engaged porch may be screened provided
that the percentage of window area to wall
area is seventy percent (70%) or greater.
Permanent enclosure of a porch to create yearround
living space is not permitted.
d). Engaged porches are only permitted at the first
story of a building.
j. Bay Window
i. A bay window is an assembly of windows
projecting from a building to provide additional
HABITABLE space, increased light, multi-directional
views, and ARTICULATION to an exterior wall.
Dimensions
A Width (max) 16 ft
B Projection (max) 3 ft
C Height (max)
Height of
BUILDING in
Stories
D SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) --
Front 3 ft
Side & Rear 0 ft
ii. Standards
a). Bay windows, including box and bow windows,
must include at least three (3) windows.
b). The cumulative width of multiple bays may
equal up to fifty percent (50%) of the width of
the exterior wall from which the bays project.
c). Bays projecting over the sidewalk of a public
THOROUGHFARE must have at least two (2) stories
of CLEARANCE and be compliant with all City
Ordinances.
SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 65
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
k. Dormer
i. A dormer is a window space with a GABLE, HIP, or
arched roof that projects perpendicularly from a
pitched roof below. Dormer windows provide light
to the HABITABLE space of a half-STORY.
Dimensions
A Width (max) window(s)
width +18 in
Side Wall SETBACK (min) --
Roof with eave 0 ft
Roof without eave 1 ft
B Front & Rear Wall SETBACK (min) 3 ft
C Ridge SETBACK (min) 1 ft
D Roof Slope (min) 4:12 (18.43º)
E Dormer Separation (min) 50% of
dormer width
ii. Standards
a). The face wall of a dormer window may not
project beyond the exterior wall of the BUILDING
and may not interrupt the eave of the roof.
b). Dormer windows may be combined with a
shed dormer(s) to create a Nantucket dormer.
c). The cumulative width of a single, multiple, or
attached combinations of dormers may equal
up to fifty percent (50%) of the eave length of
the roof below.
l. Shed Dormer
i. A shed dormer is window space with a shed roof
that projects perpendicularly from a pitched roof
below. Shed dormers provide light and additional
HABITABLE space to a half-STORY.
Dimensions
A Width (max) window(s)
width + 36 in
Side Wall SETBACK (min) --
Roof with eave 0 ft
Roof without eave 1 ft
B Front & Rear Wall SETBACK (min) 3 ft
C Ridge SETBACK (min) 1 ft
D Roof Slope (min) 4:12 (18.43º)
E Dormer Separation (min) 50% of
dormer width
ii. Standards
a). The face wall of a shed dormer may not project
beyond the exterior wall of the BUILDING and
may not interrupt the eave of the roof.
b). Shed dormers may be combined with a dormer
window(s) to create a Nantucket dormer.
c). The cumulative width of a single, multiple, or
attached combinations of dormers may equal
up to fifty percent (50%) of the eave length of
the roof below.
66 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
m. Cross Gable
i. A cross GABLE is a sloped roof that projects
perpendicularly from the roof of a BUILDING to
provide significant additional HABITABLE space to a
half-STORY.
Dimensions
A Width (max)
Equal to the
width of the
FACADE or side
wall of the
BUILDING, which
ever is less
FENESTRATION (min) 15%
ii. Standards
a). The ridge and eave of the cross GABLE must be
structurally integrated into the ridge and eave
of the MAIN ROOF.
b). Cross GABLEs never have cheek walls.
n. Projecting Gable
i. A projecting GABLE is an extension of the wall
enclosing a pitched roof that expands the size of an
attic or the HABITABLE space of a half-STORY.
Dimensions
A Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max)
Same as
the furthest
projecting
Bay or Porch
B CLEARANCE (min)
Height of
BUILDING in
Stories
ii. Standards
a). A projecting GABLE may extend only forward of
the FACADE of a BUILDING.
b). A projecting GABLE is permitted only when a Bay
or Porch is also present.
SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 67
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
o. Side Wing
i. A side wing is a multi-STORY extension from one or
more side walls of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A SETBACK from FACADE (min) 5 ft
B Width (max) 50% of MAIN
MASSING Width
C Depth (max) 100% of Main
Mass Width
D Height (max)
Same as
PRINCIPAL
BUILDING
SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) --
Front 0 ft
Side & Rear 0 ft
ii. Standards
a). Side wings must include a similarly style roof
as the PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
p. Rear Addition
i. A rear addition is an extension from the rear wall of
a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A SETBACK from Exterior Side Walls (min) 1 ft
FLOOR PLATE (max)
50% of
the FLOOR
PLATE of the
PRINCIPAL
BUILDING
B Height (max) Two (2)
Stories
SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) --
Front 0 ft
Side & Rear 0 ft
ii. Standards
a). A rear addition may extend only backward from
the rear of a BUILDING.
b). The slope of any pitched roof of a rear addition
must be equal to or less than slope of the roof
of the MAIN MASS of the BUILDING.
68 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
14. Building Design Standards
a. Contextual Front SETBACKs
i. Notwithstanding the front SETBACKs identified for
each BUILDING TYPE, new construction must have a
contextual front SETBACK as follows:
a). If the subject LOT is an INTERIOR LOT or KEY LOT,
the minimum and maximum front SETBACKs
are equal to the actual distances that PRINCIPAL
BUILDINGS are set back from the FRONT LOT LINE on
the two ABUTTING LOTs of the same BLOCK FACE.
See Figure 3.1.14.
b). If the subject LOT is a CORNER LOT, the minimum
front SETBACK is equal to the actual distance
that the PRINCIPAL BUILDING is set back from the
FRONT LOT LINE on the ABUTTING LOT that is oriented
toward the same THOROUGHFARE.
c). If the LOT on either side of the subject LOT is
vacant, the minimum and maximum front
SETBACK identified for each BUILDING TYPE governs.
ii. The contextual front SETBACK provision does not
exempt any BUILDING from complying with the
maximum front SETBACK required for each BUILDING
TYPE.
Figure 3.1.14 Contextual Front SETBACK
Contextual
Front Setback
Actual
Setback
Actual
Setback
SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 69
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
15. Architectural Design Guidelines
a. Privacy
i. GROUND STORY DWELLING UNITs should be elevated
above the grade of any adjacent sidewalk so that
the window sills of the DWELLING UNIT are at or above
the eye-level of passing pedestrians. This elevation
change maintains privacy for occupants while also
encouraging open blinds or curtains to allow natural
daylight into the unit.
ii. Dormer and sidewall window locations should
break the direct line of sight between neighboring
properties to every extent practicable. Translucent
glass on the bottom half of windows or
strategically placed landscape elements should be
utilized if it is not practical to off-set windows in
such a way as to minimize privacy impacts.
iii. Outdoor AMENITY SPACEs that are elevated, such as
roof DECKs, fully projecting balconies, and UPPER
STORY rear porches should provide sight-obscuring
visual screening at the sides to increase privacy,
security, and to limit views of ABUTTING properties
from elevated vantage points.
Figure 3.1.15 Visual Screening Example
70 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
16. Use Provisions
a. General
i. The USE of real property is subject to the provisions
of Article 9: USE Provisions of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 9, the provisions of Article 9 apply.
ii. USE categories are permitted as specified on Table
3.1.16.
iii. USE categories not identified on Table 3.1.16 are
prohibited.
iv. All USEs must comply with any USE-specific
standards applicable for each USE in §9.2 USE
Definitions & Limitations.
v. USEs permitted by Special Permit require additional
DEVELOPMENT review in accordance with §15.2.1
Special Permits.
b. Adaptive Re-USE of Specific Buildings
i. The USE of any PRINCIPAL BUILDING constructed before
the adoption date of this Ordinance for a nonresidential
USE that is considered nonconforming
in the Neighborhood Residence district, as
established by permit records or other historical
documents accepted by the BUILDING OFFICIAL, or
any BUILDING USEd for municipal operations by the
City of Somerville may be changed to any USE
within the following PRINCIPAL USE categories in
accordance with Table 3.1 (b):
a). ARTISINAL PRODUCTION;
b). Arts Sales & Services;
c). Design SERVICES;
d). Shared Workspace & Arts Education;
e). CONSUMER GOODS; or
f). Fresh Food Market or Grocery.
Table 3.1.16 Permitted Uses
Use Category
Specific Use
NR
Arts & Creative Enterprise
Artisinal Production SP
Arts Sales & Service SP
Design Services SP
Shared Workspaces & Arts Education SP
Auto-Oriented
Motor Vehicle Parking (as noted below) --
Off-Site Accessory Parking SP
Civic & Institutional
Minor Utility Facility SP
Public Service P
Religious & Educational Uses Protected by
M.G.L. 40A. Sec. 3
P
Commercial Services
Day Care Service (as noted below) --
Child Day Care Center P
Lodging
Bed & Breakfast SP
Residential
Household Living P
Group Living (except as follows) SP
Community or Group Residence P
Dormitory or Chapter House N
Homeless Shelter N
Nursing Home/Assisted Living Facility N
Rooming House N
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 71
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
17. Development Standards
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
10: DEVELOPMENT Standards of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 10, the provisions of Article 10
apply.
b. SIGNs
i. A SIGN, individual numerals or letters, or a
nonelectrical nameplate identifying the property
address is required for all real property as follows:
a). Each GROUND STORY non-residential USE must
identify the STREET address either on the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE door or above or beside the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE of the USE.
b). All residential BUILDING TYPEs must identify the
STREET address either on the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE
door, above or beside the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE, or
on a mailbox.
ii. Address SIGNs must be made easily visible through
the USE of colors or materials that contrast with the
background material they are attached to and must
be conspicuously located to provide visibility from
the THOROUGHFARE that the BUILDING faces.
iii. Address SIGNs must be twelve (12) inches or less in
height and may include the name of the occupant.
Table 3.1.16 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use
NR
Retail Sales
Consumer Goods (except as follows) P
Alcohol Sales N
Firearms Sales N
Pet Store N
Fresh Food Market or Grocery Store P
Urban Agriculture
Farming (as noted below) --
Commercial Farming N
Community Farming P
Community Gardening P
Accessory Uses
Home Occupations (as noted below) --
Creative Studio P
Hobby Kennel SP
Home-Based Business P
Home-Based Day Care SP
Home Office P
Urban Agriculture (as noted below) --
Apiculture P
Aviculture P
Commercial Farming P
Residential Gardening P
Vehicle Parking, Accessory (except as follows) P
Home-Based Business Vehicle Parking SP
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
72 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
18. Parking & Mobility
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
11: Parking & Mobility of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 11, the provisions of Article 11 apply.
ii. Vehicular parking must be provided as specified on
Table 3.1.18, except as follows:
a). Non-residential USEs with five thousand (5,000)
square feet or less of gross LEASABLE FLOOR AREA
are exempt from any minimum requirements
of Table 3.1.18.
iii. There are no parking requirements for ACCESSORY
USEs.
iv. Parking may be shared between USEs on the same
LOT and buildings on the same BLOCK in accordance
with §11.3 SHARED PARKING.
v. DEVELOPMENT outside of a TRANSIT AREA may count
one (1) on STREET parking space for every twenty
(20) feet of LOT WIDTH toward any minimum parking
requirement if residential permit parking is
permitted along the same side of the STREET as the
LOT that the spaces will serve.
b. Type
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING may be provided as SURFACE
PARKING spaces, above ground STRUCTURED PARKING,
underground STRUCTURED PARKING, and on STREET
parking spaces.
c. Driveways
i. New driveways require a permit from the City
Engineer in accordance with Chapter 11, Article II,
Sec. 11-33 Driveway Construction of The Code of
Ordinances, City of Somerville, Massachusetts.
ii. Driveways must be paved with paving stones,
grass pavers, pervious concrete, or porous
asphalt unless graded to direct runoff onto onsite
permeable areas or granted a waiver by the
City Engineer to mitigate adverse site conditions.
Ribbon driveways are highly encouraged.
iii. Driveways are not permitted in the frontage area
between a building and the front lot line.
iv. Driveways may be up to twelve (12) feet in width.
See Figure 3.1.18.
v. Ribbon driveways must have paved tracks that are
at least two (2) feet in width and five (5) feet on
center with an unpaved area that is at least three
(3) feet in width. Figure 3.1.18.
vi. Driveways may provide access in whole or in
part on or across an abutting lot(s), provided that
an access easement exists between all PROPERTY
OWNERS.
vii. New driveways should accommodate at least two
(2) motor vehicles for every one (1) ON-STREET PARKING
SPACE that will be removed as a result of the new
driveway.
Table 3.1.18 Vehicular Parking
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Use Category
Specific Use
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Within a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min/max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min)
Arts & Creative Enterprise Uses
All Permitted Uses 1.0 / 10,000 sf 1.0 / 3,000 sf none 1.0 / 1,000 sf
Civic & Institutional
Religious & Educational Uses
Protected by M.G.L. 40A. Sec. 3
none none none none
Lodging Uses
Bed & Breakfast none 2.0 none 1.0 / 4 rooms
Residential Uses
All Permitted Uses none none none 1.0 / DU
Retail Sales Uses
All Permitted Uses 1.0 / 2,500 sf 1.0 / 10,000 sf none 1.0 / 1,500 sf
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - Dwelling Unit RU - Rooming Unit
1 See the Transit Area Map
SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 73
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
d. Parking Design
i. The design of all parking is subject to §11.1 Bicycle
Parking and §11.2 MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING of this
Ordinance.
ii. Tandem parking within the drive aisle of a driveway
is permitted and is counted as two (2) parking
spaces toward any minimum parking requirement.
e. Parking Location
i. Motor vehicle parking within the drive aisle of
a driveway is exempt from the parking setback
required for each building type.
ii. Required vehicular parking, excluding any required
handicapped parking, may be provided on a
contiguous LOT under the same ownership as the
LOT that the parking will serve as follows:
a). Pedestrian ACCESS to off-SITE vehicular parking
must be via a paved sidewalk or walkway.
b). A lease, recorded covenant, or other
comparable legal instrument guaranteeing long
term USE of the SITE must be provided to the
review board or BUILDING OFFICIAL and executed
and filed with the Registry of Deeds.
iii. For real property located in more than one
municipality, MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING need not be
located within the City of Somerville.
f. Unbundled Parking
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces must be rented or
leased as an option rather than a requirement of
the rental, lease, or purchase of a DWELLING UNIT or
non-residential floor space.
ii. Bicycle parking must be provided at no cost or fee
to customers, visitors, employees, tenants, and
residents.
g. Parking Relief
i. Relief from the parking standards of Table 3.1.18
requires a Special Permit.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing
relief from the parking standards of Table
3.1.18:
i). The supply and demand of on-STREET
parking in the neighborhood, as
determined through a parking study.
ii). MOBILITY MANAGEMENT programs and
services provided by the APPLICANT to
reduce the demand for parking.
iii). That parking provided in excess of any
maximum permitted does not result in the
increase in impervious LOT AREA.
19. Public Realm
a. Sidewalk CURB CUTs
i. A CURB CUT requires a permit from the City Engineer
and must be compliant with all City Ordinances.
ii. Unless otherwise specified, the City Engineer may
Figure 3.1.18 Driveway Dimensions
| SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Neighborhood Residence (NR)
12/16/19
not permit more than one (1) CURB CUT per FRONT LOT
LINE of a LOT.
iii. CURB CUTs are prohibited along all THOROUGHFAREs
designated as a PEDESTRIAN STREET.
iv. CURB CUTs must be located to minimize conflicts
with pedestrians and bicyclists and must have a
clear distance from fire hydrants, STREET TREES, utility
poles, and other furnishings as deemed necessary
by the City Engineer.
a). CURB CUTs for commercial or high-volume
driveways should be at least one-hundred
(100) feet from an unSIGNalized or SIGNalized
intersection.
b). CURB CUTs for residential driveways should be
at least twenty (20) feet from an unSIGNalized
intersection and at least forty (40) feet from a
SIGNalized intersection.
v. The interior width of a CURB CUT (between curb
stones) may be no wider than the driveway,
vehicular entrance, or loading facility it serves.
vi. A DRIVEWAY APRON may be installed only within
the furnishing zone of a sidewalk and must be
constructed in accordance with all standards
established by relevant City Departments.
vii. The grade, cross slope, and clear width of the
walkway of a sidewalk must be maintained
between the DRIVEWAY APRON and the ABUTTING
driveway. The appearance of the walkway (ie.
scoring pattern or paving material) must indicate
that, although a vehicle may cross, the area
traversed by a vehicle remains part of the sidewalk.
Figure 3.1.19 Sidewalk Curb Cuts
74
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 75
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2 URBAN RESIDENCE (UR)
1. Character Description
The Urban Residence district is characterized by a variety of moderate FLOOR PLATE, multi-unit buildings where outdoor
AMENITY SPACE is typically shared between the residents of a BUILDING. The district is almost entirely residential, with
occasional neighborhood stores, schools, places of worsHIP, and arts related USEs on advantageous SITEs. This district
can provide a transition between Neighborhood Residence and the Mid-Ride, HIGH-RISE, and Commercial Districts when
mapped accordingly.
76 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
2. Intent
a. To implement the objectives of the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
of the City of Somerville.
b. To create, maintain, and enhance areas appropriate for
multi-unit residential buildings.
3. Purpose
a. To permit the DEVELOPMENT of multi-unit detached and
semi-detached residential buildings on individual LOTs.
b. To permit contextual MODIFICATIONs to existing detached
and semi-detached residential buildings.
c. To permit the adaptive reUSE of certain existing
nonconforming buildings for arts & creative enterprise
and retail USEs compatible with residential areas.
d. To create DWELLING UNIT types, sizes, and BEDROOM counts
ideal for both large and small hoUSEholds in permitted
BUILDING TYPEs.
e. To permit increased residential density for apartment
buildings meeting the definition of a NET ZERO READY
BUILDING or 100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
4. Applicability
a. The section is applicable to all real property within the
Urban Residence district as shown on the maps of the
Official Zoning Atlas of the City of Somerville.
5. Development Review
a. DEVELOPMENT review is subject to the provisions of
Article 15: Administration of this Ordinance.
b. All DEVELOPMENT, excluding NORMAL MAINTENANCE, requires
the submittal of a development review application to
the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the issuance of a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance prior to the issuance of a BUILDING
Permit or Certificate of Occupancy.
c. A pre-submittal meeting, in accordance with Article 15:
Administration is recommended for all DEVELOPMENT.
d. Proposed DEVELOPMENT may or may not necessitate the
need for Subdivision Plan Approval, Site Plan Approval,
a Special Permit, or a Hardship Variance based on
the nature of the proposal. In such cases, additional
DEVELOPMENT review is required in accordance with
Article 15: Administration.
i. The Zoning Board of Appeals is the decision
making authority for all DEVELOPMENT that requires
a Special Permit or Hardship Variance in the Urban
Residence district.
e. Upon verification that no additional DEVELOPMENT review
is necessary, or completion of the required DEVELOPMENT
review, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall issue a Zoning
Compliance Certificate to certify compliance with the
provisions and procedures of this Ordinance.
6. Building Types
a. One (1) PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE is permitted on each LOT.
b. The following PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPEs are permitted in
the Urban Residence district:
i. Semi-Detached Triple DECKer
ii. Multi-Plex
iii. Apartment HoUSE
iv. Apartment Building
v. Row HoUSEs
c. ACCESSory STRUCTURES are regulated according to Article
10: DEVELOPMENT Standards of this Ordinance.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 77
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2.7 Semi-Detached Triple Decker
A moderate FLOOR PLATE, semi-detached, PRINCIPAL BUILDING
TYPE with three vertically stacked DWELLING UNITs. A semidetached
triple DECKer must be attached on one side to
another semi-detached triple DECKer by a PARTY WALL.
The following images are examples from Somerville of the
semi-detached triple DECKer BUILDING TYPE and are intended
only for illustrative purposes.
78 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2.7. Semi-Detached Triple Decker (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) -- A Primary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
No Driveway ACCESS 29 ft B Secondary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 29 ft C Side SETBACK (min)
Front Driveway ACCESS 32 ft PARTY LOT LINE 0 ft
B LOT DEPTH (min) 80 ft SIDE LOT LINE 5 ft
D Rear SETBACK (min) 20 ft
Lot Development
C LOT Coverage (max) 65% Parking Setbacks
D GREEN SCORE -- E Primary Front SETBACK (min) 20 ft
Minimum 0.35 F Secondary Front SETBACK (min) 10 ft
Ideal 0.40
1 See §3.2.13.a Contextual Front SETBACKs
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 79
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2.7. Semi-Detached Triple Decker (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Mass Facade Composition
FACADE Build Out (min) 60% A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
A Width (min/max) 24 ft 30 ft B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
B Depth (min/max) 36 ft 50 ft
GROUND STORY Elevation (min) 2 ft Use & Occupancy
C STORY Height (min/max) 10 ft 12 ft DWELLING UNITs (max) 3
D Number of Stories (max) 3 stories Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/ DU
Roof Type Flat
80 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2.7. Semi-Detached Triple Decker (continued)
e. Housing
i. Multiple DWELLING UNITs within a semi-detached
triple DECKer must be, generally, stacked one over
the other. Common examples are shown in Figure
3.2.7. Dwelling units that are side-by-side or frontto-
back in orientation are not permitted.
f. Development Benefits
i. Development is subject to the provisions of Article
12: Development Benefits of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 12, the provisions of Article 12
apply.
ii. Development of a detached triple decker must
provide affordable dwelling units as specified on
Table 3.1.11.
iii. Required ADUs must be priced as a Tier 3 ADU.
Table 3.2.7 Required ADUs
Dwelling Units per Lot Required ADUs
0 to 2 units None
3 units 1 unit
Figure 3.2.7 DU Orientation Examples
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 81
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2.8 Multi-Plex
A moderate FLOOR PLATE, detached, PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE
with four to six DWELLING UNITs.
The following images are examples from Somerville of the
multi-plex BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for illustrative
purposes.
82 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2.8. Multi-Plex (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) -- A Primary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
No Driveway ACCESS 46 ft B Secondary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 46 ft C Side SETBACK (min) 5 ft
Front Driveway ACCESS 49 ft D Rear SETBACK (min) 20 ft
B LOT DEPTH (min) 85 ft
Parking Setbacks
Lot Development E Primary Front SETBACK (min) 20 ft
C LOT Coverage (max) 65% F Secondary Front SETBACK (min) 10 ft
D GREEN SCORE --
Minimum 0.35 1 See §3.2.13.a Contextual Front SETBACKs
Ideal 0.40
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 83
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2.8. Multi-Plex (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Mass Facade Composition
FACADE Build Out (min) 70% A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
A Width (min/max) 36 ft 50 ft B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
B Depth (min/max) 44 ft 64 ft
GROUND STORY Elevation (min) 2 ft Use & Occupancy
C STORY Height (min/max) 10 ft 12 ft DWELLING UNITs (min/max) 4 6
D Number of Stories (max) 3 stories Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/ DU
Roof Type Flat, GABLE,
HIP
84 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2.8. Multi-Plex (continued)
e. Housing
i. The DWELLING UNITs of a multi-plex must be,
generally, stacked one over the other. Common
examples are shown in Figure 3.2.8. DWELLING
UNITs that are front-to-back in orientation are not
permitted.
f. Development Benefits
i. Development of an apartment building is subject
to the provisions of Article 12: Development
Benefits of this Ordinance. Where the provisions
of this section conflict with those of Article 12, the
provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. Development of a general building must provide
affordable dwelling units as specified on Table
3.2.8.
Table 3.2.8 Required ADUs
Total Dwelling Units Required ADUs
4 to 6 units 20% of units
Figure 3.2.8 DU Orientation Examples
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 85
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2.9 Apartment House
A moderate FLOOR PLATE, detached, PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE
with six to ten DWELLING UNITs designed to appear as a large
hoUSE.
The following images are primarily examples from
Somerville of the apartment hoUSE BUILDING TYPE and are
intended only for illustrative purposes.
86 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2.9 Apartment House (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) -- A Primary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
No Driveway ACCESS 38 ft B Secondary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 38 ft C Side SETBACK (min) 5 ft
Front Driveway ACCESS 41 ft D Rear SETBACK (min) 20 ft
B LOT DEPTH (min) 100 ft
Parking Setbacks
Lot Development E Primary Front SETBACK (min) 20 ft
C LOT Coverage (max) 65% F Secondary Front SETBACK (min) 10 ft
D GREEN SCORE --
Minimum 0.35 1 See §3.2.13.a Contextual Front SETBACKs
Ideal 0.40
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 87
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2.9 Apartment House (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Mass Facade Composition
FACADE Build Out (min) 70% A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
A Width (min/max) 28 ft 56 ft B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
B Depth (min/max) 44 ft 68 ft
GROUND STORY Elevation (min) 2 ft Use & Occupancy
C STORY Height (min/max) 10 ft 12 ft DWELLING UNITs (min/max) 4 10
D Number of Stories (max) 2.5 stories Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/ DU
Roof Type
GABLE, HIP,
MANSARD
88 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2.9 Apartment House (continued)
e. Housing
i. Reserved
f. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of an apartment hoUSE must provide
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS as specified on Table 3.2.9.
Table 3.2.9 Required ADUs
Total Dwelling Units Required ADUs
4 to 10 units 20% of units
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 89
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2.10 Apartment Building
A moderate FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE
with multiple DWELLING UNITs primarily ACCESSed from a single
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE and interior hallway or stairway.
The following images are examples of the apartment
BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
90 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2.10 Apartment Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) -- A Primary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
No Driveway ACCESS 55 ft B Secondary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 55 ft C Side SETBACK (min) 5 ft
Front Driveway ACCESS 58 ft Side SETBACK ABUTTING NR (min) 20 ft
B LOT DEPTH (min) 90 ft D Rear SETBACK (min) 10 ft
Rear SETBACK ABUTTING NR (min) 20 ft
Lot Development
C LOT Coverage (max) 65% Parking Setbacks
D GREEN SCORE -- E Primary Front SETBACK (min) --
Minimum 0.35 SURFACE PARKING 20 ft
Ideal 0.40 STRUCTURED PARKING 20 ft
F Secondary Front SETBACK (min) --
SURFACE PARKING 10 ft
STRUCTURED PARKING 10 ft
1 See §3.2.13.a Contextual Front SETBACKs
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 91
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2.10 Apartment Building (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Mass Facade Composition
FACADE Build Out (min) 80% A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
A FLOOR PLATE (max) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
with FORECOURT 16,000 sf
without a FORECOURT 7,000 sf Use & Occupancy
GROUND STORY Elevation (min) 2 ft GROSS FLOOR AREA per DU (min) --
B STORY Height (min/max) 10 ft 12 ft LOT AREA < 5,000 sf 1,500
C Number of Stories (min) 2 4 LOT AREA >= 5,000 sf 1,125
Roof Type Flat,
MANSARD
100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING 875
NET ZERO READY BUILDING 875
Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/DU
92 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2.10 Apartment Building (continued)
e. Housing
i. Reserved
f. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of an apartment building must provide
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS as specified on Table
3.2.10.
Table 3.2.10 Required ADUs
Total Dwelling Units Required ADUs
0 to 3 units None
4 or more units 20% of units
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 93
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2.11 Row Houses
A moderate floor plate, multi-STORY, PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE
designed as series of three (3) or more small FLOOR PLATE,
attached, residential buildings, each with one (1) DWELLING
UNIT.
The following images are examples from Somerville of
the row hoUSEs BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for
illustrative purposes.
94 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2.11 Row Houses (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
SITE Dimensions Building Setbacks
Width (min) 106 ft A Primary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK1 (min/max) 10 ft 20 ft
Lot Dimensions C Side SETBACK (min) 5 ft
A LOT WIDTH (min) -- PARTY LOT LINE 0 ft
INTERIOR LOT in Sequence -- SIDE LOT LINE 5 ft
No Driveway ACCESS 24 ft D Rear SETBACK (min) 20 ft
End LOT in Sequence --
No Driveway ACCESS 29 ft Parking Setbacks
Side or Rear Driveway ACCESS 29 ft E Primary Front SETBACK (min) 20 ft
Front Driveway ACCESS 32 ft F Secondary Front SETBACK (min) 10 ft
B LOT DEPTH (min) 80 ft
1 See §3.2.13.a Contextual Front SETBACKs
Lot Development
C LOT Coverage (max) 65%
D GREEN SCORE --
Minimum 0.35
Ideal 0.40
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 95
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2.11 Row Houses (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Mass Facade Composition
FACADE Build Out (min) 70% A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
A Width per Row hOUSE (min/max) 24 ft 30 ft B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
B Depth (min/max) 34 ft 60 ft
Row hOUSes in Sequence (min/max) 4 10 Use & Occupancy
GROUND STORY Elevation (min) 2 ft DWELLING UNITs per SITE (min/max) 4 10
C STORY Height (min/max) 10 ft 12 ft DWELLING UNITs per Row HoUSE (max) 1
D Number of Stories (min) 2 stories Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/ DU
Roof Type Flat, GABLE,
MANSARD
96 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
3.2.11 Row Houses (continued)
e. Housing
i. Reserved
f. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of row hoUSEs must provide AFFORDABLE
DWELLING UNITS as specified on Table 3.2.11.
Table 3.2.11 Required ADUs
Total Dwelling Units Required ADUs
4 to 10 units 20% of units
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 97
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
12. Building Components
a. BUILDING COMPONENTS are ACCESSory elements attached to
the main mass of a PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
b. BUILDING COMPONENTS are permitted as specified on Table
3.2.12.
c. BUILDING COMPONENTS not identified on Table 3.2.12 are
prohibited.
d. Unless otherwise specified, BUILDING COMPONENTS
may attach to other BUILDING COMPONENTS to create
assemblies of components.
Table 3.2.12 Building Components
Semi-Detached Triple DECKer
Multi-Plex
Apartment HoUSE
Apartment BUILDING
Row hOUSes
Entry Canopy P P P P P
Stoop P P P P P
Portico P P P P P
Projecting Porch P P P P P
Lobby Entrance N N N P N
Bay P P P P P
Balcony N P P P P
Dormer N Y Y N Y
Shed Dormer N Y Y N N
Cross GABLE N Y Y N N
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
98 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
e. Entry Canopy
i. An entry canopy is a wall-mounted STRUCTURE that
provides shade and weather protection over the
entrance of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Width (min) See
ii. Standards
B Depth (max) 3 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft clear
D SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) --
Front 100%
Side 0 ft
Rear 0 ft
ii. Standards
a). Entry canopies must be visually supported by
brackets, cables, or rods.
b). The width of an entry canopy must be equal
to or greater than the width of the doorway
surround or exterior casing it is mounted over.
f. Stoop
i. A stoop is a frontage type featuring a set of stairs
with a landing leading to the entrance of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Landing Width (min) 4 ft
B Landing Depth (min) 4 ft
C SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) --
Front 100%
Side 0 ft
Rear 0 ft
ii. Standards
a). Stairs may be recessed into the BUILDING FACADE
when the BUILDING is set back four (4) feet or
less.
b). Stairs are not permitted to ENCROACH onto any
ABUTTING sidewalk.
c). Stairs may be built perpendicular or parallel to
the BUILDING FACADE, but must lead directly to
ground level or an ABUTTING sidewalk.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 99
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
g. Portico
i. A portico is a frontage type featuring a set of stairs
with a landing leading to the entrance of a BUILDING
and a roof supported by columns, PIERs, or posts.
Dimensions
A Landing Width (min) 4 ft
B Landing Depth (max) 4 ft
C CLEARANCE (max) 8 ft
D SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) --
Front 100%
Side 0 ft
Rear 0 ft
ii. Standards
a). Stairs are not permitted to ENCROACH onto any
ABUTTING sidewalk.
b). Stairs may be built perpendicular or parallel to
the BUILDING FACADE, but must lead directly to
ground level or an ABUTTING sidewalk.
h. Projecting Porch
i. A projecting porch is a frontage type featuring a set
of stairs with a landing leading to the entrance of a
BUILDING and a roof supported by columns, PIERs, or
posts.
Dimensions
A Width (min) 12 ft
B Depth (min) 6 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
D FURNITURE AREA, Clear (min) 6 ft x 6 ft
E SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) --
Front 100%
Side 0 ft
Rear 0 ft
ii. Standards
a). Stairs are not permitted to ENCROACH onto any
ABUTTING sidewalk.
b). Porch railings must permit visual supervision of
the PUBLIC REALM through the posts and rails.
c). A porch may be screened provided the
percentage of window area to wall area is
seventy percent (70%) or greater. Permanent
enclosure of a porch to create year-round living
space is not permitted.
d). Porches projecting from upper stories are not
required to provide stairs and the upper most
porch is not required to have a roof.
100 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
i. Lobby Entrance
i. A lobby entrance frontage type featuring an atgrade
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE providing ACCESS to UPPER
STORY USEs of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Width (max) 30 ft
B Recessed Entrance Width (max) 15 ft
Recessed Entrance Depth (max) 5 ft
ii. Standards
a). Lobby entrances must be well-defined, clearly
visible, and universally ACCESSible from the
ABUTTING sidewalk.
b). Lobby entrances should be made clearly
identifiable using a difference in design from
the rest of the FACADE.
c). Lobby entrances must include and awning or
entry canopy above the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE to
provide weather protection.
d). When a lobby entrance is set back from the
FRONT LOT LINE, the frontage must be paved to
match the ABUTTING sidewalk.
j. Bay Window
i. A bay window is an assembly of windows
projecting from a building to provide additional
HABITABLE space, increased light, multi-directional
views, and ARTICULATION to an exterior wall.
Dimensions
A Width (max) 16 ft
B Projection (max) 3 ft
C Height (max)
Height of
BUILDING in
Stories
D SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) --
Front 3 ft
Side 0 ft
Rear 0 ft
ii. Standards
a). Bay windows, including box and bow windows,
must include at least three (3) windows.
b). The cumulative width of multiple bays may
equal up to fifty percent (50%) of the width of
the exterior wall from which the bays project.
c). Bays projecting over the sidewalk of a public
THOROUGHFARE must have at least two (2) stories
of CLEARANCE and be compliant with all City
Ordinances.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 101
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
k. Balcony
i. A balcony is a platform with a railing that provides
outdoor AMENITY SPACE.
Dimensions
A Width (min) 5 ft
B Depth (min) 5 ft
Area (min) 50 sf
CLEARANCE (min) 10 ft
C SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) --
Front 100%
Side 0 ft
Rear 0 ft
ii. Standards
a). Balconies may be recessed, projecting, a
combination of the two, or terraced as part of
the roof of a portico, porch, or bay.
b). Balconies that project over any public sidewalk
requires compliance with all City Ordinances.
c). Front balconies must permit visual supervision
of the PUBLIC REALM through the posts and rails.
Side and rear balconies ABUTTING the NR district
must include sight-obscuring visual screening
so that it is at least fifty percent (50%) opaque.
l. Dormer
i. A dormer is a window space with a GABLE, HIP, or
arched roof that projects perpendicularly from a
pitched roof below. Dormer windows provide light
to the HABITABLE space of a half-STORY.
Dimensions
A Width (max) window(s)
width +18 in
Side Wall SETBACK (min) --
Roof with eave 0 ft
Roof without eave 1 ft
B Front & Rear Wall SETBACK (min) 3 ft
C Ridge SETBACK (min) 1 ft
D Roof Slope (min) 4:12 (18.43º)
E Dormer Separation (min) 50% of
dormer width
ii. Standards
a). The face wall of a dormer window may not
project beyond the exterior wall of the BUILDING
and may not interrupt the eave of the roof.
b). Dormer windows may be combined with a
shed dormer(s) to create a Nantucket dormer.
c). The cumulative width of a single, multiple, or
attached combinations of dormers may equal
up to fifty percent (50%) of the eave length of
the roof below.
102 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
m. Shed Dormer
i. A shed dormer is window space with a shed roof
that projects perpendicularly from a pitched roof
below. Shed dormers provide light and additional
HABITABLE space to a half-STORY.
Dimensions
A Width (max) window(s)
width + 36 in
Side Wall SETBACK (min) --
Roof with eave 0 ft
Roof without eave 1 ft
B Front & Rear Wall SETBACK (min) 3 ft
C Ridge SETBACK (min) 1 ft
D Roof Slope (min) 4:12 (18.43º)
E Dormer Separation (min) 50% of
dormer width
ii. Standards
a). The face wall of a shed dormer may not project
beyond the exterior wall of the BUILDING and
may not interrupt the eave of the roof.
b). Cheek wall windows are permitted.
c). Shed dormers may be combined with a dormer
window(s) to create a Nantucket dormer.
d). The cumulative width of a single, multiple, or
attached combinations of dormers may equal
up to fifty percent (50%) of the eave length of
the roof below.
n. Cross Gable
i. A cross GABLE is a sloped roof that projects
perpendicularly from the MAIN ROOF of a BUILDING to
significantly increase the HABITABLE space of a half-
STORY.
Dimensions
A Width (max)
50% of the
eave length
of the MAIN
ROOF
ii. Standards
a). The ridge and eave of the cross GABLE must be
structurally integrated into the ridge and eave
of the MAIN ROOF.
b). Cross GABLEs never have cheek walls.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 103
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
13. Building Design Standards
a. Contextual Front SETBACKs
i. Notwithstanding the front SETBACKs identified for
each BUILDING TYPE, new construction must have a
contextual front SETBACK as follows:
a). If the subject LOT is an INTERIOR LOT or KEY LOT,
the minimum and maximum front SETBACKs
are equal to the actual distances that PRINCIPAL
STRUCTURES BUILDING are set back from the FRONT
LOT LINE on the two ABUTTING LOTs of the same
BLOCK FACE. See Figure 3.2.13.
b). If the subject LOT is a CORNER LOT, the minimum
front SETBACK is equal to the actual distance that
the PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE BUILDING is set back from
the FRONT LOT LINE on the ABUTTING LOT that is
oriented toward the same THOROUGHFARE.
c). If the LOT on either side of the subject LOT is
vacant, the minimum and maximum front
SETBACK identified for each BUILDING TYPE governs.
ii. The contextual front SETBACK provision does not
exempt any BUILDING from complying with the
maximum front SETBACK required for each BUILDING
TYPE.
14. Architectural Design Guidelines
a. Residential Privacy
i. GROUND STORY DWELLING UNITs should be elevated
above the grade of any adjacent sidewalk so that
the window sills of the DWELLING UNIT are at or above
the eye-level of passing pedestrians. This elevation
change maintains privacy for occupants while also
encouraging open blinds or curtains to allow natural
daylight into the unit.
ii. Dormer and sidewall window locations should
break the direct line of sight between neighboring
properties to every extent practicable. Translucent
glass on the bottom half of windows or
strategically placed landscape elements should be
utilized if it is not practical to off-set windows in
such a way as to minimize privacy impacts.
iii. Outdoor AMENITY SPACEs that are elevated, such as
roof DECKs, fully projecting balconies, and UPPER
STORY rear porches should, provide sight-obscuring
visual screening at the sides to increase privacy,
security, and to limit views of ABUTTING properties
from elevated vantage points.
Figure 3.2.13 Contextual Front Setback
Contextual
Front Setback
Actual
Setback
Actual
Setback
104 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
15. Use Provisions
a. General
i. The USE of real property is subject to the provisions
of Article 9: USE Provisions of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 9, the provisions of Article 9 apply.
ii. USE categories are permitted as specified on Table
3.2.15.
iii. USE categories not identified on Table 3.2.15 are
prohibited.
iv. All USEs must comply with any USE-specific
standards applicable for each USE in §9.2 USE
Definitions & Limitations.
v. USEs permitted by Special Permit require additional
DEVELOPMENT review in accordance with §15.2.1
Special Permits.
b. Adaptive Re-USE of Specific Buildings
i. The USE of any PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE BUILDING
constructed before the effective date of
this Ordinance for a USE that is considered
nonconforming in the Urban Residential district, as
established by permit records or other historical
documents accepted by the BUILDING OFFICIAL, or
any BUILDING USEd for municipal operations by the
City of Somerville may be changed to any USE
within the following PRINCIPAL USE categories in
accordance with Table 3.2 (c):
a). ARTISINAL PRODUCTION;
b). Arts Sales & Services;
c). Design SERVICES;
d). Shared Workspace & Arts Education;
e). CONSUMER GOODS; or
f). Fresh Food Market or Grocery.
Table 3.2.15 Permitted Uses
Use Category
Specific Use
UR
Arts & Creative Enterprise
Artisinal Production SP
Arts Sales & Service SP
Design Services SP
Shared Workspace & Arts Education SP
Auto-Oriented
Motor Vehicle Parking (as noted below) --
Off-Site Accessory Parking SP
Civic & Institutional
Minor Utility Facility SP
Public Service P
Religious & Educational Uses Protected by
M.G.L. 40A. Sec. 3
P
Commercial Services
Day Care Service (as noted below) --
Child Day Care Center P
Vehicle Parking (except as follows) N
Bike Share Parking P
Car Share Parking (3 or fewer spaces) P
Car Share Parking (4 or more spaces) SP
Lodging
Bed & Breakfast SP
Residential
Household Living P
Group Living (except as follows) SP
Community or Group Residence P
Dormitory, Fraternity, or Sorority SP
Homeless Shelter N
Nursing Home/Assisted Living Facility SP
Rooming House SP
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 105
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
16. Development Standards
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
10: DEVELOPMENT Standards of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 10, the provisions of Article 10
apply.
b. SIGNs
i. A SIGN, individual numerals or letters, or a
nonelectrical nameplate identifying the property
address is required for all real property as follows:
a). Each GROUND STORY non-residential USE must
identify the STREET address either on the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE door or above or beside the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE of the USE.
b). All residential BUILDING TYPEs must identify the
STREET address either on the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE
door, above or beside the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE, or
on a mailbox.
ii. Address SIGNs must be made easily visible through
the USE of colors or materials that contrast with the
background material they are attached to and must
be conspicuously located to provide visibility from
the THOROUGHFARE that the BUILDING faces.
iii. Address SIGNs must be twelve (12) inches in height
or less and may include the name of the occupant.
Table 3.2.15 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use
NR
Retail Sales
Consumer Goods (except as follows) P
Alcohol Sales N
Firearms Sales N
Pet Store N
Fresh Food Market or Grocery Store P
Urban Agriculture
Farming (as noted below) --
Commercial Farming N
Community Farming P
Community Gardening P
Accessory Uses
Home Occupations (as noted below) --
Creative Studio P
Home-Based Business P
Home Office P
Urban Agriculture (as noted below) --
Apiculture P
Aviculture P
Commercial Farming P
Residential Gardening P
Vehicle Parking, Accessory (except as follows) P
Home Business Vehicle Parking SP
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
106 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
17. Parking & Mobility
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
11: Parking & Mobility of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 11, the provisions of Article 11 apply.
ii. Vehicular parking must be provided as specified on
Table 3.2.17, except as follows:
a). Non-residential USEs with five thousand (5,000)
square feet or less of gross LEASABLE FLOOR AREA
are exempt from any minimum requirements
of Table 3.2.17.
iii. There are no parking requirements for ACCESSORY
USEs.
iv. Parking may be shared between USEs on the same
LOT and buildings on the same BLOCK in accordance
with §11.3 SHARED PARKING.
v. DEVELOPMENT outside of a TRANSIT AREA may count
one (1) on STREET parking space for every twenty
(20) feet of LOT WIDTH toward any minimum parking
requirement if residential permit parking is
permitted along the same side of the STREET as the
LOT that the spaces will serve.
b. Type
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING may be provided as SURFACE
PARKING spaces, above ground STRUCTURED PARKING,
underground STRUCTURED PARKING, and on STREET
parking spaces.
c. Driveways
i. New driveways require a permit from the City
Engineer in accordance with Chapter 11, Article II,
Sec. 11-33 Driveway Construction of The Code of
Ordinances, City of Somerville, Massachusetts.
ii. Driveways must be paved with paving stones,
grass pavers, pervious concrete, or porous
asphalt unless graded to direct runoff onto on-site
permeable areas or granted a waiver by the City
Engineer to mitigate adverse site conditions.
iii. Driveways are not permitted in the frontage area
between a building and the front lot line.
iv. Driveways may be up to twelve (12) feet in width.
See Figure 3.2.17.
v. Driveways may provide access in whole or in part
on or across an abutting lot(s), provided that an
ACCESS EASEMENT exists between all PROPERTY OWNERS.
vi. New driveways should accommodate at least two
(2) motor vehicles for every one (1) ON-STREET PARKING
SPACE that will be removed as a result of the new
driveway.
d. Parking Design
i. The design of all parking is subject to §11.1 Bicycle
Parking and §11.2 MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING of this
Ordinance.
e. Parking Location
i. Required vehicular parking, excluding any required
handicapped parking, may be provided on a
Table 3.2.17 Vehicular Parking
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Use Category
Specific Use
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Within a
TRANSIT AREA1
(max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min)
Arts & Creative Enterprise Uses
All Permitted Uses 1.0 / 10,000 sf 1.0 / 3,000 sf none 1.0 / 1,000 sf
Civic & Institutional
Religious & Educational Uses
Protected by M.G.L. 40A. Sec. 3
none none none none
Lodging Uses
Bed & Breakfast none 2.0 none 1.0 / 4 rooms
Residential Uses
All Permitted Uses none none none 1.0 / DU
Retail Sales Uses
All Permitted Uses 1.0 / 2,500 sf 1.0 / 10,000 sf none 1.0 / 1,500 sf
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - Dwelling Unit RU - Rooming Unit
1 See the Transit Area Map
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 107
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
contiguous LOT under the same ownership as the
LOT that the parking will serve as follows:
a). Pedestrian ACCESS to off-SITE vehicular parking
must be via a paved sidewalk or walkway.
b). A lease, recorded covenant, or other
comparable legal instrument guaranteeing long
term USE of the SITE must be provided to the
review board or BUILDING OFFICIAL and executed
and filed with the Registry of Deeds.
ii. For real property located in more than one
municipality, MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING need not be
located within the City of Somerville.
f. Unbundled Parking
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces must be rented or
leased as an option rather than a requirement of
the rental, lease, or purchase of a DWELLING UNIT or
non-residential floor space.
ii. Bicycle parking must be provided at no cost or fee
to customers, visitors, employees, tenants, and
residents.
g. Parking Relief
i. Relief from the parking standards of Table 3.2.17
requires a Special Permit.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing
relief from the parking standards of Table
3.2.17:
i). The supply and demand of on-STREET
parking in the neighborhood, as
determined through a parking study.
ii). MOBILITY MANAGEMENT programs and
services provided by the APPLICANT to
reduce the demand for parking.
iii). That parking provided in excess of any
maximum permitted does not result in the
increase in impervious LOT AREA.
Figure 3.2.17 Driveway Dimensions
108 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
3. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Urban Residence (UR)
18. Public Realm
a. Sidewalk CURB CUTs
i. A CURB CUT requires a permit from the City Engineer
and must be compliant with all City Ordinances.
ii. Unless otherwise specified, the City Engineer may
not permit more than one (1) CURB CUT per FRONT LOT
LINE of a LOT.
iii. CURB CUTs are prohibited along all THOROUGHFAREs
designated as a PEDESTRIAN STREET.
iv. CURB CUTs must be located to minimize conflicts
with pedestrians and bicyclists and must have a
clear distance from fire hydrants, STREET TREES, utility
poles, and other furnishings as deemed necessary
by the City Engineer.
a). CURB CUTs for commercial or high-volume
driveways should be at least one-hundred
(100) feet from an unSIGNalized or SIGNalized
intersection.
b). CURB CUTs for residential driveways should be
at least twenty (20) feet from an unSIGNalized
intersection and at least forty (40) feet from a
SIGNalized intersection.
v. The interior width of a CURB CUT (between curb
stones) may be no wider than the driveway,
vehicular entrance, or loading facility it serves.
vi. A DRIVEWAY APRON may be installed only within
the furnishing zone of a sidewalk and must be
constructed in accordance with all standards
established by relevant City Departments.
vii. The grade, cross slope, and clear width of the
walkway of a sidewalk must be maintained
between the DRIVEWAY APRON and the ABUTTING
driveway. The appearance of the walkway (ie.
scoring pattern or paving material) must indicate
that, although a vehicle may cross, the area
traversed by a vehicle remains part of the sidewalk.
Figure 3.2.19 Sidewalk Curb Cuts
4 MID-RISE DISTRICTS
4.1 MID-RISE 3 (MR3) ............................................... 111
Description 111
Intent 112
Purpose 112
Applicability 112
Development Review 112
Building Types 112
Building Components 125
Facade Design 130
Architectural Design Guidelines 130
Use Provisions 132
Development Standards 134
Parking & Mobility 135
Public Realm 135
4.2 MID-RISE 4 (MR4) ...............................................139
Character Description 139
Intent 140
Purpose 140
Applicability 140
Development Review 140
Building Types 140
Building Components 153
Facade Design 158
Architectural Design Guidelines 158
Use Provisions 160
Development Standards 162
Parking & Mobility 163
Public Realm 163
4.3 MID-RISE 5 (MR5) ...............................................167
Description 167
Intent 168
Purpose 168
Applicability 168
Development Review 168
Building Types 168
Building Components 181
Facade Design 186
Architectural Design Guidelines 186
Use Provisions 188
Development Standards 190
Parking & Mobility 191
PUBLIC REALM 191
4.4 MID-RISE 6 (MR6) ...............................................195
Character Description 195
Intent 196
Purpose 196
Applicability 196
Development Review 196
Building Types 196
Building Components 213
Facade Design 218
Architectural Design Guidelines 218
Use Provisions 220
Development Standards 222
Parking & Mobility 223
Public Realm 223
110 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 111
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
4.1 MID-RISE 3 (MR3)
1. Description
The Mid-Rise 3 district is characterized by a variety of moderate FLOOR PLATE buildings up to three (3) stories in height.
Buildings are set close to the sidewalk to create a defined STREET wall that supports pedestrian activity and a sense
of place. The district is primarily commercial, with GROUND STORY USEs that typically address the needs of residents and
employees in the immediate neighborhood.
112 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
2. Intent
a. To implement the objectives of the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
of the City of Somerville.
b. To create, maintain, and enhance areas appropriate for
smaller scale, multi-USE and mixed-USE buildings and
neighborhood serving commercial USEs.
3. Purpose
a. To permit the DEVELOPMENT of multi-unit and mixed-USE
buildings that do not exceed three (3) stories in height.
b. To provide quality commercial spaces and permit smallscale,
neighborhood serving commercial USEs.
c. To create DWELLING UNIT types, sizes, and BEDROOM counts
ideal for larger hoUSEholds in apartment buildings.
d. To create DWELLING UNIT types, sizes, and BEDROOM counts
ideal for smaller hoUSEholds in general buildings.
e. To permit increased residential density for buildings
that meet the definition of a NET ZERO READY BUILDING or
100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
4. Applicability
a. The section is applicable to all real property within
the Mid-Rise 3 district as shown on the maps of the
Official Zoning Atlas of the City of Somerville.
5. Development Review
a. DEVELOPMENT review is subject to the provisions of
Article 15: Administration of this Ordinance.
b. All DEVELOPMENT, excluding NORMAL MAINTENANCE, requires
the submittal of a development review application to
the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the issuance of a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance prior to the issuance of a BUILDING
Permit or Certificate of Occupancy.
c. Proposed DEVELOPMENT may or may not necessitate the
need for SUBDivision Plan Approval, Subdivision Plan
ApprOVAl, Site Plan Approval, a Special Permit, or a
Hardship Variance based on the nature of the proposal.
In such cases, additional DEVELOPMENT review is required
in accordance with Article 15: Administration.
i. The Planning Board is the decision making
authority for all DEVELOPMENT that requires Site Plan
Approval or a Special Permit.
ii. The Zoning Board of Appeals is the Review Board
for all Hardship Variances.
d. Upon verification that no additional DEVELOPMENT review
is necessary, or completion of the required DEVELOPMENT
review, The BUILDING OFFICIAL shall issue a Zoning
Compliance Certificate to certify compliance with the
provisions and procedures of this Ordinance.
6. Building Types
a. One (1) PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE is permitted on each LOT.
b. The following BUILDING TYPEs are permitted by Site Plan
Approval in the Mid-Rise 3 district:
i. Apartment Building
ii. General Building
iii. Commercial Building
c. Apartment Buildings are prohibited on any LOT fronting
a PEDESTRIAN STREET.
d. ACCESSory structures are regulated according to Article
10: DEVELOPMENT Standards of this Ordinance.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 113
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
4.1.7 Apartment Building
A small to moderate FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY, PRINCIPAL
BUILDING TYPE purpose built for occuPATIOn by residential USEs
on all stories.
The following images are examples of the apartment
BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
114 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
4.1.7. Apartment Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 30 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 12 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 12 ft
Lot Development C Side SETBACK (min) 0 ft
LOT Coverage (max) 90% Side SETBACK ABUTTING NR or LHD (min) 10 ft
GREEN SCORE -- D Rear SETBACK (min) --
Minimum 0.25 ALLEY OR R-ROW 0 ft
Ideal 0.30 No ALLEY 10 ft
B OPEN SPACE (min) 15% No ALLEY & ABUTTING NR or LHD 20 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front SETBACK (min) --
SURFACE PARKING 30 ft
STRUCTURED PARKING 30 ft
F Secondary Front SETBACK (min) --
SURFACE PARKING 10 ft
STRUCTURED PARKING 2 ft
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 115
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
4.1.7. Apartment Building (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
A BUILDING WIDTH (max) 200 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
FACADE Build Out (min) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
Primary Front 80% BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
Secondary Front 65%
B FLOOR PLATE (max) 15,000 sf Use & Occupancy
GROUND STORY Elevation (min) 2 ft GROSS FLOOR AREA per DU --
C STORY Height (min) 10 ft LOT AREA < 5,000 sf 1,500
D Number of Stories (min/max) 2 3 LOT AREA >= 5,000 sf 1,125
E BUILDING Height, Feet (max) 38 ft NET ZERO READY BUILDING 850
Roof Type Flat 100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING 850
Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/DU
116 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
4.1.7. Apartment Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT of an apartment building is subject to
the provisions of Article 12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits
of this Ordinance. Where the provisions of this
section conflict with those of Article 12, the
provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITs as specified on Table 4.1.7.
f. Design Guidelines
i. GROUND STORY DWELLING UNITs should be elevated
above the grade of any adjacent sidewalk so that
the window sills of the DWELLING UNIT are at or above
the eye-level of passing pedestrians. This elevation
change maintains privacy for occupants while also
encouraging open blinds or curtains to allow natural
daylight and ventilation into the unit.
ii. FENESTRATION patterns and window configurations
that break the direct line of sight between
neighboring properties should be utilized to every
extent possible. Translucent glass on the bottom
half of windows or strategically placed landscape
elements should be utilized if it is not practical
to off-set windows in such a way as to minimize
privacy impacts.
iii. Outdoor AMENITY SPACEs that are elevated, such as
roof DECKs, fully projecting balconies, and UPPER
STORY rear porches should, provide sight-obscuring
visual screening at the sides to increase privacy,
security, and to limit views of ABUTTING properties
from elevated vantage points.
Table 4.1.7 Required ADUs
Total Dwelling Units Required ADUs
0 to 3 units None
4 or more units 20% of units
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 117
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
4.1.8 General Building
A moderate FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE
with GROUND STORY commercial space and no limitations
on the occupancy of upper stories for permitted USEs. The
upper stories of a general building are typically residential,
but a wide variety exists. As the number of stories
increases, it becomes more likely for the upper stories
of a general building to host commercial USEs as well as
residential.
The following images are examples of the general BUILDING
TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
118 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
4.1.8. General Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 30 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 12 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 12 ft
Lot Development C Side SETBACK (min) 0 ft
LOT Coverage (max) 90% Side SETBACK ABUTTING NR or LHD (min) 10 ft
GREEN SCORE -- D Rear SETBACK (min) --
Minimum 0.25 ALLEY OR R-ROW 0 ft
Ideal 0.30 No ALLEY 10 ft
B OPEN SPACE (min) 15% No ALLEY & ABUTTING NR or LHD 20 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front SETBACK (min) --
SURFACE PARKING 30 ft
STRUCTURED PARKING 30 ft
F Secondary Front SETBACK (min) --
SURFACE PARKING 10 ft
STRUCTURED PARKING 2 ft
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 119
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
4.1.8. General Building (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
A BUILDING WIDTH (max) 200 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 70%
FACADE Build Out, Primary Front (min) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
Primary Front 80% BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
Secondary Front 65%
B FLOOR PLATE (max) 15,000 sf Use & Occupancy
C GROUND STORY Height (min) 14 ft GROUND STORY Entrance Spacing (max) 30 ft
D UPPER STORY Height (min) 10 ft Commercial Space Depth (min) 30 ft
E Number of Stories (min/max) 2 3 GROSS FLOOR AREA per DU --
F BUILDING Height, Feet (max) 40 ft LOT AREA < 5,000 sf 1,500
Roof Type Flat LOT AREA >= 5,000 sf 1,125
NET ZERO READY BUILDING 850
100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING 850
Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/DU
120 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
4.1.8. General Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITs as specified on Table 4.1.8
(a).
iii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 4.1.8. (b).
f. Design Guidelines
i. FENESTRATION patterns and window configurations
should break the direct line of sight between
neighboring properties to every extent practicable.
Translucent glass on the bottom half of windows
or strategically placed landscape elements should
be utilized if it is not practical to off-set windows in
such a way as to minimize privacy impacts.
ii. Outdoor AMENITY SPACEs that are elevated, such as
roof DECKs, fully projecting balconies, and UPPER
STORY rear porches should, provide sight-obscuring
visual screening at the sides to increase privacy,
security, and to limit views of ABUTTING properties
from elevated vantage points.
Table 4.1.8. (a) Required ADUs
Total Dwelling Units Required ADUs
0 to 3 units None
4 or more units 20% of units
Table 4.1.8 (b) Linkage
Commercial
Gross Floor Area
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 121
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
4.1.9 Commercial Building
A moderate FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY, PRINCIPAL BUILDING
TYPE purpose built for occuPATIOn by commercial USEs on
all stories. GROUND STORY commercial space is primarily
occupied by commercial service, food & beverage service,
or retail sales PRINCIPAL USEs. Floor space on upper stories
may be occupied by retail USEs that do not rely on the
visibility of a storefront at sidewalk level.
The following images are examples of the commercial
BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
122 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
4.1.9 Commercial Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 30 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 12 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 12 ft
Lot Development C Side SETBACK (min) 0 ft
LOT Coverage (max) 90% Side SETBACK ABUTTING NR or LHD (min) 10 ft
GREEN SCORE -- D Rear SETBACK (min) --
Minimum 0.25 ALLEY OR R-ROW 0 ft
Ideal 0.30 No ALLEY 10 ft
B OPEN SPACE (min) 15% No ALLEY & ABUTTING NR or LHD 20 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front SETBACK (min) --
SURFACE PARKING 30 ft
STRUCTURED PARKING 30 ft
F Secondary Front SETBACK (min) --
SURFACE PARKING 10 ft
STRUCTURED PARKING 2 ft
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 123
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
4.1.9 Commercial Building (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
A BUILDING WIDTH (max) 200 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 70%
FACADE Build Out, (min) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 70%
Primary Front 80% BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
Secondary Front 65%
B FLOOR PLATE (max) 15,000 sf Use & Occupancy
C GROUND STORY Height (min) 14 ft GROUND STORY Entrance Spacing (max) 30 ft
D UPPER STORY Height (min) 10 ft Commercial Space Depth (min) 30 ft
E NUMBER OF STORIES (min/max) 2 3
F BUILDING Height, Feet (max) 42 ft
Roof Type Flat
124 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
4.1.9. Commercial Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 4.1.9.
Table 4.1.9 Linkage
Commercial
GROSS FLOOR AREA
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 125
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
10. Building Components
a. Building components are ACCESSory elements attached
to the MAIN MASSING of a PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
b. Building components are permitted by Site Plan
Approval as specified on Table 4.1.10.
i. At least one (1) storefront is required for each
GROUND STORY commercial space.
c. Building components not identified on Table 4.1.10 are
prohibited.
d. Unless otherwise specified, building components
may attach to other building components to create
assemblies of components.
Table 4.1.10 Building Components
Apartment BUILDING
General BUILDING
Commercial BUILDING
Awning N P P
Entry Canopy P P P
Lobby Entrance P P P
Storefront N P P
Stoop P N N
Bay Window P P P
Balcony P P N
Arcade N N N
P - Permitted N - Not Permitted
126 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
e. Awning
i. An awning is a wall mounted frame covered with
fabric or other material that provides shade and
weather protection over a storefront or building
entrance.
Dimensions
A Width (min) See ii
Standards
B Projection (min) 3 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
D SETBACK from Curb (min) 2 ft
E Valance Height (max) 12 in
ii. Standards
a). Awnings must be securely attached to and
supported by the building and must fit the
windows or doors the awning is attached to.
b). An awning must be made of durable, weatherresistant
material that is water repellent.
c). Internally illuminated or back-lit awnings are
prohibited.
d). An awning that projects over the sidewalk of a
public THOROUGHFARE requires compliance with
all City Ordinances.
f. Entry Canopy
i. An entry canopy is a wall-mounted structure that
provides shade and weather protection over a
storefront or building entrance.
Dimensions
A Width (min) See ii
Standards
B Projection (min) 3 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
D Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
SETBACK from Curb (min) 2 ft
ii. Standards
a). Entry canopies must be visually supported by
brackets, cables, or rods.
b). The width of an entry canopy must be equal
to or greater than the width of the doorway
surround or exterior casing it is mounted over.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 127
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
g. Lobby Entrance
i. A lobby entrance is a non-load bearing assembly of
entry doors and windows providing ACCESS and light
to the lobby of a building.
Dimensions
A Width (min/max) 15 ft 30 ft
B Height (min) 80% of GROUND
STORY Height
Recessed Entrance Width (max) 15 ft
Recessed Entrance Depth (max) 5 ft
ii. Standards
a). When a lobby entrance is set back from the
FRONT LOT LINE, the FRONTAGE AREA must be paved.
h. Storefront
i. A storefront is a non-load bearing assembly of
commercial entry doors and windows providing
ACCESS and light to a commercial space and a place
to display goods, services, and SIGNs.
Dimensions
A Width (min/max) 15 ft 30 ft
B Height (min) 80% of GROUND
STORY Height
Display Window Height (min) 8 ft
Recessed Entrance Width (max) 15 ft
Recessed Entrance Depth (max) 5 ft
ii. Standards
a). An unobstructed view of the interior space or a
lighted and maintained merchandise display(s)
must be provided for a depth of at least four (4)
feet behind storefront display windows.
b). When storefronts are set back from the FRONT
LOT LINE, the FRONTAGE AREA must be paved.
c). When present, awnings and canopies must be
mounted between columns, PILASTERs, or PIERs;
above doorways and display windows; and
below the SIGN BAND.
d). Exterior security grilles, gates, and roll-down
security doors and windows are prohibited.
128 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
i. Stoop
i. A stoop is a set of stairs with a landing leading to
the entrance of a building.
Dimensions
A Landing Width (min) 4 ft
B Landing Depth (min) 4 ft
C Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
ii. Standards
a). Paving, excluding driveways, must match the
ABUTTING sidewalk unless paved with pervious,
porous, or permeable materials.
b). Stairs may be recessed into the building FACADE
when the building is set back four (4) feet or
less.
c). Stairs are not permitted to ENCROACH onto any
ABUTTING sidewalk.
d). Stairs may be built perpendicular or parallel to
the building FACADE, but must lead directly to
ground level or an ABUTTING sidewalk.
j. Bay Window
i. A bay window is an assembly of windows
projecting from a building to provide additional
HABITABLE space, increased light, multi-directional
views, and ARTICULATION to an exterior wall.
Dimensions
A Width (max) 16 ft
B Projection (max) 3 ft
C Height (max)
Height of
BUILDING in
Stories
D Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 3 ft
FENESTRATION (min) 60%
ii. Standards
a). Bay windows, including box and bow windows,
must include at least three (3) windows.
b). The cumulative width of multiple bays may
equal up to fifty percent (50%) of the width of
the exterior wall from which the bays project.
c). Bays projecting over the sidewalk of a public
THOROUGHFARE must have at least two (2) stories
of CLEARANCE and be compliant with all City
Ordinances.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 129
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
k. Balcony
i. A balcony is a platform with a railing that provides
outdoor AMENITY SPACE.
Dimensions
A Width (min) 5 ft
B Depth (max) 5 ft
D Area (min) 50 sf
CLEARANCE (min) 10 ft
Permitted Front SETBACK
ENCROACHMENT (max) 6 ft
ii. Standards
a). Balconies may be recessed, projecting, a
combination of the two, or terraced as part of
the roof of a portico, porch, or bay.
b). A balcony that projects over the sidewalk of a
public THOROUGHFARE requires compliance with
all City Ordinances.
c). The guard rail of any balcony oriented toward a
FRONT LOT LINE must permit visual supervision of
the PUBLIC REALM through the posts and rails.
d). The guard rail of any balcony oriented toward
a side or REAR LOT LINE ABUTTING the NR district
must include sight-obscuring visual screening
so that it is at least fifty percent (50%) opaque.
l. Arcade
i. An arcade is a pedestrian walkway covered by the
upper floors of a building. The GROUND STORY FACADE
is SETBACK and upper floors are supported by a
colonnade or supports.
Dimensions
A Depth (min/max) 10 ft 15 ft
B Height (max) 1 STORY
C CLEARANCE (min/max) 14 ft 24 ft
ii. Standards
a). Arcades must extend the entire width of a
building and must have a consistent depth.
b). Support columns or PIERs may be spaced no
farther apart than they are tall.
c). Arcades are considered part of the building for
the purpose of measuring FACADE build out.
d). Arcades may be combined only with storefront
and lobby entrance frontages.
e). The finished ceiling of an arcade interior may
be arched or flat, but must have a greater
CLEARANCE than the openings between columns
or PIERs.
130 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
11. Facade Design
a. FACADEs must provide solid material framing each
storefront and lobby entrance as follows:
i. PILASTERs or columns supporting a horizontal lintel
and CORNICE;
ii. a spandrel positioned between PILASTERs or columns
that extend from upper stories of the building to
the ground; or
iii. flat wall above and to either side of a void or
punched opening.
b. Storefronts and lobby entrances must be set within the
resulting frame provided for each by the FACADE.
c. Materials framing each storefront or lobby entrance
may be integrated into the design of the FACADE
or customized for individual storefronts and lobby
entrances.
d. Mechanical louvers necessary for venting purposes
are not permitted in the required frame, but may be
incorporated into any storefront or lobby entrance
system.
e. FACADEs must differentiate the GROUND STORY of the
building from the upper stories through horizontal
ARTICULATION, a change in material, or a change in
window size or pattern to create a distinct base to the
building FACADE. The entire height of the GROUND STORY
must be included in the FACADE base.
f. For buildings with more than one FACADE, the design of
the base must align horizontally at the corner.
g. FACADEs must provide surface relief from the average
plane of the FACADE by at least four (4) inches, through
the USE of architectural elements such as bay windows,
columns, CORNER BOARDs, CORNICEs, door and window
surrounds, moldings, PIERs, PILASTERs, recessed
storefronts or lobby entrances, seat walls, sills, wall
thickness, and recessed or projecting windows.
h. The FACADE of any building greater than one hundred
(100) feet in width must be divided vertically and
designed as two (2) or more separate and distinct
facades of differing architectural treatment so that the
building appears to be multiple buildings. See Figure
4.1.11 (b). The differentiation between facade designs
must include the following:
i. a change in CORNICE, roof eave, or parapet;
ii. a change in wall material; and
iii. a pilaster or column on either side of the division
between each facade.
12. Architectural Design Guidelines
a. FACADEs should be visually divided into a series of
ARCHITECTURAL BAYs that are derived, in general, from the
building’s structural bay spacing.
b. PIERs, PILASTERs, or other features defining each
ARCHITECTURAL BAY should either extend all the way to
the ground or terminate at any horizontal ARTICULATION
defining the base of the building.
c. ARCHITECTURAL BAYs should align, in general, with
individual or groups of storefronts and lobby entrances.
d. PIERs, PILASTERs, or other features defining each
ARCHITECTURAL BAY should always project forward and be
uninterrupted by any horizontal articulation, excluding
Figure 4.1.11 (a) Storefront & Lobby Entrance Framing
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 131
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
any horizontal ARTICULATION USEd to differentiate the base
of the building.
e. Vents, exhausts, and other utility features on building
FACADEs should be architecturally integrated into
the design of the building and should be located to
minimize adverse effects on pedestrian comfort along
sidewalks and within OPEN SPACEs.
f. Buildings at TERMINATED VISTAs should be ARTICULATEd with
design features that function as focal points.
g. FENESTRATION glazing should be inset from the plane of
exterior wall surfaces.
h. RIBBON WINDOWS should be avoided.
i. Monotonous and repetitive storefront or lobby
systems, awnings, canopies, SIGN types, colors, or
designs should be avoided.
j. Storefronts and lobby entrances should include
awnings or canopies to provide weather protection
for pedestrians and reduce glare for storefront display
areas. Awnings should be open-ended and operable.
k. Lobby entrances for UPPER STORY USEs should be
optimally located, well defined, clearly visible, and
separate from the entrance for other GROUND STORY USEs.
l. Lobbies should be limited in both width and total area
to preserve floor space and frontage for other GROUND
STORY USEs. Buildings should USE any combination of
FACADE ARTICULATION, a double-height ceiling, a distinctive
doorway, a change in wall material, a change in paving
material within the FRONTAGE AREA, or some other
architectural element(s) to make lobbies visual and
materially distinctive.
m. The selection of materials, FENESTRATION, and
ornamentation should result in a consistent and
harmonious composition that appears as a unified
whole rather than a collection of unrelated parts.
n. The type and color of materials should be kept to a
minimum, preferably three (3) or fewer.
o. Two (2) or more wall materials should be combined
only one above the other, except for bay windows.
p. Wall materials appearing heavier in weight should be
USEd below wall materials appearing lighter in weight
(wood and metal above brick, and all three above
stone)
q. Horizontal or vertical board siding or shingles,
regardless of material, should be avoided.
r. Architectural details and finish materials for the base
of a building should be constructed of architectural
concrete or pre-cast cementitious panels, natural
or cast stone, heavy gauge metal panels, glazed or
unglazed architectural terracotta, or brick.
s. Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) should be
avoided.
Figure 4.1.11 (b) Appearance of Two Buildings
132 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
13. Use Provisions
a. General
i. The USE of real property is subject to the provisions
of Article 9: USE Provisions of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 9, the provisions of Article 9 apply.
ii. USE categories are permitted as specified on Table
4.1.13. USE categories that are not identified on
Table 4.1.13 are prohibited.
iii. All USEs must comply with any USE-specific
standards applicable for each USE in §9.2 USE
Definitions & Limitations.
iv. USEs permitted by Special Permit require additional
DEVELOPMENT review in accordance with §15.2.1
Special Permits.
b. USE Limitations
i. The USE of any GROUND STORY commercial space
fronting a PEDESTRIAN STREET, excluding lobbies for
UPPER STORY USEs, is limited to the following PRINCIPAL
USE categories:
a). Arts & Creative Enterprise
b). Food & Beverage Service
c). Retail Sales
d). Civic & Institutional
c. Increases in Density
i. Existing structures may not be altered to conflict
with number of DWELLING UNITs permitted for each
BUILDING TYPE.
Table 4.1.13 Permitted Uses
Use Category
Specific Use MR3
Arts & Creative Enterprise
Artisinal Production P
Arts Exhibition P
Arts Sales & Services P
Co-working P
Design Services P
Shared Workspaces & Arts Education P
Cannabis Establishment
Cannabis Cultivation P
Cannabis Retail Sales SP
Cannabis Research & Development P
Cannabis Testing Laboratory P
Civic & Institutional
Community Center P
Hospital SP
Library P
Minor Utility Facility SP
Museum P
Private Non-Profit Club or Lodge SP
Public Service P
Religious & Educational Uses Protected by
M.G.L 40A. Sec 3
P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 133
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
Table 4.1.13 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use MR3
Commercial Services
Animal Services (as noted below) --
Commercial Kennel SP
Pet Grooming P
Pet Daycare & Training SP
Veterinarian SP
Assembly or Entertainment SP
Banking & Financial Services (except as
follows)
P
Personal Credit SP
Broadcast and/or Recording Studio P
Building & Home Repair Services SP
Business Support Services P
Caterer/Wholesale Food Production SP
Day Care Service (as noted below) --
Adult Day Care Center P
Child Day Care Center P
Educational Services P
Maintenance & Repair of Consumer Goods P
Personal Services (except as follows) P
Body-Art Services SP
Fitness Services P
Funeral Services SP
Health Care Services SP
Formula Personal Services SP
Recreation Services SP
Vehicle Parking, Commercial (except as follows) --
Bike Share Parking P
Car Share Parking (3 or fewer spaces) P
Car Share Parking (4 or more spaces) P
Commercial Parking P
Food and Beverage Service
Bar/Restaurant/Tavern P
Bakery/Café/Coffee Shop P
Formula Food & Beverage Service SP
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
Table 4.1.13 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use MR3
Lodging
Bed & Breakfast SP
Hotel or Hostel SP
Office
General Office P
Research and Development or Laboratory P
Residential
Household Living SP
Group Living
(except as follows)
SP
Community or Group Residence P
Dormitory, Fraternity or Sorority SP
Homeless Shelter SP
Nursing Home/Assisted Living Facility SP
Rooming House SP
Retail Sales
Building/Home Supplies & Equipment SP
Consumer Goods (except as follows) P
Alcohol Sales SP
Firearms Sales N
Pet Store SP
Formula Retail SP
Fresh Food Market or Grocery Store P
Farm/Vendor Market P
Urban Agriculture
Farming (as noted below) --
Commercial Farming P
Community Farming P
Community Gardening P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
134 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
14. Development Standards
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
10: DEVELOPMENT Standards of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 10, the provisions of Article 10
apply.
b. SIGNs
i. A SIGN, individual numerals or letters, or a
nonelectrical nameplate identifying the property
address is required for all real property as follows:
a). Each GROUND STORY non-residential USE must
identify the STREET address either on the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE door or above or beside the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE of the USE.
b). All residential BUILDING TYPEs must identify the
STREET address either on the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE
door, above or beside the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE, or
on a mailbox.
ii. Address SIGNs must be made easily visible through
the USE of colors or materials that contrast with the
background material they are attached to and must
be conspicuously located to provide visibility from
the THOROUGHFARE that the building faces.
iii. Address SIGNs must be twelve (12) inches in height
or less and may include the name of the occupant.
Table 4.1.13 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use MR3
Accessory Uses
Home Occupations (as noted below) --
Creative Studio N
Hobby Kennel N
Home-Based Business N
Home Day Care N
Home Office P
Urban Agriculture (as noted below) --
Apiculture P
Aviculture P
Commercial Farming P
Residential Gardening P
Vehicle Parking, Accessory (except as follows) P
Home Business Vehicle Parking N
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 135
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
15. Parking & Mobility
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
11: Parking & Mobility of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 11, the provisions of Article 11 apply.
ii. Vehicular parking must be provided as specified on
Table 4.1 (d), except as follows:
a). Non-residential USEs with five thousand (5,000)
square feet or less of gross LEASABLE FLOOR AREA
are exempt from any minimum requirements
of Table 4.1. (d).
b). Any CHANGE IN USE within a non-residential
structure constructed before the effective date
of this Ordinance, provided that the change
is to a permitted USE, is exempt from any
minimum requirements of Table 4.1 (d).
iii. There are no parking requirements for ACCESSORY
USEs.
iv. Motor vehicle parking spaces may be shared
between USEs on the same LOT and buildings on
the same BLOCK in accordance with §11.3 SHARED
PARKING.
b. Type
i. Motor vehicle parking may be provided as SURFACE
PARKING, above ground STRUCTURED PARKING, and
underground STRUCTURED PARKING.
c. Driveways
i. New driveways require a permit from the City
Engineer in accordance with Chapter 11, Article II,
Sec. 11-33 Driveway Construction of The Code of
Ordinances, City of Somerville, Massachusetts.
ii. Driveways are not permitted in the FRONTAGE AREA
between a building and the FRONT LOT LINE.
iii. Driveways may be up to twenty four (24) feet in
width.
iv. Driveways may provide ACCESS in whole or in part
on or across an ABUTTING LOT(s), provided that an
ACCESS EASEMENT exists between all PROPERTY OWNERS.
d. Parking Design
i. The design of all parking is subject to §11.1 Bicycle
Parking and §11.2 Motor Vehicle Parking of this
Ordinance.
e. Parking Location
i. Required vehicular parking, excluding any required
handicapped parking, may be provided on a
contiguous LOT under the same ownership as the
LOT that the parking will serve as follows:
a). Pedestrian ACCESS to off-SITE vehicular parking
must be via a paved sidewalk or walkway.
b). A lease, recorded covenant, or other
comparable legal instrument guaranteeing long
term USE of the SITE must be provided to the
review board or BUILDING OFFICIAL and executed
and filed with the Registry of Deeds.
ii. For real property located in more than one
municipality, motor vehicle parking need not be
located within the City of Somerville.
f. Unbundled Parking
i. Motor vehicle parking spaces must be rented or
leased as an option rather than a requirement of
the rental, lease, or purchase of a DWELLING UNIT or
non-residential floor space.
ii. Bicycle parking must be provided at no cost or fee
to customers, visitors, employees, tenants, and
residents.
g. Parking Relief
i. Relief from the parking standards of Table 4.1 (d)
requires a special permit.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing
relief from the parking standards of Table 4.1
(d):
i). The supply and demand of on-STREET
parking in the neighborhood, as
determined through a parking study.
ii). MOBILITY MANAGEMENT programs and services
provided by the APPLICANT to reduce the
demand for parking.
iii). That parking provided in excess of any
maximum permitted does not result in the
increase in impervious LOT AREA.
16. Public Realm
a. Sidewalks
i. When DEVELOPMENT occurs on any LOT ABUTTING a
sidewalk that is less than twelve (12) feet in total
width, the building must be set-back an additional
distance to accommodate expansion of the
ABUTTING sidewalk to a width of at least twelve (12)
feet. The minimum and maximum front SETBACKs for
each BUILDING TYPE are increased accordingly.
b. Sidewalk CURB CUTs
i. A CURB CUT requires a permit from the City Engineer
and must be compliant with all City Ordinances.
ii. Unless otherwise specified, the City Engineer may
not permit more than one (1) CURB CUT per FRONT LOT
LINE of a LOT.
iii. CURB CUTs are prohibited along all THOROUGHFAREs
designated as a PEDESTRIAN STREET.
iv. CURB CUTs must be located to minimize conflicts
with pedestrians and bicyclists and must have a
clear distance from fire hydrants, STREET TREEs, utility
poles, and other furnishings as deemed necessary
by the City Engineer.
136 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
Table 4.1.15 Vehicular Parking
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Use Category
Specific Use
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Within a
TRANSIT AREA1
(max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min)
Arts & Creative Enterprise
All Permitted Uses 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Cannabis Establishment
Cannabis Retail Sales 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Cannabis Research & Development 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Cannabis Testing Laboratory 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Civic & Institutional
Community Center 1 / 10,000 sf 4 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,800 sf 1 / 600 sf
Educational Facility
1.0 /
classroom
4.0 /
classroom
1.5 /
classroom
3.0 /
classroom
Hospital
10 per
entrance 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 200 sf 1/ 1,000 sf
Library 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 500 sf
Minor Utility Facility n/a n/a n/a n/a
Museum 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 500 sf
Private Non-Profit Club or Lodge 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 200 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Commercial Services
Animal Services (as noted below) -- -- -- --
Commercial Kennel 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Pet Grooming 1 / 2,500 sf none 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Pet Day Care or Training 1 / 2,500 sf none 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Veterinarian 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Assembly or Entertainment 1 / 40 seats 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 6 seats 1 / 6 seats
Banking & Financial Services
(except as noted below)
1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 450 sf 1 / 400 sf
Broadcast and/or Recording Studio 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 600 sf
Building & Home Repair Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 2,000 sf
Business Support Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 600 sf
Caterer/Wholesale Food Production 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Day Care Service 2 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 600 sf
Maintenance & Repair of Consumer Goods 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 750 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Personal Services (except as noted below) 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 750 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Health Care Services 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 300 sf
Recreation Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - Dwelling Unit RU - Rooming Unit
1 See the Transit Area Map
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 137
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
Table 4.1.15 Vehicular Parking (continued) *See Transit Orientation Map for distance to a TRANSIT STATION
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Use Category
Specific Use
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Within a
TRANSIT AREA1
(max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min)
Food and Beverage Service
All Permitted Uses 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 300 sf 1 / 500 sf
Lodging
Bed & Breakfast n/a 2 1 / DU + 1 / 4
guest rooms
1 / DU + 1 / 4
guest rooms
Hotel or Hostel 1 / 20 rooms 1 / 10 rooms 1 / 2 rooms 1 / 2 rooms
Office
Co-Working 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 1,200 sf 1 / 800 sf
General Office 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 650 sf
Research and Development or Laboratory 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Residential
Household Living 0.1 / DU 1.0 / DU 1.0 / DU 1.0 / DU
Group Living (except as follows) 0.05 / RU 0.5 / RU -- --
Community or Group Residence -- -- -- --
Dormitory, Fraternity or Sorority 0.1 / bed 0.5 / bed .05 / bed 1.0 / 4 beds
Homeless Shelter -- -- 4.0 4.0
Nursing Home/Assisted Living Facility -- -- 1 / 6 beds 1 / 6 beds
Single Room Occupancy Housing -- -- 1 / 6 beds 1 / 4 beds
Retail Sales
Building/Home Supplies & Equipment 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Consumer Goods (except as follows) 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Formula Retail 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Fresh Food Market or Grocery Store 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 1,500 sf
Farm/Vendor Market n/a n/a n/a 1 / 1,500 sf
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - Dwelling Unit RU - Rooming Unit
1 See the Transit Area Map
138 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 3 (MR3)
a). CURB CUTs for commercial or high-volume
driveways should be at least one-hundred
(100) feet from an unSIGNalized or SIGNalized
intersection.
b). CURB CUTs for residential driveways should be
at least twenty (20) feet from an unSIGNalized
intersection and at least forty (40) feet from a
SIGNalized intersection.
v. The interior width of a CURB CUT (between curb
stones) may be no wider than the driveway,
vehicular entrance, or loading facility it serves.
vi. A DRIVEWAY APRON may be installed only within
the furnishing zone of a sidewalk and must be
constructed in accordance with all standards
established by relevant City Departments.
vii. The grade, cross slope, and clear width of the
walkway of a sidewalk must be maintained
between the DRIVEWAY APRON and the ABUTTING
driveway. The appearance of the walkway (ie.
scoring pattern or paving material) must indicate
that, although a vehicle may cross, the area
traversed by a vehicle remains part of the sidewalk.
Figure 4.1.17 Sidewalk Curb Cuts
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 139
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
4.2 MID-RISE 4 (MR4)
1. Character Description
The Mid-Rise 4 district is characterized by a variety of
moderate FLOOR PLATE buildings up to four (4) stories in
height. Buildings are set close to the sidewalk to create
a defined STREET wall that supports pedestrian activity
and a sense of place. The district is primarily commercial,
with GROUND STORY USEs that typically address the needs of
residents and employees in the immediate neighborhood.
140 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
2. Intent
a. To implement the objectives of the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
of the City of Somerville.
b. To create, maintain, and enhance areas appropriate for
smaller scale, multi-USE and mixed-USE buildings and
neighborhood serving USEs.
3. Purpose
a. To permit the DEVELOPMENT of multi-unit and mixed-USE
buildings that do not exceed four (4) stories in height.
b. To provide quality commercial spaces and permit smallscale,
neighborhood serving commercial USEs.
c. To create DWELLING UNIT types, sizes, and BEDROOM counts
ideal for larger hoUSEholds in apartment buildings.
d. To create DWELLING UNIT types, sizes, and BEDROOM counts
ideal for smaller hoUSEholds in general buildings.
e. To permit increased residential density for buildings
that are sustainable or that provide 100% AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
f. To permit increased residential density for buildings
that meet the definition of a NET ZERO READY BUILDING or
100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
4. Applicability
a. The section is applicable to all real property within
the Mid-Rise 4 district as shown on the maps of the
Official Zoning Atlas of the City of Somerville.
5. Development Review
a. DEVELOPMENT review is subject to the provisions of
Article 15: Administration of this Ordinance.
b. All DEVELOPMENT, excluding NORMAL MAINTENANCE, requires
the submittal of a development review application to
the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the issuance of a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance prior to the issuance of a Building
Permit or Certificate of Occupancy.
c. Proposed DEVELOPMENT may or may not necessitate the
need for SUBDivision Plan Approval, Site Plan Approval,
a SPecial Permit, or a Hardship Variance based on
the nature of the proposal. In such cases, additional
DEVELOPMENT review is required in accordance with
Article 15: Administration.
i. The Planning Board is the decision making
authority for all DEVELOPMENT that requires Site Plan
Approval or a Special Permit.
ii. The Zoning Board of Appeals is the Review Board
for all Hardship Variances.
d. Upon verification that no additional DEVELOPMENT review
is necessary, or completion of the required DEVELOPMENT
review, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall issue a Zoning
Compliance Certificate to certify compliance with the
provisions and procedures of this Ordinance.
6. Building Types
a. One (1) PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE is permitted on each LOT.
b. The following BUILDING TYPEs are permitted by Site Plan
Approval in the Mid-Rise 4 district:
i. Apartment Building
ii. General Building
iii. Commercial Building
c. Apartment Buildings are prohibited on any LOT fronting
a PEDESTRIAN STREET.
d. ACCESSory structures are regulated according to Article
10: DEVELOPMENT Standards of this Ordinance.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 141
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
4.2.7 Apartment Building
A moderate FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY, PRINCIPAL BUILDING
TYPE purpose built for occuPATIOn by residential USEs on all
stories.
The following images are examples of the apartment
BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
Version Notes:
§4.2.3.c deleted from previous version
142 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
4.2.7. Apartment Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 30 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 12 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 12 ft
Lot Development C Side SETBACK (min) --
LOT Coverage (max) 90% Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
GREEN SCORE -- Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 0 ft
Minimum 0.25 1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 10 ft
Ideal 0.30 4th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
B OPEN SPACE (min) 15% D Rear Setback (min) --
Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 10 ft
1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 20 ft
4th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front SETBACK (min) --
SURFACE PARKING 30 ft
STRUCTURED PARKING 30 ft
F Secondary Front SETBACK (min) --
SURFACE PARKING 10 ft
STRUCTURED PARKING 2 ft
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 143
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
4.2.7. Apartment Building (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
A BUILDING WIDTH (max) 200 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
FACADE Build Out (min) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
Primary Front 80% BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
Secondary Front 65%
B FLOOR PLATE (max) 15,000 sf Use & Occupancy
GROUND STORY Elevation (min) 2 ft GROSS FLOOR AREA per DU --
C STORY Height (min) 10 ft LOT AREA < 5,500 sf 1,500
D Number of Stories (min/max) 3 4 LOT AREA >= 5,500 sf 1,125
E BUILDING Height, Feet (max) 50 ft NET ZERO READY BUILDING 850
Roof Type Flat 100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING 850
Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/DU
144 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
4.2.7. Apartment Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS as specified on Table 4.2.7.
f. Design Guidelines
i. GROUND STORY DWELLING UNITs should be elevated
above the grade of any adjacent sidewalk so that
the window sills of the DWELLING UNIT are at or above
the eye-level of passing pedestrians. This elevation
change maintains privacy for occupants while also
encouraging open blinds or curtains to allow natural
daylight into the unit.
ii. FENESTRATION patterns and window configurations
should break the direct line of sight between
neighboring properties to every extent practicable.
Translucent glass on the bottom half of windows
or strategically placed landscape elements should
be utilized if it is not practical to off-set windows in
such a way as to minimize privacy impacts.
iii. Outdoor AMENITY SPACEs that are elevated, such as
roof DECKs, fully projecting balconies, and UPPER
STORY rear porches should, provide sight-obscuring
visual screening at the sides to increase privacy,
security, and to limit views of ABUTTING properties
from elevated vantage points.
Table 4.2.7 Required ADUs
Total DWELLING UNITs Required ADUs
0 to 3 units None
4 or more units 20% of units
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 145
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
4.2.8 General Building
A moderate FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE
with GROUND STORY commercial space and no limitations on
the occupancy of UPPER STORIES for permitted USEs. The UPPER
STORIES of a general BUILDING are typically residential, but a
wide variety exists. As the number of stories increases,
it becomes more likely for the UPPER STORIES of a general
BUILDING to host commercial USEs as well as residential.
The following images are examples of the general BUILDING
TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
146 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
4.2.8. General Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 30 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
Lot Development C Side SETBACK (min) --
LOT Coverage (max) 90% Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
GREEN SCORE -- Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 0 ft
Minimum 0.25 1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 10 ft
Ideal 0.30 4th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
B OPEN SPACE (min) 15% D Rear Setback (min) --
Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 10 ft
1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 20 ft
4th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front SETBACK (min) --
SURFACE PARKING 30 ft
STRUCTURED PARKING 30 ft
F Secondary Front SETBACK (min) --
SURFACE PARKING 10 ft
STRUCTURED PARKING 2 ft
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 147
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
4.2.8. General Building (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
A BUILDING WIDTH (max) 200 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 70%
FACADE Build Out, Primary Front (min) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
Primary Front 80% BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
Secondary Front 65%
B FLOOR PLATE (max) 15,000 sf Use & Occupancy
C GROUND STORY Height (min) 14 ft GROUND STORY Entrance Spacing (max) 30 ft
D UPPER STORY Height (min) 10 ft Commercial Space Depth (min) 30 ft
E Number of Stories (min) 3 4 GROSS FLOOR AREA per DU --
F BUILDING Height, Feet (max) 52 ft LOT AREA < 5,500 sf 1,500
Roof Type Flat LOT AREA >= 5,500 sf 1,125
NET ZERO READY BUILDING 850
100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING 850
Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/DU
148 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
4.2.8. General Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 10, the provisions of Article 10 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS as specified on Table 4.2.8
(a).
iii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 4.2.8 (b).
f. Design Guidelines
i. FENESTRATION patterns and window configurations
should break the direct line of sight between
neighboring properties to every extent practicable.
Translucent glass on the bottom half of windows
or strategically placed landscape elements should
be utilized if it is not practical to off-set windows in
such a way as to minimize privacy impacts.
ii. Outdoor AMENITY SPACEs that are elevated, such as
roof DECKs, fully projecting balconies, and UPPER
STORY rear porches should, provide sight-obscuring
visual screening at the sides to increase privacy,
security, and to limit views of ABUTTING properties
from elevated vantage points.
Table 4.2.8 (a) Required ADUs
Total DWELLING UNITs Required ADUs
0 to 3 units None
4 or more units 20% of units
Table 4.2.8 (b) Linkage
Commercial
GROSS FLOOR AREA
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 149
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
4.2.9 Commercial Building
A moderate FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY, PRINCIPAL BUILDING
TYPE purpose built for occuPATIOn by commercial USEs on
all stories. GROUND STORY commercial space is primarily
occupied by commercial service, food & beverage service,
or retail sales PRINCIPAL USEs. Floor space on upper stories
may be occupied by retail USEs that do not rely on the
visibility of a storefront at sidewalk level.
The following images are examples of the general BUILDING
TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
150 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
4.2.9. Commercial Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 30 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
Lot Development C Side SETBACK (min) --
LOT Coverage (max) 90% Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
GREEN SCORE -- Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 0 ft
Minimum 0.25 1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 10 ft
Ideal 0.30 4th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
B OPEN SPACE (min) 15% D Rear Setback (min) --
Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 10 ft
1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 20 ft
4th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front SETBACK (min) --
SURFACE PARKING 30 ft
STRUCTURED PARKING 30 ft
F Secondary Front SETBACK (min) --
SURFACE PARKING 10 ft
STRUCTURED PARKING 2 ft
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 151
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
4.2.9. Commercial Building (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
A BUILDING WIDTH (max) 200 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 70%
FACADE Build Out, Primary Front (min) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 70%
Primary Front 80% BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
Secondary Front 65%
B FLOOR PLATE (max) 15,000 sf Use & Occupancy
C GROUND STORY Height (min) 14 ft PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE Spacing (max) 30 ft
D Upper Story Height (min) 10 ft Commercial Space Depth (min) 30 ft
E Number of Stories (min/max) 3 4
F Building Height, Feet (max) 55 ft
Roof Type Flat
152 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
4.2.9. Commercial Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 4.2.9.
Table 4.2.9 Linkage
Commercial
GROSS FLOOR AREA
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 153
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
10. Building Components
a. BUILDING COMPONENTS are ACCESSory elements attached to
the MAIN MASSING of a PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
b. BUILDING COMPONENTS are permitted by Site Plan Approval
as specified on Table 4.2.10.
i. At least one (1) storefront is required for each
GROUND STORY commercial space.
c. BUILDING COMPONENTS not identified on Table 4.2.10 are
prohibited.
d. Unless otherwise specified, BUILDING COMPONENTS
may attach to other BUILDING COMPONENTS to create
assemblies of components.
Table 4.2.10 Building Components
Apartment BUILDING
General BUILDING
Commercial BUILDING
Awning N P P
Entry Canopy P P P
Lobby Entrance P P P
Storefront N P P
Stoop P N N
Bay Window P P P
Balcony P P N
Arcade N N N
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
154 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
e. Awning
i. An awning is a wall mounted frame covered with
fabric or other material that provides shade and
weather protection over a storefront or BUILDING
entrance. .
Dimensions
A Width (min) See ii
Standards
B Projection (min) 3 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
D SETBACK from Curb (min) 2 ft
E Valance Height (max) 12 in
ii. Standards
a). Awnings must be securely attached to and
supported by the BUILDING and must fit the
windows or doors the awning is attached to.
b). An awning must be made of durable, weatherresistant
material that is water repellent.
c). Internally illuminated or back-lit awnings are
prohibited.
d). An awning that projects over the sidewalk of a
public THOROUGHFARE requires compliance with
all City Ordinances.
f. Entry Canopy
i. An entry canopy is a wall-mounted STRUCTURE that
provides shade and weather protection over a
storefront or BUILDING entrance.
Dimensions
A Width (min) See ii
Standards
B Projection (min) 3 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
D Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
SETBACK from Curb (min) 2 ft
ii. Standards
a). Entry canopies must be visually supported by
brackets, cables, or rods.
b). The width of an entry canopy must be equal
to or greater than the width of the doorway
surround or exterior casing it is mounted over.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 155
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
g. Lobby Entrance
i. A lobby entrance is a non-load bearing assembly of
entry doors and windows providing ACCESS and light
to the lobby of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Width (min/max) 15 ft 30 ft
B Height (min) 80% of GROUND
STORY Height
Recessed Entrance Width (max) 15 ft
Recessed Entrance Depth (max) 5 ft
ii. Standards
a). When a lobby entrance is set back from the
FRONT LOT LINE, the FRONTAGE AREA must be paved.
h. Storefront
i. A storefront is a non-load bearing assembly of
commercial entry doors and windows providing
ACCESS and light to a commercial space and a place
to display goods, services, and SIGNs.
Dimensions
A Width (min/max) 15 ft 30 ft
B Height (min) 80% of GROUND
STORY Height
Display Window Height (min) 8 ft
Recessed Entrance Width (max) 15 ft
Recessed Entrance Depth (max) 5 ft
ii. Standards
a). An unobstructed view of the interior space or a
lighted and maintained merchandise display(s)
must be provided for a depth of at least four (4)
feet behind storefront display windows.
b). When storefronts are set back from the FRONT
LOT LINE, the FRONTAGE AREA must be paved.
c). When present, awnings and canopies must be
mounted between columns, PILASTERs, or PIERs;
above doorways and display windows; and
below the SIGN BAND.
d). Exterior security grilles, gates, and roll-down
security doors and windows are prohibited.
156 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
i. Stoop
i. A stoop is a set of stairs with a landing leading to
the entrance of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Landing Width (min) 4 ft
B Landing Depth (min) 4 ft
C Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
ii. Standards
a). Paving, excluding driveways, must match the
ABUTTING sidewalk unless paved with pervious,
porous, or permeable materials.
b). Stairs may be recessed into the BUILDING FACADE
when the BUILDING is set back four (4) feet or
less.
c). Stairs are not permitted to ENCROACH onto any
ABUTTING sidewalk.
d). Stairs may be built perpendicular or parallel to
the BUILDING FACADE, but must lead directly to
ground level or an ABUTTING sidewalk.
j. Bay Window
i. A bay window is an assembly of windows
projecting from a building to provide additional
HABITABLE space, increased light, multi-directional
views, and ARTICULATION to an exterior wall.
Dimensions
A Width (max) 16 ft
B Projection (max) 3 ft
C Height (max)
Height of
BUILDING in
Stories
D Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 3 ft
FENESTRATION (min) 60%
ii. Standards
a). Bay windows, including box and bow windows,
must include at least three (3) windows.
b). The cumulative width of multiple bays may
equal up to fifty percent (50%) of the width of
the exterior wall from which the bays project.
c). Bays projecting over the sidewalk of a public
THOROUGHFARE must have at least two (2) stories
of CLEARANCE and be compliant with all City
Ordinances.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 157
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
k. Balcony
i. A balcony is a platform with a railing that provides
outdoor AMENITY SPACE.
Dimensions
A Width (min) 5 ft
B Depth (max) 5 ft
D Area (min) 50 sf
CLEARANCE (min) 10 ft
Permitted Front SETBACK
ENCROACHMENT (max) 6 ft
ii. Standards
a). Balconies may be recessed, projecting, a
combination of the two, or terraced as part of
the roof of a portico, porch, or bay.
b). A balcony that projects over the sidewalk of a
public THOROUGHFARE requires compliance with
all City Ordinances.
c). The guard rail of any balcony oriented toward a
FRONT LOT LINE must permit visual supervision of
the PUBLIC REALM through the posts and rails.
d). The guard rail of any balcony oriented toward
a side or REAR LOT LINE ABUTTING the NR district
must include sight-obscuring visual screening
so that it is at least fifty percent (50%) opaque.
l. Arcade
i. An arcade is a pedestrian walkway covered by the
upper floors of a BUILDING. The GROUND STORY FACADE
is SETBACK and upper floors are supported by a
colonnade or supports.
Dimensions
A Depth (min/max) 10 ft 15 ft
B Height (max) 1 STORY
C CLEARANCE (min/max) 14 ft 24 ft
ii. Standards
a). Arcades must extend the entire width of a
BUILDING and must have a consistent depth.
b). Support columns or PIERs may be spaced no
farther apart than they are tall.
c). Arcades are considered part of the BUILDING for
the purpose of measuring FACADE build out.
d). Arcades may be combined only with storefront
and lobby entrance frontages.
e). The finished ceiling of an arcade interior may
be arched or flat, but must have a greater
CLEARANCE than the openings between columns
or PIERs.
158 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
11. Facade Design
a. FACADEs must provide solid material framing each
storefront and lobby entrance as follows:
i. PILASTERs or columns supporting a horizontal lintel
and CORNICE;
ii. a spandrel positioned between PILASTERs or columns
that extend from upper stories of the building to
the ground; or
iii. flat wall above and to either side of a void or
punched opening.
b. Storefronts and lobby entrances must be set within the
resulting frame provided for each by the FACADE.
c. Materials framing each storefront or lobby entrance
may be integrated into the design of the FACADE
or customized for individual storefronts and lobby
entrances.
d. Mechanical louvers necessary for venting purposes
are not permitted in the required frame, but may be
incorporated into any storefront or lobby entrance
system.
e. FACADEs must differentiate the GROUND STORY of the
building from the upper stories through horizontal
ARTICULATION, a change in material, or a change in
window size or pattern to create a distinct base to the
building FACADE. The entire height of the GROUND STORY
must be included in the FACADE base.
f. For buildings with more than one FACADE, the design of
the base must align horizontally at the corner.
g. FACADEs must provide surface relief from the average
plane of the FACADE by at least four (4) inches, through
the USE of architectural elements such as bay windows,
columns, CORNER BOARDs, CORNICEs, door and window
surrounds, moldings, PIERs, PILASTERs, recessed
storefronts or lobby entrances, seat walls, sills, wall
thickness, and recessed or projecting windows.
h. The FACADE of any building greater than one hundred
(100) feet in width must be divided vertically and
designed as two (2) or more separate and distinct
facades of differing architectural treatment so that the
building appears to be multiple buildings. See Figure
4.2.11 (b). The differentiation between facade designs
must include the following:
i. a change in CORNICE, roof eave, or parapet;
ii. a change in wall material; and
iii. a pilaster or column on either side of the division
between each facade.
12. Architectural Design Guidelines
a. FACADEs should be visually divided into a series of
ARCHITECTURAL BAYs that are derived, in general, from the
building’s structural bay spacing.
b. PIERs, PILASTERs, or other features defining each
ARCHITECTURAL BAY should either extend all the way to
the ground or terminate at any horizontal ARTICULATION
defining the base of the building.
c. ARCHITECTURAL BAYs should align, in general, with
individual or groups of storefronts and lobby entrances.
d. PIERs, PILASTERs, or other features defining each
ARCHITECTURAL BAY should always project forward and be
uninterrupted by any horizontal articulation, excluding
Figure 4.2.11 (a) Storefront & Lobby Entrance Framing
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 159
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
any horizontal ARTICULATION USEd to differentiate the base
of the building.
e. Vents, exhausts, and other utility features on building
FACADEs should be architecturally integrated into
the design of the building and should be located to
minimize adverse effects on pedestrian comfort along
sidewalks and within OPEN SPACEs.
f. Buildings at TERMINATED VISTAs should be ARTICULATEd with
design features that function as focal points.
g. FENESTRATION glazing should be inset from the plane of
exterior wall surfaces.
h. RIBBON WINDOWS should be avoided.
i. Monotonous and repetitive storefront or lobby
systems, awnings, canopies, SIGN types, colors, or
designs should be avoided.
j. Storefronts and lobby entrances should include
awnings or canopies to provide weather protection
for pedestrians and reduce glare for storefront display
areas. Awnings should be open-ended and operable.
k. Lobby entrances for UPPER STORY USEs should be
optimally located, well defined, clearly visible, and
separate from the entrance for other GROUND STORY USEs.
l. Lobbies should be limited in both width and total area
to preserve floor space and frontage for other GROUND
STORY USEs. Buildings should USE any combination of
FACADE ARTICULATION, a double-height ceiling, a distinctive
doorway, a change in wall material, a change in paving
material within the FRONTAGE AREA, or some other
architectural element(s) to make lobbies visual and
materially distinctive.
m. The selection of materials, FENESTRATION, and
ornamentation should result in a consistent and
harmonious composition that appears as a unified
whole rather than a collection of unrelated parts.
n. The type and color of materials should be kept to a
minimum, preferably three (3) or fewer.
o. Two (2) or more wall materials should be combined
only one above the other, except for bay windows.
p. Wall materials appearing heavier in weight should be
USEd below wall materials appearing lighter in weight
(wood and metal above brick, and all three above
stone)
q. Horizontal or vertical board siding or shingles,
regardless of material, should be avoided.
r. Architectural details and finish materials for the base
of a building should be constructed of architectural
concrete or pre-cast cementitious panels, natural
or cast stone, heavy gauge metal panels, glazed or
unglazed architectural terracotta, or brick.
s. Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) should be
avoided.
Figure 4.2.11 (b) Appearance of Two Buildings
160 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
13. Use Provisions
a. General
i. The USE of real property is subject to the provisions
of Article 9: USE Provisions of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 9, the provisions of Article 9 apply.
ii. USE categories are permitted as specified on Table
4.2.13. USE categories that are not identified on
Table 4.2.13 are prohibited.
iii. All USEs must comply with any USE-specific
standards applicable for each USE in §9.2 USE
Definitions & Limitations.
iv. USEs permitted by Special Permit require additional
DEVELOPMENT review in accordance with §15.2.1
Special Permits.
b. USE Limitations
i. The USE of any GROUND STORY commercial space
fronting a PEDESTRIAN STREET, excluding lobbies for
UPPER STORY USEs, is limited to the following PRINCIPAL
USE categories:
a). Arts & Creative Enterprise
b). Food & Beverage Service
c). Retail Sales
d). Civic & Institutional
c. Increases in Density
i. Existing STRUCTURES may not be altered to conflict
with number of DWELLING UNITs permitted for each
BUILDING TYPE.
Table 4.2.13 Permitted Uses
Use Category
Specific Use MR4
Arts & Creative Enterprise
Artisinal Production P
Arts Exhibition P
Arts Sales & Services P
Co-working P
Design Services P
Shared Workspaces & Arts Education P
Cannabis Establishment
Cannabis Cultivation P
Cannabis Retail Sales SP
Cannabis Research & Development P
Cannabis Testing Laboratory P
Civic & Institutional
Community Center P
Hospital SP
Library P
Minor Utility Facility SP
Museum P
Private Non-Profit Club or Lodge SP
Public Service P
Religious & Educational Uses Protected by
M.G.L. 40A. Sec. 3
P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 161
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
Table 4.2.13 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use MR4
Commercial Services
Animal Services (as noted below) --
Commercial Kennel SP
Pet Grooming P
Pet Daycare & Training SP
Veterinarian SP
Assembly or Entertainment SP
Banking & Financial Services (except as noted
below)
P
Personal Credit SP
Broadcast and/or Recording Studio P
Building & Home Repair Services SP
Business Support Services P
Caterer/Wholesale Food Production SP
Day Care Service (as noted below) --
Adult Day Care Center P
Child Day Care Center P
Educational Services P
Maintenance & Repair of Consumer Goods P
Personal Services (except as noted below) P
Body-Art Services SP
Fitness Services P
Funeral Services SP
Health Care Services SP
Formula Personal Services SP
Recreation Services SP
Vehicle Parking (except as follows) --
Bike Share Parking P
Car Share Parking (3 or fewer spaces) P
Car Share Parking (4 or more spaces) P
Commercial Parking P
Food and Beverage Service
Bar/Restaurant/Tavern P
Bakery/Café/Coffee Shop P
Formula Food & Beverage Service SP
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
Table 4.2.13 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use MR4
Lodging
Bed & Breakfast SP
Hotel or Hostel SP
Office
General Office P
Research and Development or Laboratory P
Residential
Household Living SP
Group Living
(except as follows)
SP
Community or Group Residence P
Dormitory, Fraternity or Sorority SP
Homeless Shelter SP
Nursing Home/Assisted Living Facility SP
Rooming House SP
Retail Sales
Building/Home Supplies & Equipment SP
Consumer Goods (except as follows) P
Alcohol Sales SP
Firearms Sales N
Pet Store SP
Formula Retail SP
Fresh Food Market or Grocery Store P
Farm/Vendor Market P
Urban Agriculture
Farming (as noted below) --
Commercial Farming P
Community Farming P
Community Gardening P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
162 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
14. Development Standards
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
10: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 10, the provisions of Article 10
apply.
b. SIGNs
i. A SIGN, individual numerals or letters, or a
nonelectrical nameplate identifying the property
address is required for all real property as follows:
a). Each GROUND STORY non-residential USE must
identify the STREET address either on the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE door or above or beside the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE of the USE.
b). All residential BUILDING TYPEs must identify the
STREET address either on the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE
door, above or beside the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE, or
on a mailbox.
ii. Address SIGNs must be made easily visible through
the USE of colors or materials that contrast with the
background material they are attached to and must
be conspicuously located to provide visibility from
the THOROUGHFARE that the BUILDING faces.
iii. Address SIGNs must be twelve (12) inches in height
or less and may include the name of the occupant.
Table 4.2.13 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use MR4
Accessory Uses
Home Occupations (as noted below) --
Home Office P
Urban Agriculture (as noted below) --
Apiculture P
Aviculture P
Commercial Farming P
Residential Gardening P
Vehicle Parking, Accessory (except as follows) P
Home Business Vehicle Parking N
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 163
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
15. Parking & Mobility
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
11: Parking & Mobility of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 11, the provisions of Article 11 apply.
ii. Vehicular parking must be provided as specified on
Table 4.1 (d), except as follows:
a). Non-residential USEs with five thousand (5,000)
square feet or less of gross LEASABLE FLOOR AREA
are exempt from any minimum requirements
of Table 4.1. (d).
b). Any CHANGE IN USE within a non-residential
STRUCTURE constructed before the effective date
of this Ordinance, provided that the change
is to a permitted USE, is exempt from any
minimum requirements of Table 4.1 (d).
iii. There are no parking requirements for ACCESSORY
USEs.
iv. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces may be shared
between USEs on the same LOT and buildings on
the same BLOCK in accordance with §11.3 SHARED
PARKING.
b. Type
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING may be provided as SURFACE
PARKING, above ground STRUCTURED PARKING, or
underground STRUCTURED PARKING.
c. Driveways
i. New driveways require a permit from the City
Engineer in accordance with Chapter 11, Article II,
Sec. 11-33 Driveway Construction of The Code of
Ordinances, City of Somerville, Massachusetts.
ii. Driveways are not permitted in the FRONTAGE AREA
between a building and the FRONT LOT LINE.
iii. Driveways may be up to twenty four (24) feet in
width.
iv. Driveways may provide ACCESS in whole or in part
on or across an ABUTTING LOT(s), provided that an
ACCESS EASEMENT exists between all PROPERTY OWNERS.
d. Parking Design
i. The design of all parking is subject to §11.1 Bicycle
Parking and §11.2 MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING of this
Ordinance.
e. Parking Location
i. Required vehicular parking, excluding any required
handicapped parking, may be provided on a
contiguous LOT under the same ownership as the
LOT that the parking will serve as follows:
a). Pedestrian ACCESS to off-SITE vehicular parking
must be via a paved sidewalk or walkway.
b). A lease, recorded covenant, or other
comparable legal instrument guaranteeing long
term USE of the SITE must be provided to the
review board or BUILDING OFFICIAL and executed
and filed with the Registry of Deeds.
ii. For real property located in more than one
municipality, MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING need not be
located within the City of Somerville.
f. Unbundled Parking
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces must be rented or
leased as an option rather than a requirement of
the rental, lease, or purchase of a DWELLING UNIT or
non-residential floor space.
ii. Bicycle parking must be provided at no cost or fee
to customers, visitors, employees, tenants, and
residents.
g. Parking Relief
i. Relief from the parking standards of Table 4.2 (d)
requires a Special Permit.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing
relief from the parking standards of Table 4.2
(d):
i). The supply and demand of on-STREET
parking in the neighborhood, as
determined through a parking study.
ii). MOBILITY MANAGEMENT programs and
services provided by the APPLICANT to
reduce the demand for parking.
iii). That parking provided in excess of any
maximum permitted does not result in the
increase in impervious LOT AREA.
16. Public Realm
a. Sidewalks
i. When DEVELOPMENT occurs on any LOT ABUTTING a
sidewalk that is less than twelve (12) feet in total
width, the BUILDING must be set-back an additional
distance to accommodate expansion of the
ABUTTING sidewalk to a width of at least twelve (12)
feet. The minimum and maximum front SETBACKs for
each BUILDING TYPE are increased accordingly.
b. Sidewalk CURB CUTs
i. A CURB CUT requires a permit from the City Engineer
and must be compliant with all City Ordinances.
ii. Unless otherwise specified, the City Engineer may
not permit more than one (1) CURB CUT per FRONT LOT
LINE of a LOT.
iii. CURB CUTs are prohibited along all THOROUGHFAREs
designated as a PEDESTRIAN STREET.
iv. CURB CUTs must be located to minimize conflicts
with pedestrians and bicyclists and must have a
clear distance from fire hydrants, STREET TREES, utility
poles, and other furnishings as deemed necessary
by the City Engineer.
164 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
Table 4.2.15 Vehicular Parking
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Use Category
Specific Use
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Within a
TRANSIT AREA1
(max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min)
Arts & Creative Enterprise
All Permitted Uses 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Cannabis Establishment
Cannabis Retail Sales 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Cannabis Research & Development 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Cannabis Testing Laboratory 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Civic & Institutional
Community Center 1 / 10,000 sf 4 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,800 sf 1 / 600 sf
Educational Facility
1.0 /
classroom
4.0 /
classroom
1.5 /
classroom
3.0 /
classroom
Hospital
10 per
entrance 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 200 sf 1/ 1,000 sf
Library 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 500 sf
Minor Utility Facility n/a n/a n/a n/a
Museum 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 500 sf
Private Non-Profit Club or Lodge 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 200 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Commercial Services
Animal Services (as noted below) -- -- -- --
Commercial Kennel 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Pet Grooming 1 / 2,500 sf none 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Pet Day Care or Training 1 / 2,500 sf none 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Veterinarian 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Assembly or Entertainment 1 / 40 seats 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 6 seats 1 / 6 seats
Banking & Financial Services
(except as noted below)
1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 450 sf 1 / 400 sf
Broadcast and/or Recording Studio 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 600 sf
Building & Home Repair Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 2,000 sf
Business Support Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 600 sf
Caterer/Wholesale Food Production 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Day Care Service 2 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 600 sf
Maintenance & Repair of Consumer Goods 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 750 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Personal Services (except as noted below) 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 750 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Health Care Services 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 300 sf
Recreation Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf -- --
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - Dwelling Unit RU - Rooming Unit
1 See the Transit Area Map
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 165
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
Table 4.2.15 Vehicular Parking (continued)
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Use Category
Specific Use
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Within a
TRANSIT AREA1
(max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min)
Food and Beverage Service
All Permitted Uses 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 300 sf 1 / 500 sf
Lodging
Bed & Breakfast n/a 2.0 1 / DU + 1 / 4
guest rooms
1 / DU + 1 / 4
guest rooms
Hotel or Hostel 1 / 20 rooms 1 / 10 rooms 1 / 2 rooms 1 / 2 rooms
Office
Co-Working 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 1,200 sf 1 / 800 sf
General Office 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 650 sf
Research and Development or Laboratory 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Residential
Household Living 0.1 / DU 1.0 / DU 1.0 / DU 1.0 / DU
Group Living
(except as follows)
0.05 / room 0.5 / room -- --
Community or Group Residence -- -- -- --
Dormitory, Fraternity or Sorority 0.1 / room 0.5 / room .05 / bed 1.0 / 4 beds
Homeless Shelter -- -- 4.0 4.0
Nursing Home/Assisted Living Facility -- -- 1 / 6 beds 1 / 6 beds
Single Room Occupancy Housing -- -- 1 / 6 beds 1 / 4 beds
Retail Sales
Building/Home Supplies & Equipment 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Consumer Goods (except as follows) 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Formula Retail 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Fresh Food Market or Grocery Store 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 1,500 sf
Farm/Vendor Market n/a n/a n/a 1 / 1,500 sf
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - Dwelling Unit RU - Rooming Unit
1 See the Transit Area Map
166 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 4 (MR4)
a). CURB CUTs for commercial or high-volume
driveways should be at least one-hundred
(100) feet from an unSIGNalized or SIGNalized
intersection.
b). CURB CUTs for residential driveways should be
at least twenty (20) feet from an unSIGNalized
intersection and at least forty (40) feet from a
SIGNalized intersection.
v. The interior width of a CURB CUT (between curb
stones) may be no wider than the driveway,
vehicular entrance, or loading facility it serves.
vi. A DRIVEWAY APRON may be installed only within
the furnishing zone of a sidewalk and must be
constructed in accordance with all standards
established by relevant City Departments.
vii. The grade, cross slope, and clear width of the
walkway of a sidewalk must be maintained
between the DRIVEWAY APRON and the ABUTTING
driveway. The appearance of the walkway (ie.
scoring pattern or paving material) must indicate
that, although a vehicle may cross, the area
traversed by a vehicle remains part of the sidewalk.
Figure 4.2.16 Sidewalk Curb Cuts
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 167
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
4.3 MID-RISE 5 (MR5)
1. Description
The Mid-Rise 5 district is characterized by a variety of moderate to large FLOOR PLATE buildings up to five (5) stories in
height with an UPPER STORY STEP-BACK after the fourth (4th) floor. Buildings are set close to the sidewalk to create a defined
STREET wall that supports pedestrian activity and a sense of place. The district is primarily commercial, with GROUND STORY
USEs that address the needs of residents and employees from the immediate neighborhood, but can also provide goods
and services to the larger Somerville community and visitors from the broader Boston metropolitan area.
168 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
2. Intent
a. To implement the objectives of the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
of the City of Somerville.
b. To create, maintain, and enhance areas appropriate for
moderate scale, multi-USE and mixed-USE buildings and
neighborhood- and community-serving USEs.
3. Purpose
a. To permit the DEVELOPMENT of multi-unit and mixed-USE
buildings that do not exceed five (5) stories in height.
b. To provide quality commercial spaces and permit small
and medium scale, neighborhood- and communityserving
commercial USEs.
c. To create DWELLING UNIT types, sizes, and BEDROOM counts
ideal for larger hoUSEholds in apartment buildings.
d. To create DWELLING UNIT types, sizes, and BEDROOM counts
ideal for smaller hoUSEholds in general buildings.
e. To permit increased residential density for buildings
that are sustainable or that provide 100% AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
f. To permit increased residential density for buildings
that meet the definition of a NET ZERO READY BUILDING or
100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
4. Applicability
a. The section is applicable to all real property within
the Mid-Rise 5 district as shown on the maps of the
Official Zoning Atlas of the City of Somerville.
5. Development Review
a. DEVELOPMENT review is subject to the provisions of
Article 15: Administration of this Ordinance.
b. All DEVELOPMENT, excluding NORMAL MAINTENANCE, requires
the submittal of a development review application to
the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the issuance of a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance prior to the issuance of a BUILDING
Permit or Certificate of Occupancy.
c. Proposed DEVELOPMENT may or may not necessitate the
need for SUBDivision Plan Approval, Site Plan Approval,
a SPecial Permit, or a Hardship Variance based on
the nature of the proposal. In such cases, additional
DEVELOPMENT review is required in accordance with
Article 15: Administration.
i. The Planning Board is the decision making
authority for all DEVELOPMENT that requires Site Plan
Approval or a Special Permit.
ii. The Zoning Board of Appeals is the Review Board
for all Hardship Variances.
d. Upon verification that no additional DEVELOPMENT review
is necessary, or completion of the required DEVELOPMENT
review, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall issue a Zoning
Compliance CERTIFICATE to certify compliance with the
provisions and procedures of this Ordinance.
6. Building Types
a. One (1) PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE is permitted on each LOT.
b. The following BUILDING TYPEs are permitted by Site Plan
Approval in the Mid-Rise 5 district:
i. Apartment BUILDING
ii. General BUILDING
iii. Commercial BUILDING
c. Apartment Buildings are prohibited on any LOT fronting
a PEDESTRIAN STREET.
d. ACCESSory STRUCTURES are regulated according to Article
10: DEVELOPMENT Standards of this Ordinance.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 169
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
4.3.7 Apartment Building
A moderate FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY, PRINCIPAL BUILDING
TYPE purpose built for occuPATIOn by residential USEs on all
stories.
The following images are examples of the apartment
BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
170 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
4.3.7. Apartment Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 30 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 12 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 12 ft
Lot Development C Side SETBACK (min) --
LOT Coverage (max) 90% Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
GREEN SCORE -- Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 0 ft
Minimum 0.20 1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 10 ft
Ideal 0.25 4th - 5th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
B OPEN SPACE (min) 15% D Rear Setback (min) --
Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 10 ft
1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 20 ft
4th - 5th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
F Secondary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 171
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
4.3.7. Apartment Building (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
A BUILDING WIDTH (max) 200 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
FACADE Build Out, Primary Front (min) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
Primary Front 80% BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
Secondary Front 65%
B FLOOR PLATE (max) 20,000 sf Use & Occupancy
GROUND STORY Elevation (min) 2 ft GROSS FLOOR AREA per DU --
C STORY Height (min) 10 ft LOT AREA < 5,500 sf 1,500
D Number of Stories (min/max) 3 5 LOT AREA >= 5,500 sf 1,125
E Step-Back, 5th Story (min) 10 ft NET ZERO READY BUILDING 850
F Building Height, Feet (max) 62 ft 100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING 850
Roof Type Flat Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/DU
172 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
4.3.7. Apartment Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS as specified on Table 4.3.7.
f. Design Guidelines
i. GROUND STORY DWELLING UNITs should be elevated
above the grade of any adjacent sidewalk so that
the window sills of the DWELLING UNIT are at or above
the eye-level of passing pedestrians. This elevation
change maintains privacy for occupants while also
encouraging open blinds or curtains to allow natural
daylight into the unit.
ii. FENESTRATION patterns and window configurations
should break the direct line of sight between
neighboring properties to every extent practicable.
Translucent glass on the bottom half of windows
or strategically placed landscape elements should
be utilized if it is not practical to off-set windows in
such a way as to minimize privacy impacts.
iii. Outdoor AMENITY SPACEs that are elevated, such as
roof DECKs, fully projecting balconies, and UPPER
STORY rear porches should, provide sight-obscuring
visual screening at the sides to increase privacy,
security, and to limit views of ABUTTING properties
from elevated vantage points.
Table 4.3.7 Required ADUs
Total DWELLING UNITs Required ADUs
0 to 3 units None
4 or more units 20% of units
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 173
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
4.3.8 General Building
A moderate FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE
with GROUND STORY commercial space and no limitations on
the occupancy of UPPER STORIES for permitted USEs. The UPPER
STORIES of a general BUILDING are typically residential, but a
wide variety exists. As the number of stories increases,
it becomes more likely for the UPPER STORIES of a general
BUILDING to host commercial USEs as well as residential.
The following images are examples of the general BUILDING
TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
174 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
4.3.8. General Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 30 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
Lot Development C Side SETBACK (min) --
LOT Coverage (max) 90% Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
GREEN SCORE -- Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 0 ft
Minimum 0.20 1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 10 ft
Ideal 0.25 4th - 5th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
B OPEN SPACE (min) 15% D Rear Setback (min) --
Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 10 ft
1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 20 ft
4th - 5th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
F Secondary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 175
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
4.3.8. General Building (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
A BUILDING WIDTH (max) 200 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 70%
FACADE Build Out (min) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
Primary Front 80% BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
Secondary Front 65%
B FLOOR PLATE (max) 20,000 sf Use & Occupancy
C GROUND STORY Height (min) 14 ft GROUND STORY Entrance Spacing (max) 30 ft
D UPPER STORY Height (min) 10 ft Commercial Space Depth (min) 30 ft
E Number of Stories (min/max) 3 5 GROSS FLOOR AREA per DU --
F Step-Back, 5th Story (min) 10 ft LOT AREA < 5,500 sf 1,500
G Building Height, Feet (max) 66 ft LOT AREA >= 5,500 sf 1,125
Roof Type Flat NET ZERO READY BUILDING 850
100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING 850
Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/DU
176 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
4.3.8. General Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS as specified on Table 4.3.8
(a).
iii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 4.3.8 (b).
f. Design Guidelines
i. FENESTRATION patterns and window configurations
should break the direct line of sight between
neighboring properties to every extent practicable.
Translucent glass on the bottom half of windows
or strategically placed landscape elements should
be utilized if it is not practical to off-set windows in
such a way as to minimize privacy impacts.
ii. Outdoor AMENITY SPACEs that are elevated, such as
roof DECKs, fully projecting balconies, and UPPER
STORY rear porches should, provide sight-obscuring
visual screening at the sides to increase privacy,
security, and to limit views of ABUTTING properties
from elevated vantage points.
Table 4.3.8 (a) Required ADUs
Total DWELLING UNITs Required ADUs
0 to 3 units None
4 or more units 20% of units
Table 4.3.8 (b) Linkage
Commercial
GROSS FLOOR AREA
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 177
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
4.3.9 Commercial Building
A moderate FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY, PRINCIPAL BUILDING
TYPE purpose built for occuPATIOn by commercial USEs on
all stories. GROUND STORY commercial space is primarily
occupied by commercial service, food & beverage service,
or retail sales PRINCIPAL USEs. Floor space on upper stories
may be occupied by retail USEs that do not rely on the
visibility of a storefront at sidewalk level.
The following images are examples of the commercial
BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
178 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
4.3.9. Commercial Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 30 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
Lot Development C Side SETBACK (min) 0 ft
LOT Coverage (max) 90% Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
GREEN SCORE -- Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 0 ft
Minimum 0.20 1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 10 ft
Ideal 0.25 4th - 5th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
B OPEN SPACE (min) 15% D Rear Setback (min) --
Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 10 ft
1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 20 ft
4th - 5th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
F Secondary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 179
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
4.3.9. Commercial Building (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
A BUILDING WIDTH (max) 200 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 70%
FACADE Build Out (min) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 70%
Primary Front 80% BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
Secondary Front 65%
B FLOOR PLATE (max) 20,000 sf Use & Occupancy
C GROUND STORY Height (min) 14 ft GROUND STORY Entrance Spacing (max) 30 ft
D UPPER STORY Height (min) 10 ft Commercial Space Depth (min) 30 ft
E Number of Stories (min/max) 3 5
F Step-Back, 5th Story (min) 10 ft
G Building Height, Feet (max) 70 ft
Roof Type Flat
180 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
4.3.9. Commercial Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 4.3.9.
Table 4.3.9 Linkage
Commercial
GROSS FLOOR AREA
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 181
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
10. Building Components
a. BUILDING COMPONENTS are ACCESSory elements attached to
the MAIN MASSING of a PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
b. BUILDING COMPONENTS are permitted by Site Plan Approval
as specified on Table 4.3.10.
i. At least one (1) storefront is required for each
GROUND STORY commercial space.
c. BUILDING COMPONENTS that are not identified on Table
4.2.10 are prohibited.
d. Unless otherwise specified, BUILDING COMPONENTS
may attach to other BUILDING COMPONENTS to create
assemblies of components.
Table 4.3.10 Building Components
Apartment BUILDING
General BUILDING
Commercial BUILDING
Awning N P P
Entry Canopy P P P
Lobby Entrance P P P
Storefront N P P
Stoop P N N
Bay Window P P P
Balcony P P N
Arcade N N N
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
182 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
e. Awning
i. An awning is a wall mounted frame covered with
fabric or other material that provides shade and
weather protection over a storefront or BUILDING
entrance.
Dimensions
A Width (min) See ii
Standards
B Projection (min) 3 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
D SETBACK from Curb (min) 2 ft
E Valance Height (max) 12 in
ii. Standards
a). Awnings must be securely attached to and
supported by the BUILDING and must fit the
windows or doors the awning is attached to.
b). An awning must be made of durable, weatherresistant
material that is water repellent.
c). Internally illuminated or back-lit awnings are
prohibited.
d). An awning that projects over the sidewalk of a
public THOROUGHFARE requires compliance with
all City Ordinances.
f. Entry Canopy
i. An entry canopy is a wall-mounted STRUCTURE that
provides shade and weather protection over a
storefront or BUILDING entrance.
Dimensions
A Width (min) See ii
Standards
B Projection (min) 3 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
D Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
SETBACK from Curb (min) 2 ft
ii. Standards
a). Entry canopies must be visually supported by
brackets, cables, or rods.
b). The width of an entry canopy must be equal
to or greater than the width of the doorway
surround or exterior casing it is mounted over.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 183
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
g. Lobby Entrance
i. A lobby entrance is a non-load bearing assembly of
entry doors and windows providing ACCESS and light
to the lobby of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Width (min/max) 15 ft 30 ft
B Height (min) 80% of GROUND
STORY Height
Recessed Entrance Width (max) 15 ft
Recessed Entrance Depth (max) 5 ft
ii. Standards
a). When a lobby entrance is set back from the
FRONT LOT LINE, the FRONTAGE AREA must be paved.
h. Storefront
i. A storefront is a non-load bearing assembly of
commercial entry doors and windows providing
ACCESS and light to a commercial space and a place
to display goods, services, and SIGNs.
Dimensions
A Width (min/max) 15 ft 30 ft
B Height (min) 80% of GROUND
STORY Height
Display Window Height (min) 8 ft
Recessed Entrance Width (max) 15 ft
Recessed Entrance Depth (max) 5 ft
ii. Standards
a). An unobstructed view of the interior space or a
lighted and maintained merchandise display(s)
must be provided for a depth of at least four (4)
feet behind storefront display windows.
b). When storefronts are set back from the FRONT
LOT LINE, the FRONTAGE AREA must be paved.
c). When present, awnings and canopies must be
mounted between columns, PILASTERs, or PIERs;
above doorways and display windows; and
below the SIGN BAND.
d). Exterior security grilles, gates, and roll-down
security doors and windows are prohibited.
184 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
i. Stoop
i. A stoop is a set of stairs with a landing leading to
the entrance of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Landing Width (min) 4 ft
B Landing Depth (min) 4 ft
C Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
ii. Standards
a). Paving, excluding driveways, must match the
ABUTTING sidewalk unless paved with pervious,
porous, or permeable materials.
b). Stairs may be recessed into the BUILDING FACADE
when the BUILDING is set back four (4) feet or
less.
c). Stairs are not permitted to ENCROACH onto any
ABUTTING sidewalk.
d). Stairs may be built perpendicular or parallel to
the BUILDING FACADE, but must lead directly to
ground level or an ABUTTING sidewalk.
j. Bay Window
i. A bay window is an assembly of windows
projecting from a building to provide additional
HABITABLE space, increased light, multi-directional
views, and ARTICULATION to an exterior wall.
Dimensions
A Width (max) 16 ft
B Projection (max) 3 ft
C Height (max)
Height of
BUILDING in
Stories
D Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 3 ft
FENESTRATION (min) 60%
ii. Standards
a). Bay windows, including box and bow windows,
must include at least three (3) windows.
b). The cumulative width of multiple bays may
equal up to fifty percent (50%) of the width of
the exterior wall from which the bays project.
c). Bays projecting over the sidewalk of a public
THOROUGHFARE must have at least two (2) stories
of CLEARANCE and be compliant with all City
Ordinances.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 185
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
k. Balcony
i. A balcony is a platform with a railing that provides
outdoor AMENITY SPACE.
Dimensions
A Width (min) 5 ft
B Depth (max) 5 ft
D Area (min) 50 sf
CLEARANCE (min) 10 ft
Permitted Front SETBACK
ENCROACHMENT (max) 6 ft
ii. Standards
a). Balconies may be recessed, projecting, a
combination of the two, or terraced as part of
the roof of a portico, porch, or bay.
b). A balcony that projects over the sidewalk of a
public THOROUGHFARE requires compliance with
all City Ordinances.
c). The guard rail of any balcony oriented toward a
FRONT LOT LINE must permit visual supervision of
the PUBLIC REALM through the posts and rails.
d). The guard rail of any balcony oriented toward
a side or REAR LOT LINE ABUTTING the NR district
must include sight-obscuring visual screening
so that it is at least fifty percent (50%) opaque.
l. Arcade
i. An arcade is a pedestrian walkway covered by the
upper floors of a BUILDING. The GROUND STORY FACADE
is SETBACK and upper floors are supported by a
colonnade or supports.
Dimensions
A Depth (min/max) 10 ft 15 ft
B Height (max) 1 STORY
C CLEARANCE (min/max) 14 ft 24 ft
ii. Standards
a). Arcades must extend the entire width of a
BUILDING and must have a consistent depth.
b). Support columns or PIERs may be spaced no
farther apart than they are tall.
c). Arcades are considered part of the BUILDING for
the purpose of measuring FACADE build out.
d). Arcades may be combined only with storefront
and lobby entrance frontages.
e). The finished ceiling of an arcade interior may
be arched or flat, but must have a greater
CLEARANCE than the openings between columns
or PIERs.
186 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
11. Facade Design
a. FACADEs must provide solid material framing each
storefront and lobby entrance as follows:
i. PILASTERs or columns supporting a horizontal lintel
and CORNICE;
ii. a spandrel positioned between PILASTERs or columns
that extend from upper stories of the building to
the ground; or
iii. flat wall above and to either side of a void or
punched opening.
b. Storefronts and lobby entrances must be set within the
resulting frame provided for each by the FACADE.
c. Materials framing each storefront or lobby entrance
may be integrated into the design of the FACADE
or customized for individual storefronts and lobby
entrances.
d. Mechanical louvers necessary for venting purposes
are not permitted in the required frame, but may be
incorporated into any storefront or lobby entrance
system.
e. FACADEs must differentiate the GROUND STORY of the
building from the upper stories through horizontal
ARTICULATION, a change in material, or a change in
window size or pattern to create a distinct base to the
building FACADE. The entire height of the GROUND STORY
must be included in the FACADE base.
f. Buildings of five (5) or more stories should include, at
least, the entire height of the first two (2) stories in the
required base. The design of the base may not shift up
or down across the width of the FACADE.
g. For buildings with more than one FACADE, the design of
the base must align horizontally at the corner.
h. FACADEs must provide surface relief from the average
plane of the FACADE by at least four (4) inches, through
the USE of architectural elements such as bay windows,
columns, CORNER BOARDs, CORNICEs, door and window
surrounds, moldings, PIERs, PILASTERs, recessed
storefronts or lobby entrances, seat walls, sills, wall
thickness, and recessed or projecting windows.
i. The FACADE of any building greater than one hundred
(100) feet in width must be divided vertically and
designed as two (2) or more separate and distinct
facades of differing architectural treatment so that the
building appears to be multiple buildings. See Figure
4.3.11 (b). The differentiation between facade designs
must include the following:
i. a change in CORNICE, roof eave, or parapet;
ii. a change in wall material; and
iii. a pilaster or column on either side of the division
between each facade.
12. Architectural Design Guidelines
a. FACADEs should be visually divided into a series of
ARCHITECTURAL BAYs that are derived, in general, from the
building’s structural bay spacing.
b. PIERs, PILASTERs, or other features defining each
ARCHITECTURAL BAY should either extend all the way to
the ground or terminate at any horizontal ARTICULATION
defining the base of the building.
c. ARCHITECTURAL BAYs should align, in general, with
Figure 4.3.11 (a) Storefront & Lobby Entrance Framing
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 187
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
individual or groups of storefronts and lobby entrances.
d. PIERs, PILASTERs, or other features defining each
ARCHITECTURAL BAY should always project forward and be
uninterrupted by any horizontal articulation, excluding
any horizontal ARTICULATION USEd to differentiate the base
of the building.
e. The FACADE of buildings with five (5) or more stories
should be visually divided into, at least, a horizontal
tripartite division (a base, middle, and top). The
horizontal divisions may not shift up or down across
the width of the FACADE.
f. Vents, exhausts, and other utility features on building
FACADEs should be architecturally integrated into
the design of the building and should be located to
minimize adverse effects on pedestrian comfort along
sidewalks and within OPEN SPACEs.
g. Buildings at TERMINATED VISTAs should be ARTICULATEd with
design features that function as focal points.
h. FENESTRATION glazing should be inset from the plane of
exterior wall surfaces.
i. RIBBON WINDOWS should be avoided.
j. Monotonous and repetitive storefront or lobby
systems, awnings, canopies, SIGN types, colors, or
designs should be avoided.
k. Storefronts and lobby entrances should include
awnings or canopies to provide weather protection
for pedestrians and reduce glare for storefront display
areas. Awnings should be open-ended and operable.
l. Lobby entrances for UPPER STORY USEs should be
optimally located, well defined, clearly visible, and
separate from the entrance for other GROUND STORY USEs.
m. Lobbies should be limited in both width and total area
to preserve floor space and frontage for other GROUND
STORY USEs. Buildings should USE any combination of
FACADE ARTICULATION, a double-height ceiling, a distinctive
doorway, a change in wall material, a change in paving
material within the FRONTAGE AREA, or some other
architectural element(s) to make lobbies visual and
materially distinctive.
n. The selection of materials, FENESTRATION, and
ornamentation should result in a consistent and
harmonious composition that appears as a unified
whole rather than a collection of unrelated parts.
o. The type and color of materials should be kept to a
minimum, preferably three (3) or fewer.
p. Two (2) or more wall materials should be combined
only one above the other, except for bay windows.
q. Wall materials appearing heavier in weight should be
USEd below wall materials appearing lighter in weight
(wood and metal above brick, and all three above
stone)
r. Horizontal or vertical board siding or shingles,
regardless of material, should be avoided.
s. Architectural details and finish materials for the base
of a building should be constructed of architectural
concrete or pre-cast cementitious panels, natural
or cast stone, heavy gauge metal panels, glazed or
unglazed architectural terracotta, or brick.
t. Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) should be
avoided.
Figure 4.3.11 (b) Appearance of Two Buildings
188 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
13. Use Provisions
a. General
i. The USE of real property is subject to the provisions
of Article 9: USE Provisions of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 9, the provisions of Article 9 apply.
ii. USE categories are permitted as specified on Table
4.1 (c). USE categories not identified on Table 4.3.13
are prohibited.
iii. All USEs must comply with any USE-specific
standards applicable for each USE in §9.2 USE
Definitions & Limitations.
iv. USEs permitted by Special Permit require additional
DEVELOPMENT review in accordance with §15.2.1
Special Permits.
b. USE Limitations
i. The USE of any GROUND STORY commercial space
fronting a PEDESTRIAN STREET, excluding lobbies for
UPPER STORY USEs, is limited to the following PRINCIPAL
USE categories:
a). Arts & Creative Enterprise
b). Food & Beverage Service
c). Retail
d). Civic & Institutional
c. Required USEs
i. A minimum of five percent (5%) of the gross
leasable commercial floor space in any BUILDING
must be provided as LEASABLE FLOOR AREA for USEs
from the Arts & Creative Enterprise USE category.
d. Increases in Density
i. Existing STRUCTURES may not be altered to conflict
with number of DWELLING UNITs permitted for each
BUILDING TYPE.
Table 4.3.13 Permitted Uses
Use Category
Specific Use MR5
Arts & Creative Enterprise
Artisinal Production P
Arts Exhibition P
Arts Sales & Services P
Co-working P
Design Services P
Shared Workspaces & Arts Education P
Cannabis Establishment
Cannabis Cultivation P
Cannabis Retail Sales SP
Cannabis Research & Development P
Cannabis Testing Laboratory P
Civic & Institutional
Community Center P
Hospital SP
Library P
Minor Utility Facility SP
Museum P
Private Non-Profit Club or Lodge SP
Public Service P
Religious & Educational Uses Protected by
M.G.L. 40A. Sec. 3
P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 189
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
Table 4.3.13 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use MR5
Commercial Services
Animal Services (as noted below) --
Commercial Kennel SP
Pet Grooming P
Pet Daycare & Training SP
Veterinarian SP
Assembly or Entertainment SP
Banking & Financial Services (except as noted
below)
P
Personal Credit SP
Broadcast and/or Recording Studio P
Building & Home Repair Services SP
Business Support Services P
Caterer/Wholesale Food Production SP
Day Care Service (as noted below) --
Adult Day Care Center P
Child Day Care Center P
Educational Services P
Maintenance & Repair of Consumer Goods P
Personal Services (except as noted below) P
Body-Art Services SP
Fitness Services P
Funeral Services SP
Health Care Services SP
Frmula Personal Services SP
Recreation Services SP
Vehicle Parking (except as follows) --
Bike Share Parking P
Car Share Parking (3 or fewer spaces) P
Car Share Parking (4 or more spaces) P
Commercial Parking P
Food and Beverage Service
Bar/Restaurant/Tavern P
Bakery/Café/Coffee Shop P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
Table 4.3.13 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use MR5
Lodging
Bed & Breakfast SP
Hotel or Hostel SP
Office
General Office P
Research and Development or Laboratory P
Residential
Household Living SP
Group Living (except as follows) SP
Community or Group Residence P
Dormitory, Fraternity or Sorority SP
Homeless Shelter SP
Nursing Home/Assisted Living Facility SP
Rooming House SP
Retail Sales
Building/Home Supplies & Equipment SP
Consumer Goods (except as follows) P
Alcohol Sales SP
Firearms Sales N
Pet Store SP
Formula Retail SP
Fresh Food Market or Grocery Store P
Farm/Vendor Market P
Urban Agriculture
Farming (as noted below) --
Commercial Farming P
Community Farming P
Community Gardening P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
190 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
Table 4.3.13 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use MR5
Accessory Uses
Home Occupations (as noted below) --
Home Office P
Urban Agriculture (as noted below) --
Apiculture P
Aviculture P
Commercial Farming P
Residential Gardening P
Vehicle Parking, Accessory P
Home Business Vehicle Parking N
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
14. Development Standards
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
10: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 10, the provisions of Article 10
apply.
b. SIGNs
i. A SIGN, individual numerals or letters, or a
nonelectrical nameplate identifying the property
address is required for all real property as follows:
a). Each GROUND STORY non-residential USE must
identify the STREET address either on the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE door or above or beside the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE of the USE.
b). All residential BUILDING TYPEs must identify the
STREET address either on the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE
door, above or beside the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE, or
on a mailbox.
ii. Address SIGNs must be made easily visible through
the USE of colors or materials that contrast with the
background material they are attached to and must
be conspicuously located to provide visibility from
the THOROUGHFARE that the BUILDING faces.
iii. Address SIGNs must be twelve (12) inches in height
or less and may include the name of the occupant.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 191
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
15. Parking & Mobility
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
11: Parking & Mobility of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 11, the provisions of Article 11 apply.
ii. Vehicular parking must be provided as specified on
Table 4.1 (d), except as follows:
a). Non-residential USEs with five thousand (5,000)
square feet or less of gross LEASABLE FLOOR AREA
are exempt from any minimum requirements
of Table 4.1. (d).
b). Any CHANGE IN USE within a non-residential
STRUCTURE constructed before the effective date
of this Ordinance, provided that the change
is to a permitted USE, is exempt from any
minimum requirements of Table 4.1 (d).
iii. There are no parking requirements for ACCESSORY
USEs.
iv. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces may be shared
between USEs on the same LOT and buildings on
the same BLOCK in accordance with §11.3 SHARED
PARKING.
b. Type
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING may be provided as above
ground STRUCTURED PARKING or underground
STRUCTURED PARKING. SURFACE PARKING is prohibited.
c. Driveways
i. New driveways require a permit from the City
Engineer in accordance with Chapter 11, Article II,
Sec. 11-33 Driveway Construction of The Code of
Ordinances, City of Somerville, Massachusetts.
ii. Driveways are not permitted in the FRONTAGE AREA
between a building and the FRONT LOT LINE.
iii. Driveways may be up to twenty four (24) feet in
width.
iv. Driveways may provide ACCESS in whole or in part
on or across an ABUTTING LOT(s), provided that an
ACCESS EASEMENT exists between all PROPERTY OWNERS.
d. Parking Design
i. The design of all parking is subject to §11.1 Bicycle
Parking and §11.2 MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING of this
Ordinance.
e. Parking Location
i. Required vehicular parking, excluding any required
handicapped parking, may be provided on a
contiguous LOT under the same ownership as the
LOT that the parking will serve as follows:
a). Pedestrian ACCESS to off-SITE vehicular parking
must be via a paved sidewalk or walkway.
b). A lease, recorded covenant, or other
comparable legal instrument guaranteeing long
term USE of the SITE must be provided to the
review board or BUILDING OFFICIAL and executed
and filed with the Registry of Deeds.
ii. For real property located in more than one
municipality, MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING need not be
located within the City of Somerville.
f. Unbundled Parking
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces must be rented or
leased as an option rather than a requirement of
the rental, lease, or purchase of a DWELLING UNIT or
non-residential floor space.
ii. Bicycle parking must be provided at no cost or fee
to customers, visitors, employees, tenants, and
residents.
g. Parking Relief
i. Relief from the parking standards of Table 4.3 (d)
requires a Special Permit.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing
relief from the parking standards of Table 4.3
(d):
i). The supply and demand of on-STREET
parking in the neighborhood, as
determined through a parking study.
ii). MOBILITY MANAGEMENT programs and
services provided by the APPLICANT to
reduce the demand for parking.
iii). That parking provided in excess of any
maximum permitted does not result in the
increase in impervious LOT AREA.
16. PUBLIC REALM
a. Sidewalks
i. When DEVELOPMENT occurs on any LOT ABUTTING a
sidewalk that is less than twelve (12) feet in total
width, the BUILDING must be set-back an additional
distance to accommodate expansion of the
ABUTTING sidewalk to a width of at least twelve (12)
feet. The minimum and maximum front SETBACKs for
each BUILDING TYPE are increased accordingly.
b. Sidewalk CURB CUTs
i. A CURB CUT requires a permit from the City Engineer
and must be compliant with all City Ordinances.
ii. Unless otherwise specified, the City Engineer may
not permit more than one (1) CURB CUT per FRONT LOT
LINE of a LOT.
iii. CURB CUTs are prohibited along all THOROUGHFAREs
designated as a PEDESTRIAN STREET.
iv. CURB CUTs must be located to minimize conflicts
with pedestrians and bicyclists and must have a
clear distance from fire hydrants, STREET TREES, utility
poles, and other furnishings as deemed necessary
by the City Engineer.
192 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
Table 4.3.15 Vehicular Parking
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
USE Category
Specific USE
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Within a
TRANSIT AREA1
(max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min)
Arts & Creative Enterprise
All Permitted USEs 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Cannabis Establishment
Cannabis Retail Sales 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Cannabis Research & Development 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Cannabis Testing Laboratory 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Civic & Institutional
COMMUNITY CENTER 1 / 10,000 sf 4 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,800 sf 1 / 600 sf
Educational Facility
1.0 /
classroom
4.0 /
classroom
1.5 /
classroom
3.0 /
classroom
HOSPITAL
10 per
entrance 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 200 sf 1/ 1,000 sf
LIBRARY 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 500 sf
MINOR UTILITY FACILITY n/a n/a n/a n/a
MUSEUM 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 500 sf
Private Non-Profit Club or Lodge 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 200 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Commercial Services
Animal Services (as noted below) -- -- -- --
Commercial Kennel 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Pet Grooming 1 / 2,500 sf none 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Pet Day Care or Training 1 / 2,500 sf none 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Veterinarian 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
ASSEMBLY OR ENTERTAINMENT 1 / 40 seats 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 6 seats 1 / 6 seats
Banking & Financial Services
(except as noted below)
1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 450 sf 1 / 400 sf
Broadcast and/or Recording Studio 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 600 sf
BUILDING & Home Repair Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 2,000 sf
BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 600 sf
Caterer/Wholesale Food Production 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Day Care Service 2 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 600 sf
Maintenance & Repair of CONSUMER GOODS 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 750 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
PERSONAL SERVICES (except as noted below) 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 750 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Health Care Services 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 300 sf
Recreation Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf -- --
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - DWELLING UNIT RU - ROOMING UNIT
1 See the TRANSIT AREA Map
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 193
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
Table 4.3.15 Vehicular Parking (continued)
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
USE Category
Specific USE
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Within a
TRANSIT AREA1
(max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min)
Food and Beverage Service
All Permitted USEs 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 300 sf 1 / 500 sf
Lodging
BED & BREAKFAST n/a 2.0 1 / DU + 1 / 4
guest rooms
1 / DU + 1 / 4
guest rooms
HOTEL OR HOSTEL 1 / 20 rooms 1 / 10 rooms 1 / 2 guest
rooms
1 / 2 guest
rooms
Office
CO-WORKING 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 1,200 sf 1 / 800 sf
GENERAL OFFICE 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 650 sf
Research and Development or Laboratory 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Residential
HOUSEHOLD LIVING 0.1 / DU 1.0 / DU 1.0 / DU 1.0 / DU
GROUP LIVING (except as follows) 0.05 / room 0.5 / room -- --
COMMUNITY OR GROUP RESIDENCE -- -- -- --
Dormitory, Fraternity or Sorority 0.1 / room 0.5 / room .05 / bed 1.0 / 4 beds
HOMELESS SHELTER -- -- 4.0 4.0
Nursing Home/Assisted Living Facility -- -- 1 / 6 beds 1 / 6 beds
Single Room Occupancy Housing -- -- 1 / 6 beds 1 / 4 beds
Retail Sales
BUILDING/Home Supplies & Equipment 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
CONSUMER GOODS (except as follows) 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
FORMULA RETAIL 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
FRESH FOOD MARKET OR GROCERY STORE 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 1,500 sf
Farm/Vendor Market n/a n/a n/a 1 / 1,500 sf
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - DWELLING UNIT RU - ROOMING UNIT
1 See the TRANSIT AREA Map
194 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 5 (MR5)
a). CURB CUTs for commercial or high-volume
driveways should be at least one-hundred
(100) feet from an unSIGNalized or SIGNalized
intersection.
b). CURB CUTs for residential driveways should be
at least twenty (20) feet from an unSIGNalized
intersection and at least forty (40) feet from a
SIGNalized intersection.
v. The interior width of a CURB CUT (between curb
stones) may be no wider than the driveway,
vehicular entrance, or loading facility it serves.
vi. A DRIVEWAY APRON may be installed only within
the furnishing zone of a sidewalk and must be
constructed in accordance with all standards
established by relevant City Departments.
vii. The grade, cross slope, and clear width of the
walkway of a sidewalk must be maintained
between the DRIVEWAY APRON and the ABUTTING
driveway. The appearance of the walkway (ie.
scoring pattern or paving material) must indicate
that, although a vehicle may cross, the area
traversed by a vehicle remains part of the sidewalk.
Figure 4.3.16 Sidewalk Curb Cuts
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 195
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
4.4 MID-RISE 6 (MR6)
1. Character Description
The Mid-Rise 6 district is characterized by a variety of moderate to large FLOOR PLATE buildings up to six (6) stories in height.
Buildings are set close to the sidewalk to create a defined STREET wall that supports pedestrian activity and a sense of
place. The district is primarily commercial, with a variety of employment opportunities and GROUND STORY USEs that address
the needs of residents and employees from the immediate neighborhood, but can also provide goods and services to the
larger Somerville community and visitors from the broader Boston metropolitan area.
196 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
2. Intent
a. To implement the objectives of the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
of the City of Somerville.
b. To accommodate the DEVELOPMENT of areas appropriate
for moderately-scaled multi-unit, mixed-USE, and
commercial buildings; neighborhood-, community-, and
region-serving USEs; and a wide variety of employment
opportunities.
3. Purpose
a. To permit the DEVELOPMENT of multi-unit, mixed-USE, and
commercial buildings that do not exceed six (6) stories
in height.
b. To provide quality commercial spaces and permit small
and medium-scale, neighborhood-, community-, and
region-serving commercial USEs.
c. To create DWELLING UNIT types, sizes, and BEDROOM counts
ideal for larger hoUSEholds in apartment buildings.
d. To create DWELLING UNIT types, sizes, and BEDROOM counts
ideal for smaller hoUSEholds in general buildings.
e. To permit increased residential density for buildings
that are sustainable or that provide 100% AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
f. To permit increased residential density for buildings
that meet the definition of a NET ZERO READY BUILDING or
100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
4. Applicability
a. The section is applicable to all real property within
the Mid-Rise 6 district as shown on the maps of the
Official Zoning Atlas of the City of Somerville.
5. Development Review
a. DEVELOPMENT review is subject to the provisions of
Article 15: Administration of this Ordinance.
b. All DEVELOPMENT, excluding NORMAL MAINTENANCE, requires
the submittal of a development review application to
the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the issuance of a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance prior to the issuance of a BUILDING
Permit or Certificate of Occupancy.
c. Proposed DEVELOPMENT may or may not necessitate the
need for SUBDivision Plan Approval, Site Plan Approval,
a SPecial Permit, or a Hardship Variance based on
the nature of the proposal. In such cases, additional
DEVELOPMENT review is required in accordance with
Article 15: Administration.
i. The Planning Board is the decision making
authority for all DEVELOPMENT that requires Site Plan
Approval or a Special Permit.
ii. The Zoning Board of Appeals is the Review Board
for all Hardship Variances.
d. Upon verification that no additional DEVELOPMENT review
is necessary, or completion of the required DEVELOPMENT
review, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall issue a Zoning
Compliance CERTIFICATE to certify compliance with the
provisions and procedures of this Ordinance.
6. Building Types
a. One (1) PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE is permitted on each LOT.
b. The following BUILDING TYPEs are permitted by Site Plan
Approval in the Mid-Rise 6 district:
i. Apartment BUILDING
ii. General BUILDING
iii. Commercial BUILDING
iv. Lab BUILDING
c. Apartment Buildings are prohibited on any LOT fronting
a PEDESTRIAN STREET.
d. ACCESSory STRUCTURES are regulated according to Article
10: DEVELOPMENT Standards of this Ordinance.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 197
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
4.4.7 Apartment Building
A large FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE purpose
built for occuPATIOn by residential USEs on all stories.
The following images are examples of the apartment
BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
198 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
4.4.7. Apartment Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 30 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 12 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 12 ft
Lot Development C Side SETBACK (min) 0 ft
LOT Coverage (max) 100% Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
GREEN SCORE -- Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 0 ft
Minimum 0.20 1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 10 ft
Ideal 0.25 4th - 6th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
B OPEN SPACE (min) 15% D Rear Setback (min) --
Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 10 ft
1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 20 ft
4th - 6th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
F Secondary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 199
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
4.4.7. Apartment Building (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
A BUILDING WIDTH (max) 200 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
FACADE Build Out -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
Primary Front 80% BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
Secondary Front 65%
B FLOOR PLATE (max) 25,000 sf Use & Occupancy
GROUND STORY Elevation (min) 2 ft GROSS FLOOR AREA per DU --
C STORY Height (min) 10 ft LOT AREA < 6,500 sf 1,125
D Number of Stories (min/max) 3 6 LOT AREA >= 6,500 sf 850
E Step-Back, 5th - 6th Story (min) 10 ft NET ZERO READY BUILDING 650
F Building Height, Feet 74 ft 100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING 650
Roof Type Flat Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/DU
200 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
4.4.7. Apartment Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS as specified on Table 4.4.7
(a).
f. Design Guidelines
i. GROUND STORY DWELLING UNITs should be elevated
above the grade of any adjacent sidewalk so that
the window sills of the DWELLING UNIT are at or above
the eye-level of passing pedestrians. This elevation
change maintains privacy for occupants while also
encouraging open blinds or curtains to allow natural
daylight into the unit.
ii. FENESTRATION patterns and window configurations
should break the direct line of sight between
neighboring properties to every extent practicable.
Translucent glass on the bottom half of windows
or strategically placed landscape elements should
be utilized if it is not practical to off-set windows in
such a way as to minimize privacy impacts.
iii. Outdoor AMENITY SPACEs that are elevated, such as
roof DECKs, fully projecting balconies, and UPPER
STORY rear porches should, provide sight-obscuring
visual screening at the sides to increase privacy,
security, and to limit views of ABUTTING properties
from elevated vantage points.
Table 4.4.7 Required ADUs
Total DWELLING UNITs Required ADUs
0 to 3 units None
4 or more units 20% of units
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 201
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
4.4.8 General Building
A large FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE with
GROUND STORY commercial space and no limitations on the
occupancy of UPPER STORIES for permitted USEs. The UPPER
STORIES of a general BUILDING are typically residential, but a
wide variety exists. As the number of stories increases,
it becomes more likely for the UPPER STORIES of a general
BUILDING to host commercial USEs as well as residential.
The following images are examples of the general BUILDING
TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
202 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
4.4.8. General Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 30 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
Lot Development C Side SETBACK (min) 0 ft
LOT Coverage (max) 100% Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
GREEN SCORE -- Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 0 ft
Minimum 0.20 1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 10 ft
Ideal 0.25 4th - 6th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
B OPEN SPACE (min) 15% D Rear Setback (min) --
Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 10 ft
1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 20 ft
4th - 6th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
F Secondary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 203
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
4.4.8. General Building (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
A BUILDING WIDTH (max) 200 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 70%
FACADE Build Out (min) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
Primary Front 80% BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
Secondary Front 65%
B FLOOR PLATE (max) 30,000 sf Use & Occupancy
C Ground Story Height (min) 18 ft GROUND STORY Entrance Spacing (max) 30 ft
D Upper Story Height (min) 10 ft Commercial Space Depth (min) 30 ft
E Number of Stories (min/max) 3 6 GROSS FLOOR AREA per DU --
F Step-Back, 5th - 6th Story (min) 10 ft LOT AREA < 6,500 sf 1,125
G Building Height, Feet (max) 80 ft LOT AREA >= 6,500 sf 850
Roof Type Flat NET ZERO READY BUILDING 650
100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING 650
Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/DU
204 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
4.4.8. General Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS as specified on Table 4.4.8
(a).
iii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 4.4.8 (b).
f. Design Guidelines
i. FENESTRATION patterns and window configurations
should break the direct line of sight between
neighboring properties to every extent practicable.
Translucent glass on the bottom half of windows
or strategically placed landscape elements should
be utilized if it is not practical to off-set windows in
such a way as to minimize privacy impacts.
ii. Outdoor AMENITY SPACEs that are elevated, such as
roof DECKs, fully projecting balconies, and UPPER
STORY rear porches should, provide sight-obscuring
visual screening at the sides to increase privacy,
security, and to limit views of ABUTTING properties
from elevated vantage points.
Table 4.4.8 (a) Required ADUs
Total Dwelling Units Required ADUs
0 to 3 units None
4 or more units 20% of units
Table 4.4.8 (b) Linkage
Commercial
GROSS FLOOR AREA
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 205
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
4.4.9 Commercial Building
A large FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE purpose
built for occuPATIOn by commercial USEs on all stories.
GROUND STORY commercial space is primarily occupied by
commercial service, food & beverage service, or retail
sales PRINCIPAL USEs. Floor space on upper stories may be
occupied by retail USEs that do not rely on the visibility of a
storefront at sidewalk level.
The following images are examples of the commercial
BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
206 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
4.4.9. Commercial Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 30 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
Lot Development C Side SETBACK (min) 0 ft
LOT Coverage (max) 100% Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
GREEN SCORE -- Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 0 ft
Minimum 0.20 1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 10 ft
Ideal 0.25 4th - 6th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
B OPEN SPACE (min) 15% D Rear Setback (min) --
Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 10 ft
1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 20 ft
4th - 6th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
F Secondary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 207
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
4.4.9. Commercial Building (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
A BUILDING WIDTH (max) 200 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 70%
FACADE Build Out (min) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 70%
Primary Front 80% BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
Secondary Front 65%
B FLOOR PLATE (max) 30,000 sf Use & Occupancy
C Ground Story Height (min) 18 ft GROUND STORY Entrance Spacing (max) 30 ft
D Upper Story Height (min) 10 ft Commercial Space Depth (min) 30 ft
E Number of Stories (min/max) 3 6
F Step-Back, 5th - 6th Story (min) 10 ft
G Building Height, Feet (max) 85 ft
Roof Type Flat
208 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
4.4.9. Commercial Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 4.4.9.
Table 4.4.9 Linkage
Commercial
GROSS FLOOR AREA
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 209
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
4.4.10 Lab Building
A large FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE
purpose built for occuPATIOn by laboratory and research &
DEVELOPMENT PRINCIPAL USEs. Floor space is typically custom
designed as complex, technically sophisticated, and
mechanically intensive wet or dry labs or vivariums for
animal research.
The following images are examples of the lab BUILDING TYPE
and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
210 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
4.4.10 Lab Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 30 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
Lot Development C Side SETBACK (min) 0 ft
LOT Coverage (max) 100% Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
GREEN SCORE -- Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 0 ft
Minimum 0.20 1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 10 ft
Ideal 0.25 4th - 6th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
B OPEN SPACE (min) 15% D Rear Setback (min) --
Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 10 ft
1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 20 ft
4th - 6th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
F Secondary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 211
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
4.4.10 Lab Building (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
A Width (max) 200 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 70%
FACADE Build Out (min) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 70%
Primary Front 80% BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
Secondary Front 65%
B FLOOR PLATE (max) 30,000 sf Use & Occupancy
C Ground Story Height (min) 18 ft Entrance Spacing (max) 30 ft
D Upper Story Height (min) 10 ft Commercial Space Depth (min) 30 ft
E Number of Stories (min/max) 3 6
F Step-Back, 5th - 6th Story (min) 10 ft
G BUILDING Height, Feet (max) 95 ft
Roof Type Flat
212 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
4.4.10 Lab Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 4.4.10.
Table 4.4.10 Linkage
Commercial
GROSS FLOOR AREA
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 213
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
11. Building Components
a. BUILDING COMPONENTS are ACCESSory elements attached to
the MAIN MASSING of a PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
b. BUILDING COMPONENTS are permitted by Site Plan Approval
as specified on Table 4.4.11.
i. At least one (1) storefront is required for each
GROUND STORY commercial space.
c. BUILDING COMPONENTS not identified on Table 4.4.11 are
prohibited.
d. Unless otherwise specified, BUILDING COMPONENTS
may attach to other BUILDING COMPONENTS to create
assemblies of components.
Table 4.4.11 Building Components
Apartment BUILDING
General BUILDING
Commercial BUILDING
Lab BUILDING
Awning N P P P
Entry Canopy P P P P
Lobby Entrance P P P P
Storefront N P P P
Stoop P N N N
Bay Window P P P P
Balcony P P N N
Arcade N N N N
P - Permitted N - Not Permitted
214 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
e. Awning
i. An awning is a wall mounted frame covered with
fabric or other material that provides shade and
weather protection over a storefront or BUILDING
entrance.
Dimensions
A Width (min) See
ii. Standards
B Projection (min) 3 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
D SETBACK from Curb (min) 2 ft
E Valance Height (max) 12 in
ii. Standards
a). Awnings must be securely attached to and
supported by the BUILDING and must fit the
windows or doors the awning is attached to.
b). An awning must be made of durable, weatherresistant
material that is water repellent.
c). Internally illuminated or back-lit awnings are
prohibited.
d). An awning that projects over the sidewalk of a
public THOROUGHFARE requires compliance with
all City Ordinances.
f. Entry Canopy
i. An entry canopy is a wall-mounted STRUCTURE that
provides shade and weather protection over a
storefront or BUILDING entrance.
Dimensions
A Width (min) See
ii. Standards
B Projection (min) 3 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
D Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
SETBACK from Curb (min) 2 ft
ii. Standards
a). Entry canopies must be visually supported by
brackets, cables, or rods.
b). The width of an entry canopy must be equal
to or greater than the width of the doorway
surround or exterior casing it is mounted over.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 215
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
g. Lobby Entrance
i. A lobby entrance is a non-load bearing assembly of
entry doors and windows providing ACCESS and light
to the lobby of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Width (min/max) 15 ft 30 ft
B Height (min) 80% of GROUND
STORY Height
Recessed Entrance Width (max) 15 ft
Recessed Entrance Depth (max) 5 ft
ii. Standards
a). When a lobby entrance is set back from the
FRONT LOT LINE, the FRONTAGE AREA must be paved.
h. Storefront
i. A storefront is a non-load bearing assembly of
commercial entry doors and windows providing
ACCESS and light to a commercial space and a place
to display goods, services, and SIGNs.
Dimensions
A Width (min/max) 15 ft 30 ft
B Height (min) 80% of GROUND
STORY Height
Display Window Height (min) 8 ft
Recessed Entrance Width (max) 15 ft
Recessed Entrance Depth (max) 5 ft
ii. Standards
a). An unobstructed view of the interior space or a
lighted and maintained merchandise display(s)
must be provided for a depth of at least four (4)
feet behind storefront display windows.
b). When storefronts are set back from the FRONT
LOT LINE, the FRONTAGE AREA must be paved.
c). When present, awnings and canopies must be
mounted between columns, PILASTERs, or PIERs;
above doorways and display windows; and
below the SIGN BAND.
d). Exterior security grilles, gates, and roll-down
security doors and windows are prohibited.
216 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
i. Stoop
i. A stoop is a set of stairs with a landing leading to
the entrance of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Landing Width (min) 4 ft
B Landing Depth (min) 4 ft
C Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
ii. Standards
a). Paving, excluding driveways, must match the
ABUTTING sidewalk unless paved with pervious,
porous, or permeable materials.
b). Stairs may be recessed into the BUILDING FACADE
when the BUILDING is set back four (4) feet or
less.
c). Stairs are not permitted to ENCROACH onto any
ABUTTING sidewalk.
d). Stairs may be built perpendicular or parallel to
the BUILDING FACADE, but must lead directly to
ground level or an ABUTTING sidewalk.
j. Bay Window
i. A bay window is an assembly of windows
projecting from a building to provide additional
HABITABLE space, increased light, multi-directional
views, and ARTICULATION to an exterior wall.
Dimensions
A Width (max) 16 ft
B Projection (max) 3 ft
C Height (max)
Height of
BUILDING in
Stories
D Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 3 ft
FENESTRATION (min) 60%
ii. Standards
a). Bay windows, including box and bow windows,
must include at least three (3) windows.
b). The cumulative width of multiple bays may
equal up to fifty percent (50%) of the width of
the exterior wall from which the bays project.
c). Bays projecting over the sidewalk of a public
THOROUGHFARE must have at least two (2) stories
of CLEARANCE and be compliant with all City
Ordinances.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 217
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
k. Balcony
i. A balcony is a platform with a railing that provides
outdoor AMENITY SPACE.
Dimensions
A Width (min) 5 ft
B Depth (max) 5 ft
D Area (min) 50 sf
CLEARANCE (min) 10 ft
Permitted Front SETBACK
ENCROACHMENT (max) 6 ft
ii. Standards
a). Balconies may be recessed, projecting, a
combination of the two, or terraced as part of
the roof of a portico, porch, or bay.
b). A balcony that projects over the sidewalk of a
public THOROUGHFARE requires compliance with
all City Ordinances.
c). The guard rail of any balcony oriented toward a
FRONT LOT LINE must permit visual supervision of
the PUBLIC REALM through the posts and rails.
d). The guard rail of any balcony oriented toward
a side or REAR LOT LINE ABUTTING the NR district
must include sight-obscuring visual screening
so that it is at least fifty percent (50%) opaque.
l. Arcade
i. An arcade is a pedestrian walkway covered by the
upper floors of a BUILDING. The GROUND STORY FACADE
is SETBACK and upper floors are supported by a
colonnade or supports.
Dimensions
A Depth (min/max) 10 ft 15 ft
B Height (max) 1 STORY
C CLEARANCE (min/max) 14 ft 24 ft
ii. Standards
a). Arcades must extend the entire width of a
BUILDING and must have a consistent depth.
b). Support columns or PIERs may be spaced no
farther apart than they are tall.
c). Arcades are considered part of the BUILDING for
the purpose of measuring FACADE build out.
d). Arcades may be combined only with storefront
and lobby entrance frontages.
e). The finished ceiling of an arcade interior may
be arched or flat, but must have a greater
CLEARANCE than the openings between columns
or PIERs.
218 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
12. Facade Design
a. FACADEs must provide solid material framing each
storefront and lobby entrance as follows:
i. PILASTERs or columns supporting a horizontal lintel
and CORNICE;
ii. a spandrel positioned between PILASTERs or columns
that extend from upper stories of the building to
the ground; or
iii. flat wall above and to either side of a void or
punched opening.
b. Storefronts and lobby entrances must be set within the
resulting frame provided for each by the FACADE.
c. Materials framing each storefront or lobby entrance
may be integrated into the design of the FACADE
or customized for individual storefronts and lobby
entrances.
d. Mechanical louvers necessary for venting purposes
are not permitted in the required frame, but may be
incorporated into any storefront or lobby entrance
system.
e. FACADEs must differentiate the GROUND STORY of the
building from the upper stories through horizontal
ARTICULATION, a change in material, or a change in
window size or pattern to create a distinct base to the
building FACADE. The entire height of the GROUND STORY
must be included in the FACADE base.
f. Buildings of five (5) or more stories should include, at
least, the entire height of the first two (2) stories in the
required base. The design of the base may not shift up
or down across the width of the FACADE.
g. For buildings with more than one FACADE, the design of
the base must align horizontally at the corner.
h. FACADEs must provide surface relief from the average
plane of the FACADE by at least four (4) inches, through
the USE of architectural elements such as bay windows,
columns, CORNER BOARDs, CORNICEs, door and window
surrounds, moldings, PIERs, PILASTERs, recessed
storefronts or lobby entrances, seat walls, sills, wall
thickness, and recessed or projecting windows.
i. The FACADE of any building greater than one hundred
(100) feet in width must be divided vertically and
designed as two (2) or more separate and distinct
facades of differing architectural treatment so that the
building appears to be multiple buildings. See Figure
4.4.12 (b). The differentiation between facade designs
must include the following:
i. a change in CORNICE, roof eave, or parapet;
ii. a change in wall material; and
iii. a pilaster or column on either side of the division
between each facade.
13. Architectural Design Guidelines
a. FACADEs should be visually divided into a series of
ARCHITECTURAL BAYs that are derived, in general, from the
building’s structural bay spacing.
b. PIERs, PILASTERs, or other features defining each
ARCHITECTURAL BAY should either extend all the way to
the ground or terminate at any horizontal ARTICULATION
defining the base of the building.
c. ARCHITECTURAL BAYs should align, in general, with
Figure 4.4.12 (a) Storefront & Lobby Entrance Framing
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 219
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
individual or groups of storefronts and lobby entrances.
d. PIERs, PILASTERs, or other features defining each
ARCHITECTURAL BAY should always project forward and be
uninterrupted by any horizontal articulation, excluding
any horizontal ARTICULATION USEd to differentiate the base
of the building.
e. The FACADE of buildings with five (5) or more stories
should be visually divided into, at least, a horizontal
tripartite division (a base, middle, and top). The
horizontal divisions may not shift up or down across
the width of the FACADE.
f. Vents, exhausts, and other utility features on building
FACADEs should be architecturally integrated into
the design of the building and should be located to
minimize adverse effects on pedestrian comfort along
sidewalks and within OPEN SPACEs.
g. Buildings at TERMINATED VISTAs should be ARTICULATEd with
design features that function as focal points.
h. FENESTRATION glazing should be inset from the plane of
exterior wall surfaces.
i. RIBBON WINDOWS should be avoided.
j. Monotonous and repetitive storefront or lobby
systems, awnings, canopies, SIGN types, colors, or
designs should be avoided.
k. Storefronts and lobby entrances should include
awnings or canopies to provide weather protection
for pedestrians and reduce glare for storefront display
areas. Awnings should be open-ended and operable.
l. Lobby entrances for UPPER STORY USEs should be
optimally located, well defined, clearly visible, and
separate from the entrance for other GROUND STORY USEs.
m. Lobbies should be limited in both width and total area
to preserve floor space and frontage for other GROUND
STORY USEs. Buildings should USE any combination of
FACADE ARTICULATION, a double-height ceiling, a distinctive
doorway, a change in wall material, a change in paving
material within the FRONTAGE AREA, or some other
architectural element(s) to make lobbies visual and
materially distinctive.
n. The selection of materials, FENESTRATION, and
ornamentation should result in a consistent and
harmonious composition that appears as a unified
whole rather than a collection of unrelated parts.
o. The type and color of materials should be kept to a
minimum, preferably three (3) or fewer.
p. Two (2) or more wall materials should be combined
only one above the other, except for bay windows.
q. Wall materials appearing heavier in weight should be
USEd below wall materials appearing lighter in weight
(wood and metal above brick, and all three above
stone)
r. Horizontal or vertical board siding or shingles,
regardless of material, should be avoided.
s. Architectural details and finish materials for the base
of a building should be constructed of architectural
concrete or pre-cast cementitious panels, natural
or cast stone, heavy gauge metal panels, glazed or
unglazed architectural terracotta, or brick.
t. Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) should be
avoided.
Figure 4.4.12 (b) Appearance of Two Buildings
220 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
14. Use Provisions
a. General
i. The USE of real property is subject to the provisions
of Article 9: USE Provisions of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 9, the provisions of Article 9 apply.
ii. USE categories are permitted as specified on Table
4.1.14. USE categories not identified on Table 4.1.14
are prohibited.
iii. All USEs must comply with any USE-specific
standards applicable for each USE in §9.2 USE
Definitions & Limitations.
iv. USEs permitted by Special Permit require additional
DEVELOPMENT review in accordance with §15.2.1
Special Permits.
b. USE Limitations
i. The USE of any GROUND STORY commercial space
fronting a PEDESTRIAN STREET, excluding lobbies for
UPPER STORY USEs, is limited to the following PRINCIPAL
USE categories:
a). Arts & Creative Enterprise
b). Food & Beverage Service
c). Retail Sales
d). Civic & Institutional
c. Required USEs
i. A minimum of five percent (5%) of the gross
leasable commercial floor space in any BUILDING
must be provided as LEASABLE FLOOR AREA for USEs
from the Arts & Creative Enterprise USE category.
d. Increases in Density
i. Existing STRUCTURES may not be altered to conflict
with number of DWELLING UNITs permitted for each
BUILDING TYPE.
Table 4.4.14 Permitted Uses
Use Category
Specific Use MR6
Arts & Creative Enterprise
Artisinal Production P
Arts Exhibition P
Arts Sales & Services P
Co-Working P
Design Services P
Shared Workspaces & Arts Education P
Cannabis Establishment
Cannabis Cultivation P
Cannabis Retail Sales SP
Cannabis Research & Development P
Cannabis Testing Laboratory P
Civic & Institutional
Community Center P
Hospital SP
Library P
Minor Utility Facility SP
Museum P
Private Non-Profit Club or Lodge SP
Public Service P
Religious & Educational Uses Protected by
M.G.L. 40A. Sec. 3
P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 221
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
Table 4.4.14 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use MR6
Commercial Services
Animal Services (as noted below) --
Commercial Kennel SP
Pet Grooming P
Pet Daycare & Training SP
Veterinarian SP
Assembly or Entertainment SP
Banking & Financial Services (except as noted
below)
P
Personal Credit SP
Broadcast and/or Recording Studio P
Building & Home Repair Services SP
Business Support Services P
Caterer/Wholesale Food Production SP
Day Care Service (as noted below) --
Adult Day Care Center P
Child Day Care Center P
Educational Services P
Maintenance & Repair of Consumer Goods P
Personal Services (except as noted below) P
Body-Art Services SP
Fitness Services P
Funeral Services SP
Health Care Services SP
Formula Personal Services SP
Recreation Services SP
Vehicle Parking (as noted below) --
Bike Share Parking P
Car Share Parking (3 or fewer spaces) P
Car Share Parking (4 or more spaces) P
Commercial Parking P
Food and Beverage Service
Bar/Restaurant/Tavern P
Bakery/Café/Coffee Shop P
Formula Food & Beverage Service SP
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
Table 4.4.14 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use MR6
Lodging
Bed & Breakfast SP
Hotel or Hostel SP
Office
General Office P
Research and Development or Laboratory P
Residential
Household Living SP
Group Living (except as follows) SP
Community or Group Residence P
Dormitory, Fraternity or Sorority SP
Homeless Shelter SP
Nursing Home/Assisted Living Facility SP
Rooming House SP
Retail Sales
Building/Home Supplies & Equipment SP
Consumer Goods (except as follows) P
Alcohol Sales SP
Firearms Sales N
Pet Store SP
Formula Retail SP
Fresh Food Market or Grocery Store P
Farm/Vendor Market P
Urban Agriculture
Farming (as noted below) --
Commercial Farming P
Community Farming P
Community Gardening P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
222 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
15. Development Standards
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
10: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 10, the provisions of Article 10
apply.
b. SIGNs
i. A SIGN, individual numerals or letters, or a
nonelectrical nameplate identifying the property
address is required for all real property as follows:
a). Each GROUND STORY non-residential USE must
identify the STREET address either on the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE door or above or beside the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE of the USE.
b). All residential BUILDING TYPEs must identify the
STREET address either on the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE
door, above or beside the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE, or
on a mailbox.
ii. Address SIGNs must be made easily visible through
the USE of colors or materials that contrast with the
background material they are attached to and must
be conspicuously located to provide visibility from
the THOROUGHFARE that the BUILDING faces.
iii. Address SIGNs must be twelve (12) inches in height
or less and may include the name of the occupant.
Table 4.4.14 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use MR6
Accessory Uses
Home Occupations (as noted below) --
Home Office P
Urban Agriculture (as noted below) --
Apiculture P
Aviculture P
Commercial Farming P
Residential Gardening P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 223
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
16. Parking & Mobility
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
11: Parking & Mobility of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 11, the provisions of Article 11 apply.
ii. Vehicular parking must be provided as specified on
Table 4.1 (d), except as follows:
a). Non-residential USEs with five thousand (5,000)
square feet or less of gross LEASABLE FLOOR AREA
are exempt from any minimum requirements
of Table 4.1. (d).
b). Any CHANGE IN USE within a non-residential
STRUCTURE constructed before the effective date
of this Ordinance, provided that the change
is to a permitted USE, is exempt from any
minimum requirements of Table 4.1 (d).
iii. There are no parking requirements for ACCESSORY
USEs.
iv. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces may be shared
between USEs on the same LOT and buildings on
the same BLOCK in accordance with §11.3 SHARED
PARKING.
b. Type
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING may be provided as above
ground STRUCTURED PARKING or underground
STRUCTURED PARKING. SURFACE PARKING is prohibited.
c. Driveways
i. New driveways require a permit from the City
Engineer in accordance with Chapter 11, Article II,
Sec. 11-33 Driveway Construction of The Code of
Ordinances, City of Somerville, Massachusetts.
ii. Driveways are not permitted in the FRONTAGE AREA
between a building and the FRONT LOT LINE.
iii. Driveways may be up to twenty four (24) feet in
width.
iv. Driveways may provide ACCESS in whole or in part
on or across an ABUTTING LOT(s), provided that an
ACCESS EASEMENT exists between all PROPERTY OWNERS.
d. Parking Design
i. The design of all parking is subject to §11.1 Bicycle
Parking and §11.2 MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING of this
Ordinance.
e. Parking Location
i. Required vehicular parking, excluding any required
handicapped parking, may be provided on a
contiguous LOT under the same ownership as the
LOT that the parking will serve as follows:
a). Pedestrian ACCESS to off-SITE vehicular parking
must be via a paved sidewalk or walkway.
b). A lease, recorded covenant, or other
comparable legal instrument guaranteeing long
term USE of the SITE must be provided to the
review board or BUILDING OFFICIAL and executed
and filed with the Registry of Deeds.
ii. For real property located in more than one
municipality, MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING need not be
located within the City of Somerville.
f. Unbundled Parking
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces must be rented or
leased as an option rather than a requirement of
the rental, lease, or purchase of a DWELLING UNIT or
non-residential floor space.
ii. Bicycle parking must be provided at no cost or fee
to customers, visitors, employees, tenants, and
residents.
g. Parking Relief
i. Relief from the parking standards of Table 4.4 (d)
requires a Special Permit.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing
relief from the parking standards of Table 4.4
(d):
i). The supply and demand of on-STREET
parking in the neighborhood, as
determined through a parking study.
ii). MOBILITY MANAGEMENT programs and
services provided by the APPLICANT to
reduce the demand for parking.
iii). That parking provided in excess of any
maximum permitted does not result in the
increase in impervious LOT AREA.
17. Public Realm
a. Sidewalks
i. When DEVELOPMENT occurs on any LOT ABUTTING a
sidewalk that is less than twelve (12) feet in total
width, the BUILDING must be set-back an additional
distance to accommodate expansion of the
ABUTTING sidewalk to a width of at least twelve (12)
feet. The minimum and maximum front SETBACKs for
each BUILDING TYPE are increased accordingly.
b. Sidewalk CURB CUTs
i. A CURB CUT requires a permit from the City Engineer
and must be compliant with all City Ordinances.
ii. Unless otherwise specified, the City Engineer may
not permit more than one (1) CURB CUT per FRONT LOT
LINE of a LOT.
iii. CURB CUTs are prohibited along all THOROUGHFAREs
designated as a PEDESTRIAN STREET.
iv. CURB CUTs must be located to minimize conflicts
with pedestrians and bicyclists and must have a
clear distance from fire hydrants, STREET TREES, utility
poles, and other furnishings as deemed necessary
by the City Engineer.
224 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
Table 4.4.16 Vehicular Parking
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Use Category
Specific Use
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Within a
TRANSIT AREA1
(max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min)
Arts & Creative Enterprise
All Permitted Uses 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Cannabis Establishment
Cannabis Retail Sales 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Cannabis Research & Development 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Cannabis Testing Laboratory 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Civic & Institutional
Community Center 1 / 10,000 sf 4 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,800 sf 1 / 600 sf
Educational Facility
1.0 /
classroom
4.0 /
classroom
1.5 /
classroom
3.0 /
classroom
Hospital
10 per
entrance 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 200 sf 1/ 1,000 sf
Library 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 500 sf
Minor Utility Facility n/a n/a n/a n/a
Museum 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 500 sf
Private Non-Profit Club or Lodge 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 200 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Commercial Services
Animal Services (as noted below) -- -- -- --
Commercial Kennel 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Pet Grooming 1 / 2,500 sf none 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Pet Day Care or Training 1 / 2,500 sf none 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Veterinarian 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Assembly or Entertainment 1 / 40 seats 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 6 seats 1 / 6 seats
Banking & Financial Services
(except as noted below)
1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 450 sf 1 / 400 sf
Broadcast and/or Recording Studio 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 600 sf
Building & Home Repair Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 2,000 sf
Business Support Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 600 sf
Caterer/Wholesale Food Production 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Day Care Service 2 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 600 sf
Maintenance & Repair of Consumer Goods 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 750 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Personal Services (except as noted below) 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 750 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Health Care Services 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 300 sf
Recreation Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf -- --
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - Dwelling Unit RU - Rooming Unit
1 See the Transit Area Map
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 225
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
Table 4.4.16 Vehicular Parking (continued)
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Use Category
Specific Use
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Within a
TRANSIT AREA1
(max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min)
Food and Beverage Service
All Permitted Uses 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 300 sf 1 / 500 sf
Lodging
Bed & Breakfast none 2 / 10 rooms 1 / 4 rooms 1 / 4 rooms
Hotel or Hostel 1 / 20 rooms 1 / 10 rooms 1 / 2 rooms 1 / 2 rooms
Office
Co-Working 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 1,200 sf 1 / 800 sf
General Office 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 650 sf
Research and Development or Laboratory 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Residential
Household Living 0.1 / DU 1.0 / DU 1.0 / DU 1.0 / DU
Group Living
(except as follows)
0.05 / room 0.5 / room -- --
Community or Group Residence -- -- -- --
Dormitory, Fraternity or Sorority 0.1 / room 0.5 / room .05 / bed 1.0 / 4 beds
Homeless Shelter -- -- 4.0 4.0
Nursing Home/Assisted Living Facility -- -- 1 / 6 beds 1 / 6 beds
Single Room Occupancy Housing -- -- 1 / 6 beds 1 / 4 beds
Retail Sales
Building/Home Supplies & Equipment 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Consumer Goods (except as follows) 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Formula Retail 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Fresh Food Market or Grocery Store 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 1,500 sf
Farm/Vendor Market n/a n/a n/a 1 / 1,500 sf
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - Dwelling Unit RU - Rooming Unit
1 See the Transit Area Map
226 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. MID-RISE DISTRICTS
Mid-Rise 6 (MR6)
a). CURB CUTs for commercial or high-volume
driveways should be at least one-hundred
(100) feet from an unSIGNalized or SIGNalized
intersection.
b). CURB CUTs for residential driveways should be
at least twenty (20) feet from an unSIGNalized
intersection and at least forty (40) feet from a
SIGNalized intersection.
v. The interior width of a CURB CUT (between curb
stones) may be no wider than the driveway,
vehicular entrance, or loading facility it serves.
vi. A DRIVEWAY APRON may be installed only within
the furnishing zone of a sidewalk and must be
constructed in accordance with all standards
established by relevant City Departments.
vii. The grade, cross slope, and clear width of the
walkway of a sidewalk must be maintained
between the DRIVEWAY APRON and the ABUTTING
driveway. The appearance of the walkway (ie.
scoring pattern or paving material) must indicate
that, although a vehicle may cross, the area
traversed by a vehicle remains part of the sidewalk.
Figure 4.4.17 Sidewalk Curb Cuts
5 HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
5.1 HIGH-RISE (HR) ...................................................229
Character Description 229
Intent 230
Purpose 230
Applicability 230
Development Review 230
Building Types 230
Building Components 251
Facade Design 256
Architectural Design Guidelines 256
Use Provisions 258
Development Standards 260
Parking & Mobility 261
Public Realm 261

5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 229
5.1 HIGH-RISE (HR)
1. Character Description
The HIGH-RISE district is characterized by a variety of moderate to large FLOOR PLATE HIGH-RISE buildings. Buildings are set
close to the sidewalk and have an UPPER STORIES stepped back to define a mid-rise STREET wall that supports pedestrian
activity and a sense of place. The district is primarily commercial, with a variety of employment opportunities. GROUND
STORY USEs typically address the needs of residents and employees from the immediate neighborhood, but can also
provide goods and services to the larger Somerville community and visitors from the broader Boston metropolitan area.
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
230 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
2. Intent
a. To implement the objectives of the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
of the City of Somerville.
b. To accommodate the DEVELOPMENT of areas appropriate
for an intense mix of multi-STORY multi-unit, mixed-USE,
and commercial buildings; neighborhood-, community-,
and region-serving USEs; and a wide variety of
employment opportunities.
3. Purpose
a. To permit the DEVELOPMENT of multi-unit, mixed-USE, and
commercial HIGH-RISE buildings.
b. To provide quality commercial spaces and permit small
and medium-scale, neighborhood-, community-, and
region-serving commercial USEs.
c. To create DWELLING UNIT types, sizes, and BEDROOM counts
ideal for larger hoUSEholds in apartment buildings.
d. To create DWELLING UNIT types, sizes, and BEDROOM counts
ideal for smaller hoUSEholds in general buildings.
e. To permit increased residential density for buildings
that are sustainable or that provide 100% AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
f. To permit increased residential density for buildings
that meet the definition of a NET ZERO READY BUILDING or
100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
4. Applicability
a. The section is applicable to all real property within the
HIGH-RISE district as shown on the maps of the Official
Zoning Atlas of the City of Somerville.
5. Development Review
a. DEVELOPMENT review is subject to the provisions of
Article 15: Administration of this Ordinance.
b. All DEVELOPMENT, excluding NORMAL MAINTENANCE, requires
the submittal of a development review application to
the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the issuance of a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance prior to the issuance of a BUILDING
Permit or Certificate of Occupancy.
c. Proposed DEVELOPMENT may or may not necessitate the
need for SUBDivision Plan Approval, Site Plan Approval,
a SPecial Permit, or a Hardship Variance based on
the nature of the proposal. In such cases, additional
DEVELOPMENT review is required in accordance with
Article 15: Administration.
i. The Planning Board is the decision making
authority for all DEVELOPMENT that requires Site Plan
Approval or a Special Permit.
ii. The Zoning Board of Appeals is the Review Board
for all Hardship Variances.
d. Upon verification that no additional DEVELOPMENT review
is necessary, or completion of the required DEVELOPMENT
review, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall issue a Zoning
Compliance CERTIFICATE to certify compliance with the
provisions and procedures of this Ordinance.
6. Building Types
a. One (1) PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE is permitted on each LOT.
b. The following BUILDING TYPEs are permitted by Site Plan
Approval in the HIGH-RISE district:
i. General BUILDING
ii. Commercial BUILDING
iii. Lab BUILDING
iv. Mid-Rise Podium Tower
v. BLOCK BUILDING
c. Apartment Buildings are prohibited on any LOT fronting
a PEDESTRIAN STREET.
d. ACCESSory STRUCTURES are regulated according to Article
10.0 DEVELOPMENT Standards of this Ordinance.
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 231
5.1.7 General Building
A large FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE with
GROUND STORY commercial space and no limitations on the
occupancy of UPPER STORIES for permitted USEs. The UPPER
STORIES of a general BUILDING are typically residential, but a
wide variety exists. As the number of stories increases,
it becomes more likely for the UPPER STORIES of a general
BUILDING to host commercial USEs as well as residential.
The following images are examples of the general BUILDING
TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
232 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
5.1.7. General Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 30 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
Lot Development C Side SETBACK (min) --
LOT Coverage (max) 100% Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
GREEN SCORE -- Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 0 ft
Minimum 0.20 1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 10 ft
Ideal 0.25 4th - 6th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
B OPEN SPACE (min) 15% D Rear Setback (min) --
Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 10 ft
1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 20 ft
4th - 6th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
F Secondary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 233
5.1.7. General Building (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
A BUILDING WIDTH (max) 200 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 70%
FACADE Build Out (min) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
Primary Front 80% BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
Secondary Front 65%
B FLOOR PLATE (max) 30,000 sf Use & Occupancy
C GROUND STORY Height (min) 18 ft GROUND STORY Entrance Spacing (max) 30 ft
D UPPER STORY Height (min) 10 ft Commercial Space Depth (min) 30 ft
E Number of Stories (min/max) 3 6 GROSS FLOOR AREA per DU (min) --
F BUILDING Height, Feet (max) 80 ft LOT AREA < 7,000 sf 1,125
Roof Type Flat LOT AREA >= 7,000 sf 875
NET ZERO READY BUILDING 650
100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING 650
Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/DU
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
234 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
5.1.7. General Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS as specified on Table 5.1.7
(a).
iii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 5.1.7 (b).
f. Design Guidelines
i. FENESTRATION patterns and window configurations
should break the direct line of sight between
neighboring properties to every extent practicable.
Translucent glass on the bottom half of windows
or strategically placed landscape elements should
be utilized if it is not practical to off-set windows in
such a way as to minimize privacy impacts.
ii. Outdoor AMENITY SPACEs that are elevated, such as
roof DECKs, fully projecting balconies, and UPPER
STORY rear porches should,, provide sight-obscuring
visual screening at the sides to increase privacy,
security, and to limit views of ABUTTING properties
from elevated vantage points.
Table 5.1.7 (a) Required ADUs
Total Dwelling Units Required ADUs
0 to 3 units None
4 or more units 20% of units
Table 5.1.7 (b) Linkage
Commercial
GROSS FLOOR AREA
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 235
5.1.8 Commercial Building
A large FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE purpose
built for occuPATIOn by commercial USEs on all stories.
GROUND STORY commercial space is primarily occupied by
commercial service, food & beverage service, or retail
sales PRINCIPAL USEs. Floor space on upper stories may be
occupied by retail USEs that do not rely on the visibility of a
storefront at sidewalk level.
The following images are examples of the commercial
BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
236 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
5.1.8. Commercial Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 30 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
Lot Development C Side SETBACK (min) --
LOT Coverage (max) 100% Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
GREEN SCORE -- Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 0 ft
Minimum 0.20 1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 10 ft
Ideal 0.25 4th - 10th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
B OPEN SPACE (min) 15% D Rear Setback (min) --
Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 10 ft
1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 20 ft
4th - 10th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
F Secondary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 237
5.1.8. Commercial Building (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
A BUILDING WIDTH (max) 200 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 70%
FACADE Build Out (min) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 70%
Primary Front 80% BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
Secondary Front 65%
B FLOOR PLATE (max) 30,000 sf Use & Occupancy
C GROUND STORY Height (min) 18 ft Entrance Spacing (max) 30 ft
D UPPER STORY Height (min) 10 ft Commercial Space Depth (min) 30 ft
E BUILDING Height, Stories (min/max) 3 10
F BUILDING Height, Feet (max) 150 ft
Roof Type Flat
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
238 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
5.1.8. Commercial Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 5.1.8.
Table 5.1.8 Linkage
Commercial
GROSS FLOOR AREA
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 239
5.1.9 Lab Building
A large FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE
purpose built for occuPATIOn by laboratory and research &
DEVELOPMENT PRINCIPAL USEs. Floor space is typically custom
designed as complex, technically sophisticated, and
mechanically intensive wet or dry labs or vivariums for
animal research.
The following images are examples of the lab BUILDING TYPE
and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
240 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
5.1.9. Lab Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 30 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
LOT Coverage C Side SETBACK (min) --
LOT Coverage (max) 100% Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
GREEN SCORE -- Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 0 ft
Minimum 0.20 1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 10 ft
Ideal 0.25 4th - 9th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
B OPEN SPACE (min) 15% D Rear Setback (min) --
Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 10 ft
1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 20 ft
4th - 9th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
F Secondary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 241
5.1.9. Lab Building (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
A Width (max) 240 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 70%
FACADE Build Out (min) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 70%
Primary Front 80% BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
Secondary Front 65%
B FLOOR PLATE (MAX) 35,000 sf Use & Occupancy
C GROUND STORY Height (min) 18 ft Entrance Spacing (max) 30 ft
D UPPER STORY Height (min) 10 ft Commercial Space Depth (min) 30 ft
E BUILDING Height, Stories (min/max) 4 9
F BUILDING Height, Feet (max) 155 ft
Roof Type Flat
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
242 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
5.1.9. Lab Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 5.1.9.
Table 5.1.9 Linkage
Commercial
GROSS FLOOR AREA
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 243
5.1.10 Mid-Rise Podium Tower
A large FLOOR PLATE, multi STORY, PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE
composed of a three (3) to six (6) STORY general BUILDING
serving as a podium and an UPPER STORY residential POINT
TOWER. The general building has ground story commercial
space, spatially defines the PUBLIC REALM, and may
incorporate STRUCTURED PARKING.
The following images are examples of the mid-rise podium
tower BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for illustrative
purposes.
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
244 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
5.1.10.Mid-Rise Podium Tower (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 150 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (MIN/MAX) 2 ft 15 ft
Lot Development C Side SETBACK (min) --
LOT Coverage (max) 100% Podium abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
GREEN SCORE -- Podium abutting any non-NR or -LHD 0 ft
Minimum 0.20 1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 10 ft
Ideal 0.25 4th - 6th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
B OPEN SPACE (min) 15% Point Tower 30 ft
Point Tower Abutting NR or LHD 60 ft
D Podium Rear Setback (min) --
Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 10 ft
1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 20 ft
4th - 6th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
POINT TOWER REAR SETBACK 30 ft
ABUTTING NR or LHD 60 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front SETBACK (min) 30 ft
F Secondary Front SETBACK (min) 30 ft
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 245
5.1.10.Mid-Rise Podium Tower (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
A Width (max) 250 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 70%
FACADE Build Out (min) 80% B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 50%
FLOOR PLATE (max) -- BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
PODIUM 35,000 sf
POINT TOWER 10,000 sf Use & Occupancy
B GROUND STORY Height (min) 18 ft Entrance Spacing (max) 30 ft
C UPPER STORY Height (min) 10 ft Commercial Space Depth (min) 30 ft
D Number of Stories (min) 4 GROSS FLOOR AREA per DU --
Number of Stories (max) -- LOT AREA < 7,000 sf 1,125
E PODIUM 6 LOT AREA >= 7,000 sf 875
F POINT TOWER 18 NET ZERO READY BUILDING 650
POINT TOWER Dimensions (max) -- 100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING 650
G Width & Depth 100 ft Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/DU
Diagonal 145 ft
BUILDING Height, Feet (max) --
PODIUM 80 ft
POINT TOWER 260 ft
Roof Type Flat
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
246 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
5.1.10. Mid-Rise Podium Tower (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS as specified on Table
5.1.10 (a).
iii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 5.1.10 (b).
f. Design Standards
i. The top of the podium facade must either include
horizontal ARTICULATION such as a CORNICE or other
molding or the POINT TOWER must be stepped back
from the facade of the podium.
ii. The review boards may require the POINT TOWER to
be stepped back from the stories below up to ten
(10) feet as a condition of Site Plan Approval to
emphasize the appearance of the PODIUM as a midrise
building.
g. Design Guidelines
i. FENESTRATION patterns and window configurations
should break the direct line of sight between
neighboring properties to every extent practicable.
Translucent glass on the bottom half of windows
or strategically placed landscape elements should
be utilized if it is not practical to off-set windows in
such a way as to minimize privacy impacts.
ii. Outdoor AMENITY SPACEs that are elevated, such as
roof DECKs, fully projecting balconies, and UPPER
STORY rear porches should, provide sight-obscuring
visual screening at the sides to increase privacy,
security, and to limit views of ABUTTING properties
from elevated vantage points.
Table 5.1.10 (a) Required ADUs
Total Dwelling Units Required ADUs
0 to 3 units None
4 or more units 20% of units
Table 5.1.10 (b) Linkage
Commercial
GROSS FLOOR AREA
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
Figure 5.1.10 Podium Articulation Example
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 247
5.1.11 Block Building
A very large FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY, PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE
composed of a three (3) to six (6) STORY PODIUM with GROUND
STORY commercial space and one (1) or more UPPER STORY
TOWERs. A BLOCK building occupies either an entire BLOCK or
half of a BLOCK, on a LOT that fronts onto at least three (3)
THOROUGHFAREs or CIVIC SPACEs. BLOCK buildings are designed
to appear as an assembly of attached buildings, each with
its own massing, proportions, and detailing.
The following images are examples of the BLOCK BUILDING
TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
248 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
5.1.11. Block Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 200 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
Depth (min) 250 ft B Secondary Front SETBACK 2 ft 15 ft
C Side SETBACK (min) --
Lot Development Podium abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
B LOT Coverage (max) 100% Podium abutting any non-NR or -LHD 0 ft
GREEN SCORE -- 1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 10 ft
Minimum 0.20 4th - 6th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
Ideal 0.25 Tower(s) 30 ft
C OPEN SPACE (min) 15% Tower(s) Abutting NR or LHD 60 ft
D Podium Rear Setback (min) --
Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 10 ft
1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 20 ft
4th - 6th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
TOWER(S) REAR SETBACK 30 ft
ABUTTING NR or LHD 60 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front SETBACK (min) 30 ft
F Secondary Front SETBACK (min) 30 ft
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 249
5.1.11. Block Building (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Massing Facade Composition
A BUILDING WIDTH (max) 500 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 70%
FACADE Build Out (min) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) -- --
Primary Front 100% Residential 15% 50%
Secondary Front 100% Commercial 15% 70%
FLOOR PLATE (max) -- BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
PODIUM n/a
TOWER(s) 30,000 sf Use & Occupancy
B GROUND STORY Height (min) 18 ft GROUND STORY Entrance Spacing (max) 30 ft
C UPPER STORY Height (min) 10 ft Commercial Space Depth (min) 30 ft
D Number of Stories (min) 3 stories GROSS FLOOR AREA per DU --
Number of Stories (max) -- LOT AREA < 7,000 sf 1,125
E PODIUM 6 stories LOT AREA >= 7,000 sf 850
F TOWER(s) 10 stories NET ZERO READY BUILDING 650
G Building Height (min) -- 100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING 650
PODIUM 80 ft Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/DU
TOWER(S) 150 ft
Roof Type Flat
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
250 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
5.1.11. Block Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a BLOCK building must provide
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS as specified on Table
5.1.11 (a).
iii. DEVELOPMENT of a BLOCK building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 5.1.11 (b).
f. Building Design Standards
i. The FACADE of any BLOCK building greater that two
hundred (200) feet in width must be divided
vertically and designed as two (2) or more separate
and distinct facades of differing architectural
treatment so that the building appears to be
multiple buildings. See Figure 5.1.11 (a). The
differentiation between facade designs must
include the following:
a). a change in CORNICE, roof eave, or parapet;
b). a change in wall material; and
c). a pilaster or column on either side of the
division between each facade.
ii. One (1) GROUND STORY commercial space is required
per seventy (70) feet of building width, including
vehicular entrances, for each BLOCK FACE.
iii. One (1) lobby entrance is permitted per BLOCK FACE
and each TOWER must have an individual lobby
entrance serving the UPPER STORY USEs.
g. DEVELOPMENT Standards
i. Loading facilities and services areas must be
located within the building and set back from any
FACADE by at least thirty (30) feet. Transformer and
fire suppression rooms are exempt.
h. Parking & Mobility
i. One (1) vehicular entrance is permitted per BLOCK
FACE, and up two (2) vehicular entrances per BLOCK
building are permitted in total.
i. PUBLIC REALM
i. BLOCK buildings occupying an entire BLOCK must
provide a covered ALLEY internal to the building.
Table 5.1.11 (a) Required ADUs
Total Dwelling Units Required ADUs
0 to 3 units None
4 or more units 20% of units
Table 5.1.11 (b) Linkage
Commercial
GROSS FLOOR AREA
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
Figure 5.1.11 (a) Appearance of Two Buildings
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 251
12. Building Components
a. BUILDING COMPONENTS are ACCESSory elements attached to
the MAIN MASSING of a BUILDING.
b. BUILDING COMPONENTS are permitted by Site Plan Approval
as specified on Table 5.1.12.
i. At least one (1) storefront is required for each
GROUND STORY commercial space.
c. BUILDING COMPONENTS not identified on Table 5.1.12 are
prohibited.
d. Unless otherwise specified, BUILDING COMPONENTS
may attach to other BUILDING COMPONENTS to create
assemblies of components.
Table 5.1.12 Building Components
General BUILDING
Commercial BUILDING
LAB BUILDING
Mid-Rise Podium Tower
BLOCK BUILDING
Awning P P P P P
Entry Canopy P P P P P
Lobby Entrance P P P P P
Storefront P P P P P
Stoop P N N P N
Bay Window P P P P P
Balcony P N N P P
Arcade P P P P P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
252 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
e. Awning
i. An awning is a wall mounted frame covered with
fabric or other material that provides shade and
weather protection over a storefront or BUILDING
entrance.
Dimensions
A Width (min) See ii
Standards
B Projection (min) 3 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
D SETBACK from Curb (min) 2 ft
E Valance Height (max) 12 in
ii. Standards
a). Awnings must be securely attached to and
supported by the BUILDING and must fit the
windows or doors the awning is attached to.
b). An awning must be made of durable, weatherresistant
material that is water repellent.
c). Internally illuminated or back-lit awnings are
prohibited.
d). An awning that projects over the sidewalk of a
public THOROUGHFARE requires compliance with
all City Ordinances.
f. Entry Canopy
i. An entry canopy is a wall-mounted STRUCTURE that
provides shade and weather protection over a
storefront or BUILDING entrance.
Dimensions
A Width (min) See ii
Standards
B Projection (min) 3 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
D Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
SETBACK from Curb (min) 2 ft
ii. Standards
a). Entry canopies must be visually supported by
brackets, cables, or rods.
b). The width of an entry canopy must be equal
to or greater than the width of the doorway
surround or exterior casing it is mounted over.
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 253
g. Lobby Entrance
i. A lobby entrance is a non-load bearing assembly of
entry doors and windows providing ACCESS and light
to the lobby of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Width (min/max) 15 ft 30 ft
B Height (min) 80% of GROUND
STORY Height
Recessed Entrance Width (max) 15 ft
Recessed Entrance Depth (max) 5 ft
ii. Standards
a). When a lobby entrance is set back from the
FRONT LOT LINE, the FRONTAGE AREA must be paved.
h. Storefront
i. A storefront is a non-load bearing assembly of
commercial entry doors and windows providing
ACCESS and light to a commercial space and a place
to display goods, services, and SIGNs.
Dimensions
A Width (min/max) 15 ft 30 ft
B Height (min) 80% of GROUND
STORY Height
Display Window Height (min) 8 ft
Recessed Entrance Width (max) 15 ft
Recessed Entrance Depth (max) 5 ft
ii. Standards
a). An unobstructed view of the interior space or a
lighted and maintained merchandise display(s)
must be provided for a depth of at least four (4)
feet behind storefront display windows.
b). When storefronts are set back from the FRONT
LOT LINE, the FRONTAGE AREA must be paved.
c). When present, awnings and canopies must be
mounted between columns, PILASTERs, or PIERs;
above doorways and display windows; and
below the SIGN BAND.
d). Exterior security grilles, gates, and roll-down
security doors and windows are prohibited.
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
254 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
i. Stoop
i. A stoop is a set of stairs with a landing leading to
the entrance of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Landing Width (min) 4 ft
B Landing Depth (min) 4 ft
C Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
ii. Standards
a). Paving, excluding driveways, must match the
ABUTTING sidewalk unless paved with pervious,
porous, or permeable materials.
b). Stairs may be recessed into the BUILDING FACADE
when the BUILDING is set back four (4) feet or
less.
c). Stairs are not permitted to ENCROACH onto any
ABUTTING sidewalk.
d). Stairs may be built perpendicular or parallel to
the BUILDING FACADE, but must lead directly to
ground level or an ABUTTING sidewalk.
j. Bay Window
i. A bay window is an assembly of windows
projecting from a building to provide additional
HABITABLE space, increased light, multi-directional
views, and ARTICULATION to an exterior wall.
Dimensions
A Width (max) 16 ft
B Projection (max) 3 ft
C Height (max)
Height of
BUILDING in
Stories
D Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 3 ft
FENESTRATION (min) 60%
ii. Standards
a). Bay windows, including box and bow windows,
must include at least three (3) windows.
b). The cumulative width of multiple bays may
equal up to fifty percent (50%) of the width of
the exterior wall from which the bays project.
c). Bays projecting over the sidewalk of a public
THOROUGHFARE must have at least two (2) stories
of CLEARANCE and be compliant with all City
Ordinances.
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 255
k. Balcony
i. A balcony is a platform with a railing that provides
outdoor AMENITY SPACE.
Dimensions
A Width (min) 5 ft
B Depth (max) 5 ft
D Area (min) 50 sf
CLEARANCE (min) 10 ft
Permitted Front SETBACK
ENCROACHMENT (max) 6 ft
ii. Standards
a). Balconies may be recessed, projecting, a
combination of the two, or terraced as part of
the roof of a portico, porch, or bay.
b). A balcony that projects over the sidewalk of a
public THOROUGHFARE requires compliance with
all City Ordinances.
c). The guard rail of any balcony oriented toward a
FRONT LOT LINE must permit visual supervision of
the PUBLIC REALM through the posts and rails.
d). The guard rail of any balcony oriented toward
a side or REAR LOT LINE ABUTTING the NR district
must include sight-obscuring visual screening
so that it is at least fifty percent (50%) opaque.
l. Arcade
i. An arcade is a pedestrian walkway covered by the
upper floors of a BUILDING. The GROUND STORY FACADE
is SETBACK and upper floors are supported by a
colonnade or supports.
Dimensions
A Depth (min/max) 10 ft 15 ft
B Height (max) 1 STORY
C CLEARANCE (min/max) 14 ft 24 ft
ii. Standards
a). Arcades must extend the entire width of a
BUILDING and must have a consistent depth.
b). Support columns or PIERs may be spaced no
farther apart than they are tall.
c). Arcades are considered part of the BUILDING for
the purpose of measuring FACADE build out.
d). Arcades may be combined only with storefront
and lobby entrance frontages.
e). The finished ceiling of an arcade interior may
be arched or flat, but must have a greater
CLEARANCE than the openings between columns
or PIERs.
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
256 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
13. Facade Design
a. FACADEs must provide solid material framing each
storefront and lobby entrance as follows:
i. PILASTERs or columns supporting a horizontal lintel
and CORNICE;
ii. a spandrel positioned between PILASTERs or columns
that extend from upper stories of the building to
the ground; or
iii. flat wall above and to either side of a void or
punched opening.
b. Storefronts and lobby entrances must be set within the
resulting frame provided for each by the FACADE.
c. Materials framing each storefront or lobby entrance
may be integrated into the design of the FACADE
or customized for individual storefronts and lobby
entrances. Mechanical louvers necessary for venting
purposes are not permitted in the required frame,
but may be incorporated into any storefront or lobby
entrance system.
d. FACADEs must differentiate the GROUND STORY of the
building from the upper stories through horizontal
ARTICULATION, a change in material, or a change window
size or pattern to create a distinct base to the building
FACADE. The entire height of the GROUND STORY must be
included in the FACADE base.
e. The FACADE of buildings with five (5) or more stories
should include, at least, the entire height of the first
two (2) stories in the design of the required base. The
design of the base may not shift up or down across the
width of the FACADE.
f. For buildings with more than one FACADE, the design of
the base must align horizontally at the corner.
g. FACADEs must provide surface relief from the average
plane of the FACADE by at least four (4) inches, through
the USE of architectural elements such as bay windows,
columns, CORNER BOARDs, CORNICEs, door and window
surrounds, moldings, PIERs, PILASTERs, recessed
storefronts or lobby entrances, seat walls, sills, wall
depth, and recessed or projecting windows.
14. Architectural Design Guidelines
i. FACADEs should be visually divided into a series of
ARCHITECTURAL BAYs that are derived, in general, from
the building’s structural bay spacing.
ii. PIERs, PILASTERs, or other features defining each
ARCHITECTURAL BAY should either extend all the
way to the ground or terminate at any horizontal
ARTICULATION defining the base of the building.
iii. ARCHITECTURAL BAYs should align, in general, with
individual or groups of storefronts and lobby
entrances.
iv. PIERs, PILASTERs, or other features defining each
ARCHITECTURAL BAY should always project forward
and be uninterrupted by any horizontal articulation,
excluding any horizontal ARTICULATION USEd to
differentiate the base of the building.
v. The FACADE of buildings with five (5) or more stories
should be visually divided into, at least, a horizontal
tripartite division (a base, middle, and top). The
horizontal divisions may not shift up or down
Figure 5.1.13 Storefront Framing
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 257
across the width of the FACADE.
vi. Vents, exhausts, and other utility features on
building FACADEs should be architecturally integrated
into the design of the building and should be
located to minimize adverse effects on pedestrian
comfort along sidewalks and within OPEN SPACEs.
vii. Buildings at TERMINATED VISTAs should be ARTICULATEd
with design features that function as focal points.
viii. FENESTRATION glazing should be inset from the plane
of exterior wall surfaces.
ix. RIBBON WINDOWS should be avoided.
x. Monotonous and repetitive storefront or lobby
systems, awnings, canopies, SIGN types, colors, or
designs should be avoided.
xi. Storefronts and lobby entrances should include
awnings or canopies to provide weather protection
for pedestrians and reduce glare for storefront
display areas. Awnings should be open-ended and
operable.
xii. Lobby entrances for UPPER STORY USEs should be
optimally located, well defined, clearly visible, and
separate from the entrance for other GROUND STORY
USEs.
xiii. Lobbies should be limited in both width and
total area to preserve floor space and frontage
for other GROUND STORY USEs. Buildings should USE
any combination of FACADE ARTICULATION, a doubleheight
ceiling, a distinctive doorway, a change in
wall material, a change in paving material within
the FRONTAGE AREA, or some other architectural
element(s) to make lobbies visual and materially
distinctive.
a. Materials
i. The selection of materials, FENESTRATION, and
ornamentation should result in a consistent and
harmonious composition that appears as a unified
whole rather than a collection of unrelated parts.
ii. The type and color of materials should be kept to a
minimum, preferably three (3) or fewer.
iii. Two (2) or more wall materials should be combined
only one above the other, except for bay windows.
iv. Wall materials appearing heavier in weight should
be USEd below wall materials appearing lighter in
weight (wood and metal above brick, and all three
above stone)
v. Horizontal or vertical board siding or shingles,
regardless of material, should be avoided.
vi. Architectural details and finish materials for the
base of a building should be constructed of
architectural concrete or pre-cast cementitious
panels, natural or cast stone, heavy gauge metal
panels, glazed or unglazed architectural terracotta,
or brick.
vii. Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS)
should be avoided.
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
258 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
15. Use Provisions
a. Permitted USEs
i. The USE of real property is subject to the provisions
of Article 9: USE Provisions of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 9, the provisions of Article 9 apply.
ii. USE categories are permitted as specified on Table
5.1.15. USE categories not identified on Table 5.1.15
are prohibited.
iii. All USEs must comply with any USE-specific
standards applicable for each USE in §9.2 USE
Definitions & Limitations.
iv. USEs permitted by Special Permit require additional
DEVELOPMENT review in accordance with §15.2.1
Special Permits.
b. USE Limitations
i. The USE of any GROUND STORY commercial space
fronting a PEDESTRIAN STREET, excluding lobbies for
UPPER STORY USEs, is limited to the following PRINCIPAL
USE categories:
a). Arts & Creative Enterprise
b). Food & Beverage Service
c). Retail Sales
d). Civic & Institutional
c. Required USEs
i. A minimum of five percent (5%) of the gross
leasable commercial floor space in any BUILDING
must be provided as LEASABLE FLOOR AREA for USEs
from the Arts & Creative Enterprise USE category.
Table 5.1.15 Permitted Uses
Use Category
Specific Use HR
Arts & Creative Enterprise
Artisinal Production P
Arts Exhibition P
Arts Sales & Services P
Co-working P
Design Services P
Shared Workspaces & Arts Education P
Cannabis Establishment
Cannabis Cultivation P
Cannabis Retail Sales SP
Cannabis Research & Development P
Cannabis Testing Laboratory P
Civic & Institutional
Community Center P
Hospital SP
Library P
Minor Utility Facility SP
Museum P
Private Non-Profit Club or Lodge SP
Public Service P
Religious & Educational Uses Protected by
M.G.L. 40A. Sec. 3
P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 259
Table 5.1.15 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use HR
Lodging
Bed & Breakfast SP
Hotel or Hostel SP
Office
General Office P
Research and Development or Laboratory P
Residential
Household Living SP
Group Living (except as follows) SP
Community or Group Residence P
Dormitory or Chapter House SP
Homeless Shelter SP
Nursing Home/Assisted Living Facility SP
Rooming House SP
Retail Sales
Building/Home Supplies & Equipment SP
Consumer Goods (except as follows) P
Alcohol Sales SP
Firearms Sales N
Pet Store SP
Formula Retail SP
Fresh Food Market or Grocery Store P
Farm/Vendor Market P
Urban Agriculture
Farming (as noted below) --
Commercial Farming P
Community Farming P
Community Gardening P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
Table 5.1.15 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use HR
Commercial Services
Animal Services (as noted below) --
Commercial Kennel SP
Pet Grooming P
Pet Daycare & Training SP
Veterinarian SP
Assembly or Entertainment SP
Banking & Financial Services (except as
follows)
P
Personal Credit SP
Broadcast and/or Recording Studio P
Building & Home Repair Services SP
Business Support Services P
Caterer/Wholesale Food Production SP
Day Care Service (as noted below) --
Adult Day Care Center P
Child Day Care Center P
Educational Services P
Maintenance & Repair of Consumer Goods P
Personal Services (except as follows) P
Body-Art Services SP
Fitness Services P
Funeral Services SP
Health Care Services SP
Formula Personal Services SP
Recreation Services SP
Vehicle Parking, Commercial (except as follows) --
Bike Share Parking P
Car Share Parking (3 or fewer spaces) P
Car Share Parking (4 or more spaces) P
Commercial Parking P
Food and Beverage Service
Bar or Tavern P
Bakery/Café/Coffee Shop P
Formula Food & Beverage Service SP
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
260 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
16. Development Standards
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to Article 10: DEVELOPMENT
STANDARDS of this Ordinance. Where the provisions
of this section conflict with those of Article 10, the
provisions of Article 10 apply.
b. SIGNs
i. A SIGN, individual numerals or letters, or a
nonelectrical nameplate identifying the property
address is required for all real property as follows:
a). Each GROUND STORY non-residential USE must
identify the STREET address either on the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE door or above or beside the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE of the USE.
b). All residential BUILDING TYPEs must identify the
STREET address either on the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE
door, above or beside the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE, or
on a mailbox.
ii. Address SIGNs must be made easily visible through
the USE of colors or materials that contrast with the
background material they are attached to and must
be conspicuously located to provide visibility from
the THOROUGHFARE that the BUILDING faces.
iii. Address SIGNs must be twelve (12) inches in height
or less and may include the name of the occupant.
Table 5.1.15 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use HR
Accessory Uses
Home Occupations (as noted below) --
Home Office P
Urban Agriculture (as noted below) --
Apiculture P
Aviculture P
Commercial Farming P
Residential Gardening P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 261
17. Parking & Mobility
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
11: Parking & Mobility of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 11, the provisions of Article 11 apply.
ii. Vehicular parking must be provided as specified on
Table 5.1.17, except as follows:
a). Non-residential USEs with five thousand (5,000)
square feet or less of gross LEASABLE FLOOR AREA
are exempt from any minimum requirements
of Table 5.1.17.
b). Any CHANGE IN USE within a non-residential
STRUCTURE constructed before the effective date
of this Ordinance, provided that the change
is to a permitted USE, is exempt from any
minimum requirements of Table 5.1.17.
iii. There are no parking requirements for ACCESSORY
USEs.
iv. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces may be shared
between USEs on the same LOT and buildings on
the same BLOCK in accordance with §11.3 SHARED
PARKING.
b. Type
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING may be provided as above
ground STRUCTURED PARKING or underground
STRUCTURED PARKING. SURFACE PARKING is prohibited.
c. Driveways
i. New driveways require a permit from the City
Engineer in accordance with Chapter 11, Article II,
Sec. 11-33 Driveway Construction of The Code of
Ordinances, City of Somerville, Massachusetts.
ii. Driveways are not permitted in the FRONTAGE AREA
between a building and the FRONT LOT LINE.
iii. Driveways may be up to twenty four (24) feet in
width.
iv. Driveways may provide ACCESS in whole or in part
on or across an ABUTTING LOT(s), provided that an
ACCESS EASEMENT exists between all PROPERTY OWNERS.
d. Parking Design
i. The design of all parking is subject to §11.1 Bicycle
Parking and §11.2 MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING of this
Ordinance.
e. Parking Location
i. Required MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING, excluding any
required handicapped parking, may be provided off-
SITE according to the following:
a). The off-SITE parking must be located within one
thousand three hundred and twenty (1,320)
feet of walking distance to the LOT it will serve,
measured from the nearest point of the off-SITE
parking along BLOCK FACEs and walkways to the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE of the USE served;
b). Pedestrian ACCESS to off-SITE MOTOR VEHICLE
PARKING must be via a paved sidewalk or
walkway.
c). A lease, recorded covenant, or other
comparable legal instrument guaranteeing long
term USE of the SITE must be provided to the
review board or BUILDING OFFICIAL and executed
and filed with the Registry of Deeds.
ii. For real property located in more than one
municipality, MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING need not be
located within the City of Somerville.
f. Unbundled Parking
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces must be rented or
leased as an option rather than a requirement of
the rental, lease, or purchase of a DWELLING UNIT,
ROOMING UNIT, or non-residential floor space.
ii. Bicycle parking must be provided at no cost or fee
to customers, visitors, employees, tenants, and
residents.
g. Parking Relief
i. Relief from the parking standards of Table 5.1.17
requires a special permit.
a). In its discretion to approve or deny a special
permit authorizing relief from the parking
standards of Table 5.1.17, the review board
shall make findings considering the following
in addition to the review considerations for all
Special Permits specified in §15.D.1.e. Review
Criteria:
i). The supply and demand of on-STREET
parking in the neighborhood, as
determined through a parking study.
ii). MOBILITY MANAGEMENT programs and services
provided by the APPLICANT to reduce the
demand for parking.
18. Public Realm
a. Sidewalks
i. When DEVELOPMENT occurs on any LOT ABUTTING a
sidewalk that is less than eighteen (18) feet in total
width, the BUILDING must be set-back an additional
distance to accommodate expansion of the ABUTTING
sidewalk to a width of at least eighteen (18) feet.
The minimum and maximum front SETBACKs for each
BUILDING TYPE are increased accordingly.
b. Sidewalk CURB CUTs
i. A CURB CUT requires a permit from the City Engineer
and must be compliant with all City Ordinances.
ii. Unless otherwise specified, the City Engineer may
not permit more than one (1) CURB CUT per FRONT LOT
LINE, up to two (2) CURB CUTs per LOT.
iii. CURB CUTs are prohibited along all THOROUGHFAREs
designated as a PEDESTRIAN STREET.
iv. CURB CUTs must be located to minimize conflicts
with pedestrians and bicyclists and must have a
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
262 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
Table 5.1.17 Vehicular Parking
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Use Category
Specific Use
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Within a
TRANSIT AREA1
(max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min)
Arts & Creative Enterprise
All Permitted Uses 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Cannabis Establishment
Cannabis Retail Sales 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Cannabis Research & Development 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Cannabis Testing Laboratory 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Civic & Institutional
Community Center 1 / 10,000 sf 4 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,800 sf 1 / 600 sf
Educational Facility
1.0 /
classroom
4.0 /
classroom
1.5 /
classroom
3.0 /
classroom
Hospital
10 per
entrance 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 200 sf 1/ 1,000 sf
Library 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 500 sf
Minor Utility Facility n/a n/a n/a n/a
Museum 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 500 sf
Private Non-Profit Club or Lodge 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 200 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Commercial Services
Animal Services (as noted below) -- -- -- --
Commercial Kennel 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Pet Grooming 1 / 2,500 sf none 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Pet Day Care or Training 1 / 2,500 sf none 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Veterinarian 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Assembly or Entertainment 1 / 40 seats 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 6 seats 1 / 6 seats
Banking & Financial Services
(except as noted below)
1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 450 sf 1 / 400 sf
Broadcast and/or Recording Studio 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 600 sf
Building & Home Repair Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 2,000 sf
Business Support Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 600 sf
Caterer/Wholesale Food Production 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Day Care Service 2 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 600 sf
Maintenance & Repair of Consumer Goods 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 750 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Personal Services (except as noted below) 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 750 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Health Care Services 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 300 sf
Recreation Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf -- --
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - Dwelling Unit RU - Rooming Unit
1 See the Transit Area Map
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 263
Table 5.1.17 Vehicular Parking (continued)
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Use Category
Specific Use
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Within a
TRANSIT AREA1
(max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min)
Food and Beverage Service
All Permitted Uses 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 300 sf 1 / 500 sf
Lodging
Bed & Breakfast n/a 2.0 1 / DU + 1 / 4
guest rooms
1 / DU + 1 / 4
guest rooms
Hotel or Hostel 1 / 20 rooms 1 / 10 rooms 1 / 2 guest
rooms
1 / 2 guest
rooms
Office
Co-Working 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 1,200 sf 1 / 800 sf
General Office 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 650 sf
Research and Development or Laboratory 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Residential
Household Living 0.1 / DU 1.0 / DU 1.0 / DU 1.0 / DU
Group Living (except as follows) 0.05 / room 0.5 / room -- --
Community or Group Residence -- -- -- --
Dormitory or Chapter House 0.1 / room 0.5 / room .05 / bed 1.0 / 4 beds
Homeless Shelter -- -- 4.0 4.0
Nursing Home/Assisted Living Facility -- -- 1 / 6 beds 1 / 6 beds
Single Room Occupancy Housing -- -- 1 / 6 beds 1 / 4 beds
Retail Sales
Building/Home Supplies & Equipment 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Consumer Goods (except as follows) 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Formula Retail 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Fresh Food Market or Grocery Store 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 1,500 sf
Farm/Vendor Market n/a n/a n/a 1 / 1,500 sf
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - Dwelling Unit RU - Rooming Unit
1 See the Transit Area Map
5. HIGH-RISE DISTRICTS
High-Rise (HR)
264 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
clear distance from fire hydrants, STREET TREES, utility
poles, and other furnishings as deemed necessary
by the City Engineer.
a). CURB CUTs for commercial or high-volume
driveways should be at least one-hundred
(100) feet from an unSIGNalized or SIGNalized
intersection.
b). CURB CUTs for residential driveways should be
at least twenty (20) feet from an unSIGNalized
intersection and at least forty (40) feet from a
SIGNalized intersection.
v. The interior width of a CURB CUT (between curb
stones) may be no wider than the driveway,
vehicular entrance, or loading facility it serves.
vi. A DRIVEWAY APRON may be installed only within
the furnishing zone of a sidewalk and must be
constructed in accordance with all standards
established by relevant City Departments.
vii. The grade, cross slope, and clear width of the
walkway of a sidewalk must be maintained
between the DRIVEWAY APRON and the ABUTTING
driveway. The appearance of the walkway (ie.
scoring pattern or paving material) must indicate
that, although a vehicle may cross, the area
traversed by a vehicle remains part of the sidewalk.
Figure 5.1.18 Sidewalk Curb Cuts
6 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
6.1 FABRICATION (FAB) ............................................267
Description 267
Intent 268
Purpose 268
Applicability 268
Development Review 268
Building Types 268
Building Components 273
Facade Design 277
Architectural Design Guidelines 277
Use Provisions 279
Development Standards 280
Parking & Mobility 281
Public Realm 281
6.2 COMMERCIAL CORE (CC) ..................................285
Description 285
Intent 286
Purpose 286
Applicability 286
Development Review 286
Building Types 286
Building Components 299
Facade Design 303
Architectural Design Guidelines 303
Use Provisions 305
Development Standards 307
Parking & Mobility 307
Public Realm 310
6.3 COMMERCIAL INDUSTRY (CI) ...........................311
Description 311
Intent 312
Purpose 312
Applicability 312
Development Review 312
Building Types 312
Building Components 317
Facade Design 320
Architectural Design Guidelines 320
Use Provisions 321
Development Standards 323
Public Realm 327
6.4 COMMERCIAL BUSINESS (CB) ..........................329
Character Description 329
Intent 330
Purpose 330
Applicability 330
Standards & Measurements 330
Development Review 330
Building Types 330
Building Components 343
Facade Design 347
Architectural Design Guidelines 347
Use Provisions 348
Development Standards 350
Parking & Mobility 350
Public Realm 353

6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 267
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
6.1 FABRICATION (FAB)
1. Description
The Fabrication district is characterized by moderate to large FLOOR PLATE buildings up to four (4) stories in height. Buildings
are set close to the sidewalk to create a defined STREET wall that supports pedestrian activity and a sense of place. The
district is entirely commercial with buildings typically designed or retrofitted to support multiple tenants.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
268 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
2. Intent
a. To implement the objectives of the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
of the City of Somerville related to the arts & creative
economy.
b. To protect buildings that are key assets to the creative
economy of Somerville from residential conversion,
preserve existing work space, and retain incubator
spaces for start-up, entry-, and mid-level businesses.
c. To create, maintain, and enhance areas appropriate
for small- and moderate-scale, single- and multi-USE
buildings; activities common to the arts & creative
economy and supporting commercial activities; and
a variety of employment opportunities in the arts &
creative enterprises.
3. Purpose
a. To permit the DEVELOPMENT of single- and multi-USE
buildings that do not exceed four (4) stories in height.
b. To provide quality commercial spaces and permit a mix
of USEs common to the arts & creative economy and
supporting commercial activities.
c. To prohibit residential PRINCIPAL USEs.
4. Applicability
a. The section is applicable to all real property within the
Fabrication district as shown on maps of the Official
Zoning Atlas of the City of Somerville.
5. Development Review
a. DEVELOPMENT review is subject to the provisions of
Article 15: Administration of this Ordinance.
b. All DEVELOPMENT, excluding NORMAL MAINTENANCE, requires
the submittal of a development review application to
the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the issuance of a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance prior to the issuance of a BUILDING
Permit or Certificate of Occupancy.
c. Proposed DEVELOPMENT may or may not necessitate the
need for SUBDivision Plan Approval, Site Plan Approval,
a SPecial Permit, or a Hardship Variance based on
the nature of the proposal. In such cases, additional
DEVELOPMENT review is required in accordance with
Article 15: Administration.
i. The Planning Board is the decision making
authority for all DEVELOPMENT that requires Site Plan
Approval or a Special Permit.
ii. The Zoning Board of Appeals is the Review Board
for all Hardship Variances.
d. Upon verification that no additional DEVELOPMENT review
is necessary, or completion of the required DEVELOPMENT
review, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall issue a Zoning
Compliance CERTIFICATE to certify compliance with the
provisions and procedures of this Ordinance.
6. Building Types
a. One (1) PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE is permitted on each LOT.
b. The following BUILDING TYPEs are permitted by Site Plan
Approval in the Fabrication district:
i. Fabrication BUILDING
c. ACCESSory STRUCTURES are regulated according to Article
10: DEVELOPMENT Standards of this Ordinance.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 269
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
6.1.7. Fabrication Building
A moderate to large FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY BUILDING TYPE
typically designed with tall ceilings, expansive windows,
wide corridors, service elevators, and loading docks.
Fabrication buildings are sometimes naturally lit with a
monitor, clereSTORY, or sawtooth roofs.
The following images are examples of the fabrication
BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
270 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
6.1.7. Fabrication Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 30 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
LOT Coverage C Side SETBACK (min) 0 ft
LOT Coverage (max) 100% Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
Green Factor (min) 0.20 Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 0 ft
1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 10 ft
4th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
D Rear Setback (min) --
Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 10 ft
1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 20 ft
4th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front SETBACK (min) --
SURFACE PARKING 20 ft
STRUCTURED PARKING 20 ft
F Secondary Front SETBACK (min) --
SURFACE PARKING 10 ft
STRUCTURED PARKING 2 ft
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 271
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
6.1.7. Fabrication Building (continued)
c. Height & Massing d. USEs & Features
Main Mass Facade Composition
A BUILDING WIDTH (max) n/a GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) --
FACADE Build Out A Primary Front 50%
Primary Front (min) 65% Secondary Front 15%
Secondary Front (min) 65% C UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 70%
B FLOOR PLATE (max) 30,000 sf BLANK WALL (max) 50 ft
C GROUND STORY Height (min) 15 ft
D UPPER STORY Height (min) 10 ft Use & Occupancy
E Number of Stories (min/max) 2 4 GROUND STORY Entrance Spacing (max) n/a
F BUILDING Height, Feet (max) 60 ft Commercial Space Depth (min) 30 ft
Roof Type n/a
B
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
272 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
6.1.7. Fabrication Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a fabrication building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 6.1.7.
Table 6.1.7 Linkage
Commercial
GROSS FLOOR AREA
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 273
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
8. Building Components
a. BUILDING COMPONENTS are ACCESSory elements attached to
the main mass of a BUILDING.
b. Building components are permitted by Site Plan
Approval as specified on Table 6.1.8.
i. At least one (1) storefront is required for each
GROUND STORY commercial space.
c. BUILDING COMPONENTS not identified on Table 5.1.8 are
prohibited.
d. Unless otherwise specified, BUILDING COMPONENTS
may attach to other BUILDING COMPONENTS to create
assemblies of components.
Table 6.1.8 Building Components
General BUILDING
Commercial BUILDING
LAB BUILDING
Mid-Rise Podium Tower
BLOCK BUILDING
Awning P P P P P
Entry Canopy P P P P P
Lobby Entrance P P P P P
Storefront P P P P P
Bay Window P P P P P
Arcade P P P P P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
274 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
e. Awning
i. An awning is a wall mounted frame covered with
fabric or other material that provides shade and
weather protection over a storefront or BUILDING
entrance.
Dimensions
A Width (min) See ii
Standards
B Projection (min) 3 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
D SETBACK from Curb (min) 2 ft
E Valance Height (max) 12 in
ii. Standards
a). Awnings must be securely attached to and
supported by the BUILDING and must fit the
windows or doors the awning is attached to.
b). An awning must be made of durable, weatherresistant
material that is water repellent.
c). Internally illuminated or back-lit awnings are
prohibited.
d). An awning that projects over the sidewalk of a
public THOROUGHFARE requires compliance with
all City Ordinances.
f. Entry Canopy
i. An entry canopy is a wall-mounted STRUCTURE that
provides shade and weather protection over a
storefront or BUILDING entrance.
Dimensions
A Width (min) See ii
Standards
B Projection (min) 3 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
D Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
SETBACK from Curb (min) 2 ft
ii. Standards
a). Entry canopies must be visually supported by
brackets, cables, or rods.
b). The width of an entry canopy must be equal
to or greater than the width of the doorway
surround or exterior casing it is mounted over.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 275
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
g. Lobby Entrance
i. A lobby entrance is a non-load bearing assembly of
entry doors and windows providing ACCESS and light
to the lobby of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Width (min/max) 15 ft 30 ft
B Height (min) 80% of Ground
Story Height
Recessed Entrance Width (max) 15 ft
Recessed Entrance Depth (max) 5 ft
ii. Standards
a). When a lobby entrance is set back from the
FRONT LOT LINE, the FRONTAGE AREA must be paved.
h. Storefront
i. A storefront is a non-load bearing assembly of
commercial entry doors and windows providing
ACCESS and light to a commercial space and a place
to display goods, services, and SIGNs.
Dimensions
A Width (min/max) 15 ft 30 ft
B Height (min) 80% of Ground
Story Height
Display Window Height (min) 8 ft
Recessed Entrance Width (max) 15 ft
Recessed Entrance Depth (max) 5 ft
ii. Standards
a). An unobstructed view of the interior space or a
lighted and maintained merchandise display(s)
must be provided for a depth of at least four (4)
feet behind storefront display windows.
b). When storefronts are set back from the FRONT
LOT LINE, the FRONTAGE AREA must be paved.
c). When present, awnings and canopies must be
mounted between columns, PILASTERs, or PIERs;
above doorways and display windows; and
below the SIGN BAND.
d). Exterior security grilles, gates, and roll-down
security doors and windows are prohibited.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
276 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
i. Bay Window
i. A bay window is an assembly of multiple windows
that projects from a BUILDING to provide additional
HABITABLE space, increased light, multi-directional
views, and ARTICULATION to an exterior wall.
Dimensions
A Width (max) 16 ft
B Projection (max) 3 ft
C Height (max)
Height of
BUILDING in
Stories
D Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 3 ft
FENESTRATION (min) 60%
ii. Standards
a). Bay windows, including box and bow windows,
must include at least three (3) windows.
b). The cumulative width of multiple bays may
equal up to fifty percent (50%) of the width of
the exterior wall from which the bays project.
c). Bays projecting over the sidewalk of a public
THOROUGHFARE must have at least two (2) stories
of CLEARANCE and be compliant with all City
Ordinances.
j. Arcade
i. An arcade is a frontage type featuring a pedestrian
walkway covered by the upper floors of a BUILDING.
The GROUND STORY FACADE is SETBACK and upper floors
are supported by a colonnade or supports.
Dimensions
A Depth (min/max) 10 ft 15 ft
B Height (max) 1 STORY
C CLEARANCE (min/max) 14 ft 24 ft
ii. Standards
a). Arcades must extend the entire width of a
BUILDING and must have a consistent depth.
b). Support columns or PIERs may be spaced no
farther apart than they are tall.
c). Arcades are considered part of the BUILDING for
the purpose of measuring FACADE build out.
d). Arcades may be combined only with storefront
and lobby entrance frontages
e). The finished ceiling of an arcade interior may
be arched or flat, but must have a greater
CLEARANCE than the openings between columns
or PIERs.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 277
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
9. Facade Design
a. FACADEs must provide solid material framing each
storefront and lobby entrance as follows:
i. PILASTERs or columns supporting a horizontal lintel
and CORNICE;
ii. a spandrel positioned between PILASTERs or columns
that extend from upper stories of the building to
the ground; or
iii. flat wall above and to either side of a void or
punched opening.
b. Storefronts and lobby entrances must be set within the
resulting frame provided for each by the FACADE.
c. Materials framing each storefront or lobby entrance
may be integrated into the design of the FACADE
or customized for individual storefronts and lobby
entrances.
d. Mechanical louvers necessary for venting purposes
are not permitted in the required frame, but may be
incorporated into any storefront or lobby entrance
system.
10. Architectural Design Guidelines
a. FACADEs should be visually divided into a series of
ARCHITECTURAL BAYs that are derived, in general, from the
building’s structural bay spacing.
b. PIERs, PILASTERs, or other features defining each
ARCHITECTURAL BAY should either extend all the way to
the ground or terminate at any horizontal ARTICULATION
defining the base of the building.
c. ARCHITECTURAL BAYs should align, in general, with
individual or groups of storefronts and lobby entrances.
d. PIERs, PILASTERs, or other features defining each
ARCHITECTURAL BAY should always project forward and be
uninterrupted by any horizontal articulation.
e. Vents, exhausts, and other utility features on building
FACADEs should be architecturally integrated into
the design of the building and should be located to
minimize adverse effects on pedestrian comfort along
sidewalks and within OPEN SPACEs.
f. Buildings at TERMINATED VISTAs should be ARTICULATEd with
design features that function as focal points.
g. FENESTRATION glazing should be inset from the plane of
exterior wall surfaces.
h. RIBBON WINDOWS should be avoided.
i. Monotonous and repetitive storefront or lobby
systems, awnings, canopies, SIGN types, colors, or
designs should be avoided.
j. Storefronts and lobby entrances should include
awnings or canopies to provide weather protection
for pedestrians and reduce glare for storefront display
areas. Awnings should be open-ended and operable.
k. Lobby entrances for UPPER STORY USEs should be
optimally located, well defined, clearly visible, and
separate from the entrance for other GROUND STORY USEs.
l. Lobbies should be limited in both width and total area
to preserve floor space and frontage for other GROUND
STORY USEs. Buildings should USE any combination of
FACADE ARTICULATION, a double-height ceiling, a distinctive
doorway, a change in wall material, a change in paving
material within the FRONTAGE AREA, or some other
Figure 5.1.13 Storefront Framing
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
278 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
architectural element(s) to make lobbies visual and
materially distinctive.
m. The selection of materials, FENESTRATION, and
ornamentation should result in a consistent and
harmonious composition that appears as a unified
whole rather than a collection of unrelated parts.
n. The type and color of materials should be kept to a
minimum, preferably three (3) or fewer.
o. Two (2) or more wall materials should be combined
only one above the other, except for bay windows.
p. Wall materials appearing heavier in weight should be
USEd below wall materials appearing lighter in weight
(wood and metal above brick, and all three above
stone)
q. Horizontal or vertical board siding or shingles,
regardless of material, should be avoided.
r. Architectural details and finish materials for the base
of a building should be constructed of architectural
concrete or pre-cast cementitious panels, natural
or cast stone, heavy gauge metal panels, glazed or
unglazed architectural terracotta, or brick.
s. Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) should be
avoided.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 279
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
11. Use Provisions
a. General
i. The USE of real property is subject to the provisions
of Article 9: USE Provisions of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 9, the provisions of Article 9 apply.
ii. USE categories are permitted as specified on Table
6.1.11. USE categories not identified on Table 6.1.11
are prohibited.
iii. All USEs must comply with any USE-specific
standards applicable for each USE in §9.2 USE
Definitions & Limitations.
iv. USEs permitted by Special Permit require additional
DEVELOPMENT review in accordance with §15.2.1
Special Permits.
b. USE Limitations
i. The USE of any GROUND STORY commercial space
fronting a PEDESTRIAN STREET, excluding lobbies for
UPPER STORY USEs, is limited to the following PRINCIPAL
USE categories:
a). Arts & Creative Enterprise
b). Food & Beverage Service
c). Retail Sales
d). Civic & Institutional
c. Required USEs
i. A minimum of five percent (5%) of the gross
leasable commercial floor space in any BUILDING
must be provided as LEASABLE FLOOR AREA for USEs
from the Arts & Creative Enterprise USE category.
Table 6.1.11 Permitted Uses
Use Category
Specific Use FAB
Arts & Creative Enterprise
Artisinal Production P
Arts Exhibition P
Arts Sales & Services P
Co-working P
Design Services P
Shared Workspaces & Arts Education P
Work/Live Creative Studio SP
Cannabis Establishment
Cannabis Cultivation P
Cannabis Product Manufacturing P
Civic & Institutional
Community Center P
Library P
Minor Utility Facility SP
Museum P
Public Service P
Religious & Educational Uses Protected by
M.G.L. 40A. Sec. 3
P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
280 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
Table 6.1.11 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use FAB
Commercial Services
Broadcast and/or Recording Studio P
Caterer/Wholesale Food Production P
Day Care Service (as noted below) --
Child Day Care Center P
Educational Services P
Personal Services (except as follows) N
Body-Art Services P
Fitness Services P
Funeral Services N
Health Care Services N
Formula Personal Services SP
Recreation Services SP
Vehicle Parking (as noted below) --
Bike Share Parking P
Car Share Parking (3 or fewer spaces) P
Car Share Parking (4 or more spaces) P
Commercial Parking P
Industrial
Manufacturing P
Wholesale Trade & Distribution P
Urban Agriculture
Farming (as noted below) --
Commercial Farming P
Community Farming P
Community Gardening P
Accessory Uses
Urban Agriculture (as noted below) --
Commercial Farming P
Vehicle Parking, Accessory (except as follows) P
Home Business Vehicle Parking P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
12. Development Standards
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
10 SITE DEVELOPMENT of this Ordinance. Where the
provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 10, the provisions of Article 10 apply.
b. SIGNs
i. A SIGN, individual numerals or letters, or a
nonelectrical nameplate identifying the property
address is required for all real property as follows:
a). Each GROUND STORY non-residential USE must
identify the STREET address either on the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE door or above or beside the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE of the USE.
b). All residential BUILDING TYPEs must identify the
STREET address either on the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE
door, above or beside the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE, or
on a mailbox.
ii. Address SIGNs must be made easily visible through
the USE of colors or materials that contrast with the
background material they are attached to and must
be conspicuously located to provide visibility from
the THOROUGHFARE that the BUILDING faces.
iii. Address SIGNs must be twelve (12) inches in height
or less and may include the name of the occupant.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 281
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
13. Parking & Mobility
a. General
i. Vehicular parking must be provided as specified on
Table 6.1 (d), except as follows:
a). Non-residential USEs with five thousand (5,000)
square feet or less of gross LEASABLE FLOOR AREA
are exempt from any minimum requirements
of Table 6.1.13.
b). Any CHANGE IN USE within a non-residential
STRUCTURE constructed before the effective date
of this Ordinance, provided that the change
is to a permitted USE, is exempt from any
minimum requirements of Table 6.1.13.
ii. There are no parking requirements for ACCESSORY
USEs.
iii. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces may be shared
between USEs on the same LOT and buildings on
the same BLOCK in accordance with §11.3 SHARED
PARKING.
b. Type
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING may be provided as above
ground STRUCTURED PARKING or underground
STRUCTURED PARKING. SURFACE PARKING spaces are
prohibited.
c. Driveways
i. New driveways require a permit from the City
Engineer.
ii. Driveways must be compliant with all City
Ordinances and constructed in accordance
with all standards established by relevant City
Departments.
iii. Driveways are not permitted in the FRONTAGE AREA
between a BUILDING and the FRONT LOT LINE.
iv. Driveways may be no wider than twenty four (24)
feet in the FRONTAGE AREA of a LOT.
v. Driveways may provide ACCESS in whole or in part
on or across an ABUTTING LOT(s), provided that an
ACCESS EASEMENT exists between all PROPERTY OWNERS.
d. Parking Design
i. The design of all parking is subject to §11.1 Bicycle
Parking and §11.2 MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING of this
Ordinance.
e. Parking Location
i. Required vehicular parking, excluding any required
handicapped parking, may be provided on a
contiguous LOT under the same ownership as the
LOT that the parking will serve as follows:
a). Pedestrian ACCESS to off-SITE vehicular parking
must be via a paved sidewalk or walkway.
b). A lease, recorded covenant, or other
comparable legal instrument guaranteeing long
term USE of the SITE must be provided to the
review board or BUILDING OFFICIAL and executed
and filed with the Registry of Deeds.
ii. For real property located in more than one
municipality, MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING need not be
located within the City of Somerville.
f. Unbundled Parking
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces must be rented or
leased as an option rather than a requirement of
the rental, lease, or purchase of a DWELLING UNIT or
non-residential floor space.
ii. Bicycle parking must be provided at no cost or fee
to customers, visitors, employees, tenants, and
residents.
g. Parking Relief
i. Relief from the parking standards of Table 6.1.13
requires a special permit.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing
relief from the parking standards of Table
6.1.13:
i). The supply and demand of on-STREET
parking in the neighborhood, as
determined through a parking study.
ii). MOBILITY MANAGEMENT programs and services
provided by the APPLICANT to reduce the
demand for parking.
iii). That parking provided in excess of any
maximum permitted does not result in the
increase in impervious LOT AREA.
14. Public Realm
a. Sidewalks
i. When DEVELOPMENT occurs on any LOT ABUTTING a
sidewalk that is less than twelve (12) feet in total
width, the BUILDING must be set-back an additional
distance to accommodate expansion of the
ABUTTING sidewalk to a width of at least twelve (12)
feet. The minimum and maximum front SETBACKs for
each BUILDING TYPE are increased accordingly.
b. Sidewalk CURB CUTs
i. A CURB CUT requires a permit from the City Engineer
and must be compliant with all City Ordinances.
ii. Unless otherwise specified, the City Engineer may
not permit more than one (1) CURB CUT per FRONT LOT
LINE of a LOT.
iii. CURB CUTs are prohibited along all THOROUGHFAREs
designated as a PEDESTRIAN STREET.
iv. CURB CUTs must be located to minimize conflicts
with pedestrians and bicyclists and must have a
clear distance from fire hydrants, STREET TREES, utility
poles, and other furnishings as deemed necessary
by the City Engineer.
a). CURB CUTs for commercial or high-volume
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
282 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
Table 6.1.13 Vehicular Parking
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
USE Category
Specific USE
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Within a
TRANSIT AREA1
(max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min)
Arts & Creative Enterprise
ALL PERMITTED USES 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Cannabis Establishment
Cannabis Product Manufacturing 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Civic & Institutional
COMMUNITY CENTER 1 / 10,000 sf 4 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,800 sf 1 / 600 sf
Educational Facility
1.0 /
classroom
4.0 /
classroom
1.5 /
classroom
3.0 /
classroom
LIBRARY 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 500 sf
MINOR UTILITY FACILITY n/a n/a n/a n/a
MUSEUM 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 500 sf
Private Non-Profit Club or Lodge 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 200 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Commercial Services
Broadcast and/or Recording Studio 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 600 sf
Caterer/Wholesale Food Production 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Day Care Service 2 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 600 sf
Recreation Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf -- --
Industrial
MANUFACTURING 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 1,200 sf
Wholesale Trade & Distribution 1 / 40,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 1,200 sf
Office
GENERAL OFFICE 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 650 sf
Research and Development or Laboratory 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - DWELLING UNIT
1 See the TRANSIT AREA Map
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 283
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
driveways should be at least one-hundred
(100) feet from an unSIGNalized or SIGNalized
intersection.
b). CURB CUTs for residential driveways should be
at least twenty (20) feet from an unSIGNalized
intersection and at least forty (40) feet from a
SIGNalized intersection.
v. The interior width of a CURB CUT (between curb
stones) may be no wider than the driveway,
vehicular entrance, or loading facility it serves.
vi. A DRIVEWAY APRON may be installed only within
the furnishing zone of a sidewalk and must be
constructed in accordance with all standards
established by relevant City Departments.
vii. The grade, cross slope, and clear width of the
walkway of a sidewalk must be maintained
between the DRIVEWAY APRON and the ABUTTING
driveway. The appearance of the walkway (ie.
scoring pattern or paving material) must indicate
that, although a vehicle may cross, the area
traversed by a vehicle remains part of the sidewalk.
Figure 6.1.14 Sidewalk Curb Cuts
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
284 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Fabrication (FAB)
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 285
6.2 COMMERCIAL CORE (CC)
1. Description
The Commercial Core district is characterized by medium to large FLOOR PLATE buildings at a variety of heights. Buildings
are set close to the sidewalk and taller buildings have an UPPER STORY STEP-BACK to define a mid-rise STREET wall that supports
pedestrian activity and a sense of place. The district is entirely commercial, with a wide diversity of USEs.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
286 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
2. Intent
a. To implement the objectives of the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
of the City of Somerville for commercial DEVELOPMENT.
b. To create, maintain, and enhance areas appropriate for
moderately-scaled single- and multi-USE commercial
buildings; neighborhood-, community-, and regionserving
USEs; and a wide variety of employment
opportunities.
3. Purpose
a. To permit the DEVELOPMENT of mid- and HIGH-RISE singleand
multi-USE commercial buildings.
b. To provide quality GROUND STORY commercial spaces
and permit small and medium-scale, neighborhood-,
community-, and region-serving commercial USEs.
4. Applicability
a. The section is applicable to all real property within
the Commercial Core district as shown on the Official
Zoning Map of the City of Somerville.
b. The Commercial Core district is a family of sub
districts where the CC zone classification is followed
by a number associated with which differ only in the
permitted building height on the zoning map.
c. On the maps of the Official Zoning Atlas, the CC zone
classification is followed by a number associated with
the number of stories permitted for the sub-district.
5. Development Review
a. DEVELOPMENT review is subject to the provisions of
Article 15: Administration of this Ordinance.
b. All DEVELOPMENT, excluding NORMAL MAINTENANCE, requires
the submittal of a development review application to
the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the issuance of a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance prior to the issuance of a Building
Permit or Certificate of Occupancy.
c. Proposed DEVELOPMENT may or may not necessitate the
need for SUBDivision Plan Approval, Site Plan Approval,
a SPecial Permit, or a Hardship Variance based on
the nature of the proposal. In such cases, additional
DEVELOPMENT review is required in accordance with
Article 15: Administration.
i. The Planning Board is the decision making
authority for all DEVELOPMENT that requires Site Plan
Approval or a Special Permit.
ii. The Zoning Board of Appeals is the Review Board
for all Hardship Variances.
d. Upon verification that no additional DEVELOPMENT review
is necessary, or completion of the required DEVELOPMENT
review, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall issue a Zoning
Compliance Certificate to certify compliance with the
provisions and procedures of this Ordinance.
6. Building Types
a. One (1) PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE is permitted on each LOT.
b. The following BUILDING TYPEs are permitted by Site Plan
Approval in the Commercial Core district:
i. Commercial Building
ii. Lab Building
iii. Commercial BLOCK Building
c. ACCESSory structures are regulated according to Article
10: DEVELOPMENT Standards of this Ordinance.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 287
6.2.7. Commercial Building
A multi-STORY PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE purpose built for
occuPATIOn by commercial USEs on all floors. GROUND STORY
commercial space is primarily occupied by commercial
service, food & beverage service, or retail sales PRINCIPAL
USEs. Floor space on upper stories may be occupied by
retail USEs that do not rely on the visibility of a storefront at
sidewalk level.
The following images are examples of the commercial
BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
288 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.2.7. Commercial Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 30 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK 2 ft 15 ft
LOT Coverage C Side SETBACK (min) --
LOT Coverage (max) 100% Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
GREEN SCORE -- Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 0 ft
Minimum 0.20 1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 10 ft
Ideal 0.25 4th - 10th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
B OPEN SPACE (min) 25% D Rear Setback (min) --
Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 10 ft
1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 20 ft
4th - 10th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
F Secondary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 289
6.2.7. Commercial Building (continued)
c. Height & Massing d. USEs & Features
Main Mass Facade Composition
A Width (max) 200 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 70%
FACADE Build Out (min) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 70%
Primary Frontage 80% BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
Secondary Frontage 65%
FLOOR PLATE (max) 30,000 sf Use & Occupancy
B GROUND STORY Height (min) 18 ft Entrance Spacing (max) 30 ft
C UPPER STORY Height (min) 10 ft Commercial Space Depth (min) 30 ft
D BUILDING Height, Stories (min) --
Primary Frontage 4 stories
Secondary Frontage 3 stories
E BUILDING Height, Stories (max) Varies by Map
Designation
F BUILDING Height, Feet (max) --
3 STORY 50 ft
4 STORY 55 ft
5 STORY 70 ft
7 STORY 100 ft
10 STORY 150 ft
Roof Type Flat
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
290 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.2.7. Commercial Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a commercial building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 6.2.7.
Table 6.2.7 Linkage
Commercial
GROSS FLOOR AREA
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 291
6.2.8. Lab Building
A large FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE
purpose built for occuPATIOn by laboratory and research &
DEVELOPMENT PRINCIPAL USEs. Floor space is typically custom
designed as complex, technically sophisticated, and
mechanically intensive wet or dry labs or vivariums for
animal research.
The following images are examples of the lab BUILDING TYPE
and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
292 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.2.8. Lab Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 30 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK 2 ft 15 ft
LOT Coverage C Side SETBACK (min) --
LOT Coverage (max) 100% Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
GREEN SCORE -- Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 0 ft
Minimum 0.20 1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 10 ft
Ideal 0.25 4th - 10th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
B OPEN SPACE (min) 25% D Rear Setback (min) --
Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 10 ft
1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 20 ft
4+ Stories abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
F Secondary Front Setback (min) 30 ft
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 293
6.2.8. Lab Building (continued)
c. Height & Massing d. USEs & Features
Main Mass Facade Composition
A Width (max) 240 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 70%
FACADE Build Out (min) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 70%
Primary Frontage 80% BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
Secondary Frontage 65%
FLOOR PLATE 35,000 sf Use & Occupancy
B GROUND STORY Height (min) 18 ft Entrance Spacing (max) 30 ft
C UPPER STORY Height (min) 10 ft Commercial Space Depth (min) 30 ft
D BUILDING Height, Stories (min) --
Primary Frontage 4 stories
E BUILDING Height, Stories (max) Varies by Map
Designation
F BUILDING Height, Feet (max) --
3 STORY 50 ft
4 STORY 65 ft
5 STORY 80 ft
7 STORY 110 ft
10 STORY 155 ft
Roof Type Flat
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
294 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.2.8. Lab Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 6.2.8.
Table 6.2.8 Linkage
Commercial
GROSS FLOOR AREA
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 295
6.2.9. Commercial Block Building
A very large FLOOR PLATE, multi-STORY, PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE
composed of a three (3) to six (6) STORY PODIUM and one (1)
or more UPPER STORY TOWERs with commercial USEs on all
stories. A BLOCK building occupies either an entire BLOCK or
half of a BLOCK, on a LOT that fronts onto at least three (3)
THOROUGHFAREs or CIVIC SPACEs. BLOCK buildings are designed
to appear as an assembly of attached buildings, each with
its own massing, proportions, and detailing.
The following images are examples of the BLOCK BUILDING
TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
296 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.2.9. Commercial Block Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 200 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
Depth (min) 250 ft B Secondary Front SETBACK 2 ft 15 ft
C Side SETBACK (min) --
Lot Development Podium abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
LOT Coverage (max) 100% Podium abutting any non-NR or -LHD 0 ft
GREEN SCORE -- 1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 10 ft
Minimum 0.20 4th - 6th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
Ideal 0.25 Tower(s) 30 ft
B OPEN SPACE (min) 25% Tower(s) Abutting NR or LHD 60 ft
D Podium Rear Setback (min) --
Abutting an Alley or R-ROW 0 ft
Abutting any non-NR or -LHD 10 ft
1st - 3rd Story abutting NR or LHD 20 ft
4th - 6th Story abutting NR or LHD 30 ft
Tower(s) Rear Setback 30 ft
ABUTTING NR or LHD 60 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front SETBACK (min) 30 ft
F Secondary Front SETBACK (min) 30 ft
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 297
6.2.9. Commercial Block Building (continued)
c. Massing & Height d. USEs & Features
Main Mass Facade Composition
A BUILDING WIDTH (max) 500 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 70%
FACADE Build Out (min) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 70%
Primary Front 100% BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
Secondary Front 100%
FLOOR PLATE (max) -- Use & Occupancy
PODIUM n/a GROUND STORY Entrance Spacing (max) 30 ft
TOWER(s) 30,000 sf Commercial Space Depth (min) 30 ft
B GROUND STORY Height (min) 18 ft
C UPPER STORY Height (min) 10 ft
D Number of Stories (min) 3 stories
Number of Stories (max) --
E PODIUM 6 stories
F TOWER(s) 10 stories
G Building Height (min) --
PODIUM 80 ft
TOWER 140 ft
Roof Type Flat
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
298 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.2.9. Block Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a BLOCK building must provide
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITs as specified on Table
5.1.11 (a).
iii. DEVELOPMENT of a BLOCK building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 5.1.11 (b).
f. Building Design Standards
i. The FACADE of any BLOCK building greater that two
hundred (200) feet in width must be divided
vertically and designed as two (2) or more separate
and distinct facades of differing architectural
treatment so that the building appears to be
multiple buildings. See Figure 5.1.11 (a). The
differentiation between facade designs must
include the following:
a). a change in CORNICE, roof eave, or parapet;
b). a change in wall material; and
c). a pilaster or column on either side of the
division between each facade.
ii. One (1) GROUND STORY commercial space is required
per seventy (70) feet of building width, including
vehicular entrances, for each BLOCK FACE.
iii. One (1) lobby entrance is permitted per BLOCK FACE
and each TOWER must have an individual lobby
entrance serving the UPPER STORY USEs.
g. DEVELOPMENT Standards
i. Loading facilities and services areas must be
located within the building and set back from any
FACADE by at least thirty (30) feet. Transformer and
fire suppression rooms are exempt.
h. Parking & Mobility
i. One (1) vehicular entrance is permitted per BLOCK
FACE, and up to two (2) vehicular entrances per
BLOCK building are permitted in total.
i. PUBLIC REALM
i. BLOCK buildings occupying an entire BLOCK must
provide a covered ALLEY internal to the building.
Table 6.2.9 Linkage
Commercial
GROSS FLOOR AREA
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
Figure 6.2.9 Appearance of Two Buildings
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 299
10. Building Components
a. Building components are ACCESSory elements attached
to the main mass of a building.
b. Building components are permitted by Site Plan
Approval as specified on Table 6.1.8.
i. At least one (1) storefront is required for each
GROUND STORY commercial space.
c. Building components not identified on Table 5.1.8 are
prohibited.
d. Unless otherwise specified, building components
may attach to other building components to create
assemblies of components.
Table 6.1.8 Building Components
General Building
Commercial Building
Lab Building
Mid-Rise Podium Tower
BLOCK Building
Awning P P P P P
Entry Canopy P P P P P
Lobby Entrance P P P P P
Storefront P P P P P
Bay Window P P P P P
Arcade P P P P P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
300 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
e. Awning
i. An awning is a wall mounted frame covered with
fabric or other material that provides shade and
weather protection over a storefront or BUILDING
entrance.
Dimensions
A Width (min) See
ii Standards
B Projection (min) 3 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
D SETBACK from Curb (min) 2 ft
E Valance Height (max) 12 in
ii. Standards
a). Awnings must be securely attached to and
supported by the BUILDING and must fit the
windows or doors the awning is attached to.
b). An awning must be made of durable, weatherresistant
material that is water repellent.
c). Internally illuminated or back-lit awnings are
prohibited.
d). An awning that projects over the sidewalk of a
public THOROUGHFARE requires compliance with
all City Ordinances.
f. Entry Canopy
i. An entry canopy is a wall-mounted STRUCTURE that
provides shade and weather protection over a
storefront or BUILDING entrance.
Dimensions
A Width (min) See ii
Standards
B Projection (min) 3 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
D Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
SETBACK from Curb (min) 2 ft
ii. Standards
a). Entry canopies must be visually supported by
brackets, cables, or rods.
b). The width of an entry canopy must be equal
to or greater than the width of the doorway
surround or exterior casing it is mounted over.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 301
g. Lobby Entrance
i. A lobby entrance is a non-load bearing assembly of
entry doors and windows providing ACCESS and light
to the lobby of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Width (min/max) 15 ft 30 ft
B Height (min) 80% of GROUND
STORY Height
Recessed Entrance Width (max) 15 ft
Recessed Entrance Depth (max) 5 ft
ii. Standards
a). When a lobby entrance is set back from the
FRONT LOT LINE, the FRONTAGE AREA must be paved.
h. Storefront
i. A storefront is a non-load bearing assembly of
commercial entry doors and windows providing
ACCESS and light to a commercial space and a place
to display goods, services, and SIGNs.
Dimensions
A Width (min/max) 15 ft 30 ft
B Height (min) 80% of GROUND
STORY Height
Display Window Height (min) 8 ft
Recessed Entrance Width (max) 15 ft
Recessed Entrance Depth (max) 5 ft
ii. Standards
a). An unobstructed view of the interior space or a
lighted and maintained merchandise display(s)
must be provided for a depth of at least four (4)
feet behind storefront display windows.
b). When storefronts are set back from the FRONT
LOT LINE, the FRONTAGE AREA must be paved.
c). When present, awnings and canopies must be
mounted between columns, PILASTERs, or PIERs;
above doorways and display windows; and
below the SIGN BAND.
d). Exterior security grilles, gates, and roll-down
security doors and windows are prohibited.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
302 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
i. Bay Window
i. A bay window is an assembly of multiple windows
that projects from a BUILDING to provide additional
HABITABLE space, increased light, multi-directional
views, and ARTICULATION to an exterior wall.
Dimensions
A Width (max) 16 ft
B Projection (max) 3 ft
C Height (max)
Height of
BUILDING in
Stories
D Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 3 ft
FENESTRATION (min) 60%
ii. Standards
a). Bay windows, including box and bow windows,
must include at least three (3) windows.
b). The cumulative width of multiple bays may
equal up to fifty percent (50%) of the width of
the exterior wall from which the bays project.
c). Bays projecting over the sidewalk of a public
THOROUGHFARE must have at least two (2) stories
of CLEARANCE and be compliant with all City
Ordinances.
j. Arcade
i. An arcade is a frontage type featuring a pedestrian
walkway covered by the upper floors of a BUILDING.
The GROUND STORY FACADE is SETBACK and upper floors
are supported by a colonnade or supports.
Dimensions
A Depth (min/max) 10 ft 15 ft
B Height (max) 1 STORY
C CLEARANCE (min/max) 14 ft 24 ft
ii. Standards
a). Arcades must extend the entire width of a
BUILDING and must have a consistent depth.
b). Support columns or PIERs may be spaced no
farther apart than they are tall.
c). Arcades are considered part of the BUILDING for
the purpose of measuring FACADE build out.
d). Arcades may be combined only with storefront
and lobby entrance frontages
e). The finished ceiling of an arcade interior may
be arched or flat, but must have a greater
CLEARANCE than the openings between columns
or PIERs.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 303
11. Facade Design
a. FACADEs must provide solid material framing each
storefront and lobby entrance as follows:
i. PILASTERs or columns supporting a horizontal lintel
and CORNICE;
ii. a spandrel positioned between PILASTERs or columns
that extend from upper stories of the building to
the ground; or
iii. flat wall above and to either side of a void or
punched opening.
b. Storefronts and lobby entrances must be set within the
resulting frame provided for each by the FACADE.
c. Materials framing each storefront or lobby entrance
may be integrated into the design of the FACADE
or customized for individual storefronts and lobby
entrances. Mechanical louvers necessary for venting
purposes are not permitted in the required frame,
but may be incorporated into any storefront or lobby
entrance system.
d. FACADEs must differentiate the GROUND STORY of the
building from the upper stories through horizontal
ARTICULATION, a change in material, or a change window
size or pattern to create a distinct base to the building
FACADE. The entire height of the GROUND STORY must be
included in the FACADE base.
e. The FACADE of buildings with five (5) or more stories
should include, at least, the entire height of the first
two (2) stories in the design of the required base. The
design of the base may not shift up or down across the
width of the FACADE.
f. For buildings with more than one FACADE, the design of
the base must align horizontally at the corner.
g. FACADEs must provide surface relief from the average
plane of the FACADE by at least four (4) inches, through
the USE of architectural elements such as bay windows,
columns, CORNER BOARDs, CORNICEs, door and window
surrounds, moldings, PIERs, PILASTERs, recessed
storefronts or lobby entrances, seat walls, sills, wall
depth, and recessed or projecting windows.
12. Architectural Design Guidelines
a. FACADEs
i. FACADEs should be visually divided into a series of
ARCHITECTURAL BAYs that are derived, in general, from
the building’s structural bay spacing.
ii. PIERs, PILASTERs, or other features defining each
ARCHITECTURAL BAY should either extend all the
way to the ground or terminate at any horizontal
ARTICULATION defining the base of the building.
iii. ARCHITECTURAL BAYs should align, in general, with
individual or groups of storefronts and lobby
entrances.
iv. PIERs, PILASTERs, or other features defining each
ARCHITECTURAL BAY should always project forward
and be uninterrupted by any horizontal articulation,
excluding any horizontal ARTICULATION USEd to
differentiate the base of the building.
v. The FACADE of buildings with five (5) or more stories
should be visually divided into, at least, a horizontal
Figure 5.1.13 Storefront Framing
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
304 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
tripartite division (a base, middle, and top). The
horizontal divisions may not shift up or down
across the width of the FACADE.
vi. Vents, exhausts, and other utility features on
building FACADEs should be architecturally integrated
into the design of the building and should be
located to minimize adverse effects on pedestrian
comfort along sidewalks and within OPEN SPACEs.
vii. Buildings at TERMINATED VISTAs should be ARTICULATEd
with design features that function as focal points.
b. FENESTRATION
i. FENESTRATION glazing should be inset from the plane
of exterior wall surfaces.
ii. RIBBON WINDOWS should be avoided.
c. Storefronts & Lobby Entrances
i. Monotonous and repetitive storefront or lobby
systems, awnings, canopies, SIGN types, colors, or
designs should be avoided.
ii. Storefronts and lobby entrances should include
awnings or canopies to provide weather protection
for pedestrians and reduce glare for storefront
display areas. Awnings should be open-ended and
operable.
iii. Lobby entrances for UPPER STORY USEs should be
optimally located, well defined, clearly visible, and
separate from the entrance for other GROUND STORY
USEs.
iv. Lobbies should be limited in both width and
total area to preserve floor space and frontage
for other GROUND STORY USEs. Buildings should USE
any combination of FACADE ARTICULATION, a doubleheight
ceiling, a distinctive doorway, a change in
wall material, a change in paving material within
the FRONTAGE AREA, or some other architectural
element(s) to make lobbies visual and materially
distinctive.
d. Materials
i. The selection of materials, FENESTRATION, and
ornamentation should result in a consistent and
harmonious composition that appears as a unified
whole rather than a collection of unrelated parts.
ii. The type and color of materials should be kept to a
minimum, preferably three (3) or fewer.
iii. Two (2) or more wall materials should be combined
only one above the other, except for bay windows.
iv. Wall materials appearing heavier in weight should
be USEd below wall materials appearing lighter in
weight (wood and metal above brick, and all three
above stone)
v. Horizontal or vertical board siding or shingles,
regardless of material, should be avoided.
vi. Architectural details and finish materials for the
base of a building should be constructed of
architectural concrete or pre-cast cementitious
panels, natural or cast stone, heavy gauge metal
panels, glazed or unglazed architectural terracotta,
or brick.
vii. Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS)
should be avoided.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 305
13. Use Provisions
a. General
i. The USE of real property is subject to the provisions
of Article 9: USE Provisions of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 9, the provisions of Article 9 apply.
ii. USE categories are permitted according to Table
6.2.13.
iii. All USEs must comply with any USE-specific
standards applicable for each USE in §9.2 USE
Definitions & Limitations.
iv. USEs permitted by Special Permit require additional
DEVELOPMENT review in accordance with §15.2.1
Special Permits.
v. USE categories not identified on Table 6.2.13 are
prohibited.
b. USE Limitations
i. The USE of any GROUND STORY commercial space
fronting a PEDESTRIAN STREET, excluding lobbies for
UPPER STORY USEs, is limited to the following PRINCIPAL
USE categories:
a). Arts & Creative Enterprise
b). Food & Beverage Service
c). Retail Sales
d). Civic & Institutional
c. Required USEs
i. A minimum of five percent (5%) of the GROSS FLOOR
AREA of any Commercial BUILDING or Lab BUILDING
must be provided as LEASABLE FLOOR AREA for USEs
from the Arts & Creative Enterprise USE category.
Table 6.2.13 Permitted Uses
Use Category
Specific Use CC
Arts & Creative Enterprise
Artisinal Production P
Arts Exhibition P
Arts Sales & Services P
Co-Working P
Design Services P
Shared Workspaces & Arts Education P
Cannabis Establishment
Cannabis Cultivation P
Cannabis Retail Sales SP
Cannabis Research & Development P
Cannabis Testing Laboratory P
Civic & Institutional
Community Center P
Hospital SP
Library P
Minor Utility Facility SP
Museum P
Private Non-Profit Club or Lodge SP
Public Service P
Religious & Educational Uses Protected by
M.G.L. 40A. Sec. 3
P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
306 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
Table 6.2.13 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use CC
Commercial Services
Animal Services (as noted below) --
Commercial Kennel SP
Pet Grooming P
Pet Daycare & Training SP
Veterinarian SP
Assembly or Entertainment SP
Banking & Financial Services (except as follows P
Personal Credit SP
Broadcast and/or Recording Studio P
Building & Home Repair Services SP
Business Support Services P
Caterer/Wholesale Food Production SP
Day Care Service (as noted below) --
Adult Day Care Center P
Child Day Care Center P
Educational Services P
Maintenance & Repair of Consumer Goods P
Personal Services (except as noted below) P
Body-Art Services SP
Funeral Services SP
Fitness Services P
Health Care Services SP
Formula Personal Services SP
Recreation Services SP
Vehicle Parking (as noted below) P
Bike Share Parking P
Car Share Parking (3 or fewer spaces) P
Car Share Parking (4 or more spaces) P
Commercial Parking P
Food and Beverage Service
Bar/Restaurant/Tavern P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
Table 6.2.13 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use CC
Bakery/Café/Coffee Shop P
Formula Food & Beverage Service SP
Lodging
Bed & Breakfast SP
Hotel or Hostel SP
Office
General Office P
Research and Development or Laboratory P
Retail Sales
Building/Home Supplies & Equipment SP
Consumer Goods (except as follows) P
Alcohol Sales SP
Firearms Sales N
Pet Store SP
Formula Retail SP
Fresh Food Market or Grocery Store P
Farm/Vendor Market P
Urban Agriculture
Farming (as noted below) --
Commercial Farming P
Community Farming P
Community Gardening P
Accessory Uses
Urban Agriculture (as noted below) --
Commercial Farming P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 307
14. Development Standards
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
10 SITE DEVELOPMENT of this Ordinance. Where the
provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 10, the provisions of Article 10 apply.
b. SIGNs
i. A SIGN, individual numerals or letters, or a
nonelectrical nameplate identifying the property
address is required for all real property as follows:
a). Each GROUND STORY non-residential USE must
identify the STREET address either on the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE door or above or beside the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE of the USE.
b). All residential BUILDING TYPEs must identify the
STREET address either on the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE
door, above or beside the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE, or
on a mailbox.
ii. Address SIGNs must be made easily visible through
the USE of colors or materials that contrast with the
background material they are attached to and must
be conspicuously located to provide visibility from
the THOROUGHFARE that the BUILDING faces.
iii. Address SIGNs must be twelve (12) inches in height
or less and may include the name of the occupant.
15. Parking & Mobility
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
11: Parking & Mobility of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 11, the provisions of Article 11 apply.
ii. Vehicular parking must be provided as specified on
Table 6.2.15, except as follows:
a). Non-residential USEs with five thousand (5,000)
square feet or less of gross LEASABLE FLOOR AREA
are exempt from any minimum requirements
of Table 6.2.15.
b). Any CHANGE IN USE within a non-residential
STRUCTURE constructed before the effective date
of this Ordinance, provided that the change
is to a permitted USE, is exempt from any
minimum requirements of Table 6.2.15.
iii. There are no parking requirements for ACCESSORY
USEs.
iv. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces may be shared
between USEs on the same LOT and buildings on
the same BLOCK in accordance with §11.3 SHARED
PARKING.
b. Type
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING may be provided as above
ground STRUCTURED PARKING or underground
STRUCTURED PARKING. SURFACE PARKING is prohibited.
c. Driveways
i. New driveways require a permit from the City
Engineer.
ii. Driveways must be compliant with all City
Ordinances and constructed in accordance
with all standards established by relevant City
Departments.
iii. Driveways are not permitted in the FRONTAGE AREA
between a BUILDING and the FRONT LOT LINE.
iv. Driveways may be no wider than twenty four (24)
feet in the FRONTAGE AREA of a LOT.
v. Driveways may provide ACCESS in whole or in part
on or across an ABUTTING LOT(s), provided that an
ACCESS EASEMENT exists between all PROPERTY OWNERS.
d. Parking Design
i. The design of all parking is subject to §11.1 Bicycle
Parking and §11.2 MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING of this
Ordinance.
e. Parking Location
i. Required vehicular parking, excluding any required
handicapped parking, may be provided on a
contiguous LOT under the same ownership as the
LOT that the parking will serve as follows:
a). Pedestrian ACCESS to off-SITE vehicular parking
must be via a paved sidewalk or walkway.
b). A lease, recorded covenant, or other
comparable legal instrument guaranteeing long
term USE of the SITE must be provided to the
review board or BUILDING OFFICIAL and executed
and filed with the Registry of Deeds.
ii. For real property located in more than one
municipality, MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING need not be
located within the City of Somerville.
f. Unbundled Parking
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces must be rented or
leased as an option rather than a requirement of
the rental, lease, or purchase of a DWELLING UNIT or
non-residential floor space.
ii. Bicycle parking must be provided at no cost or fee
to customers, visitors, employees, tenants, and
residents.
g. Parking Relief
i. Relief from the parking standards of Table 6.2.15
requires a Special Permit.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing
relief from the parking standards of Table 4.4
(d):
i). The supply and demand of on-STREET
parking in the neighborhood, as
determined through a parking study.
ii). MOBILITY MANAGEMENT programs and
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
308 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
Table 6.2.15 Vehicular Parking
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Use Category
Specific Use
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Within a
TRANSIT AREA1
(max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min)
Arts & Creative Enterprise
All Permitted Uses 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Cannabis Establishment
Cannabis Retail Sales 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Cannabis Research & Development 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Cannabis Testing Laboratory 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Civic & Institutional
Community Center 1 / 10,000 sf 4 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,800 sf 1 / 600 sf
Educational Facility
1.0 /
classroom
4.0 /
classroom
1.5 /
classroom
3.0 /
classroom
Hospital
10 per
entrance 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 200 sf 1/ 1,000 sf
Library 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 500 sf
Minor Utility Facility n/a n/a n/a n/a
Museum 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 500 sf
Private Non-Profit Club or Lodge 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 200 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Commercial Services
Animal Services (as noted below) -- -- -- --
Commercial Kennel 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Pet Grooming 1 / 2,500 sf none 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Pet Day Care or Training 1 / 2,500 sf none 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Veterinarian 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Assembly or Entertainment 1 / 40 seats 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 6 seats 1 / 6 seats
Banking & Financial Services
(except as noted below)
1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 450 sf 1 / 400 sf
Broadcast and/or Recording Studio 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 600 sf
Building & Home Repair Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 2,000 sf
Business Support Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 600 sf
Caterer/Wholesale Food Production 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Day Care Service 2 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 600 sf
Maintenance & Repair of Consumer Goods 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 750 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Personal Services (except as noted below) 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 750 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Health Care Services 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 300 sf
Recreation Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf -- --
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - Dwelling Unit RU - Rooming Unit
1 See the Transit Area Map
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 309
Table 6.2.15 Vehicular Parking (continued)
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Use Category
Specific Use
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Within a
TRANSIT AREA1
(max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min)
Food and Beverage Service
All Permitted Uses 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 300 sf 1 / 500 sf
Lodging
Bed & Breakfast 1 / 20 rooms 1 / 10 rooms 1 / DU + 1 / 4
guest rooms
1 / DU + 1 / 4
guest rooms
Hotel or Hostel 1 / 20 rooms 1 / 10 rooms 1 / 2 guest
rooms
1 / 2 guest
rooms
Short Term Rental 1 / 20 rooms 1 / 10 rooms n/a n/a
Office
Co-Working 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 1,200 sf 1 / 800 sf
General Office 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 650 sf
Research and Development or Laboratory 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Retail Sales
Building/Home Supplies & Equipment 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Consumer Goods (except as follows) 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Formula Retail 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Fresh Food Market or Grocery Store 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 1,500 sf
Farm/Vendor Market n/a n/a n/a 1 / 1,500 sf
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - Dwelling Unit RU - Rooming Unit
1 See the Transit Area Map
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Core (CC)
310 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
services provided by the APPLICANT to
reduce the demand for parking.
iii). That parking provided in excess of any
maximum permitted does not result in the
increase in impervious LOT AREA.
16. Public Realm
a. Sidewalks
i. When DEVELOPMENT occurs on any LOT ABUTTING a
sidewalk that is less than twelve (12) feet in total
width, the BUILDING must be set-back an additional
distance to accommodate expansion of the
ABUTTING sidewalk to a width of at least twelve (12)
feet. The minimum and maximum front SETBACKs for
each BUILDING TYPE are increased accordingly.
b. Sidewalk CURB CUTs
i. A CURB CUT requires a permit from the City Engineer
and must be compliant with all City Ordinances.
ii. Unless otherwise specified, the City Engineer may
not permit more than one (1) CURB CUT per FRONT LOT
LINE, up to two (2) CURB CUTs per LOT.
iii. CURB CUTs are prohibited along all THOROUGHFAREs
designated as a PEDESTRIAN STREET.
iv. CURB CUTs must be located to minimize conflicts
with pedestrians and bicyclists and must have a
clear distance from fire hydrants, STREET TREES, utility
poles, and other furnishings as deemed necessary
by the City Engineer.
a). CURB CUTs for commercial or high-volume
driveways should be at least one-hundred
(100) feet from an unSIGNalized or SIGNalized
intersection.
b). CURB CUTs for residential driveways should be
at least twenty (20) feet from an unSIGNalized
intersection and at least forty (40) feet from a
SIGNalized intersection.
c). Multiple CURB CUTs serving the same LOT or
BUILDING must be at least one hundred and fifty
(150) feet apart from one another.
v. The interior width of a CURB CUT (between curb
stones) may be no wider than the driveway,
vehicular entrance, or loading facility it serves.
vi. A DRIVEWAY APRON may be installed only within
the furnishing zone of a sidewalk and must be
constructed in accordance with all standards
established by relevant City Departments.
vii. The grade, cross slope, and clear width of the
walkway of a sidewalk must be maintained
between the DRIVEWAY APRON and the ABUTTING
driveway. The appearance of the walkway (ie.
scoring pattern or paving material) must indicate
that, although a vehicle may cross, the area
traversed by a vehicle remains part of the sidewalk.
Figure 6.2.16 Sidewalk Curb Cuts
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Industry (CI)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 311
6.3 COMMERCIAL INDUSTRY (CI)
1. Description
The Commercial Industry district is characterized by
large FLOOR PLATE buildings up to four (4) stories in height.
Buildings are typically SETBACK by parking and include
warehoUSE and factory styles along with multi STORY offices.
The district is entirely commercial, with USEs that are
typically auto-oriented, commercial service, industrial, or
office in nature.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Industry (CI)
312 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
2. Intent
a. To maintain industrial and commercial activities that
provide employment opportunities and business-tobusiness
commerce.
b. To maintain already existing areas appropriate
for moderate- and large-scale, low-rise and midrise
buildings and community- and region-serving
commercial USEs that do not readily assimilate into
other zoning districts.
3. Purpose
a. To permit the DEVELOPMENT of moderate-scale low- and
mid-rise buildings.
b. To provide quality commercial spaces and permit light
& moderate industrial and large commercial USEs.
4. Applicability
a. The section is applicable to all real property within the
Commercial Industry district as shown on the Official
Zoning Map of the City of Somerville.
5. Development Review
a. DEVELOPMENT review is subject to the provisions of
Article 15: Administration of this Ordinance.
b. All DEVELOPMENT, excluding NORMAL MAINTENANCE, requires
the submittal of a development review application to
the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the issuance of a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance prior to the issuance of a Building
Permit or Certificate of Occupancy.
c. Proposed DEVELOPMENT may or may not necessitate the
need for SUBDivision Plan Approval, Site Plan Approval,
a SPecial Permit, or a Hardship Variance based on
the nature of the proposal. In such cases, additional
DEVELOPMENT review is required in accordance with
Article 15: Administration.
i. The Zoning Board of Appeals is the decision
making authority for all DEVELOPMENT in the
Commercial Business district.
d. Upon verification that no additional DEVELOPMENT review
is necessary, or completion of the required DEVELOPMENT
review, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall issue a Zoning
Compliance Certificate to certify compliance with the
provisions and procedures of this Ordinance.
6. Building Types
a. One (1) PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE is permitted on each LOT.
b. The following BUILDING TYPEs are permitted by Site Plan
Approval in the Commercial Core district:
i. Commercial Building
c. ACCESSory structures are regulated according to Article
10: DEVELOPMENT Standards of this Ordinance.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Industry (CI)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 313
6.3.7. Commercial Building
A single to multi-STORY BUILDING TYPE purpose built for
occuPATIOn by commercial USEs on all floors.
The following images are examples of the commercial
BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Industry (CI)
314 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.3.7. Commercial Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 30 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min) 0 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min) 0 ft
LOT Coverage C Side SETBACK (min) 0 ft
LOT Coverage (max) 100% Side SETBACK ABUTTING NR or LHD (min) 10 ft
Green Factor (min) 0.20 D Rear SETBACK (min) 10 ft
Rear SETBACK ABUTTING NR or LHD (min) 15 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Primary Front SETBACK (min) 10 ft
F Secondary Front SETBACK (min) --
SURFACE PARKING 10 ft
STRUCTURED PARKING 10 ft
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Industry (CI)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 315
6.3.7. Commercial Building (continued)
c. Height & Massing d. USEs & Features
Main Mass Facade Composition
A Width (max) 300 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 15%
FACADE Build Out (min) -- B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min) 15%
Primary Frontage 80% BLANK WALL (max) 50 ft
Secondary Frontage 65%
B FLOOR PLATE 50,000 sf
C GROUND STORY Height (min) 14 ft
D UPPER STORY Height (min) 10 ft
E Number of Stories (max) 4 stories
F BUILDING Height, Feet (max) 65 feet
Roof Type Flat
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Industry (CI)
316 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.3.7. Commercial Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 6.3.7.
Table 6.3.7 Linkage
Commercial
GROSS FLOOR AREA
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Industry (CI)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 317
8. Building Components
a. BUILDING COMPONENTS are ACCESSory elements attached to
the main mass of a PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
b. Building components are permitted by Site Plan
Approval as specified on Table 6.1.8.
i. At least one (1) storefront is required for each
GROUND STORY commercial space.
c. BUILDING COMPONENTS not identified on Table 5.1.8 are
prohibited.
d. Unless otherwise specified, BUILDING COMPONENTS
may attach to other BUILDING COMPONENTS to create
assemblies of components.
Table 6.1.8 Building Components
General Building
Commercial Building
Lab Building
Mid-Rise Podium Tower
BLOCK Building
Awning P P P P P
Entry Canopy P P P P P
Lobby Entrance P P P P P
Storefront P P P P P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Industry (CI)
318 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
e. Awning
i. A wall mounted, pitched covering extending from
a BUILDING to provide shade and weather protection
for pedestrians.
Dimensions
A Width (min) See
ii. Standards
B Projection (min) 3 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
D SETBACK from Curb (min) 2 ft
E Valance Height (max) 12 in
ii. Standards
a). Awnings must be securely attached to and
supported by the BUILDING and must fit the
windows or doors the awning is attached to.
b). An awning must be made of durable, weatherresistant
material that is water repellent.
c). Internally illuminated or back-lit awnings are
prohibited.
d). An awning that projects over the sidewalk of a
public THOROUGHFARE requires compliance with
all City Ordinances.
f. Entry Canopy
i. An entry canopy is a wall-mounted STRUCTURE that
provides shade and weather protection over the
entrance of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Width (min) See
ii. Standards
B Depth (max) 3 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft
D Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
ii. Standards
a). Entry canopies must be visually supported by
brackets, cables, or rods.
b). The width of an entry canopy must be equal
to or greater than the width of the doorway
surround or exterior casing it is mounted over.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Industry (CI)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 319
g. Lobby Entrance
i. A lobby entrance is a non-load bearing assembly of
entry doors and windows providing ACCESS and light
to the lobby of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Width (min/max) 15 ft 30 ft
Recessed Entrance Width (max) 15 ft
Recessed Entrance Depth (max) 5 ft
ii. Standards
a). When a lobby entrance is set back from the
FRONT LOT LINE, the FRONTAGE AREA must be paved.
h. Storefront
i. A storefront is a non-load bearing assembly of
commercial entry doors and windows providing
ACCESS and light to a commercial space and a place
to display goods, services, and SIGNs.
Dimensions
A Width (min/max) 15 ft 30 ft
B Display Window Height (min) 8 ft
Recessed Entrance Width (max) 15 ft
Recessed Entrance Depth (max) 5 ft
ii. Standards
a). An unobstructed view of the interior space or a
lighted and maintained merchandise display(s)
must be provided for a depth of at least four (4)
feet behind storefront display windows.
b). When storefronts are set back from the FRONT
LOT LINE, the FRONTAGE AREA must be paved.
c). When present, awnings and canopies must be
mounted between columns, PILASTERs, or PIERs;
above doorways and display windows; and
below the SIGN BAND.
d). Exterior security grilles, gates, and roll-down
security doors and windows are prohibited.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Industry (CI)
320 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
9. Facade Design
a. FACADEs must provide solid material framing each
storefront and lobby entrance as follows:
i. PILASTERs or columns supporting a horizontal lintel
and CORNICE;
ii. a spandrel positioned between PILASTERs or columns
that extend from upper stories of the building to
the ground; or
iii. flat wall above and to either side of a void or
punched opening.
b. Storefronts and lobby entrances must be set within the
resulting frame provided for each by the FACADE.
c. Materials framing each storefront or lobby entrance
may be integrated into the design of the FACADE
or customized for individual storefronts and lobby
entrances. Mechanical louvers necessary for venting
purposes are not permitted in the required frame,
but may be incorporated into any storefront or lobby
entrance system.
d. FACADEs must provide horizontal ARTICULATION or a change
in window size or pattern from the upper stories to
create a distinct base that includes the entire height of
the of the GROUND STORY of the building.
e. The FACADE of buildings with five (5) or more stories
should include, at least, the entire height of the first
two (2) stories in the design of the required base. The
design of the base may not shift up or down across the
width of the FACADE.
f. For buildings with more than one FACADE, the design of
the base must align horizontally at the corner.
g. FACADEs must provide surface relief from the average
plane of the FACADE by at least four (4) inches, through
the USE of architectural elements such as bay windows,
columns, CORNER BOARDs, CORNICEs, door and window
surrounds, moldings, PIERs, PILASTERs, recessed
storefronts or lobby entrances, seat walls, sills, wall
depth, and recessed or projecting windows.
10. Architectural Design Guidelines
i. Reserved
Figure 5.1.13 Storefront Framing
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Industry (CI)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 321
11. Use Provisions
a. General
i. The USE of real property is subject to the provisions
of Article 9: USE Provisions of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 9, the provisions of Article 9 apply.
ii. USE categories are permitted according to Table
6.3.11.
iii. All USEs must comply with any USE-specific
standards applicable for each USE in §9.2 USE
Definitions & Limitations.
iv. USEs permitted by Special Permit require additional
DEVELOPMENT review in accordance with §15.2.1
Special Permits.
v. USE categories not identified on Table 6.3.11 are
prohibited.
Table 6.3.11 Permitted Uses
Use Category
Specific Use CI
Arts & Creative Enterprise
Artisinal Production P
Arts Exhibition P
Arts Sales & Services P
Co-Working P
Design Services P
Shared Workspaces & Arts Education P
Auto-Oriented
Commercial Vehicle Repair or Maintenance SP
Dispatch Service (except as follows) P
Towing Service SP
Motor Vehicle Parking (as noted below) --
Off-Site Accessory Parking P
Personal Vehicle Repair or Maintenance SP
Vehicle Sales SP
Cannabis Establishment
Cannabis Cultivation P
Cannabis Product Manufacturing P
Cannabis Retail Sales SP
Cannabis Research & Development P
Cannabis Testing Laboratory P
Civic & Institutional
Hospital SP
Minor Utility Facility SP
Public Service P
Religious & Educational Uses Protected by
M.G.L. 40A. Sec. 3
P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Industry (CI)
322 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
Table 6.3.11 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use CI
Commercial Services
Animal Services (as noted below) --
Commercial Kennel P
Pet Grooming P
Pet Daycare & Training P
Veterinarian P
Assembly or Entertainment SP
Banking & Financial Services (except as
follows)
P
Personal Credit SP
Broadcast and/or Recording Studio P
Building & Home Repair Services P
Business Support Services P
Caterer/Wholesale Food Production P
Day Care Service (as noted below) --
Adult Day Care Center P
Child Day Care Center P
Educational Services P
Maintenance & Repair of Consumer Goods P
Personal Services (except as follows) P
Body-Art Services P
Fitness Services P
Funeral Services P
Health Care Services SP
Formula Personal Services SP
Recreation Services P
Vehicle Parking (as noted below) --
Bike Share Parking P
Car Share Parking (3 or fewer spaces) P
Car Share Parking (4 or more spaces) P
Commercial Parking P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
Table 6.3.11 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use CI
Food and Beverage Service
Bar/Restaurant/Tavern P
Bakery/Café/Coffee Shop P
Formula Food & Beverage Service SP
Industrial
Dry Cleaning or Laundry Services SP
Data Center SP
Manufacturing P
Moving and/or Self Storage (except as follows) P
Self Storage SP
Recycling Collection SP
Trucking and Transportation Depot SP
Wholesale Trade & Distribution P
Lodging
Hotel or Hostel SP
Office
General Office P
Research and Development or Laboratory P
Retail Sales
Building/Home Supplies & Equipment P
Consumer Goods (except as follows) P
Alcohol Sales SP
Firearms Sales N
Pet Store SP
Formula Retail SP
Fresh Food Market or Grocery Store SP
Farm/Vendor Market P
Urban Agriculture
Farming (as noted below) --
Commercial Farming P
Community Farming P
Community Gardening P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Industry (CI)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 323
Table 6.3.11 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use CI
Accessory Uses
Urban Agriculture (as noted below) --
Commercial Farming P
Vehicle Parking, Accessory (except as follows) P
Home Business Vehicle Parking N
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
12. Development Standards
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
10 SITE DEVELOPMENT of this Ordinance. Where the
provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 10, the provisions of Article 10 apply.
b. SIGNs
i. A SIGN, individual numerals or letters, or a
nonelectrical nameplate identifying the property
address is required for all real property as follows:
a). Each GROUND STORY non-residential USE must
identify the STREET address either on the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE door or above or beside the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE of the USE.
b). All residential BUILDING TYPEs must identify the
STREET address either on the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE
door, above or beside the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE, or
on a mailbox.
ii. Address SIGNs must be made easily visible through
the USE of colors or materials that contrast with the
background material they are attached to and must
be conspicuously located to provide visibility from
the THOROUGHFARE that the BUILDING faces.
iii. Address SIGNs must be twelve (12) inches in height
or less and may include the name of the occupant.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Industry (CI)
324 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
Parking & Mobility
c. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
11: Parking & Mobility of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 11, the provisions of Article 11 apply.
ii. Vehicular parking must be provided as specified on
Table 6.3.13, except as follows:
a). Non-residential USEs with five thousand (5,000)
square feet or less of gross LEASABLE FLOOR AREA
are exempt from any minimum requirements
of Table 6.3.13.
b). Any CHANGE IN USE within a non-residential
STRUCTURE constructed before the effective date
of this Ordinance, provided that the change
is to a permitted USE, is exempt from any
minimum requirements of Table 6.3.13.
iii. There are no parking requirements for ACCESSORY
USEs.
iv. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces may be shared
between USEs on the same LOT and buildings on
the same BLOCK in accordance with §11.3 SHARED
PARKING.
d. Type
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING may be provided as SURFACE
PARKING, above ground STRUCTURED PARKING, or
underground STRUCTURED PARKING.
e. Driveways
i. New driveways require a permit from the City
Engineer.
ii. Driveways must be compliant with all City
Ordinances and constructed in accordance
with all standards established by relevant City
Departments.
iii. Driveways are not permitted in the FRONTAGE AREA
between a BUILDING and the FRONT LOT LINE.
iv. Driveways may be no wider than twenty four (24)
feet in the FRONTAGE AREA of a LOT.
v. Driveways may provide ACCESS in whole or in part
on or across an ABUTTING LOT(s), provided that an
ACCESS EASEMENT exists between all PROPERTY OWNERS.
f. Parking Design
i. The design of all parking is subject to §11.1 Bicycle
Parking and §11.2 MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING of this
Ordinance.
g. Parking Location
i. Required vehicular parking, excluding any required
handicapped parking, may be provided on a
contiguous LOT under the same ownership as the
LOT that the parking will serve as follows:
a). Pedestrian ACCESS to off-SITE vehicular parking
must be via a paved sidewalk or walkway.
b). A lease, recorded covenant, or other
comparable legal instrument guaranteeing long
term USE of the SITE must be provided to the
review board or BUILDING OFFICIAL and executed
and filed with the Registry of Deeds.
ii. For real property located in more than one
municipality, MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING need not be
located within the City of Somerville.
h. Loading Facilities
i. All DEVELOPMENT is exempt from §11.2.5.b.i.
i. Unbundled Parking
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces must be rented or
leased as an option rather than a requirement of
the rental, lease, or purchase of a DWELLING UNIT or
Table 6.3.13 Vehicular Parking
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Use Category
Specific Use
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Within a
TRANSIT AREA1
(max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min)
Arts & Creative Enterprise
All Permitted Uses 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Cannabis Establishment
Cannabis Product Manufacturing 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Cannabis Retail Sales 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Cannabis Research & Development 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Cannabis Testing Laboratory 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - Dwelling Unit RU - Rooming Unit
1 See the Transit Area Map
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Industry (CI)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 325
Table 6.3.13 Vehicular Parking (continued)
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Use Category
Specific Use
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Within a
TRANSIT AREA1
(max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min)
Civic & Institutional
Community Center 1 / 10,000 sf 4 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,800 sf 1 / 600 sf
Educational Facility
1.0 /
classroom
4.0 /
classroom
1.5 /
classroom
3.0 /
classroom
Hospital
10 per
entrance 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 200 sf 1/ 1,000 sf
Library 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 500 sf
Minor Utility Facility n/a n/a n/a n/a
Museum 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 500 sf
Private Non-Profit Club or Lodge 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 200 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Commercial Services
Animal Services (as noted below) -- -- -- --
Commercial Kennel 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Pet Grooming 1 / 2,500 sf none 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Pet Day Care or Training 1 / 2,500 sf none 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Veterinarian 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Assembly or Entertainment 1 / 40 seats 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 6 seats 1 / 6 seats
Banking & Financial Services
(except as noted below)
1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 450 sf 1 / 400 sf
Broadcast and/or Recording Studio 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 600 sf
Building & Home Repair Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 2,000 sf
Business Support Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 600 sf
Caterer/Wholesale Food Production 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Day Care Service 2 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 600 sf
Maintenance & Repair of Consumer Goods 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 750 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Personal Services (except as noted below) 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 750 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Health Care Services 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 300 sf
Recreation Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf -- --
Food and Beverage Service
All Permitted Uses 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 300 sf 1 / 500 sf
Industrial
Dry Cleaning or Laundry Services -- -- -- 1 / 1,200 sf
Data Center -- -- -- 1 / 1,200 sf
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - Dwelling Unit RU - Rooming Unit
1 See the Transit Area Map
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Industry (CI)
326 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
Table 6.3.13 Vehicular Parking (continued)
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Use Category
Specific Use
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Within a
TRANSIT AREA1
(max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min)
Manufacturing -- 1 / 10,000 sf -- 1 / 1,200 sf
Moving and/or Self Storage (except as follows) -- -- -- 1 / 1,200 sf
Self Storage -- -- -- 1 / 1,200 sf
Recycling Collection -- -- -- 1 / 1,200 sf
Trucking and Transportation Depot -- -- -- 1 / 1,200 sf
Wholesale Trade & Distribution -- 1 / 40,000 sf -- 1 / 1,200 sf
Lodging
Bed & Breakfast 1 / 20 rooms 1 / 10 rooms 1 / DU + 1 / 4
guest rooms
1 / DU + 1 / 4
guest rooms
Hotel or Hostel 1 / 20 rooms 1 / 10 rooms 1 / 2 guest
rooms
1 / 2 guest
rooms
Office
Co-Working 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 1,200 sf 1 / 800 sf
General Office 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 650 sf
Research and Development or Laboratory 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Residential
Household Living 0.1 / DU 1.0 / DU 1.0 / DU 1.0 / DU
Group Living (except as follows) 0.05 / room 0.5 / room -- --
Community or Group Residence -- -- -- --
Dormitory, Fraternity or Sorority 0.1 / room 0.5 / room .05 / bed 1.0 / 4 beds
Homeless Shelter -- -- 4.0 4.0
Nursing Home/Assisted Living Facility -- -- 1 / 6 beds 1 / 6 beds
Single Room Occupancy Housing -- -- 1 / 6 beds 1 / 4 beds
Retail Sales
Building/Home Supplies & Equipment 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Consumer Goods (except as follows) 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Formula Retail 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Fresh Food Market or Grocery Store 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 1,500 sf
Farm/Vendor Market n/a n/a n/a 1 / 1,500 sf
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - Dwelling Unit RU - Rooming Unit
1 See the Transit Area Map
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Industry (CI)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 327
non-residential floor space.
ii. Bicycle parking must be provided at no cost or fee
to customers, visitors, employees, tenants, and
residents.
j. Parking Relief
i. Relief from the parking standards of Table 6.3.13
requires a Special Permit.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing
relief from the parking standards of Table
6.3.13:
i). The supply and demand of on-STREET
parking in the neighborhood, as
determined through a parking study.
ii). MOBILITY MANAGEMENT programs and
services provided by the APPLICANT to
reduce the demand for parking.
iii). That parking provided in excess of any
maximum permitted does not result in the
increase in impervious LOT AREA.
13. Public Realm
a. Sidewalk CURB CUTs
i. A CURB CUT requires a permit from the City Engineer
and must be compliant with all City Ordinances.
ii. Unless otherwise specified, the City Engineer may
not permit more than two (2) CURB CUTs per FRONT
LOT LINE of a LOT.
iii. CURB CUTs are prohibited along all THOROUGHFAREs
designated as a PEDESTRIAN STREET.
iv. CURB CUTs must be located to minimize conflicts
with pedestrians and bicyclists and must have a
clear distance from fire hydrants, STREET TREES, utility
poles, and other furnishings as deemed necessary
by the City Engineer.
a). CURB CUTs should be at least one-hundred
(100) feet from an unSIGNalized or SIGNalized
intersection.
b). Multiple CURB CUTs providing ACCESS to the same
LOT must be at least one hundred and fifty (150)
feet from one another.
v. The interior width of a CURB CUT (between curb
stones) may be no wider than the driveway,
vehicular entrance, or loading facility it serves.
vi. A DRIVEWAY APRON may be installed only within
the furnishing zone of a sidewalk and must be
constructed in accordance with all standards
established by relevant City Departments.
vii. The grade, cross slope, and clear width of the
walkway of a sidewalk must be maintained
between the DRIVEWAY APRON and the ABUTTING
driveway. The appearance of the walkway (ie.
scoring pattern or paving material) must indicate
that, although a vehicle may cross, the area
traversed by a vehicle remains part of the sidewalk.
Figure 6.3.14 Sidewalk Curb Cuts
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Industry (CI)
328 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 329
6.4 COMMERCIAL BUSINESS (CB)
1. Character Description
The Commercial Business district is characterized by large FLOOR PLATE buildings up to two (2) stories in height. Buildings
are typically SETBACK by large PARKING LOTs and SITEs are primarily designed to accommodate automobiles. The district is
entirely commercial, with concentrations of commercial services, food & beverage services, and retailers.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
330 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
2. Intent
a. To maintain commercial activities that are primarily
ACCESSed by motor vehicles.
b. To maintain already existing areas appropriate for
moderate- and large-scale, low-rise buildings and
community- and region-serving commercial USEs that
do not readily assimilate into other zoning districts.
3. Purpose
a. To permit the DEVELOPMENT of moderate- and large-scale
low-rise buildings.
b. To provide quality commercial spaces and permit
commercial USEs.
4. Applicability
a. The section is applicable to all real property within the
Commercial Business district as shown in the Official
Zoning Atlas of the City of Somerville.
5. Standards & Measurements
a. General
i. Notwithstanding the defined terms of Article 16:
Definitions, the Director of Planning & Zoning shall
designate the FACADE of any PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE.
ii. If such a designation caUSEs a BUILDING to orient
away from the THOROUGHFARE its LOT is ABUTTING, the
front and rear SETBACKs are also reoriented.
6. Development Review
a. DEVELOPMENT review is subject to the provisions of
Article 15: Administration of this Ordinance.
b. All DEVELOPMENT, excluding NORMAL MAINTENANCE, requires
the submittal of a development review application to
the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the issuance of a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance prior to the issuance of a BUILDING
Permit or Certificate of Occupancy.
c. Proposed DEVELOPMENT may or may not necessitate the
need for SUBDivision Plan Approval, Site Plan Approval,
a SPecial Permit, or a Hardship Variance based on
the nature of the proposal. In such cases, additional
DEVELOPMENT review is required in accordance with
Article 15: Administration.
i. The Zoning Board of Appeals is the decision
making authority for all DEVELOPMENT in the
Commercial Business district.
d. Upon verification that no additional DEVELOPMENT review
is necessary, or completion of the required DEVELOPMENT
review, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall issue a Zoning
Compliance CERTIFICATE to certify compliance with the
provisions and procedures of this Ordinance.
7. Building Types
a. One (1) PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE is permitted on each LOT.
b. The following BUILDING TYPEs are permitted by Site Plan
Approval in the HIGH-RISE district:
i. Box BUILDING
ii. Strip Commerce
iii. Pad Commerce
c. ACCESSory STRUCTURES are regulated according to Article
10: DEVELOPMENT Standards of this Ordinance.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 331
6.4.8. Box Building
A free-standing, low-rise, large FLOOR PLATE, usually single
tenant PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE that is frequently SETBACK by
motor vehicle parking.
The following images are examples of the box BUILDING TYPE
and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
332 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.4.8. Box Building (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (max) 800 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 60 ft 300 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min/max) 10 ft 300 ft
Lot Development C Side SETBACK (min) 0 ft
B LOT Coverage (max) 75% Side SETBACK ABUTTING NR or LHD (min) 50 ft
C Green Factor (min) 0.20 D Rear SETBACK (min) 20 ft
Rear SETBACK ABUTTING NR or LHD (min) 50 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Front SETBACK (min) 10 ft
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 333
6.4.8. Box Building (continued)
c. Height & Massing d. USEs & Features
Main Mass Facade Composition
A BUILDING WIDTH (max) 400 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 50%
B FLOOR PLATE (max) 65,000 sf BLANK WALL (max) 50 ft
C Number of Stories (max) 1 STORY
BUILDING Height, Feet (max) 50 ft Use & Occupancy
GROUND STORY Entrance Spacing (max) 200 ft
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
334 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.4.8. Box Building (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a box building must provide linkage
payments as specified on Table 6.4.8.
f. Building Design Standards
i. Reserved
g. Architectural Design Guidelines
i. Reserved
Table 6.4.8 Linkage
Commercial
GROSS FLOOR AREA
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 335
6.4.9. Strip Commerce
A low rise, large FLOOR PLATE, multi-tenant BUILDING TYPE that
is frequently SETBACK by MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING. Commercial
tenants, typically retail or office USEs, are oriented side-byside.
Second floors are uncommon, but permitted.
The following images are examples of the strip commerce
BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
336 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.4.9. Strip Commerce (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (max) 400 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 60 ft 200 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min/max) 10 ft 200 ft
Lot Development C Side SETBACK (min) 0 ft
B LOT Coverage (max) 75% Side SETBACK ABUTTING NR or LHD (min) 50 ft
C Green Factor (min) 0.20 D Rear SETBACK (min) 20 ft
Rear SETBACK ABUTTING NR or LHD (min) 50 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Front SETBACK (min) 10 ft
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 337
6.4.9. Strip Commerce (continued)
c. Height & Massing d. USEs & Features
Main Mass Facade Composition
A BUILDING WIDTH (max) 400 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 50%
B FLOOR PLATE (max) 65,000 sf B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 15% 70%
C BUILDING Height, Stories (max) 2 stories BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
BUILDING Height, Feet (max) 50 ft
Use & Occupancy
GROUND STORY Entrance Spacing (max) 30 ft
Commercial Space Depth (min) 30 ft
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
338 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.4.9. Strip Commerce (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 6.4.9.
f. Building Design Standards
i. Reserved
g. Architectural Design Guidelines
i. Reserved
Table 6.4.9 Linkage
Floor Area
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 339
6.4.10. Pad Commerce
A low-rise, small FLOOR PLATE, one- to two-tenant BUILDING
TYPE on a freestanding LOT typically located in front or to the
side of a box BUILDING or strip commerce BUILDING TYPE.
The following images are examples of the pad commerce
BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
340 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.4.10.Pad Commerce (continued)
a. LOT Standards b. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (max) 250 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 75 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 40 ft
Lot Development C Side SETBACK (min) 15 ft
LOT Coverage (max) 75% Side SETBACK ABUTTING NR or LHD (min) 50 ft
B Green Factor (min) 0.20 D Rear SETBACK (min) 20 ft
Rear SETBACK ABUTTING NR or LHD (min) 50 ft
Parking Setbacks
E Front SETBACK (min) 10 ft
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 341
6.4.10.Pad Commerce (continued)
c. Height & Massing d. USEs & Features
Main Mass Facade Composition
A BUILDING WIDTH (max) 100 ft A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) 70%
B FLOOR PLATE (max) 10,000 sf BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
C BUILDING Height, Stories (max) 1 STORY
BUILDING Height, Feet (max) 25 ft
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
342 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6.4.10. Pad Commerce (continued)
e. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 6.4.10.
f. Building Design Standards
i. Reserved
g. Architectural Design Guidelines
i. Reserved
Table 6.4.10 Linkage
Floor Area
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 343
11. Building Components
a. Building components are ACCESSory elements attached
to the main mass of a building.
b. Building components are permitted by Site Plan
Approval as specified on Table 6.1.8.
i. At least one (1) storefront is required for each
GROUND STORY commercial space.
c. Building components not identified on Table 5.1.8 are
prohibited.
d. Unless otherwise specified, BUILDING COMPONENTS
may attach to other BUILDING COMPONENTS to create
assemblies of components.
Table 6.1.8 Building Components
General Building
Commercial Building
Lab Building
Mid-Rise Podium Tower
Block Building
Awning P P P P P
Entry Canopy P P P P P
Lobby Entrance P P P P P
Storefront P P P P P
Arcade P P P P P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
344 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
e. Awning
i. A wall mounted, pitched covering extending from
a BUILDING to provide shade and weather protection
for pedestrians.
Dimensions
A Width (min) See ii
Standards
B Projection (min) 3 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft clear
Front SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
D SETBACK from Curb (min) 2 ft
E Valance Height (max) 12 in
ii. Standards
a). Awnings must be securely attached to and
supported by the BUILDING, and must fit the
windows or doors the awning is attached to.
b). An awning must be made of durable, weatherresistant
material that is water repellent.
c). Internally illuminated or back-lit awnings are
prohibited.
d). An awning that projects over the sidewalk of a
public THOROUGHFARE requires compliance with
all City Ordinances.
f. Entry Canopy
i. An entry canopy is a wall-mounted STRUCTURE that
provides shade and weather protection over the
entrance of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Width (min) See ii
Standards
B Depth (max) 3 ft
C CLEARANCE (min) 8 ft clear
D Permitted SETBACK ENCROACHMENT (max) 100%
ii. Standards
a). Entry canopies must be visually supported by
brackets, cables, or rods.
b). The width of an entry canopy must be equal
to or greater than the width of the doorway
surround or exterior casing it is mounted over.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 345
g. Lobby Entrance
i. A lobby entrance is a non-load bearing assembly of
entry doors and windows providing ACCESS and light
to the lobby of a BUILDING.
Dimensions
A Width (min/max) 15 ft 30 ft
Recessed Entrance Width (max) 15 ft
Recessed Entrance Depth (max) 5 ft
ii. Standards
a). When a lobby entrance is set back from the
FRONT LOT LINE, the FRONTAGE AREA must be paved.
h. Storefront
i. A storefront is a non-load bearing assembly of
commercial entry doors and windows providing
ACCESS and light to a commercial space and a place
to display goods, services, and SIGNs.
Dimensions
A Width (min/max) 15 ft 30 ft
B Display Window Height (min) 8 ft
Recessed Entrance Width (max) 15 ft
Recessed Entrance Depth (max) 5 ft
ii. Standards
a). An unobstructed view of the interior space or a
lighted and maintained merchandise display(s)
must be provided for a depth of at least four (4)
feet behind storefront display windows.
b). When storefronts are set back from the FRONT
LOT LINE, the FRONTAGE AREA must be paved.
c). When present, awnings and canopies must be
mounted between columns, PILASTERs, or PIERs;
above doorways and display windows; and
below the SIGN BAND.
d). Exterior security grilles, gates, and roll-down
security doors and windows are prohibited.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
346 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
i. Arcade
i. An arcade is a frontage type featuring a pedestrian
walkway covered by the upper floors of a BUILDING.
The GROUND STORY FACADE is SETBACK and upper floors
are supported by a colonnade or supports.
Dimensions
A Depth (min/max) 10 ft 15 ft
B Height (max) 1 STORY
C CLEARANCE (min/max) 14 ft 24 ft
ii. Standards
a). Arcades must extend the entire width of a
BUILDING and must have a consistent depth.
b). Support columns or PIERs may be spaced no
farther apart than they are tall.
c). Arcades are considered part of the BUILDING for
the purpose of measuring FACADE build out.
d). Arcades may be combined only with storefront
and lobby entrance frontages
e). The finished ceiling of an arcade interior may
be arched or flat, but must have a greater
CLEARANCE than the openings between columns
or PIERs.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 347
Figure 5.1.13 Storefront Framing
12. Facade Design
a. FACADEs must provide solid material framing each
storefront and lobby entrance as follows:
i. PILASTERs or columns supporting a horizontal lintel
and CORNICE;
ii. a spandrel positioned between PILASTERs or columns
that extend from upper stories of the building to
the ground; or
iii. flat wall above and to either side of a void or
punched opening.
b. Storefronts and lobby entrances must be set within the
resulting frame provided for each by the FACADE.
c. Materials framing each storefront or lobby entrance
may be integrated into the design of the FACADE
or customized for individual storefronts and lobby
entrances. Mechanical louvers necessary for venting
purposes are not permitted in the required frame,
but may be incorporated into any storefront or lobby
entrance system.
d. FACADEs must provide horizontal ARTICULATION or a change
in window size or pattern from the upper stories to
create a distinct base that includes the entire height of
the of the GROUND STORY of the building.
e. For buildings with more than one FACADE, the design of
the base must align horizontally at the corner.
f. FACADEs must provide surface relief from the average
plane of the FACADE by at least four (4) inches, through
the USE of architectural elements such as bay windows,
columns, CORNER BOARDs, CORNICEs, door and window
surrounds, moldings, PIERs, PILASTERs, recessed
storefronts or lobby entrances, seat walls, sills, wall
depth, and recessed or projecting windows.
13. Architectural Design Guidelines
a. Reserved
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
348 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
Table 6.4 (a) Permitted Uses
Use Category
Specific Use
CB
Arts & Creative Enterprise
Artisinal Production P
Arts Exhibition P
Arts Sales & Services P
Co-Working P
Design Services P
Shared Workspaces & Arts Education P
Auto-Oriented
Commercial Vehicle Repair or Maintenance SP
Dispatch Service (except as follows) P
Towing Service SP
Motor Vehicle Parking (as noted below) --
Off-Site Accessory Parking P
Personal Vehicle Repair or Maintenance SP
Vehicle Sales SP
Cannabis Establishment
Cannabis Cultivation P
Cannabis Retail Sales SP
Cannabis Research & Development P
Cannabis Testing Laboratory P
Civic & Institutional
Minor Utility Facility SP
Public Service P
Religious & Educational Uses Protected by
M.G.L. 40A. SEc. 3
P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
14. Use Provisions
a. Permitted USEs
i. The USE of real property is subject to the provisions
of Article 9: USE Provisions of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 9, the provisions of Article 9 apply.
ii. USE categories are permitted as specified on Table
6.4.14.
iii. USE categories not identified on Table 6.4.14 are
prohibited.
iv. All USEs must comply with any USE-specific
standards applicable for each USE in §9.2 USE
Definitions & Limitations.
v. USEs permitted by Special Permit require additional
DEVELOPMENT review in accordance with §15.2.1
Special Permits.
b. Required USEs
i. A minimum of five percent (5%) of the GROSS FLOOR
AREA of any Commercial BUILDING or Lab BUILDING
must be provided as LEASABLE FLOOR AREA for USEs
from the Arts & Creative Enterprise USE category.
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 349
Table 6.4 (a) Permitted Uses
Use Category
Specific Use
CB
Commercial Services
Animal Services (as noted below) --
Commercial Kennel P
Pet Grooming P
Pet Day Care or Training P
Veterinarian P
Assembly or Entertainment SP
Banking & Financial Services (except as follows) P
Personal Credit SP
Broadcast and/or Recording Studio P
Building & Home Repair Services P
Business Support Services P
Caterer/Wholesale Food Production P
Day Care Service
(as noted below)
--
Adult Day Care Center P
Child Day Care Center P
Educational Services P
Maintenance & Repair of Consumer Goods P
Personal Services (except as follows) P
Body-Art Services P
Fitness Services P
Funeral Services P
Health Care Services SP
Formula Personal Services SP
Recreation Services P
Vehicle Parking (as noted below) --
Bike Share Parking P
Car Share Parking (3 or less) P
Car Share Parking (4 or more) P
Commercial Parking P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
Table 6.4 (a) Permitted Uses
Use Category
Specific Use
CB
Food and Beverage Service
Bar/Restaurant/Tavern P
Bakery/Café/Coffee Shop P
Formula Food & Beverage Service P
Industrial
Moving and/or Self Storage (except as follows) N
Self Storage SP
Lodging
Hotel or Hostel SP
Office
General Office P
Research and Development or Laboratory P
Retail Sales
Building/Home Supplies & Equipment P
Consumer Goods (except as follows) P
Alcohol Sales SP
Firearms Sales N
Pet Store SP
Formula Retail P
Fresh Food Market or Grocery Store P
Farm/Vendor Market P
Urban Agriculture
Farming (as noted below) --
Commercial Farming P
Community Farming P
Community Gardening P
Accessory Uses
Urban Agriculture (as noted below) --
Commercial Farming P
Vehicle Parking, Accessory (except as follows) P
Home Business Vehicle Parking N
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
350 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
15. Development Standards
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
10: DEVELOPMENT Standards of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 10, the provisions of Article 10
apply.
b. SIGNs
i. A SIGN, individual numerals or letters, or a
nonelectrical nameplate identifying the property
address is required for all real property as follows:
a). Each GROUND STORY non-residential USE must
identify the STREET address either on the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE door or above or beside the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE of the USE.
b). All residential BUILDING TYPEs must identify the
STREET address either on the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE
door, above or beside the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE, or
on a mailbox.
ii. Address SIGNs must be made easily visible through
the USE of colors or materials that contrast with the
background material they are attached to and must
be conspicuously located to provide visibility from
the THOROUGHFARE that the BUILDING faces.
iii. Address SIGNs must be twelve (12) inches in height
or less and may include the name of the occupant.
16. Parking & Mobility
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
11: Parking & Mobility of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 11, the provisions of Article 11 apply.
ii. Vehicular parking must be provided as specified on
Table 6.4.14, except as follows:
a). Non-residential USEs with five thousand (5,000)
square feet or less of gross LEASABLE FLOOR AREA
are exempt from any minimum requirements
of Table 6.4.14.
b). Any CHANGE IN USE within a non-residential
STRUCTURE constructed before the effective date
of this Ordinance, provided that the change
is to a permitted USE, is exempt from any
minimum requirements of Table 6.4.14.
iii. There are no parking requirements for ACCESSORY
USEs.
iv. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces may be shared
between USEs on the same LOT and buildings on
the same BLOCK in accordance with §11.3 SHARED
PARKING.
b. Type
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING may be provided as SURFACE
PARKING, above ground STRUCTURED PARKING, or
underground STRUCTURED PARKING.
c. Driveways
i. New driveways require a permit from the City
Engineer.
ii. Driveways must be compliant with all City
Ordinances and constructed in accordance
with all standards established by relevant City
Departments.
iii. Driveways are not permitted in the FRONTAGE AREA
between a BUILDING and the FRONT LOT LINE.
iv. Driveways may be no wider than twenty four (24)
feet in the FRONTAGE AREA of a LOT.
v. Driveways may provide ACCESS in whole or in part
on or across an ABUTTING LOT(s), provided that an
ACCESS EASEMENT exists between all PROPERTY OWNERS.
d. Parking Design
i. The design of all parking is subject to §11.1 Bicycle
Parking and §11.2 MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING of this
Ordinance.
e. Parking Location
i. Required vehicular parking, excluding any required
handicapped parking, may be provided on a
contiguous LOT under the same ownership as the
LOT that the parking will serve as follows:
a). Pedestrian ACCESS to off-SITE vehicular parking
must be via a paved sidewalk or walkway.
b). A lease, recorded covenant, or other
comparable legal instrument guaranteeing long
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 351
Table 6.4.14 Vehicular Parking
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Use Category
Specific Use
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Within a
TRANSIT AREA1
(max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min)
Arts & Creative Enterprise
All Permitted Uses 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Cannabis Establishment
Cannabis Product Manufacturing 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Cannabis Retail Sales 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Cannabis Research & Development 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Cannabis Testing Laboratory 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Civic & Institutional
Community Center 1 / 10,000 sf 4 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,800 sf 1 / 600 sf
Educational Facility
1.0 /
classroom
4.0 /
classroom
1.5 /
classroom
3.0 /
classroom
Hospital
10 per
entrance 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 200 sf 1/ 1,000 sf
Library 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 500 sf
Minor Utility Facility n/a n/a n/a n/a
Museum 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 500 sf
Private Non-Profit Club or Lodge 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 200 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Commercial Services
Animal Services (as noted below) -- -- -- --
Commercial Kennel 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Pet Grooming 1 / 2,500 sf none 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Pet Day Care or Training 1 / 2,500 sf none 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Veterinarian 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 500 sf
Assembly or Entertainment 1 / 40 seats 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 6 seats 1 / 6 seats
Banking & Financial Services
(except as noted below)
1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 450 sf 1 / 400 sf
Broadcast and/or Recording Studio 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 600 sf
Building & Home Repair Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 2,000 sf
Business Support Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 600 sf
Caterer/Wholesale Food Production 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 800 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Day Care Service 2 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 600 sf
Maintenance & Repair of Consumer Goods 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 750 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Personal Services (except as noted below) 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 750 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Health Care Services 1 / 2,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 300 sf
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - Dwelling Unit RU - Rooming Unit
1 See the Transit Area Map
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
352 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
Table 6.4.14 Vehicular Parking (continued)
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Use Category
Specific Use
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Within a
TRANSIT AREA1
(max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA1
(min)
Recreation Services 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf -- --
Food and Beverage Service
Bar/Restaurant/Tavern 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 300 sf 1 / 500 sf
Bakery/Café/Coffee Shop 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 300 sf 1 / 500 sf
Formula Food & Beverage Service 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 300 sf 1 / 500 sf
Lodging
Bed & Breakfast 1 / 20 rooms 1 / 10 rooms 1 / DU + 1 / 4
guest rooms
1 / DU + 1 / 4
guest rooms
Hotel or Hostel 1 / 20 rooms 1 / 10 rooms 1 / 2 guest
rooms
1 / 2 guest
rooms
Short Term Rental 1 / 20 rooms 1 / 10 rooms n/a n/a
Office
Co-Working 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 1,200 sf 1 / 800 sf
General Office 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 3,000 sf 1 / 900 sf 1 / 650 sf
Research and Development or Laboratory 1 / 20,000 sf 1 / 5,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Residential
Household Living 0.1 / DU 1.0 / DU 1.0 / DU 1.0 / DU
Group Living
(except as follows)
0.05 / room 0.5 / room -- --
Community or Group Residence -- -- -- --
Dormitory, Fraternity or Sorority 0.1 / room 0.5 / room .05 / bed 1.0 / 4 beds
Homeless Shelter -- -- 4.0 4.0
Nursing Home/Assisted Living Facility -- -- 1 / 6 beds 1 / 6 beds
Single Room Occupancy Housing -- -- 1 / 6 beds 1 / 4 beds
Retail Sales
Building/Home Supplies & Equipment 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 1,000 sf
Consumer Goods (except as follows) 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Formula Retail 1 / 2,500 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 1,500 sf 1 / 750 sf
Fresh Food Market or Grocery Store 1 / 1,000 sf 1 / 10,000 sf 1 / 500 sf 1 / 1,500 sf
Farm/Vendor Market n/a n/a n/a 1 / 1,500 sf
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - Dwelling Unit RU - Rooming Unit
1 See the Transit Area Map
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 353
term USE of the SITE must be provided to the
review board or BUILDING OFFICIAL and executed
and filed with the Registry of Deeds.
ii. For real property located in more than one
municipality, MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING need not be
located within the City of Somerville.
f. Unbundled Parking
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces must be rented or
leased as an option rather than a requirement of
the rental, lease, or purchase of a DWELLING UNIT or
non-residential floor space.
ii. Bicycle parking must be provided at no cost or fee
to customers, visitors, employees, tenants, and
residents.
g. Parking Relief
i. Relief from the parking standards of Table 6.4.14
requires a Special Permit.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing
relief from the parking standards of Table 4.4
(d):
i). The supply and demand of on-STREET
parking in the neighborhood, as
determined through a parking study.
ii). MOBILITY MANAGEMENT programs and
services provided by the APPLICANT to
reduce the demand for parking.
iii). That parking provided in excess of any
maximum permitted does not result in the
increase in impervious LOT AREA.
17. Public Realm
a. Sidewalk CURB CUTs
i. A CURB CUT requires a permit from the City Engineer
and must be compliant with all City Ordinances.
ii. Unless otherwise specified, the City Engineer may
not permit more than one (1) CURB CUT per FRONT LOT
LINE of a LOT.
iii. CURB CUTs are prohibited along all THOROUGHFAREs
designated as a PEDESTRIAN STREET.
iv. CURB CUTs must be located to minimize conflicts
with pedestrians and bicyclists and must have a
clear distance from fire hydrants, STREET TREES, utility
poles, and other furnishings as deemed necessary
by the City Engineer.
a). CURB CUTs should be at least one-hundred
(100) feet from an unSIGNalized or SIGNalized
intersection.
b). Multiple CURB CUTs providing ACCESS to the same
LOT must be at least one hundred and fifty (150)
feet from one another.
v. The interior width of a CURB CUT (between curb
stones) may be no wider than the driveway,
vehicular entrance, or loading facility it serves.
vi. A DRIVEWAY APRON may be installed only within
the furnishing zone of a sidewalk and must be
constructed in accordance with all standards
established by relevant City Departments.
vii. The grade, cross slope, and clear width of the
walkway of a sidewalk must be maintained
between the DRIVEWAY APRON and the ABUTTING
driveway. The appearance of the walkway (ie.
scoring pattern or paving material) must indicate
that, although a vehicle may cross, the area
traversed by a vehicle remains part of the sidewalk.
Figure 6.4.15 Sidewalk Curb Cuts
6.0 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Commercial Business (CB)
354 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
7.1 CIVIC (CIV) ...........................................................357
Character Description 357
Intent 358
Purpose 358
Applicability 358
Development Review 358
Use Provisions 358
Development Standards 358
Parking & Mobility 358
Public Realm 358
7.2 POWDERHOUSE SCHOOL (PS) .........................359
Character Description 359
Intent 360
Purpose 360
Applicability 360
Development Review 360
Building Standards 360
Use Provisions 360
Development Standards 362
Parking & Mobility 362
Development Benefits 362
Public Realm 363
7.3 TUFTS UNIVERSITY (TU) ...................................365
Character Description 365
Intent 366
Purpose 366
Applicability 366
Development Review 366
Lots 366
Building Standards 366
Use Provisions 369
Parking & Mobility 369
7.4 ASSEMBLY SQUARE MIXED-USE (ASMD) .......371
Description 371
Intent 372
Purpose 372
Applicability 372
Development Review 372
Master Plan Standards 373
Building Standards 373
Use Provisions 375
DEVELOPMENT Standards 377
Parking & Mobility 378
DEVELOPMENT Benefits 378
Public Realm 379
Land Platting 379

7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Civic (CIV)
12/16/19
7.1 CIVIC (CIV)
1. Character Description
The Civic district is characterized by public spaces, such as parks, commons, and plazas, and buildings dedicated to arts,
culture, education, recreation, and local government that serve as necessary components of any community. Buildings
are distinctive in their placement, orientation, and design and occupy prominent locations that reinforce community
identity.
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Civic (CIV)
12/16/19
2. Intent
a. To implement the objectives of the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
of the City of Somerville.
b. To preserve already established SITEs as CIVIC SPACE.
c. To accommodate facilities of a public nature such as
municipal buildings, libraries, and police & fire stations;
governmental USEs; and public or private utility services
that support he community.
3. Purpose
a. To permit the DEVELOPMENT of buildings that serve a
public purpose for the community.
b. To permit the DEVELOPMENT of CIVIC SPACEs throughout the
city.
c. The permit DEVELOPMENT by Site Plan Approval so that
any impacts to ABUTTING properties can be properly
mitigated.
4. Applicability
a. The section is applicable to all real property within
the Civic district as shown on the maps of the Official
Zoning Atlas of the City of Somerville.
5. Development Review
a. DEVELOPMENT review is subject to the provisions of
Article 15: Administration of this Ordinance.
b. All DEVELOPMENT, excluding NORMAL MAINTENANCE, requires
the submittal of a development review application to
the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the issuance of a Certificate
of Zoning Compliance prior to the issuance of a
Thoroughfare Permit, Civic Space Permit, BUILDING
Permit, or Certificate of Occupancy.
c. Proposed DEVELOPMENT may or may not necessitate the
need for Subdivision Plan Approval, SUBdivision Plan
Approval, Site Plan Approval, a Special Permit, or a
Hardship Variance based on the nature of the proposal.
In such cases, additional DEVELOPMENT review is required
in accordance with Article 15: Administration.
i. The Planning Board is the decision making
authority for all DEVELOPMENT that requires a Special
Permit.
ii. The Zoning Board of Appeals is the Review Board
for all Hardship Variances.
d. Upon verification that no additional DEVELOPMENT review
is necessary, or completion of the required DEVELOPMENT
review, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall issue a Zoning
Compliance Certificate to certify compliance with the
provisions and procedures of this Ordinance.
6. Use Provisions
a. Permitted USEs
i. The USE of real property is subject to the provisions
of Article 9: USE Provisions of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 9, the provisions of Article 9 apply.
ii. USE categories are permitted as specified on Table
7.1.6. (a).
iii. USE categories that are not identified on Table 7.1.6.
(a) are prohibited.
iv. All USEs must comply with any USE-specific
standards applicable for each USE in §9.2 USE
Definitions & Limitations.
v. USEs permitted by Special Permit require additional
DEVELOPMENT review in accordance with §15.2.1
Special Permits.
7. Development Standards
a. DEVELOPMENT is exempt from Article 10: DEVELOPMENT
Standards of this Ordinance.
8. Parking & Mobility
a. DEVELOPMENT is exempt from Article 11: Parking and
Mobility of this Ordinance.
9. Public Realm
a. CIVIC SPACEs existing prior to the adoption date of this
Ordinance are exempt from Article 13: PUBLIC REALM of
this Ordinance.
Table 7.1.7 Permitted Uses
USE Category
Specific USE
CIV
Civic & Institutional
MINOR UTILITY FACILITY SP
Public Services P
Religious & Educational USEs Protected by
M.G.L. 40A. Sec. 3
P
Commercial Services
Recreation Services P
Vehicle Parking (as noted below --
Bike Share Parking P
Car Share Parking (3 or less) N
Car Share Parking (4 or more) N
COMMERCIAL PARKING N
Urban Agriculture
Farming (as noted below) --
Commercial Farming N
Community Farming P
Community Gardening P
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 359
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Powderhouse School (PS)
7.2 POWDERHOUSE SCHOOL (PS)
1. Character Description
The PowderhoUSE School district is characterized by the adaptation and re-USE of a former school into a mixed-USE
COURTyard BUILDING. Ground level and garden level commercial USEs address the needs of residents and neighbors in the
immediate neighborhood and encourage activation of the adjacent CIVIC SPACE. Residential USEs include a variety of unit
types, sizes, BEDROOM counts, and affordability.
360 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Powderhouse School (PS)
2. Intent
a. To accommodate reDEVELOPMENT the former
PowderhoUSE Community School as an inclusive
and diverse mix of complimentary urban USEs and
intergenerational housing options that is respectful of
the surrounding neighborhood.
3. Purpose
a. To permit the reDEVELOPMENT reUSE of the former
PowderhoUSE Community School.
b. To require a minimum amount of commercial activity
fronting onto Broadway.
c. To USE discretion in the permitting of residential USEs.
4. Applicability
a. The section is applicable to all real property within the
PowderhoUSE School ReDEVELOPMENT district as shown
on the maps of the Official Zoning Atlas of the City of
Somerville.
b. Unless otherwise specified, where the provisions of
this Section conflict with those found elsewhere in this
Ordinance, the provisions of this Section apply.
5. Development Review
a. DEVELOPMENT review is subject to the provisions of
Article 15: Administration of this Ordinance.
b. All DEVELOPMENT, excluding NORMAL MAINTENANCE, requires
the submittal of a development review application to
the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the issuance of a Certificate
of Zoning Compliance prior to the issuance of a
Thoroughfare Permit, Civic Space Permit, BUILDING
Permit, or Certificate of Occupancy.
c. Proposed DEVELOPMENT may or may not necessitate the
need for SUBDivision Plan Approval, Site Plan Approval,
a SPecial Permit, or a Hardship Variance based on
the nature of the proposal. In such cases, additional
DEVELOPMENT review is required in accordance with
Article 15: Administration.
i. The Planning Board is the decision making
authority for all DEVELOPMENT that requires Site Plan
Approval or a Special Permit.
ii. The Zoning Board of Appeals is the Review Board
for all Hardship Variances.
d. Upon verification that no additional DEVELOPMENT review
is necessary, or completion of the required DEVELOPMENT
review, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall issue a Zoning
Compliance CERTIFICATE to certify compliance with the
provisions and procedures of this Ordinance.
6. Building Standards
a. Construction or reconstruction of a PRINCIPAL BUILDING
is permitted by Site Plan Approval in accordance with
Table 7.2.6 Dimensional Standards.
b. ACCESSory STRUCTURES are regulated according to Article
10: DEVELOPMENT Standards of this Ordinance.
7. Use Provisions
a. General
i. The USE of real property is subject to the provisions
of Article 9.0 USE Provisions of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 9.0, the provisions of Article 4.0
apply.
ii. USE categories are permitted as specified on Table
7.2.7 Permitted USEs.
iii. USE categories not identified on Table 7.4.7 are
prohibited.
iv. All USEs must comply with any USE-specific
standards applicable for each USE in §9.2 USE
Definitions & Limitations.
v. USEs permitted by Special Permit require additional
DEVELOPMENT review in accordance with §15.2.1
Special Permits.
b. Required USEs
i. A minimum of ten thousand (10,000) gross square
feet must be provided as one or more commercial
USEs.
ii. Commercial space must front onto Broadway for a
minimum of one hundred (100) feet in width.
Table 7.2.6 Dimensional Standards
LOT AREA/DWELLING UNIT (min) 1,000 sq. ft.
(43.56/acre)
Maximum Height, Stories (max) 3
Maximum Height, Feet (max) 50 ft.
Maximum GROUND COVErage (max) 95%
Landscaped Area (min) 15%
PERVIOUS AREA (min) 5%
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 361
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Powderhouse School (PS)
Table 7.2.7 Permitted Uses
USE Category
Specific USE PSR
Arts & Creative Enterprise
ARTISINAL PRODUCTION P
ARTS EXHIBITION P
Arts Sales & Services P
Civic & Institutional
COMMUNITY CENTER P
LIBRARY P
MINOR UTILITY FACILITY P
MUSEUM P
Public Service P
Religious & Educational USEs Protected by
M.G.L. 40A. Sec. 3
P
Commercial Services
ASSEMBLY OR ENTERTAINMENT P
Day Care Service (as noted below) --
ADULT DAY CARE CENTER P
CHILD DAY CARE CENTER P
Maintenance & Repair of CONSUMER GOODS P
PERSONAL SERVICES (except as follows) P
Body-Art Services SP
Fitness Services P
Funeral Services N
Health Care Services SP
Formula Personal Services SP
Vehicle Parking (except as follows) --
Bike Share Parking P
Car Share Parking (3 or less) P
Car Share Parking (4 or more) P
Public Parking P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
Table 7.2.7 Permitted Uses
USE Category
Specific USE PSR
Food and Beverage Service
Bar/Restaurant/Tavern SP
Bakery/Café/Coffee Shop P
Office
GENERAL OFFICE P
Research and DEVELOPMENT and Laboratory P
Residential
HOUSEHOLD LIVING SP
GROUP LIVING (except as follows) SP
COMMUNITY OR GROUP RESIDENCE P
DORMITORY OR CHAPTER HOUSE N
HOMELESS SHELTER N
Nursing Home/Assisted Living Facility N
Rooming HoUSE N
Retail Sales
CONSUMER GOODS (except as follows) P
ALCOHOL SALES P
FIREARMS SALES N
PET STORE SP
FRESH FOOD MARKET OR GROCERY STORE P
Urban Agriculture
FARMING (as noted below) --
COMMERCIAL FARMING P
COMMUNITY FARMING P
COMMUNITY GARDENING P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
362 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Powderhouse School (PS)
8. Development Standards
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
10: DEVELOPMENT Standards of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 10, the provisions of Article 10
apply.
ii. All storage, dumpsters, and mechanical
equipment must be located within the building. Air
conditioners may be located on the roof(s).
b. SIGNs
i. A SIGN, individual numerals or letters, or a
nonelectrical nameplate identifying the property
address is required for all real property as follows:
a). Each GROUND STORY non-residential USE must
identify the STREET address either on the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE door or above or beside the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE of the USE.
b). All residential BUILDING TYPEs must identify the
STREET address either on the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE
door, above or beside the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE, or
on a mailbox.
ii. Address SIGNs must be made easily visible through
the USE of colors or materials that contrast with the
background material they are attached to and must
be conspicuously located to provide visibility from
the THOROUGHFARE that the building faces.
iii. Address SIGNs must be twelve (12) inches in height
or less and may include the name of the occupant.
9. Parking & Mobility
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
11: Parking & Mobility of this Ordinance.
ii. The total parking requirement in the PS district is
as follows:
a). A minimum of forty-eight (48) motor vehicle
parking spaces must be provided on-SITE.
b). A minimum of one hundred (100) bicycle
parking spaces must be provided on-SITE.
b. Parking Type
i. Motor vehicle parking may be provided as
above ground STRUCTURED PARKING or underground
STRUCTURED PARKING.
c. Parking Design
i. Bicycle and motor vehicle parking is subject to
§11.1 Parking Design of this Ordinance except as
follows:
a). Parking spaces may be seven (7) feet six (6)
inches in width.
b). Two (2) way maneuvering aisles may be
eighteen (18) feet in width.
d. Loading Facilities
i. Loading facilities are not required for any USEs.
10. Development Benefits
a. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article 12:
DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where the
provisions of this section conflict with those of Article
12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
b. DEVELOPMENT must provide AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITs as
specified on Table 7.4.10 (a).
Table 7.4.10 (a) Required ADUs
Total DWELLING UNITs Required ADUs
0 to 3 units None
4 or more units 20% of units
Table 7.2.7 Permitted Uses
USE Category
Specific USE PSR
ACCESSORY USEs
HOME OCCUPATIONs (as noted below) --
CREATIVE STUDIO P
HOBBY KENNEL N
HOME-BASED BUSINESS P
Home Day Care P
HOME OFFICE P
Tourist Home P
Urban Agriculture (as noted below) --
APICULTURE P
AVICULTURE P
COMMERCIAL FARMING P
Residential Gardening P
Vehicle Parking, ACCESSory (except as follows) N
Home Business Vehicle Parking N
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 363
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Powderhouse School (PS)
11. Public Realm
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
13: PUBLIC REALM of this Ordinance. Where the
provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 13, the provisions of Article 13 apply.
b. Sidewalk CURB CUTs
i. A CURB CUT requires a permit from the City Engineer
and must be compliant with all City Ordinances.
ii. Unless otherwise specified, the City Engineer may
not permit more than one (1) CURB CUT per FRONT LOT
LINE of a LOT.
iii. CURB CUTs are prohibited along all THOROUGHFAREs
designated as a PEDESTRIAN STREET.
iv. CURB CUTs must be located to minimize conflicts
with pedestrians and bicyclists and must have a
clear distance from fire hydrants, STREET TREES, utility
poles, and other furnishings as deemed necessary
by the City Engineer.
a). CURB CUTs for commercial or high-volume
driveways should be at least one-hundred
(100) feet from an unSIGNalized or SIGNalized
intersection.
b). CURB CUTs for residential driveways should be
at least twenty (20) feet from an unSIGNalized
intersection and at least forty (40) feet from a
SIGNalized intersection.
v. The interior width of a CURB CUT (between curb
stones) may be no wider than the driveway,
vehicular entrance, or loading facility it serves.
vi. A DRIVEWAY APRON may be installed only within
the furnishing zone of a sidewalk and must be
constructed in accordance with all standards
established by relevant City Departments.
vii. The grade, cross slope, and clear width of the
walkway of a sidewalk must be maintained
between the DRIVEWAY APRON and the ABUTTING
driveway. The appearance of the walkway (ie.
scoring pattern or paving material) must indicate
that, although a vehicle may cross, the area
traversed by a vehicle remains part of the sidewalk.
Figure 7.2.11 Sidewalk Curb Cuts
364 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Powderhouse School (PS)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 365
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Tufts University (TU)
7.3 TUFTS UNIVERSITY (TU)
1. Character Description
The Tufts University district is characterized by a large private research university set in a campus like setting. A wide
variety of administration buildings, lecture halls, academic centers, dining facilities, student housing, and recreation
facilities are typically SETBACK from the STREET. Well landscaped commons and BUILDING grounds provide outdoor space for
students, employees, and visitors.
366 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Tufts University (TU)
2. Intent
a. To maintain an area of the city for the campus of a
educational institution.
b. To preserve land areas primarily dedicated to collegiate
Education Services PRINCIPAL USEs protected by M.G.L.,
Chapter 40A, Section 3 and other USEs necessary to
maintain an academic campus.
3. Purpose
a. To reduce the impact of higher intensity educational
USEs on surrounding residential properties by reducing
the height of buildings at the edge of the campus and
locate taller buildings toward the center of the campus.
b. To distribute the coverage and floor area of buildings
across the quadrants of the district in a generally even
distribution as to not overly cluster DEVELOPMENT.
4. Applicability
a. The section is applicable to all real property within the
Tufts University district as shown on the maps of the
Official Zoning Atlas of the City of Somerville.
b. The provisions of this Section are applicable only to the
portion(s) of any BUILDING within the City of Somerville
and are not applicable to any portion(s) located within
the City of Medford.
c. Unless otherwise specified, where the provisions of
this Section conflict with those found elsewhere in this
Ordinance, the provisions of this Section apply.
5. Development Review
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT review is subject to the provisions of
Article 15: Administration of this Ordinance.
ii. All DEVELOPMENT, excluding NORMAL MAINTENANCE,
requires the submittal of a development review
application to the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the issuance
of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance prior to
the issuance of a Thoroughfare Permit, Civic
Space Permit, BUILDING Permit, or Certificate of
Occupancy.
iii. Proposed DEVELOPMENT may or may not necessitate
the need for SUBDivision Plan Approval, Site Plan
Approval, a SPecial Permit, or a Hardship Variance
based on the nature of the proposal. In such
cases, additional DEVELOPMENT review is required in
accordance with Article 15: Administration.
b. Authority
i. The Zoning Board of Appeals is the decision
making authority for all DEVELOPMENT in the TU
district.
c. Special Permits
i. Review Criteria
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny any Special Permit required by
this section:
i). Impact on surrounding residential
properties.
ii). Impact on the experience of the PUBLIC
REALM that would result from strict
compliance to the standards of this
Ordinance.
6. Lots
a. DEVELOPMENT is exempt from Section 10.1 Land Platting
of this Ordinance and all real property within the TU
district, including portions of campus situated in whole
or in part within the City of Medford, is considered a
single DEVELOPMENT SITE.
7. Building Standards
a. General
i. Multiple principal buildings are permitted on each
LOT.
b. Existing STRUCTURES
i. The BUILDING OFFICIAL shall deem all buildings and
structures to be in compliance with the building
standards of this section.
c. BUILDING Placement
i. All buildings and STRUCTURES must be located at or
behind the following SETBACKs:
a). Twenty (20) feet from the FRONT LOT LINE ABUTTING
College Avenue between Talbot Avenue and
Powder House Boulevard, Powder House
Boulevard from College Avenue to Packard
Avenue, and Packard Avenue from Powder
House Boulevard to Talbot Avenue.
b). Fifteen (15) feet from the FRONT LOT LINE ABUTTING
Dearborn Road and Curtis Street northwesterly
of Sawyer Avenue.
ii. Within the portion of the Tufts University district
which lies on the southwesterly side of Sawyer
Avenue between Packard Avenue and Curtis
Street,
a). where BUILDING length is less than thirty (30)
feet, the SETBACK is calculated as follows, with
a minimum of fifteen (15) feet required for
front yards and a minimum of twenty (20) feet
required for rear yards:
i). SETBACK = height + length (facing front/REAR
LOT LINE) 4
b). and where BUILDING length is more than thirty
(30) feet, the SETBACK is calculated as follows:
i). SETBACK = height + length (facing front/REAR
LOT LINE) 3
c). and each BUILDING must be separated from all
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 367
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Tufts University (TU)
other buildings by at least seventeen (17) feet.
d. Buiding Height
i. Maximum BUILDING height is permitted as specified
on Table 7.3.7 and shown on Map 7.3.7(a) for the
following areas:
a). The Blue Band comprises the land within one
hundred (100) feet of the following:
i). the center line of Dearborn Road,
ii). the center line of College Avenue,
iii). the center line of Powder House
Boulevard,
iv). the center line of that portion of Packard
Avenue between Powder House Boulevard
and the southwesterly line of Sawyer
Avenue, or
v). the center line of Curtis Street between
Sawyer Avenue and the City line, or
vi). lies southwesterly of the center line of
Sawyer Avenue between Packard Avenue
and Curtis Street.
b). The Red Band comprises the land within the
Tufts University district which is not included in
the Blue Band and is within two hundred (200)
feet of the following:
i). the center line of Dearborn Road,
ii). the center line of College Avenue,
iii). the center line of Powder House
Boulevard,
iv). the center line of that portion of Packard
Avenue between Powder House Boulevard
and the southwesterly line of Talbot
Avenue, or
v). the center line of Curtis Street between
Map 7.3.7(a) Tufts University Height Map
Powderhouse Blvd.
College Ave.
Sawyer Ave.
Curtis St.
Packard Ave.
Dearborn Rd.
Table 7.3.7 Building Height
Location Stories Feet
With the Blue Band 2.5 35
Within the Red Band 4 56
Within the Yellow Band 6 72
Within the Green Band 8 98
368 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Tufts University (TU)
Sawyer Avenue and the City line, or
vi). is within one hundred (100) feet of the
center line of Sawyer Avenue, between
the Red Band measured from Curtis Street
and the Red Band measured from Packard
Avenue.
c). The Yellow Band comprises the land within the
Tufts University district which is not included in
the Blue Band or the Red Band and is
i). within the BLOCK bounded by Sawyer
Avenue, Curtis Street, Professors Row and
Packard Avenue, or
ii). within the area bounded by Professors
Row, Curtis Street, the City Line and a line
parallel to and three hundred fifty (350) feet
southeasterly from Curtis Street.
d). The Green Band comprises the land within the
Tufts University district which is not included
in the Blue Band, the Red Band, or the Yellow
Band.
e. BUILDING MASSING
i. DEVELOPMENT SITES must be equal to one (1) of
the measuring PARCELs shown on Map 7.3.7(a)
established for the following areas:
a). MP-1: The land bounded by Professors Row,
College Avenue, Powder House Boulevard and
Packard Avenue.
b). MP-2: The land bounded by Curtis Street,
Professors Row, Packard Avenue, and the Tufts
University district line running from Packard
Avenue to Curtis Street between Sawyer
Avenue and Whitfield Road.
c). MP-3: The land bounded by Boston Avenue,
College Avenue, Professors Row, Curtis Street,
Winthrop STREET, the northeasterly side line
of Capen STREET Extension, and the westerly
sidelines of University Avenue extended to
Capen STREET Extension.
d). MP-4: The land bounded by Boston Avenue,
Dearborn Road and College Avenue.
ii. Development review applications must identify the
total land area, total LOT coverage, total NET FLOOR
Map 7.3.7 (b) Tufts University Measuring PARCELs
Powderhouse Blvd.
College Ave.
Sawyer Ave.
Curtis St.
Packard Ave.
Dearborn Rd.
MP1
MP3 MP3
MP4
MP2
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 369
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Tufts University (TU)
AREA, and total floor area ratio for all structures
within the subject measuring PARCEL.
iii. The maximum LOT coverage for each measuring
PARCEL is sixty-five percent (65%).
iv. The maximum floor area ratio for each measuring
PARCEL is 2.0.
v. The maximum FLOOR PLATE of any individual building
is fifteen thousand (15,000) gross square feet.
8. Use Provisions
a. General
i. The USE of real property is subject to the provisions
of Article 9.0 USE Provisions of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 9.0, the provisions of Article 9
apply.
b. Permitted USEs
i. The USE of real property is permitted as an
educational service principal use, including all
facilities customarily provided by educational
service USEs in directly serving the needs of
faculty, staff, students, and visitors, as deemed
necessary by Tufts University, in accordance with
the provisions of Section 9.2 Use Definitions &
Standards.
9. Parking & Mobility
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
11: Parking & Mobility of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 11, the provisions of Article 11 apply.
ii. Vehicular parking must be provided as specified
on Table 7.3.9 (a) based on the total number of
persons in the Tufts University campus population,
including faculty, staff, students, and visitors. The
total number of motor vehicle parking spaces
provided on the Tufts University campus must be
equal to the sum of the products for each row of
Table 7.3.9 (a).
b. Type
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING may be provided as SURFACE
PARKING spaces, above ground STRUCTURED PARKING,
underground STRUCTURED PARKING, and on STREET
parking spaces which are owned or controlled by
Tufts University.
c. Parking Design
i. The design of all parking is subject to §11.1 Bicycle
Parking and §11.2 MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING of this
Ordinance.
ii. PARKING LOTs located within the red, yellow, or green
bands as shown on Map 7.3.7(a) are exempt from
§11.2.2.b.iv.
d. Parking Location
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING may be located anywhere
on or within five hundred (500) feet of the Tufts
University campus and need not be located within
the City of Somerville.
ii. To ensure that motor vehicle parking spaces
are reasonably distributed throughout the Tufts
University campus, a minimum and maximum
percentage of the required motor vehicle parking
spaces must be located as specified on Table
7.3.9(b).
e. Parking ACCESS
i. Tufts University shall establish and administer a
parking permit program for motor vehicle parking
spaces provided on the Tufts University campus.
ii. Parking permits may be issued only to Tufts
University faculty, staff, or students and to visitors
having a need for parking for temporary USE.
iii. Parking permits may be issued for general USE of
motor vehicle parking spaces or for limited USE of
specific parking spaces or for limited time periods.
f. Annual Reporting
i. Tufts University shall submit an annual report to
the Director of Mobility within sixty (60) days after
September 1st in each year that identifies the
following:
a). The number and location of motor vehicle
parking spaces provided by Tufts University to
faculty, staff, students, and visitors.
b). The average number of persons in the Tufts
University campus population, including
Table 7.3.9 (b) Parking Space Location
Location Min Max
Area between Professors Row -
Dearborn Road in Somerville and
Boston Avenue in Medford
25% 75%
Area southwesterly of Professors Row
in Somerville
10% 50%
Area easterly of Boston Avenue in
Medford: minimum
10% 60%
Table 7.3.9 (a) Required Parking Spaces
Multiplier
Full Time Faculty & Staff 0.47
Part Time Faculty & Staff 0.37
Campus Resident Students 0.12
Non Campus Resident Students 0.24
Other 0.44
370 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Tufts University (TU)
faculty, staff, students, and visitors, organized
by the categories of Table 7.3.9 (a).
c). The average of the number of persons holding
Tufts University parking permits broken down
by type, if applicable, during the preceding
twelve month period.
d). Any known incidences of motor vehicle parking
spaces USEd by persons not holding Tufts
University parking permits.
g. Parking Demand Study
i. Tufts University shall submit a parking demand
study, prepared by a qualified professional
consultant, every three (3) years. If the parking
demand study identifies a deficiency in the number
of motor vehicle parking spaces provided by Tufts
University compared to the number of motor
vehicle parking spaces required by Table 7.3.9 (a),
Tufts University shall also submit a plan for the
interim and long term correction and elimination of
such a deficiency.
h. Parking Relief
i. If the parking demand study indicates that a
lesser number of motor vehicle parking spaces is
necessary than is required by Table 7.3.9 (a), the
Director of Mobility may permit a reduction in the
number of motor vehicle parking spaces provided
by up to twenty-five (25) percent. Permission
granted for such reduction remains in effect for
an initial period of up to three (3) years, but may
subsequently be extended or granted for a longer
period upon reasonable verification in the annual
report that the parking provided remains adequate.
i. Loading Facilities
i. Buildings located within the red, yellow, or green
bands as shown on Map 7.3.7(a) are exempt from
§11.2.5.b.i.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 371
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Assembly Square Mixed-Use (ASMD)
7.4 ASSEMBLY SQUARE MIXED-USE (ASMD)
1. Description
The Assembly Square district is characterized by a variety of mid- and HIGH-RISE, transit oriented, mixed-USE buildings;
an urban scale THOROUGHFARE network and BLOCK size conducive to a walkable neighborhood; and a variety of CIVIC SPACE
types that serve the various social and recreational needs of neighborhood residents, workers, and visitors. Buildings are
typically developed at the full-BLOCK or half-BLOCK scale to mask PARKING STRUCTURES from public view. The district features
GROUND STORY retail, high-density residential, and large commercial USEs that draw customers and employees from the
broader Boston metropolitan area.
372 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Assembly Square Mixed-Use (ASMD)
1. Intent
a. To implement recommendations of SomerVision for
transformational reDEVELOPMENT.
b. To implement the ASSEMBLY SQUARE PLAN (ASQ Plan).
c. To redevelop underutilized areas within close walking
distance to the Assembly Square T-station with mixed-
USE, mid-rise and HIGH-RISE, transit-oriented DEVELOPMENT
that will support the transformation of Assembly
Square into an urban commerce center.
d. To improve the Mystic River waterfront and create new
CIVIC SPACE within the Assembly Square district.
e. To improve utility infraSTRUCTURE, THOROUGHFAREs, off-
STREET pedestrian and bicycle paths, and physical
connections to surrounding areas, including East
Somerville, Ten Hills, and Sullivan Square.
2. Purpose
a. To permit the DEVELOPMENT of multi-unit, mixed-USE, and
commercial mid-rise and HIGH-RISE buildings.
b. To provide quality commercial spaces and permit small
and medium-scale, neighborhood-, community-, and
region-serving commercial USEs.
c. To permit larger buildings and increased residential
density following the approval of a Master Plan Special
Permit.
d. To USE discretion in the permitting of loading and
service areas.
e. To provide flexibility in the permitting of SIGNs.
3. Applicability
a. The section is applicable to all real property within
the Assembly Square Mixed-USE district as shown on
the maps of the Official Zoning Atlas of the City of
Somerville.
b. Unless otherwise specified, where the provisions of
this Section conflict with those found elsewhere in this
Ordinance, the provisions of this Section apply.
c. Real property subject to a previously approved Planned
Unit DEVELOPMENT (PUD) Preliminary Master Plan may
be developed in accordance with the provisions of the
Somerville Zoning Ordinance effective as of August 1,
2019.
4. Development Review
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT review is subject to the provisions of
Article 15: Administration of this Ordinance.
ii. All DEVELOPMENT, excluding NORMAL MAINTENANCE,
requires the submittal of a development review
application to the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the issuance
of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance prior to
the issuance of a Thoroughfare Permit, Civic
Space Permit, BUILDING Permit, or Certificate of
Occupancy.
iii. Proposed DEVELOPMENT may or may not necessitate
the need for Master Plan Special Permit,
SUBDivision Plan Approval, Site Plan Approval, a
SPecial Permit, or a Hardship Variance based on the
nature of the proposal. In such cases, additional
DEVELOPMENT review is required in accordance with
Article 15: Administration.
a). The Planning Board is the decision making
authority for all DEVELOPMENT that requires
Master Plan Special Permit, Site Plan Approval
or a Special Permit.
b). The Zoning Board of Appeals is the Review
Board for all Hardship Variances.
iv. Upon verification that no additional DEVELOPMENT
review is necessary, or completion of the required
DEVELOPMENT review, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall
issue a Zoning Compliance Certificate to certify
compliance with the provisions and procedures of
this Ordinance.
b. Master Planned DEVELOPMENT
i. Proposed DEVELOPMENT involving the SUBDIVISION of
a DEVELOPMENT SITE, DEVELOPMENT of two (2) or more
LOTS, or the DEVELOPMENT of any building over fifty
thousand (50,000) GROSS FLOOR AREA requires a
Master Plan Special Permit as a prerequiSITE to the
DEVELOPMENT review for the SUBDIVISION or individual
LOT.
ii. In addition to the review criteria for all for all
Master Plan Special Permits specified in §15.2.2.e.
Review Criteria, the review board shall make
findings considering the following:
a). Consistency with the ASQ Plan.
iii. DEVELOPMENT SITEs are not permitted to include
portions of land area separated by more than one
hundred (100) feet in distance.
c. Site Plan Approval
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Site Plan
Approvals specified in §15.3.2.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following:
a). Consistency with the ASQ Plan.
b). Conformance with an approved Master Plan
Special Permit and any other Special Permits
applicable to the subject LOT.
d. Plan Revisions
i. The Director of Planning & Zoning shall consider
the following revisions to an approved development
review application to be a MAJOR AMENDMENT in
accordance with §15.2.4 Plan Revision:
a). any increase in floor area or LOT coverage by
fifteen percent (15%) or more;
b). substantial changes in ACCESS to a DEVELOPMENT
SITE; and
c). MODIFICATIONs that result in a condition that
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 373
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Assembly Square Mixed-Use (ASMD)
is substantially more detrimental to the
surrounding neighborhood than the existing
condition(s) or previously approved plans.
5. Master Plan Standards
a. THOROUGHFARE Network
i. The alignment and connectivity of THOROUGHFAREs
must be consistent with the ASQ Plan.
b. CIVIC SPACE
i. At least twenty percent (25%) of a DEVELOPMENT SITE,
excluding THOROUGHFAREs, must be provided as one
or more CIVIC SPACEs.
ii. CIVIC SPACEs are subject to the provisions of Article
13: PUBLIC REALM of this Ordinance.
iii. CIVIC SPACES must be dedicated to the public in
perpetuity by a covenant or other deed restriction.
iv. CIVIC SPACE created through EASEMENT or
decommissioning of an existing THOROUGHFARE or
other ABUTTING right-of-way may be counted toward
the required amount of CIVIC SPACE.
v. Any DEVELOPMENT SITE ABUTTING the MYSTIC RIVER BANK
must provide at least two hundred and thirty five
thousand (235,000) square feet of CIVIC SPACE
ABUTTING the Mystic River.
vi. CIVIC SPACEs ABUTTING the Mystic River must be
designed to reduce the level of storm water runoff
into the river and with special attention to the
provision of wildlife habitat.
c. Mixed USEs
i. Proposed DEVELOPMENT with any single commercial
space over fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of
LEASABLE FLOOR AREA dedicated to any PRINCIPAL USE
from the Retail Sales USE category must dedicate at
least sixty percent (60%) of any additional LEASIBLE
FLOOR AREA to PRINCIPAL USEs that are not from the
Retail Sales USE category.
6. Building Standards
a. General
i. One (1) PRINCIPAL BUILDING is permitted on each LOT as
specified on Table 7.4.7.
a). PRINCIPAL BUILDINGs with up to ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of GROSS FLOOR AREA are
permitted BY RIGHT.
b). PRINCIPAL BUILDINGs over ten thousand (10,000)
square feet and up to fifty thousand (50,000)
square feet of GROSS FLOOR AREA are permitted
by Site Plan Approval.
c). Buildings over fifty thousand (50,000) square
feet of GROSS FLOOR AREA are permitted by Site
Plan Approval subject to an approved Master
Plan Special Permit.
ii. PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS are prohibited within onehundred
and fifty (150) feet of the MYSTIC RIVER
BANK.
iii. STRUCTURED PARKING, whether above grade or below
grade, is excluded for purposes of calculating
GROSS FLOOR AREA, NET FLOOR AREA and Floor Area
Ratio in the ASMD.
iv. ACCESSory STRUCTURES in any CIVIC SPACE located within
one-hundred and fifty (150) feet of the MYSTIC RIVER
BANK may be up to thirty (30) feet in height.
v. The Planning Board may waive the provisions
of §7.4.6 BUILDING Standards or the dimensional
standards of Table 7.4.6 by Special Permit.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing
a WAIVER from the provisions of §7.4.6 BUILDING
Standards or the dimensional standards of
Table 7.4.6:
i). Consistency with the ASQ Plan.
b. BUILDING SETBACKs
Table 7.4.6 Dimensional Standards
Up to
10,000
GFA
10,000 -
50,000
GFA
Over
50,000
GFA
LOT Standards
LOT AREA (min) 5,000 sf 10,000 sf n/a
OPEN SPACE (min) 25% 25% --
BUILDING Standards
Floor Area Ratio (max) 1.0 2.0 10.0
BUILDING Height (max) -- -- --
150 ft - 250 ft of the
MYSTIC RIVER BANK
40 ft 50 ft 70 ft
250 ft - 350 ft of the
MYSTIC RIVER BANK
40 ft 50 ft 90 ft
Within 1,000 ft of
an Assembly
Square Station
Entrance
40 ft 50 ft 250 ft
All other Locations 40 ft 50 ft 125 ft
Density
LOT AREA/DWELLING UNIT
(min) -- -- --
1-9 Units 600 600 none
10+ Units 300 300 none
374 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Assembly Square Mixed-Use (ASMD)
i. Buildings may be set back from the FRONT LOT LINE
up to five (5) feet except in special circumstances,
where greater SETBACKs would enhance the
pedestrian friendly experience of the frontage.
c. BUILDING Design Standards
i. Building FACADEs must provide solid material
framing each storefront and lobby entrance as
follows:
a). PILASTERs or columns supporting a horizontal
lintel and CORNICE;
b). a spandrel positioned between PILASTERs or
columns that extend from upper stories of the
building to the ground; or
c). flat wall above and to either side of a void or
punched opening.
ii. Storefronts and lobby entrances must be set
within the resulting frame provided for each by the
building FACADE.
iii. Materials framing each storefront or lobby entrance
may be integrated into the design of the building
or customized for individual storefronts and lobby
entrances.
iv. FACADEs must be ARTICULATEd to create surface relief
and shadow lines that add depth to the FACADE
through the USE of architectural elements such as
balconies, Bays, CLADDING, columns, CORNER BOARDs,
CORNICEs, door surrounds, moldings, PIERs, PILASTERs,
seat walls, sills, wall depth, and windows that
either recess or project from the average plane of
the FACADE by at least four (4) inches.
v. PRINCIPAL ENTRANCEs must be clearly defined, through
the USE of BUILDING elements such as canopies,
porticos, overhangs, peaked roof forms, and/or
arches. Outdoor PATIOs, tile work, moldings, integral
PLANTERs or wing walls with landscaped areas, or
places for sitting are required for entries set back
from the FRONT LOT LINE.
vi. GROUND STORY BUILDING FACADEs and accompanying
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCEs must provide extensive areas
of window glass to provide visual ACCESS to interior
USEs.
vii. BUILDING FACADEs must include windows providing
visual ACCESS to the interior of a space, arcades,
display windows, entry areas, awnings, or other
such features for at least seventy (70) percent of
the horizontal length of all GROUND STORY FACADEs that
face public THOROUGHFAREs or the Mystic River.
viii. Forty percent (40%) of this activated FACADE area
on the GROUND STORY of BUILDING walls along primary
and secondary STREETs must consist of window or
doors meant for public entry and exit.
ix. Uninterrupted or unfenestrated lengths of FACADE
exceeding thirty-five (35) horizontal feet are
prohibited.
d. Building Design Guidelines
i. FACADEs should be vertically ARTICULATEd into a series
of ARCHITECTURAL BAYs no wider than thirty (30) feet.
ii. ARCHITECTURAL BAYs should be derived, in general,
from the BUILDING’s structural bay spacing.
iii. ARCHITECTURAL BAYs should have PIERs (flat wall),
PILASTERs, or columns that either extend all the way
to the ground or to the CORNICE and SIGN BAND of
ground level storefronts frames.
iv. ARCHITECTURAL BAYs should align, in general, with
individual or groups of storefronts and lobby
entrances.
v. The location, alignment, and massing of residential
TOWERs should limit the obstruction of desirable
views from inside DWELLING UNITs and increase the
actual or perceived distance between TOWERs.
vi. GROUND STORY commercial spaces should be
dedicated to USEs from the Retail Sales, Food &
Beverage, or Commercial Services USE categories
to encourage pedestrian activity.
vii. Multiple and frequent entrances oriented toward
FRONT LOT LINEs are encouraged.
viii. GROUND STORY commercial spaces should take
advantage of views of the waterfront and other
OPEN SPACEs, and add a STREET front presence to
public THOROUGHFAREs and sidewalks.
ix. DEVELOPMENT surrounding OPEN SPACE should result
in a net benefit to the space in terms of activation,
enhanced quality and attractiveness, expanded USE,
and public ACCESS.
x. The selection of materials, FENESTRATION, and
ornamentation should result in a consistent and
harmonious composition that appears as a unified
whole rather than a collection of unrelated parts.
xi. The type and color of materials USEd for a BUILDING
should be kept to a minimum, preferably three (3)
or fewer.
e. Self-Storage Buildings
i. Buildings purpose built for self storage USEs must
be designed as follows:
a). FACADEs greater than one hundred (100) feet in
horizontal width must have a change in vertical
plane of at least eight (8) inches (in depth or
projection) for at least one (1) ARCHITECTURAL BAY
to divide the BUILDING’s form and break up its
apparent mass into smaller elements. FACADEs
oriented toward any interstate highway are
exempt.
b). GROUND STORY FACADEs must include FENESTRATION
for a minimum of forty percent (40%) of
the wall area. FACADEs oriented toward any
interstate highway are exempt.
c). UPPER STORY FACADEs must include FENESTRATION
for between fifteen percent (15%) minimum
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 375
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Assembly Square Mixed-Use (ASMD)
and seventy percent (70%) maximum of the
wall area of each STORY. UPPER STORY FENESTRATION
must be designed to appear as windows for
residential or commercial USEs.
d). FACADEs may have a maximum BLANK WALL area
of thirty five (35) feet.
e). UPPER STORY USEs must have an at-grade PRINCIPAL
ENTRANCE designed as a lobby. Lobby entrances
may be no wider that thirty (30) feet in width
and must be well-defined, clearly visible,
and universally ACCESSible from the ABUTTING
sidewalk.
f). When a lobby entrance is set back from the
FRONT LOT LINE, the SETBACK must be paved to
match the ABUTTING sidewalk.
7. Use Provisions
a. General
i. The USE of real property is subject to the provisions
of Article 9: USE Provisions of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 9, the provisions of Article 9 apply.
ii. USE categories are permitted as specified on Table
7.4.7. USE categories not identified on Table 7.4.7 are
prohibited.
iii. All USEs must comply with any USE-specific
standards applicable for each USE in §9.2 USE
Definitions & Limitations and this Section.
iv. USEs permitted by Special Permit require additional
DEVELOPMENT review in accordance with §15.2.1
Special Permits.
b. Definitions & USE Specific Standards
i. General
a). This section provides definitions and standards
applicable to individual USEs not already
identified in Article 9: USE Provisions of this
Ordinance.
ii. Industrial
a). Marina
i). A SITE USEd for docking and storage of
pleasure boats or services for pleasure
boaters, including minor repair of boats
while in the water, sale of fuel and
supplies, or provision of food, beverages,
and entertainment. ANCILLARY long-term dry
storage of recreational watercraft in racks
or other storage systems may be provided.
c. USE Limitations
i. Occupancy of any single GROUND STORY commercial
space over fifty thousand (50,000) square feet in
LEASABLE FLOOR AREA by any USE from the Retail Sales
USE category is prohibited.
ii. Occupancy of any single commercial space greater
than ten-thousand (10,000) square feet in LEASABLE
FLOOR AREA by any permitted USE requires a Special
Permit.
iii. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
special permit authorizing occupancy of any single
commercial space over ten-thousand (10,000)
square feet in LEASABLE FLOOR AREA by any permitted
USE:
a). Compatibility with the intensity of activity
associated with the surrounding land USEs.
b). Capacity of the local THOROUGHFARE network
Table 7.2.7 Permitted Uses
Use Category
Specific Use ASQ
Arts & Creative Enterprise
Artisinal Production P
Arts Exhibition P
Arts Sales & Services P
Co-Working P
Design Services P
Shared Workspaces & Arts Education P
Auto-Oriented
Dispatch Service (except as follows) P
Towing Service N
Gasoline Station P
Motor Vehicle Parking (as noted below) --
Off-Site Accessory Parking P
Vehicle Sales P
Civic & Institutional
Community Center P
Hospital P
Library P
Minor Utility Facility P
Museum P
Private Non-Profit Club or Lodge P
Public Service P
Religious & Educational Uses Protected by
M.G.L. 40A. Sec. 3
P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
376 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Assembly Square Mixed-Use (ASMD)
Table 7.2.7 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use ASQ
Commercial Services
Animal Services (as noted below) --
Commercial Kennel P
Veterinarian P
Assembly or Entertainment P
Banking & Financial Services (except as
follows)
P
Personal Credit N
Broadcast and/or Recording Studio P
Business Support Services P
Caterer/Wholesale Food Production P
Day Care Service (as noted below) --
Adult Day Care Center P
Child Day Care Center P
Educational Services P
Maintenance & Repair of Consumer Goods P
Personal Services (except as follows) P
Body-Art Services P
Fitness Services P
Funeral Services N
Health Care Services P
Formula Personal Services P
Vehicle Parking (except as follows) --
Bike Share Parking P
Car Share Parking (3 or less) P
Car Share Parking (4 or more) SP
Public Parking P
Food and Beverage Service
Bar/Restaurant/Tavern P
Bakery/Café/Coffee Shop P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
Table 7.2.7 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use ASQ
Industrial
Manufacturing P
Marina P
Moving and/or Self Storage (except as follows) N
Self Storage P
Recycling Collection P
Wholesale Trade & Distribution P
Lodging
Hotel or Hostel P
Office
General Office P
Research and Development and Laboratory P
Residential
Household Living P
Group Living (except as follows) SP
Community or Group Residence P
Dormitory, Fraternity or Sorority SP
Homeless Shelter SP
Nursing Home/Assisted Living Facility SP
Rooming House SP
Retail Sales
Building/Home Supplies & Equipment P
Consumer Goods (except as follows) P
Alcohol Sales P
Firearms Sales N
Pet Store N
Fresh Food Market or Grocery Store P
Farm/Vendor Market P
Urban Agriculture
Farming (as noted below) --
Commercial Farming P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 377
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Assembly Square Mixed-Use (ASMD)
providing ACCESS to the SITE and the impact on
pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic and
circulation patterns in the neighborhood.
d. Required USEs
i. Any DEVELOPMENT providing fifty thousand (50,000)
net square feet of retail floor area must provide
one and one half (1.5) square feet of non-retail USEs
for every square foot over fifty thousand (50,000)
net square feet of Retail USE.
e. USE Restrictions
i. Drive-up and drive-through USEs are prohibited.
ii. GROUND STORY retail USEs over fifty-thousand (50,000)
gross square feet are prohibited.
f. Changes in USE
i. Changes in USE within the same USE category are
permitted without additional review, provided the
following criteria are met:
a). The NET FLOOR AREA of the proposed PRINCIPAL
USE may not be greater than one hundred and
five percent (105%) of the NET FLOOR AREA of the
existing USE;
b). In the case of USEs within the residential USE
category, the proposed number of DWELLING
UNITs may not exceed the existing number of
DWELLING UNITs; and
c). The only exterior changes to the BUILDING
allowed will be renovations and SIGNage.
ii. The flexibility to move within the same USE
category does not apply to legally pre-existing
nonconforming USEs.
iii. As part of an approved Master Plan Special Permit,
the Planning Board may specify permitted USEs
for any or all phases of DEVELOPMENT and permit
the change of USE between these specified USEs
without further review.
8. DEVELOPMENT Standards
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
10: DEVELOPMENT Standards of this Ordinance.
Where the provisions of this section conflict with
those of Article 10, the provisions of Article 10
apply.
b. SIGNs
i. Off-premises SIGNs are prohibited.
ii. All SIGNs must comply with standards set forth in
Section 10.8. SIGNs except as follows:
a). The top of a wall SIGN attached parallel to a
BUILDING may be no higher than 35 feet above
finished grade.
iii. Nonconforming freestanding, directional, or wall
SIGNs may be approved by Special Permit.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing
a nonconforming freestanding, directional, or
wall SIGNs:
i). The creation of legible urban environment
free from the over USE of SIGNs.
ii). Aesthetics, proportion, scale of the
proposed SIGN in relation to the BUILDING or
storefront.
iii). Design, location, and context of other
SIGNage on the BUILDING and on surrounding
properties.
iv. The Planning Board may waive the provisions of
§7.4.8.b SIGNS by Special Permit.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
WAIVER from the provisions of §7.4.8.b SIGNS:
i). Consistency with the ASQ Plan.
c. Storm Water Management
i. Storm water should be removed from all
roofs, canopies, and paved areas, and routed
through well-engineered systems designed with
appropriate storm water management techniques.
ii. Skimming devices, oil and grease traps, and similar
Table 7.2.7 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use ASQ
Accessory Uses
Home Occupations (as noted below) --
Creative Studio N
Hobby Kennel N
Home-Based Business N
Home Day Care P
Home Office N
Urban Agriculture (as noted below) --
Apiculture P
Aviculture P
Commercial Farming P
Residential Gardening P
Vehicle Parking, Accessory (except as follows) P
Home Business Vehicle Parking P
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
378 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Assembly Square Mixed-Use (ASMD)
facilities at the collection or discharge points for
paved surface must be maintained regularly.
iii. Where practical, the routing of runoff through
sheet flow, swales, or other means that increases
filtration and percolation is strongly encouraged.
iv. The Planning Board may require independent peer
review of a storm water management plan by an
accredited independent engineering firm.
9. Parking & Mobility
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
11: Parking & Mobility of this Ordinance. Where
the provisions of this section conflict with those of
Article 11, the provisions of Article 11 apply.
b. Type
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING may be provided as above
ground STRUCTURED PARKING or underground
STRUCTURED PARKING.
ii. SURFACE PARKING LOTs may be permitted on an interim
basis by Special Permit.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
SURFACE PARKING LOT:
i). Documented un-met demand for parking;
ii). DEVELOPMENT schedule for planned
reDEVELOPMENT of the LOT; and
iii). capacity of the local THOROUGHFARE network
providing ACCESS to the SITE and impact on
pedestrian, bicycle, and motor vehicle
traffic and circulation patterns in the
neighborhood.
c. Parking Design
i. The design of all parking is subject to §11.1 Bicycle
Parking and §11.2 MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING of this
Ordinance.
d. Parking Location
i. No SURFACE PARKING is permitted within two-hundred
(200) feet of the MYSTIC RIVER BANK as defined by
310 CMR 10.54.2.c.
e. Unbundled Parking
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces must be rented or
leased as an option rather than a requirement of
the rental, lease, or purchase of a DWELLING UNIT or
non-residential floor space.
ii. Bicycle parking must be provided at no cost or fee
to customers, visitors, employees, tenants, and
residents.
f. Loading Facilities
i. Loading facilities must be located away from
major public THOROUGHFAREs, the Mystic River, and
other highly visible locations. The visual impact
of exposed loading facilities should be reduced
through creative design solutions.
ii. MODIFICATIONs to, relocations of, or creation of new
loading facilities for an existing BUILDING requires a
Special Permit.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
MODIFICATION to, relocation of, or creation of new
loading space for an existing BUILDING:
i). Documented need for loading facilities.
ii). Impact on pedestrian, bicycle, and
vehicular traffic and circulation patterns in
the neighborhood.
10. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
a. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article 12:
DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this Ordinance. Where the
provisions of this section conflict with those of Article
12, the provisions of Article 12 apply.
b. DEVELOPMENT must provide AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITs as
specified on Table 7.2.11 (a).
c. DEVELOPMENT of a general building must provide linkage
payments as specified on Table 7.2.11. (b).
Table 7.2.10 (a) Required ADUs
Total DWELLING UNITs Required ADUs
0 to 3 units None
4 or more units 20% of units
Table 7.2.10 (b) Linkage
Floor Area
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 379
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Assembly Square Mixed-Use (ASMD)
11. Public Realm
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions of Article
13: PUBLIC REALM of this Ordinance. Unless
otherwise specified, where the provisions of
this section conflict with those of Article 13, the
provisions of Article 13 apply.
b. THOROUGHFAREs
i. THOROUGHFARE design should be consistent with the
ASQ Plan, specifically the 2002 Assembly Square:
Design Guidelines for the PUBLIC REALM.
ii. DEVELOPMENT SITEs ABUTTING Mystic Avenue or
Fellsway must contribute toward the improvement
pedestrian ACCESS to the Ten Hills and East
Somerville neighborhoods by means of sidewalk
connections, crosswalks, STREETscape landscaping,
traffic SIGNalization, and traffic calming, as deemed
necessary by the Planning Board.
iii. Continuous pedestrian connections must be
provided between all major points of pedestrian
activity on a DEVELOPMENT SITE, including, but
not limited to, connections to the Mystic River
waterfront, connections to all public and private
ways ABUTTING a DEVELOPMENT SITE, and any TRANSIT
STATIONs.
c. Sidewalk CURB CUTs
i. A CURB CUT requires a permit from the City Engineer
and must be compliant with all City Ordinances.
ii. Unless otherwise specified, the City Engineer may
not permit more than one (1) CURB CUT per FRONT LOT
LINE of a LOT.
iii. CURB CUTs are prohibited along all THOROUGHFAREs
designated as a PEDESTRIAN STREET.
iv. CURB CUTs must be located to minimize conflicts
with pedestrians and bicyclists and must have a
clear distance from fire hydrants, STREET TREES, utility
poles, and other furnishings as deemed necessary
by the City Engineer.
a). CURB CUTs for commercial or high-volume
driveways should be at least one-hundred
(100) feet from an unSIGNalized or SIGNalized
intersection.
b). CURB CUTs for residential driveways should be
at least twenty (20) feet from an unSIGNalized
intersection and at least forty (40) feet from a
SIGNalized intersection.
v. The interior width of a CURB CUT (between curb
stones) may be no wider than the driveway,
vehicular entrance, or loading facility it serves.
vi. A DRIVEWAY APRON may be installed only within
the furnishing zone of a sidewalk and must be
constructed in accordance with all standards
established by relevant City Departments.
vii. The grade, cross slope, and clear width of the
walkway of a sidewalk must be maintained
between the DRIVEWAY APRON and the ABUTTING
driveway. The appearance of the walkway (ie.
scoring pattern or paving material) must indicate
that, although a vehicle may cross, the area
traversed by a vehicle remains part of the sidewalk.
12. Land Platting
a. The following standards supersede the provisions of
Article 13: PUBLIC REALM Standards:
i. BLOCK Size
a). BLOCKS may have individual BLOCK FACES up to
five-hundred (500) feet in width and a total
perimeter up to eighteen-hundred (1,800) feet.
ii. LOTs Width
a). LOTS may be platted to have up to a maximum
LOT WIDTH of five hundred (500) feet.
Figure 7.2.11 Sidewalk Curb Cuts
380 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
7 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Assembly Square Mixed-Use (ASMD)
8 OVERLAY DISTRICTS
8.1 SMALL BUSINESS (SB) ......................................383
Intent 383
Purpose 383
Applicability 383
Use Provisions 383
Parking & Mobility 383
8.2 FLOODPLAINS (FP) .............................................386
Intent 386
Purpose 386
Applicability 386
District Boundaries 386
Definitions 386
Compliance with Other Regulations 386
Development Limitations 386
Notification of Watercourse Alteration 387
8.3 MASTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (MPD) .....388
Intent 388
Purpose 388
Applicability 388
Urban Design 388
Development Review 388
In-Lieu Payments 389
Thoroughfares & Civic Spaces 390
Development Standards 390
Parking & Mobility 390
Assembly Square (ASQ) Sub-Area 391
Boynton Yards (BY) Sub-Area 392
Brickbottom (BB) Sub-Area 395
Grand Junction (GJ) Sub-Area 396
Inner Belt (IB) Sub-Area 397
North Point (NP) Sub-Area 398
Union Square (USQ) Sub-Area 405
Union Square East (USQE) Sub-Area 409

12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 383
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Small Business (SB)
8.1 SMALL BUSINESS (SB)
1. Intent
a. To implement recommendations of SomerVision for
commercial DEVELOPMENT.
b. To create, maintain, and enhance locations appropriate
for neighborhood- and community-serving businesses.
2. Purpose
a. To permit neighborhood- and community-serving
commercial USEs providing for the frequently recurring
needs of local residents.
b. To USE discretion in permitting the occupancy of
commercial spaces over five thousand (5,000) square
feet in LEASABLE FLOOR AREA.
3. Applicability
a. The section is applicable to all real property within the
Small Business overlay district as shown on the maps
of the Official Zoning Atlas of the City of Somerville.
b. The provisions of this Section supplement or
supersede the provisions of the districts upon which it
is superimposed.
c. Where the provisions of this Section conflict with
those found elsewhere in this Ordinance, the
provisions of this Section apply.
4. Use Provisions
a. General
i. USE categories are permitted as specified on Table
8.1 (a).
b. LEASABLE FLOOR AREA
i. Occupancy of any commercial space over five
thousand (5,000) square feet in LEASABLE FLOOR AREA
by any permitted USE requires a Special Permit.
ii. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or
deny a special permit authorizing occupancy of
a commercial space over five thousand (5,000)
square feet in LEASABLE FLOOR AREA by any permitted
USE specified on Table 8.5 (a):
a). Compatibility with the intensity of activity
associated with the surrounding land USEs.
b). Capacity of the local THOROUGHFARE network
providing ACCESS to the SITE and the impact on
pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic and
circulation patterns in the neighborhood.
5. Parking & Mobility
a. Vehicular parking must be provided as specified on
Table 8.1.5.
384 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Small Business (SB)
Table 8.1.4 Permitted Uses
Use Category
Specific Use SB
USE Specific
Standards
Arts & Creative Enterprises
Artisinal Production P §9.2.2.a
Arts Exhibition P §9.2.2.b
Arts Sales & Services P §9.2.2.c
Design Services P
Shared Workspaces & Arts
Education
P §9.2.2.f
Civic & Institutional
Private Non-Profit Club or Lodge SP
Commercial Services
Animal Services (as noted below) --
Pet Grooming P
Veterinarian SP
Building & Home Repair Services SP §9.2.5.e
Business Support Services P
Day Care Service (as noted below) -- §9.2.5.h
Adult Day Care Center P §9.2.5.h.i
Child Day Care Center P §9.2.5.h.ii
Maintenance & Repair of
Consumer Goods
P §9.2.5.j
Personal Services (except as
noted below)
P §9.2.5.k
Body-Art Services SP §9.2.5.k.i
Fitness Services P §9.2.5.k.ii
Funeral Services SP §9.2.5.k.iii
Health Care Services SP §9.2.5.k.iv
Formula Personal Services SP §9.2.5.l
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
Table 8.1.4 Permitted Uses (continued)
Use Category
Specific Use SB
USE Specific
Standards
Food & Beverage Services
Bar, Restaurant or Tavern SP §9.2.6.a
Bakery, Café, or Coffee Shop SP §9.2.6.b
Formula Food & Beverage
Services
SP §9.2.6.c
Retail Sales
Building or Home Supplies &
Equipment
SP §9.2.11.a
Consumer Goods (except as
follows)
P §9.2.11.b
Alcohol Sales SP §9.2.11.b.i
Firearms Sales N §9.2.11.b.ii
Pet Store SP §9.2.11.b.v
Formula Retail Sales SP §9.2.11.c
Fresh Food Market or Grocery
Store
P §9.2.10.d
Farm or Vendor Market P §9.2.10.e
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 385
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Small Business (SB)
Table 8.1.5 Vehicular Parking *See TRANSIT AREAs Map for LOTs located in a TRANSIT AREA
BICYCLE MOTOR VEHICLE
USE Category
Specific USE
Short-Term
(min)
Long-Term
(min)
Inside a
TRANSIT AREA
(max)
Outside of a
TRANSIT AREA
(min)
Arts & Creative Enterprise
All Permitted USEs 0.1 / 1,000 sf 0.33 / 1,000 sf 0.8 / 1,000 sf 1.0 / 1,000 sf
Civic & Institutional
All Permitted USEs 0.5 / 1,000 sf 0.1 / 1,000 sf 4 / 1,000 sf 1.0 / 1,000 sf
Commercial Services
All Permitted USEs (except as noted below) 0.4 / 1,000 sf 0.1 / 1,000 sf 1.0 / 1,000 sf 1.0 / 1,000 sf
Business Support Services -- -- -- 0.75 / 1,000 sf
Day Care Service 2 (min) -- -- 0.75 / 1,000 sf
Maintenance & Repair of Consumer Goods -- -- 0.5 / 1,000 sf --
Personal Services -- -- 0.5 / 1,000 sf --
Food and Beverage Service
All Permitted USEs 1.0 / 1,000 sf 0.2 / 1,000 sf 0.33 / 1,000 sf 0.5 / 1,000 sf
Retail Sales
All Permitted USEs (except as noted below) 0.4 / 1,000 sf 0.1 / 1,000 sf 1.0 / 1,000 sf 0.66 / 1,000 sf
Farm/Vendor Market none none none --
sf - Gross Leasable Square Footage DU - DWELLING UNIT RU - ROOMING UNIT
386 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Floodplains (FP)
8.2 FLOODPLAINS (FP)
6. Intent
a. to ensure public safety through reducing the threats to
life and personal injury
b. to eliminate new hazards to emergency response
officials
c. to prevent the occurrence of public emergencies
resulting from water quality contamination and
pollution due to flooding
d. to avoid the loss of utility services which if damaged by
flooding would disrupt or shut down the utility network
and impact regions of the community beyond the SITE
of flooding
e. to eliminate costs associated with the response and
cleanup of flooding conditions
f. to reduce damage to public and private property
resulting from flooding.
7. Purpose
a. To require DEVELOPMENT to be in compliance with
applicable provisions of the Massachusetts State
BUILDING Code and Massachusetts General Laws.
b. To appropriately limit DEVELOPMENT within floodways to
reduce obstructions to flood flows and reduce flooding
impacts on the community.
8. Applicability
a. Where the provisions of this Section conflict with
those found elsewhere in this Ordinance, the
provisions of this Section apply.
9. District Boundaries
a. The FP overlay district includes all special flood hazard
areas within the City of Somerville designated as Zone
A or Zone AE on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
b. The map panels of the Middlesex County FIRM, dated
June 4, 2010, that are wholly or partially within the City
of Somerville are:
i. 25017C0417E
ii. 25017C0419E
iii. 25017C0436E
iv. 25017C0438E
v. 25017C0439E
vi. 25017C0576E
vii. 25017C0577E
c. The boundaries of the FP overlay district are defined by
the 100-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM
and further defined by the Middlesex County Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) report dated June 4, 2010.
d. The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by
reference and are on file with the City Clerk, Planning
Board, BUILDING OFFICIAL, Conservation Commission and
City Engineer.
10. Definitions
a. For the purpose of this overlay district alone, the
definitions of 44 CFR 59.1 apply.
11. Compliance with Other Regulations
a. All DEVELOPMENT within the FP overlay district must be
in compliance with, or operating under duly approved
Hardship Variances from, the following regulations:
i. Section of the Massachusetts State BUILDING Code
which addresses floodplain and coastal high hazard
areas (currently 780 CMR 120.G, “Flood Resistant
Construction and Construction in Coastal Dunes”)
ii. Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department
of Environmental Protection (DEP) (currently 310
CMR 10.00)
iii. Sections of Massachusetts Law which address
altering of land bordering waters (currently Chapter
131, Section 40 of the Massachusetts General
Laws)
iv. Inland Wetlands Restriction (currently 310 CMR
13.00);
v. Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface
Disposal of Sanitary Sewage (currently 310 CMR
15, Title 5)
12. Development Limitations
a. In “A” Zones, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall USE the best
available Federal, State, local or other floodway data to
prohibit ENCROACHMENTs in floodways which would result
in any increase in flood levels within the overlay district
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
b. In Zones AE:
i. along watercourses that have regulatory floodways
designated within the City of Somerville on
the FIRM, ENCROACHMENTs are prohibited in the
regulatory floodway which would result in any
increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
ii. along watercourses that have not had a regulatory
floodway designated, no new construction,
substantial improvement, or other DEVELOPMENT
is permitted unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed DEVELOPMENT,
when combined with all other existing and
anticipated DEVELOPMENT, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood discharge.
c. The following USEs of low flood damage potential and
causing no obstructions to flood flows are encouraged,
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 387
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Floodplains (FP)
provided they are permitted in the underlying district
and they do not require STRUCTURES, fill, or storage of
materials or equipment:
i. outdoor recreational USEs
ii. conservation of water, plants, wildlife
iii. buildings lawfully existing prior to the adoption of
these provisions
13. Notification of Watercourse Alteration
a. The BUILDING OFFICIAL shall notify the following of any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
i. Adjacent Municipalities
ii. The State Coordinator for the National Flood
Insurance Program at the Massachusetts
Department of Conservation and Recreation
iii. Program Specialist for the National Flood Insurance
Program at the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, Region 1 Office.
388 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
8.3 MASTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (MPD)
1. Intent
a. To implement recommendations of SomerVision for
transformational reDEVELOPMENT.
b. To implement design-based neighborhood and station
area plans called for by SomerVision.
2. Purpose
a. To require a Master Plan Special Permit for all
DEVELOPMENT requiring SUBDIVISION.
b. To require a Master Plan Special Permit for the
coordinated DEVELOPMENT of two or more LOTs.
c. To permit real property that is not subject to an
approved Master Plan Special Permit to develop by
Special Permit.
d. To permit DEVELOPMENT in accordance with zoning
districts or dimensional standards that would not
otherwise be available to real property outside of the
MPD overlay.
e. To require that thoroughfares and CIVIC SPACES developed
in each sub area are dedicated to the public.
f. To require buildings developed in each sub area to be
environmental sustainable.
g. To require that any off-STREET motor vehicle parking be
provided in underground commercial PARKING STRUCTUREs.
3. Applicability
a. The section is applicable to all real property within the
Master Planned DEVELOPMENT (MPD) overlay district as
shown on the maps of the Official Zoning Atlas of the
City of Somerville.
b. The provisions of this Section supplement or
supersede the provisions of the districts upon which it
is superimposed. Where the provisions of this Section
conflict with those found elsewhere in this Ordinance,
the provisions of this Section apply.
4. Urban Design
a. The Planning Board shall adopt an Urban Design
Framework for each sub-area specified in this Section.
b. An Urban Design Framework may be adopted as part
of a more comprehensive neighborhood plan.
c. An Urban Design Framework must include, but
may not be limited to, the intended alignment and
connectivity of THOROUGHFAREs, ideal location and type
of CIVIC SPACEs, and identification of advantageous SITEs
for different BUILDING TYPEs permitted by the regulatory
maps for each sub-area.
5. Development Review
a. General
i. DEVELOPMENT review is subject to the provisions of
Article 15: Administration of this Ordinance.
ii. All DEVELOPMENT, excluding NORMAL MAINTENANCE,
requires the submittal of a development review
application to the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the issuance
of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance prior to the
issuance of a BUILDING Permit or Certificate of
Occupancy.
b. Master Planned DEVELOPMENT
i. Proposed DEVELOPMENT involving the SUBDIVISION of
a DEVELOPMENT SITE or the DEVELOPMENT of two (2) or
more LOTS requires a Master Plan Special Permit
as a prerequiSITE to the DEVELOPMENT review for the
SUBDIVISION or individual LOT.
ii. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
Master Plan Special Permit:
a). Consistency with the approved Urban Design
Framework for the sub-area where the
DEVELOPMENT SITE is located.
b). The proposed alignment and connectivity of
the THOROUGHFARE network.
c). The GROSS FLOOR AREA allocated to different USE
categories.
d). Mitigation proposed to alleviate any adverse
impacts on utility infrastructure.
e). Proposed DEVELOPMENT phasing.
f). Proposed on-STREET parking to address
demand by customers of Retail Sales, Food
& Beverage, or Commercial Services PRINCIPAL
USEs.
iii. Following the approval of a Master Plan Special
Permit, DEVELOPMENT of individual LOTs is permitted
in accordance with the zoning districts shown on
the regulatory maps for each sub-area.
iv. Previously permitted DEVELOPMENT may be included
in a DEVELOPMENT SITE, provided that the date of the
first certificate of occupancy, civic space permit, or
thoroughfare permit for the subject real property
is within two (2) years of the decision date of the
master plan special permit.
v. Changes to a development review application
subject to an approved Master Plan Special Permit
are subject to §15.2.4 Plan Revision.
c. Contributing LOTs
i. Unless otherwise specified, real property that is
not subject to an approved Master Plan Special
Permit may be developed in accordance with the
zoning districts shown on the regulatory maps for
each sub-area by Special Permit.
ii. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 389
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny
a special permit authorizing DEVELOPMENT of a
contributing LOT:
a). Consistency with the approved Urban Design
Framework for the sub-area where the subject
property is located.
iii. DEVELOPMENT of real property as an individual
contributing LOT is prohibited unless the Planning
Board had adopted an Urban Design Framework for
the sub-area where the subject property is located.
iv. DEVELOPMENT of real property as an individual
contributing LOT is prohibited for any LOT subject to
an approved Master Plan Special Permit.
d. Site Plan Approval
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Site Plan
Approval specified in §15.3.2.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following:
a). Consistency with the approved Urban Design
Framework for the sub-area where the subject
property is located.
b). Conformance with an approved Master Plan
Special Permit and any other Special Permits
applicable to the subject LOT.
e. Compliance with other Permits
i. The SUBDIVISION of any DEVELOPMENT SITE, the
construction or reconstruction of any THOROUGHFARE,
and the DEVELOPMENT of LOT in the MPD overlay
district must comply with any approved Master
Plan Special Permit and any approved Special
Permits, as applicable, for the subject DEVELOPMENT
SITE.
6. In-Lieu Payments
a. Master Planned DEVELOPMENT
i. The Planning Board may permit an in lieu payment
for up to ten percent (10%) of the civic space
required in each sub-area by Special Permit
in accordance with Section 12.3 Buyouts &
Payments.
b. Contributing Lots
i. The Planning Board may permit an in lieu payment
for up to one hundred percent (100%) of the
civic space required in each sub-area by Special
Permit in accordance with Section 12.3 Buyouts &
Payments.
7. Master Plan Standards
a. Submitted master plans must include a sustainability
component that details the following:
i. Identification of all master plan scale efforts
to mitigate climate change impacts identified
in Somerville’s Climate Change Vulnerability
Assessment in relation to the design, construction,
and occupancy or use of all thoroughfares, civic
spaces, and buildings.
ii. A carbon neutral pathway assessment.
iii. A storm water management and green
infrastructure plan.
b. Submitted master plans must include development
phasing commitments and proposed contingencies as
a basis of a performance bond.
8. Thoroughfares & Civic Spaces
a. Required and recommended THOROUGHFAREs and CIVIC
SPACEs are shown on the regulating maps for each subarea.
i. Required THOROUGHFAREs and CIVIC SPACEs are
mandatory and necessary to implement the
approved plan for each sub-area.
ii. Recommended THOROUGHFAREs and CIVIC SPACEs are
ideal, but not mandatory.
b. THOROUGHFAREs and CIVIC SPACEs are subject to the
provisions of Article 13: PUBLIC REALM of this Ordinance.
c. All THOROUGHFAREs and CIVIC SPACES must be dedicated to
the public in perpetuity by a covenant or other deed
restriction.
d. CIVIC SPACE created through EASEMENT or
decommissioning of an existing THOROUGHFARE or other
ABUTTING right-of-way may be counted toward the
required amount of CIVIC SPACE.
9. Development Standards
a. Sustainable DEVELOPMENT
i. Laboratory buildings must be LEED Platinum
certifiable.
ii. All other building types must meet the following:
a). No on-site combustion for HVAC system
operation;
b). No on-site combustion for cooking equipment,
excluding Eating & Drinking Establishment
principal uses; and
c). Be certifiable as:
i). Zero Carbon or higher from the
International Living Future Institute; or
ii). PHIUS+ from the Passive House Institute
US.
iii. All new principal building types must include a
green roof, photovoltaic (PV) devices, or both for
100% of the roof area not occupied by building
systems equipment or required outdoor amenity
spaces.
10. Parking & Mobility
a. Type
i. Unless otherwise specified, MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING
must be provided as underground STRUCTURED
390 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
PARKING. All other types of parking are prohibited.
b. Parking Maximums
i. The maximum number of OFF-STREET PARKING SPACEs
and RESERVED PARKING spaces permitted for each
sub-area is specified in the provisions for each subarea.
ii. The maximum number of OFF-STREET PARKING SPACEs
and RESERVED PARKING spaces permitted in each subarea
is reduced by the number of OFF-STREET PARKING
SPACEs and RESERVED PARKING spaces provided on any
LOT in each sub-area.
c. Parking Relief
i. The maximum number of OFF-STREET PARKING SPACEs in
each sub-area may be exceeded by Special Permit.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing an
increase in the maximum number of OFF-STREET
PARKING SPACEs serving DEVELOPMENT within the
MPD overlay district:
i). That the amount of commercial floor space
included in the proposal has resulted
in an increase in the estimated parking
demand necessary for the full build out of
DEVELOPMENT.
b). The Planning Board shall USE a demand
model provided by the Director of Mobility to
determine the appropriate number of parking
spaces necessary to meet the increased
demand.
c). The Planning Board shall require a MOBILITY
MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION (i.e. Transportation
Management Agency) to be constituted by
a date of its choosing as a condition of the
Special Permit approval.
i). The MOBILITY MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION must be
empowered to set the prices and policies
for the rent or lease of any vehicular
parking operated as a commercial service
USE within each sub-area.
ii. The maximum number of RESERVED PARKING SPACES
may be exceeded with the payment of a fee.
a). The Planning Board shall establish and
annually update a fee schedule based on the
recommendations of the Director of Mobility
in relation to the estimated cost to build
STRUCTURED PARKING and the cost of offsetting the
impact of unSHARED PARKING.
iii. The Planning Board shall establish an expiration
date for any parking spaces approved but not built
within a particular time frame as a condition of the
approved Special Permit.
d. Parking ACCESS
i. ACCESS for motor vehicles, loading, and service to
new BLOCKs and individual LOTs must be from an
ALLEY. The configuration of ALLEYs internal to a BLOCK
must conform to §10.1.5 Alley Access.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 391
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
11. Assembly Square (ASQ) Sub-Area
a. Reserved
392 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
12. Boynton Yards (BY) Sub-Area
a. Intent
i. To implement the Boynton Yards Urban Design
Framework adopted by the Planning Board.
b. Purpose
i. To permit denser DEVELOPMENT than would
otherwise be permitted in the Mid-Rise district.
ii. To permit taller and denser DEVELOPMENT than would
otherwise be permitted in the HIGH-RISE district.
iii. To require a minimum percentage of developed
floor space to be set aside for occupancy by nonresidential
PRINCIPAL USEs.
iv. To constrain the supply of motor vehicle parking
spaces to encourage the USE of public transit,
bicycles, and walking in lieu of driving.
c. Applicability
i. The section is applicable to all real property shown
on Map 8.3.12 (a).
ii. Zoning districts shown on map 8.3.12 (a)
supersede those shown on the maps of the
Official Zoning Atlas of the City of Somerville for
DEVELOPMENT complying with the provisions of the
BY sub-area.
d. THOROUGHFARE Network
i. Required and recommended THOROUGHFAREs are
shown on Map 8.3.12 (b).
ii. The center line of any required THOROUGHFARE may
be moved up to twenty (25) feet, so long as:
a). the center line of West Ward STREET is at least
one hundred and forty (140) feet from both
reference points along the MBTA right-of-way;
b). West Ward STREET intersects with Webster
Avenue in the west and Harding STREET in the
east;
c). the center line of South STREET is at least
one hundred and forty (140) feet from both
reference points along the municipal boundary
with Cambridge;
d). South STREET intersects with Webster Avenue
in the west;
e). all required THOROUGHFAREs intersect with other
THOROUGHFAREs, forming a network; and
f). all intersections are at least one hundred
(100) feet from any other intersection, unless
granted a WAIVER by the Planning Board.
e. Master Plan Standards
i. At least five percent (5%) of the total commercial
floor area included in the proposed build out or
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, whichever
is less, and at least ten thousand (10,000) square
feet must be dedicated to a Community Center
PRINCIPAL USE.
Map 8.3.12 (a) BY Sub-Area Boundary and Superseding Zoning Districts
Key
Mid Rise 5
High Rise
Fabrication
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 393
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
f. Build Out Standards
i. General
a). DEVELOPMENT SITEs subject to approved Master
Plan Special Permit may comply with the
following standards in aggregate rather than
for each individual LOT by Master Plan Special
Permit.
ii. CIVIC SPACE
a). At least twenty percent (20%) of each
DEVELOPMENT SITE, excluding THOROUGHFAREs, must
be provided as one or more CIVIC SPACEs.
b). A CIVIC SPACE, of at least fifty-two thousand
(52,000) square feet, must be provided,
ABUTTING both West Ward STREET and South
STREET, within the required CIVIC SPACE area
indicated on Map 8.3.12 (b) and may be
developed as a public common or a public
square CIVIC SPACE type. See Article 11 PUBLIC
REALM for more information.
iii. Commercial Floor Area
a). At least seventy-five percent (75%) of the floor
space of any building must be dedicated to
non-residential USEs, excluding Auto-Oriented
PRINCIPAL USEs.
b). At least ten percent (10%) of the total
commercial floor area required by §8.3.11.f.iii
must be dedicated to Arts & Creative
Enterprise PRINCIPAL USEs.
c). At least three hundred and seventy five (375)
square feet of commercial space must be
provided for each DWELLING UNIT.
d). Any DEVELOPment site that includes lot MBL
96/A/6 must provide at least one hundred
thousand (100,000) leasable square feet of
commercial space dedicated to Arts & Creative
Enterprise PRINCIPAL USEs.
g. Building Standards
i. The standards of Table 8.3.12 (a) supersede
specific dimensional standards for BUILDING TYPEs
permitted by the zoning district shown on the
regulating maps of this Section.
h. Use Provisions
i. The standards of Table 8.3.12 (b) supersede the
table of permitted uses for the High-Rise district
for development subject to an approved Master
Plan Special Permit.
ii. ACCESSory motor vehicle parking for customers
of retail sales or food & beverage service USEs
is prohibited for real property in any MR district
shown on Map 8.3.12 (a), but may be provided for
employees.
iii. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Map 8.3.12 (b) Thoroughfares & Civic Spaces
KEY
Required THOROUGHFARE
Reference Point
Required CIVIC SPACE
394 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
special permit authorizing a manufacturing PRINCIPAL
USE:
a). Capacity of the local THOROUGHFARE network
providing ACCESS to the SITE and impact on
pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic and
circulation patterns in the neighborhood.
b). Methods or techniques for noise mitigation to
limit noise for other USErs of the building and
ABUTTING properties.
i. Parking & Mobility
i. The maximum number of OFF-STREET PARKING SPACEs
in the BY sub-area may not exceed one thousand
five hundred (1,500) spaces.
ii. Up to three hundred (300) OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
may be provided as RESERVED PARKING SPACES.
a). CAR-SHARE PARKING spaces are exempt.
iii. Off-STREET motor vehicle parking spaces may be
provided as SURFACE PARKING on a revolving two
(2) year basis for real property in any HR district
shown on Map 8.3.12 (a) by Special Permit.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing an
interim SURFACE PARKING LOT:
i). Documented un-met demand for parking;
ii). The DEVELOPMENT schedule and phasing
for DEVELOPMENT subject to a Master Plan
Special Permit;
iii). The capacity of the local THOROUGHFARE
network providing ACCESS to the SITE; and
iv). The impact of the PARKING LOT on pedestrian,
bicycle, and motor vehicle traffic and
circulation patterns in the neighborhood.
Table 8.3.12 (a) Superseding Dimensional Standards
MR5
HR
LOT Standards
OPEN SPACE (min) none none
Massing & Height
Building Height, Stories (min) -- 6 stories
Building Height, Stories & Feet
(max)
-- --
General Building -- none
Commercial Building -- none
Lab Building -- none
Mid-Rise Podium Tower -- --
POINT TOWER -- none
BLOCK Building -- --
TOWER(s) -- none
Building Height,
Feet (max)
-- --
General Building -- none
Commercial Building -- none
Lab Building -- none
Mid-Rise
PODIUM TOWER
-- --
POINT TOWER -- none
BLOCK Building -- --
PODIUM -- --
TOWER(s) -- none
USEs & Features
GROSS FLOOR AREA
per DU (min)
none none
Table 8.3.12 (b) Superseding Permitted Uses
USE Category
Specific USE HR
Industrial
Dry Cleaning or Laundry Services SP
Manufacturing SP
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 395
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
13. Brickbottom (BB) Sub-Area
a. Reserved
396 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
14. Grand Junction (GJ) Sub-Area
a. Reserved
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 397
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
15. Inner Belt (IB) Sub-Area
a. Reserved
398 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
16. North Point (NP) Sub-Area
a. Intent
i. To implement the North Point Urban Design
Framework adopted by the Planning Board.
ii. To redevelop underutilized areas within close
walking distance to the Lechmere and Community
College T-stations with mixed-USE, HIGH-RISE
DEVELOPMENT that will support the transformation of
North Point into an urban center.
b. Purpose
i. To permit the DEVELOPMENT in accordance with
the provisions of the MR5 and HR districts for
DEVELOPMENT that complies with the provisions of
this Section.
ii. To permit larger and taller PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPEs
than would otherwise be permitted by the HIGHRISE
district.
iii. To permit USE categories and PRINCIPAL USEs by-right
than would otherwise be permitted by the HIGHRISE
district.
iv. To permit the occupancy of larger floor spaces
by certain permitted commercial USEs than would
otherwise be permitted by the HIGH-RISE district.
c. Applicability
i. The section is applicable to all real property shown
on Map 8.3.16.
ii. The BUILDING OFFICIAL shall regard a previously
approved Neighborhood DEVELOPMENT Plan Approval
(NDPA) as an approved Master Plan Special Permit
for the enforcement of this section.
d. DEVELOPMENT Review
i. Following the approval of a Master Plan Special
Permit, DEVELOPMENT on any LOT with less than ten
percent (10%) of its land area within the City of
Somerville that has already received approval from
the ABUTTING municipality at the time a development
review application is submitted to the BUILDING
OFFICIAL does not require Site Plan Approval and is
exempt from the provisions of Sections 5.1 HIGHRISE,
13.1 CIVIC SPACE, and 13.2 THOROUGHFAREs.
e. Master Plan Standards
i. New THOROUGHFAREs must establish a
comprehensive network with frequent
intersections, on-STREET parking, STREET TREES, and
public furniture.
ii. North First STREET must be extended as the primary
connection to East Cambridge.
iii. Pedestrian connections must be provided to East
Cambridge, the Community College Orange Line
T-Station via the Gilmore Bridge, New Charles River
Basin Park, and regional bike ways.
f. BUILDING TYPEs
i. Following the approval of a Master Plan Special
Permit, the following additional BUILDING TYPE is
permitted within the NP Sub-Area overlay district:
a). Residential TOWER
Map 8.3.16 NP Sub-Area Boundary
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 399
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
g. Residential Tower
A large FLOOR PLATE, multi STORY PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE
composed of a residential TOWER above a mid-rise general
BUILDING serving as a PODIUM. The PODIUM defines the
PUBLIC REALM, provides GROUND STORY commercial space or
amenities for residents, and may incorporate STRUCTURED
PARKING.
The following images are examples of the residential TOWER
BUILDING TYPE and are intended only for illustrative purposes.
400 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
g. Residential Tower (continued)
i. LOT Standards ii. BUILDING Placement
Lot Dimensions Building Setbacks
A LOT WIDTH (min) 150 ft A Primary Front SETBACK (min/max) 2 ft 15 ft
B Secondary Front SETBACK 2 ft 15 ft
Lot Development C Side SETBACK (min) --
B LOT Coverage (max) 100% PODIUM 0 ft
GREEN SCORE -- TOWER 30 ft
Minimum 0.20 D PODIUM Rear SETBACK (min) --
Ideal 0.25 TOWER REAR SETBACK 0 ft
C Open Space (min) 15%
Parking Setbacks
E Primary & Secondary Front SETBACK,
GROUND STORY (min) 30 ft
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 401
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
g. Residential Tower (continued)
iii. Massing & Height iv. USEs & Features
Main Mass Facade Composition
A FACADE Build Out (min) 80% A GROUND STORY FENESTRATION (min) --
FLOOR PLATE (max) -- Commercial 65%
Up to 65 ft 45,000 sf Residential 30% 50%
Up to 220 ft 20,000 sf B UPPER STORY FENESTRATION (min/max) 30% 50%
B GROUND STORY Height (min) 14 ft BLANK WALL (max) 20 ft
C UPPER STORY Height (min) 10 ft
D Number of Stories (min) 3 stories Use & Occupancy
E TOWER Dimensions (max) -- Commercial Space Depth (min) 30 ft
Width & Depth 150 ft Outdoor AMENITY SPACE (min) 1/DU
F BUILDING Height, Feet (max) 220 ft
402 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
g. Residential Tower (continued)
v. DEVELOPMENT Benefits
a). DEVELOPMENT is subject to the provisions
of Article 12: DEVELOPMENT Benefits of this
Ordinance. Where the provisions of this
section conflict with those of Article 12, the
provisions of Article 12 apply.
b). DEVELOPMENT of a residential TOWER must provide
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITs as specified on Table
4.3.8 (a).
c). DEVELOPMENT of a residential TOWER must provide
linkage payments as specified on Table 4.3.8
(b).
Table 8.3.16. (b) Linkage
Commercial
GROSS FLOOR AREA
Affordable
Housing Linkage
Employment
Linkage
30,000 sf or less None None
Over 30,000 sf $10/sf $2.46/sf
Table 8.3.16. (a) Required ADUs
Total DWELLING UNITs Required ADUs
0 to 3 units None
4 or more units 20% of units
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 403
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
h. Building Standards
i. The standards of Table 8.3.16 (c) supersede
specific dimensional standards for BUILDING TYPEs
permitted in the HIGH-RISE district for DEVELOPMENT
subject to an approved Master Plan Special Permit.
i. USE Provisions
i. The standards of Table 8.3.16 (d) supersede the
table of permitted uses for the High-Rise district
for development subject to an approved Master
Plan Special Permit.
ii. PRINCIPAL USEs are exempt from the special permit
required for large FLOOR PLATE USEs by §9.1.7 except
as follows:
Table 8.3.16 (c) Superseding Dimensional Standards
HR
LOT Standards
OPEN SPACE (min) none
Building SETBACKs
Primary Front SETBACKs (min/max) 0 ft 20 ft
Rear SETBACK (min) none
Massing & Height
Building Width (max) none
FLOOR PLATE (max) --
General Building --
Up to 65 ft 45,000 sf
Up to 220 ft 20,000 sf
Commercial Building 50,000 sf
Number of Stories (min) 4
Number of Stories (max) --
General Building none
Commercial Building none
TOWER Dimensions --
General Building --
Width/Depth 150 ft
Building Height (max) 220 ft
Table 8.3.16 (d) Superseding Permitted Uses
USE Category
Specific USE HR
Commercial Services
ASSEMBLY OR ENTERTAINMENT P
PERSONAL SERVICES P
Recreation Services P
Lodging
HOTEL OR HOSTEL P
Residential
GROUP LIVING (except as follows) SP
COMMUNITY OR GROUP RESIDENCE P
Dormitory, Fraternity or Sorority N
HOMELESS SHELTER N
Nursing Home/Assisted Living Facility N
Rooming HoUSE N
Retail Sales
CONSUMER GOODS (except as follows) P
PET STORE P
ACCESSORY USEs
HOME OCCUPATIONs (as noted below) --
HOME-BASED BUSINESS P
Home Day Care P
HOME OFFICE P
Urban Agriculture (as noted below) --
APICULTURE P
AVICULTURE P
COMMERCIAL FARMING P
Residential Gardening P
Vehicle Parking, ACCESSory (except as follows) P
Home Business Vehicle Parking N
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
404 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
a). Occupancy of any single GROUND STORY
commercial space greater than ten-thousand
(10,000) square feet in LEASABLE FLOOR AREA by
any permitted Commercial Service or Retail
Sales PRINCIPAL USE is prohibited.
b). Occupancy of any single UPPER STORY
commercial space greater than fifty-thousand
square feet in LEASABLE FLOOR AREA by any
Recreation Services PRINCIPAL USE requires a
Special Permit in accordance with the same
findings required in §9.1.9.
j. Parking & Mobility
i. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING may be provided as SURFACE
PARKING on a revolving two (2) year basis by Special
Permit.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing an
interim SURFACE PARKING LOT:
i). Documented un-met demand for parking;
ii). The DEVELOPMENT schedule and phasing
for DEVELOPMENT subject to a Master Plan
Special Permit;
iii). The capacity of the local THOROUGHFARE
network providing ACCESS to the SITE; and
iv). The impact of the PARKING LOT on pedestrian,
bicycle, and motor vehicle traffic and
circulation patterns in the neighborhood.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 405
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
17. Union Square (USQ) Sub-Area
a. Intent
i. To implement the Union Square Urban Design
Framework adopted by the Planning Board.
ii. To maintain and enhance already established
commercial areas in the core of Union Square.
iii. To redevelop underutilized areas within close
walking distance to the future Union Square
T-station with mixed-USE, mid-rise and HIGH-RISE
DEVELOPMENT that will support the transformation of
Union Square into an urban employment center.
iv. To implement the 2003 Union Square MASTER
PLAN, the 2012 Union Square Revitalization Plan,
and the 2016 Union Square Neighborhood Plan, as
amended.
b. Purpose
i. To permit DEVELOPMENT in accordance with the
provisions of the MR4, MR5, CC, and HR districts.
ii. To require a minimum percentage of developed
floor space to be set aside for occupancy by nonresidential
PRINCIPAL USEs.
iii. To permit flexibility in compliance with certain
dimensional standards than would otherwise be
permitted by the zoning districts shown on the
maps of the Official Zoning Atlas of the City of
Somerville.
iv. To require DEVELOPMENT to be contextually sensitive
to the existing neighborhood of Union Square.
v. To constrain the supply of MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING
spaces to encourage the USE of public transit,
bicycles, and walking in lieu of driving.
c. Applicability
i. The section is applicable to all real property shown
on Map 8.3.15.
ii. Zoning districts shown on map 8.3.15 supersede
those shown on the maps of the Official Zoning
Atlas of the City of Somerville for DEVELOPMENT
complying with the provisions of Section 8.3 and
the Union Square Sub-Area.
iii. Real property subject to an approved Design &
Site Plan Review (DSPR) first approved prior to the
adoption date of this Ordinance may be developed
in accordance with the provisions of the Somerville
Zoning Ordinance effective as of December 14,
2017 in lieu of the provisions of this Ordinance.
d. Development Review
i. All DEVELOPMENT requires a Master Plan Special
Permit as a prerequiSITE to the DEVELOPMENT review
required for SUBDIVISION or the development of an
individual LOT.
ii. Development of real property that is not subject
to an approved Master Plan Special Permit (a
‘contributing lot’) is prohibited.
e. Master Plan Standards
i. At least one (1) neighborhood park, with a
minimum size of twenty-seven thousand (27,000)
square feet, and one (1) plaza must be proposed in
any master plan.
ii. At least twenty-five percent (25%) of the
cumulative land area proposed as CIVIC SPACE in a
master plan must be landscaped area compliant
with §10.3 Landscaping.
iii. At least fifty percent (50%) of the cumulative
land area proposed as CIVIC SPACE in a master plan
must be landscaped area compliant with §10.3
Landscaping or be covered by tree canopy at full
maturity of the trees provided in each CIVIC SPACE.
f. Build Out Standards
i. General
a). DEVELOPMENT SITEs subject to a Master Plan
Special Permit may comply with the following
standards in aggregate rather than for each
individual LOT by Master Plan Special Permit.
ii. CIVIC SPACE
a). At least twenty-five percent (25%) of each LOT,
excluding ALLEYs and any land occupied by the
MBTA’s Union Square Green Line station, must
be improved as follows:
i). At least seventy percent (70%) must be
provided as one or more CIVIC SPACEs.
ii). Up to thirty percent (30%) may be
provided in the form of PUBLIC REALM.
Improvements.
b). CIVIC SPACE created through EASEMENT or
decommissioning of an existing THOROUGHFARE
or other right-of-way may be counted toward
the required amount of CIVIC SPACE.
iii. Commercial Floor Area
a). At least sixty percent (60%) of the GROSS FLOOR
AREA of any building must be dedicated to nonresidential
USEs, excluding Auto-Oriented and
Industrial PRINCIPAL USEs.
b). At least forty percent (40%) of the COMMERCIAL
FLOOR AREA required by §8.3.16.f.iii.a) must be
dedicated to either Office PRINCIPAL USEs or
Design SERVICES USEs from the Arts & Creative
Enterprise USE category.
c). At least five percent (5%) of the total GROSS
FLOOR AREA required by §8.3.16.f.iii.a) must be
dedicated to PRINCIPAL USEs within the Arts &
Creative Enterprise USE category.
d). At least three hundred and seventy five (375)
square feet of commercial space must be
provided for each DWELLING UNIT.
g. Building Standards
i. Standards & Measurements
a). For any LOT with frontage on (2) two or more
THOROUGHFAREs with a difference in elevation
406 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
MAP 8.3.15 USQ Sub-Area Boundary and Superseding Zoning Districts
CC4 CC4 CC4
CC4
CC5
CC7
CC5
CC4
KEY
Mid Rise 4 (MR4)
Mid Rise 5 (MR5)
High Rise (HR)
Commercial Core (CC)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 407
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
of at least ten (10) feet, the GROUND STORY at
the lower elevation is not included in the
calculation of total number of stories.
ii. Stepback Exemption
a). Buildings developed in accordance with the
provisions of the MR5 and MR6 districts
are exempt from UPPER STORY stepback
requirements.
iii. Dimensional Compliance
a). DEVELOPMENt of any building type permitted
in the USQ sub-area may deviate up to five
percent (5%) from the BUILDING WIDTH; POINT
TOWER width, depth, diagonal, and FLOOR PLATE;
FACADE build out; FENESTRATION; entrance spacing;
and commercial space depth standards by
Special Permit.
b). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
permit DEVELOPMENT to deviate up to five (5)
percent:
i). If the proposed deviation can provide a
positive refinement of the massing of a
BUILDING in context to its surroundings,
improve FLOOR PLATE efficiency, provide for
unique storefront design, or better address
specific operational requirements of
commercial tenants.
iv. Contextual Massing & Design
a). For real property within the MR4 or MR5
districts as shown on Map 8.3.15, any General
BUILDING on a CORNER LOT may be designed
according to the standards of the Apartment
BUILDING TYPE along the secondary frontage in
the following circumstances:
i). The CORNER LOT has a secondary FRONT LOT
LINE over one hundred and fifty (150) feet in
width; and
ii). The BUILDING has GROUND STORY commercial
space along the primary frontage and
for at least the first sixty (60) feet of the
secondary frontage, measured from the
intersection of the FRONT LOT LINEs.
b). For real property within the HIGH-RISE district
as shown on Map 8.3.15, the UPPER STORIES of
any BUILDING that exceeds five (5) stories in
height must step back at either the 3rd, 4th, or
5th STORY at least ten (10) feet from the FACADE
of the stories below for any BUILDING fronting
Somerville Avenue, Washington STREET,
Prospect STREET, or Webster Avenue and at
least thirty (30) feet from the FACADE of the
stories below for any BUILDING fronting Merriam
STREET.
c). For real property within the HIGH-RISE district as
shown on Map 8.3.15, any Mid-Rise Podium
Tower BUILDING on a LOT directly fronting onto
Somerville Avenue, Washington STREET, or
Merriam STREET the maximum building height is
limited to ten (10) stories.
d). Notwithstanding the maximum heights
indicated for the Mid-Rise Podium Tower
BUILDING TYPE, any Mid-Rise Podium Tower on a
LOT fronting onto a CIVIC SPACE that fronts onto
Prospect STREET may be built to twenty-five (25)
stories and two hundred and eighty-six (288)
feet.
e). For real property within the Commercial Core
district as shown on Map 8.3.15, the maximum
height of any BUILDING on a LOT with NORTH-FACING
frontage along Somerville Avenue directly
oppoSITE of Union Square Plaza is limited
to seventy-five (75) feet. Together with any
mechanical penthoUSEs on such a BUILDING, the
total height is limited to eighty-five (85) feet,
except as follows:
i). Mechanical penthoUSEs must be set back a
minimum distance from the FACADE equal to
the height of the penthoUSE
ii). The Planning Board may approve the
extension of rooftop mechanical elements
above the aforementioned limit, provided
that (a) the Board finds that such additional
height is the minimum necessary to
achieve the desired objective, taking into
account other important zoning goals such
as energy efficiency and sustainability,
will not create unreasonable shadow
or other visual impacts, and cannot
otherwise reasonably be addressed
within the proposed height and (b)
the additional height of such rooftop
mechanical elements must be limited to
five (5) additional feet; and (c) such rooftop
mechanical elements must be located to
the south of the centerline of the BUILDING
roof.
h. DEVELOPMENT Standards
i. For real property with a frontage on Everett STREET,
luminaries located in the FRONTAGE AREA must be
provided with sensors, timers, or other means to
automatically reduce the LUMENs emitted by at least
thirty percent (30%) beginning one hour after the
close of business of the GROUND STORY tenant until
7:00am. Lighting required by the Massachusetts
State BUILDING Code is exempt.
ii. Sound emanating from rooftop mechanical
408 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
equipment must be minimized to every extent
practicable including, but not limited to, the
location and sizing of equipment, the selection of
equipment, and sound attenuation measures.
iii. At a minimum, rooftop mechanical equipment
must not exceed ambient noise levels at ground
level measured at the property line or cause a
noise disturbance as defined by Article VII, Division
2, Section 9-114 of the Code of Ordinances, City of
Somerville, MAssachusetts.
iv. The review board shall require an acoustical report,
prepared by a professional acoustical engineer
and including field measurements, demonstrating
compliance with all applicable noise standards
to be submitted to the Building Official prior
to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy
as a condition of any Site Plan Approval for a
Commercial Building or Laboratory Building.
i. Parking & Mobility
i. The maximum number of OFF-STREET PARKING SPACEs
in the BY sub-area may not exceed one thousand
five hundred (1,500) spaces.
ii. Up to three hundred (300) OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
may be provided as RESERVED PARKING SPACES.
a). CAR-SHARE PARKING spaces are exempt.
iii. ACCESSory parking for customers of retail sales or
Food & Beverage Service USEs is prohibited for real
property in any MR district shown on Map 8.3.11
(a), but may be provided for employees.
iv. Off-STREET motor vehicle parking spaces may be
provided as SURFACE PARKING on a revolving two
(2) year basis for real property in any HR district
shown on Map 8.3.11 (a) by Special Permit.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing an
interim SURFACE PARKING LOT:
i). Documented un-met demand for parking;
ii). The DEVELOPMENT schedule and phasing
for DEVELOPMENT subject to a Master Plan
Special Permit;
iii). The capacity of the local THOROUGHFARE
network providing ACCESS to the SITE; and
iv). The impact of the PARKING LOT on pedestrian,
bicycle, and motor vehicle traffic and
circulation patterns in the neighborhood.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 409
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
18. Union Square East (USQE) Sub-Area
a. Intent
i. To implement the Union Square East Urban Design
Framework adopted by the Planning Board.
b. Purpose
i. To permit taller development than would otherwise
be permitted in the Commercial Core district.
ii. To constrain the supply of motor vehicle parking
spaces to encourage the use of public transit,
bicycles, and walking in lieu of driving.
c. Applicability
i. The section is applicable to all real property shown
on Map 8.3.18 (a).
ii. Zoning districts shown on map 8.3.18 (a)
supersede those shown on the maps of the
Official Zoning Atlas of the City of Somerville for
development complying with the provisions of the
USQE sub-area.
d. Thoroughfare Network
i. Required and recommended thoroughfares are
shown on Map 8.3.18 (b).
ii. The center line of any required or recommended
thoroughfare may be moved up to twenty (25) feet,
so long as:
a). Medford Street is generally aligned to intersect
with Poplar Street.
b). all required thoroughfares intersect with other
thoroughfares, forming a network; and
c). all intersections are at least one hundred
(100) feet from any other intersection, unless
granted a waiver by the Planning Board.
e. Build Out Standards
i. General
a). Development sites subject to approved Master
Plan Special Permit may comply with the
following standards in aggregate rather than
for each individual lot by Master Plan Special
Permit.
f. Building Standards
i. The standards of Table 8.3.18 supersede specific
dimensional standards for building types permitted
by the zoning district shown on the regulating
maps of this Section.
g. Parking & Mobility
i. The maximum number of off-street parking
spaces in the USQE sub-area may not exceed one
thousand (1,000) spaces.
ii. Up to one hundred (100) off-street parking spaces
may be provided as reserved parking spaces.
a). Car-share parking spaces are exempt.
Map 8.3.18 (a) BY Sub-Area Boundary and Superseding Zoning Districts
KEY
Commercial Core
410 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
8. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Master Planned Development (MPD)
Table 8.3.18 Superseding Dimensional Standards
CC
LOT Standards
OPEN SPACE (min) none
Massing & Height
Building Height, Stories (min) 6 stories
Number of Stories (max) --
Commercial Building none
Lab Building none
BLOCK Building --
TOWER(s) none
Building Height (max) --
Commercial Building none
Lab Building none
BLOCK Building --
PODIUM --
TOWER(s) none
Map 8.3.18 (b) Thoroughfares & Civic Spaces
KEY
Required Thoroughfare
Recommended Thoroughfare
Required Civic Space
9 USE PROVISIONS
9.1 GENERAL .............................................................413
General 413
Applicability 413
Development Review 413
Protected Uses 413
Classification of Uses 413
Category Designation 413
Use Restrictions 413
Pedestrian Street Restrictions 413
Large Floor Area Uses 413
Outdoor Storage & Display 414
9.2 USE DEFINITIONS & STANDARDS ....................420
General 420
Arts & Creative Enterprise Use Categories 420
Auto-Oriented Use Categories 421
Cannabis Establishment Use Categories 422
Civic & Institutional Use Categories 423
Commercial Services Use Categories 424
Food & Beverage Service Use Categories 428
Industrial Use Categories 428
Lodging Use Categories 430
Office Use Categories 430
Residential Use Categories 431
Retail Sales Use Categories 432
Urban Agriculture Use Categories 433
Accessory Use Categories 434

12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 413
9. USE PROVISIONS
General
9.1 GENERAL
1. General
a. The USE of real property is permitted as specified on
Table 9.1.1.
b. USE categories not identified on Table 9.1.1 are
prohibited.
c. Real property may have one or more principal and one
or more ACCESSORY USEs.
2. Applicability
a. The continuation of any USE that existed prior to the
establishment of zoning in Somerville or that complied
with the Somerville Zoning Ordinance when the USE
was established, but is non-compliant to a subsequent
amendment of the Somerville Zoning Ordinance is
permitted, subject to Article 14: Nonconformance.
3. Development Review
a. The establishment of any USE, CHANGE IN USE of any
STRUCTURE or land, and any expansion in the USE of
land requires the submittal of a development review
application to the BUILDING OFFICIAL.
b. All USEs must comply with any USE-specific standards
applicable for each USE in §9.2 USE Definitions &
Limitations.
c. USEs permitted by Special Permit require additional
DEVELOPMENT review in accordance with §15.2.1 Special
Permits.
4. Protected Uses
a. This Ordinance does not restrict the USE of land or
STRUCTURES for activities protected by M.G.L. Chapter
40A, Section 3. In cases where Table 9.1 indicates
the USE of real property for a protected USE requires a
special permit (SP) or is not permitted (N), that USE is
permitted (P) and is subject only to the provisions for
the appropriate BUILDING TYPE.
5. Classification of Uses
a. USE Categories
i. This Ordinance classifies principal land USEs into
USE categories based on similar functional, product,
or physical characteristics, the type and amount
of activity, the manner of tenancy, the conduct
of customers, how goods or services are sold
or delivered, and likely impact on surrounding
properties.
b. Specific USE Types
i. Some categories are further broken into a list of
individual USEs. For example, under the CONSUMER
GOODS category is ALCOHOL SALES, which is a more
strictly regulated USE than others in this same
category.
c. Organization of Text & Tables
i. USE categories are listed on Table 9.1 and ordered
in the text of 9.2 USE Definitions & Standards using
the same headings for organizational purposes.
d. Some USE categories identify a list of individual USEs
that are regulated differently than other USEs within
the same category, despite their similarity. In this
circumstance the specific USEs are identified by text
that reads ‘the following USEs are regulated differently’
in 9.2 USE Definitions & Standards and ‘except as
follows’ on the USE table.
e. Some USE categories identify an exclusive list of
individual USEs that are permitted, where individual
USEs not identified are prohibited. This circumstance is
identified by text that reads ‘the specific USEs are’ in 9.2
USE Definitions & Standards and ‘as noted below’ on
the USE table.
6. Category Designation
a. The BUILDING OFFICIAL shall classify land USEs based on
the definitions of the USE category and individual USEs
listed in 9.2 USE Definitions & Standards.
b. A USE classified into one category cannot also be
classified in a different USE category.
c. If a proposed USE is not listed in a USE category, but
meets the definition of a USE category or is similar
to a listed individual USE, the BUILDING OFFICIAL may
consider the proposed USE part of that USE category
and issue a written interpretation to document
such a determination for subsequent applications in
accordance with §15.4.3 Written Interpretation.
d. When a proposed USE is not found to meet the
definition of a USE category or be similar to a listed
individual USE by the BUILDING OFFICIAL, the USE is
prohibited.
7. Use Restrictions
a. General
i. The uses permitted according to Table 9.1 may be
limited or restricted from occupancy within certain
building types. See the standards for each Building
Type in each zoning district for more information.
ii. Drive-up and drive-through uses are prohibited.
b. Pedestrian Streets
i. The uses permitted according to Table 9.1.1 may
be further limited for real property abutting a
Pedestrian Street. See the provisions for each
zoning district for more information.
c. Large Floor Area Uses
i. Unless otherwise specified, occupancy of any
single commercial space greater than ten-thousand
(10,000) square feet in LEASABLE FLOOR AREA by any
414 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
9. USE PROVISIONS
General
permitted Auto-Oriented, Commercial Service, or
Retail Sales USE requires a Special Permit.
ii. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny
a special permit authorizing an auto oriented,
consumer service or retail sales USE over ten
thousand (10,000) square feet in LEASABLE FLOOR
AREA:
a). Compatibility with the intensity of activity
associated with the surrounding land USEs.
b). Capacity of the local THOROUGHFARE network
providing ACCESS to the SITE and the impact on
pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic and
circulation patterns in the neighborhood.
d. Formula Businesses
i. Unless other wise specified, formula businesses
require a Special Permit.
ii. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
special permit authorizing a formula retail principal
use:
a). The existing concentrations of formula
businesses within the neighborhood;
b). The availability of other similar uses and the
maintenance of a diverse blend of uses within
the neighborhood;
c). The compatibility of the proposed formula
business with the existing architectural and
aesthetic character of the neighborhood;
d). The proposed uses contribution to the
nationwide trend of standardized offerings that
detracts from the uniqueness of Somerville’s
neighborhoods; and
e). The existing non-residential vacancy rates
within the neighborhood.
8. Outdoor Storage & Display
a. OUTDOOR STORAGE of equipment, inventory, materials,
merchandise, supplies, or other items is prohibited,
except in the Fabrication district, Commercial Industry
district, and Tufts University special district.
b. Unless otherwise specified, OUTDOOR DISPLAY of products
and merchandise is prohibited.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 415
9. USE PROVISIONS
General
Table 9.1.1 Permitted Uses
Use Category
Specific Use
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
MR5
MR6
HR
FAB
CC
CI
CB
CIV
USE
Specific
Standards
Arts & Creative Enterprise
Artisinal Production SP SP P P P P P P P P P N §9.2.2.a
Arts Exhibition N N P P P P P P P P P N §9.2.2.b
Arts Sales or Services SP SP P P P P P P P P P N §9.2.2.c
Co-Working N N P P P P P P P P P N §9.2.2.d
Design Services SP SP P P P P P P P P P N §9.2.2.e
Shared Workspaces or Arts
Education
SP SP P P P P P P P P P N §9.2.2.f
Work/Live Creative Studio N N N N N N N SP N N N N §9.2.2.g
Auto-Oriented
Commercial Vehicle Repair or
Maintenance
N N N N N N N N N SP SP N §9.2.3.a
Dispatch Service (except as
follows)
N N N N N N N N N P P N §9.2.3.b
Towing Service N N N N N N N N N SP SP N §9.2.3.b.i
Gasoline Station N N N N N N N N N N N N §9.2.3.c
Motor Vehicle Parking
(as noted below)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- §9.2.3.d
Off-Site Accessory Parking SP SP N N N N N N N P P N §9.2.3.d.i
Personal Vehicle Repair or
Maintenance
N N N N N N N N N SP SP N §9.2.3.e
Vehicle Sales N N N N N N N N N SP SP N §9.2.3.f
Cannabis Establishment
Cannabis Cultivation N N SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP N §9.2.4.b
Cannabis Product Manufacturing N N N N N N N P N P N N §9.2.4.c
Cannabis Retail Sales N N SP SP SP SP SP N SP SP SP N §9.2.4.d
Cannabis Research &
Development
N N P P P P P N P P P N §9.2.4.e
Cannabis Testing Laboratory N N P P P P P N P P P N §9.2.4.f
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
416 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
9. USE PROVISIONS
General
Table 9.1.1 Permitted Uses
Use Category
Specific Use
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
MR5
MR6
HR
FAB
CC
CI
CB
CIV
USE
Specific
Standards
Civic & Institutional
Community Center N N P P P P P P P N N N §9.2.5.a
Hospital N N SP SP SP SP SP N SP SP N N §9.2.5.b
Library N N P P P P P P P N N N §9.2.5.c
Minor Utility Facility SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP §9.2.5.d
Major Utility Facility N N N N N N N N N N N N §9.2.5.e
Museum N N P P P P P P P N N N §9.2.5.f
Private Non-Profit Club or Lodge N N SP SP SP SP SP N SP N N N §9.2.5.g
Public Service P P P P P P P P P P P P §9.2.5.h
Religious & Educational Uses
Protected by M.G.L. 40A. Sec. 3
P P P P P P P P P P P P §9.2.5.i
Commercial Services
Animal Services
(as noted below)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- §9.2.6.a
Commercial Kennel N N SP SP SP SP SP N SP P P N §9.2.6.a.i
Pet Grooming N N P P P P P N P P P N §9.2.6.a.ii
Pet Day Care or Training N N SP SP SP SP SP N SP P P N §9.2.6.a.iii
Veterinarian N N SP SP SP SP SP N SP P P N §9.2.6.a.iv
Assembly or Entertainment N N SP SP SP SP SP N SP SP SP N §9.2.6.b
Banking or Financial Services
(except as follows)
N N P P P P P N P P P N §9.2.6.c
Personal Credit N N SP SP SP SP SP N SP SP SP N §9.2.6.c.i
Broadcast or Recording Studio N N P P P P P P P P P N §9.2.6.d
Building or Home Repair Services N N SP SP SP SP SP N SP P P N §9.2.6.e
Business Support Services N N P P P P P N P P P N §9.2.6.f
Caterer or Wholesale Food
Production
N N SP SP SP SP SP P SP P P N §9.2.6.g
Day Care Services
(as noted below)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- §9.2.6.h
Adult Day Care Center N N P P P P P N P P P N §9.2.6.h.i
Child Day Care Center P P P P P P P P P P P N §9.2.6.h.ii
Educational Services N N P P P P P P P P P N §9.2.6.i
Maintenance or Repair Services N N P P P P P N P P P N §9.2.6.j
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 417
9. USE PROVISIONS
General
Table 9.1.1 Permitted Uses
Use Category
Specific Use
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
MR5
MR6
HR
FAB
CC
CI
CB
CIV
USE
Specific
Standards
Personal Services
(except as follows)
N N P P P P P N P P P N §9.2.6.k
Body Art Services N N SP SP SP SP SP P SP P P N §9.2.6.k.i
Fitness Services N N P P P P P P P P P N §9.2.6.k.ii
Funeral Services N N SP SP SP SP SP N SP P P N §9.2.6.k.iii
Health Care Services N N SP SP SP SP SP N SP SP SP N §9.2.6.k.iv
Recreation Services N N SP SP SP SP SP SP SP P P P §9.2.6.l
Vehicle Parking
(as noted below)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- §9.2.6.m
Bike Share Parking N P P P P P P P P P P P §9.2.6.m.i
Car Share Parking (3 or less) N P P P P P P P P P P N §9.2.6.m.ii
Car Share Parking (4 or more) N SP P P P P P P P P P N §9.2.6.m.ii
Commercial Parking N N P P P P P P P P P N §9.2.6.m.iii
Food and Beverage Services
Bar, Restaurant, or Tavern N N P P P P P N P P P N §9.2.7.a
Bakery, Café, or Coffee Shop N N P P P P P N P P P N §9.2.7.b
Industrial
Dry Cleaning or Laundry Services N N N N N N N N N SP N N §9.2.8.a
Data Center N N N N N N N N N SP N N §9.2.8.b
Manufacturing N N N N N N N P N P N N §9.2.8.c
Moving or Storage Services
(except as follows)
N N N N N N N N N P N N §9.2.8.d
Self Storage N N N N N N N N N SP SP N §9.2.8.d.i
Recycling Collection N N N N N N N N N SP N N §9.2.8.e
Salvage Yard N N N N N N N N N N N N §9.2.8.f
Trucking or Transportation Depot N N N N N N N N N SP N N §9.2.8.g
Wholesale Trade or Distribution N N N N N N N P N P N N §9.2.8.h
Lodging
Bed & Breakfast SP SP SP SP SP SP SP N SP N N N §9.2.9.a
Hotel or Hostel N N SP SP SP SP SP N SP SP SP N §9.2.9.b
Office
General Office N N P P P P P N P P P N §9.2.10.a
Research and Development or
Laboratory
N N P P P P P N P P P N §9.2.10.b
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
418 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
9. USE PROVISIONS
General
Table 9.1.1 Permitted Uses
Use Category
Specific Use
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
MR5
MR6
HR
FAB
CC
CI
CB
CIV
USE
Specific
Standards
Residential
Household Living P P SP SP SP SP SP N N N N N §9.2.11.a
Group Living
(except as follows)
SP SP SP SP SP SP SP N N N N N §9.2.11.b
Community or Group Residence P P P P P P P N N N N N §9.2.11.b.i
Dormitory or Chapter House N SP SP SP SP SP SP N N N N N §9.2.11.b.ii
Homeless Shelter N N SP SP SP SP SP N N N N N §9.2.11.b.iii
Nursing Home/Assisted Living
Facility N SP SP SP SP SP SP N N N N N §9.2.11.b.iv
Rooming House N SP SP SP SP SP SP N N N N N §9.2.11.b.v
Retail Sales
Building/Home Supplies or
Equipment
N N SP SP SP SP SP N SP P P N §9.2.12.a
Consumer Goods
(except as follows)
P P P P P P P N P P P N §9.2.12.b
Alcohol Sales N N SP SP SP SP SP N SP SP SP N §9.2.12.b.ii
Firearms Sales N N N N N N N N N N N N §9.2.12.b.iv
Pet Store N N SP SP SP SP SP N SP SP SP N §9.2.12.b.v
Fresh Food Market or Grocery
Store
P P P P P P P N P SP P N §9.2.12.d
Farm/Vendor Market N N P P P P P N P P P N §9.2.12.e
Urban Agriculture
Farming (as noted below) -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- §9.2.13.a
Commercial Farming N N P P P P P P P P P N §9.2.13.a.i
Community Farming P P P P P P P P P P P P §9.2.13.a.ii
Community Gardening P P P P P P P P P P P P §9.2.13.b
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 419
9. USE PROVISIONS
General
Table 9.1.1 Permitted Uses
Use Category
Specific Use
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
MR5
MR6
HR
FAB
CC
CI
CB
CIV
USE
Specific
Standards
Accessory Uses
Home Occupations
(as noted below)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- §9.2.14.c
Creative Studio P P N N N N N N N N N N §9.2.14.c.ii
Hobby Kennel SP N N N N N N N N N N N §9.2.14.c.iii
Home-Based Business P P N N N N N N N N N N §9.2.14.c.iv
Home-Based Day Care SP N N N N N N N N N N N §9.2.14.c.v
Home Office P P P P P P P N N N N N §9.2.14.c.vi
Urban Agriculture
(as noted below)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- §9.2.14.d
Apiculture P P P P P P P N N N N N §9.2.14.d.i
Aviculture P P P P P P P N N N N N §9.2.14.d.ii
Commercial Farming P P P P P P P P P P P N §9.2.14.d.iii
Residential Gardening P P P P P P P N N N N N §9.2.14.d.iv
Vehicle Parking, Accessory
(except as follows)
P P P P P N N P N P P N §9.2.14.e
Home Business Vehicle Parking SP SP N N N N N P N N N N §9.2.14.e.i
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
420 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
9. USE PROVISIONS
Use Definitions & Standards
9.2 USE DEFINITIONS & STANDARDS
1. General
a. This section provides definitions for USE categories and
individual USEs and identifies standards applicable to
either all USEs within a category or specifically to an
individual USE.
b. In some cases, a PRINCIPAL USE may include ANCILLARY
activities that are subordinate, customary, and
incidental to the day-to-day operations of the PRINCIPAL
USE. Such ANCILLARY activities do not require separate
approval, but must comply with any standards
applicable to the PRINCIPAL USE.
2. Arts & Creative Enterprise Use Categories
a. ARTISINAL PRODUCTION
The on-SITE production of hand-fabricated or handmanufactured
parts and custom or craft CONSUMER GOODS
based on the skill and knowledge of the artisan and
the USE of hand tools or small-scale, light mechanical
equipment. The ARTISINAL PRODUCTION category
includes apparel MANUFACTURING, breweries, cabinetry,
chocolatiers, confectionery, furniture making, glass
working, jewelry making, metal working, pottery,
sculpture, wood working, and their substantial
equivalents. Showrooms and the ANCILLARY sales of
goods produced on-SITE are permitted. The following
standards apply:
i. The production of offensive noise, vibration,
smoke, dust or other pARTICULATE matter, heat,
humidity, glare, or other objectionable effect
is prohibited, except in the Fabrication and
Commercial Industry districts.
ii. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
special permit authorizing an ARTISINAL PRODUCTION
PRINCIPAL USE:
a). Appreciable methods to mitigate noise for
ABUTTING residential properties.
b). Location of loading, trash and recycling
storage, and the procedure for drop-off and
pickup.
c). The limitation of visitors and ANCILLARY retail
sales to between the hours of 7:00am to
9:00pm.
b. ARTS EXHIBITION
The production, rehearsal, or live performance of
cultural entertainment or artistic expression such
as singing, dancing, comedy, literary readings,
performance art, musical theater, live plays, and
concerts. The ARTS EXHIBITION category includes venues
such as assembly halls, auditoriums, cinemas, concert
halls, dinner theaters, gallery space, performance
halls, rehearsal & preproduction studios, live theaters,
and their substantial equivalents along with the
administrative offices, booking agencies, and ticket
sales of performing arts organizations.
c. ARTS SALES OR SERVICES
The display and retail sale, lease, or rental of finished
artwork, art supplies, musical instruments, multi-media,
or publications and activities that provide various arts
related services to individuals, groups, or businesses
including galleries, supply stores, printing shops, set
design studios, and their substantial equivalents. The
following standards apply:
i. OUTDOOR DISPLAY of products and merchandise is
permitted according to the following:
a). OUTDOOR DISPLAY is permitted in any storefront
frontage or on a public sidewalk subject to all
City Ordinances as an ANCILLARY activity.
b). OUTDOOR DISPLAY must be removed and placed
inside a fully-enclosed BUILDING at the end of
each business day.
c). Display areas extending more than eight feet
from the FACADE are prohibited.
d). A minimum four (4) foot wide clear path of
ACCESS must be maintained to the PRINCIPAL
ENTRANCE.
e). Display areas are permitted to occupy up to
thirty percent (30%) of the FRONTAGE AREA.
f). Display areas must comply with the sidewalk
standards of Article 8: PUBLIC REALM.
ii. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
special permit authorizing an arts sales & service
PRINCIPAL USE:
a). Appreciable methods to mitigate noise for
ABUTTING residential properties.
b). Location of loading, trash and recycling
storage, and the procedure for drop-off and
pickup.
c). The limitation of visitors and ANCILLARY retail
sales to between the hours of 7:00am to
9:00pm.
d. CO-WORKING
A commercial or non-profit organization providing
multiple individuals and small firms ACCESS to
workplace facilities, including but not limited to, artist
studios, office suites, for-rent ‘hot-desks’, dedicated
workstations, conference rooms, meeting rooms,
event space, resource libraries, and business or
administrative support services.
e. Design SERVICES
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 421
9. USE PROVISIONS
Use Definitions & Standards
Individuals and firms that provide design SERVICES
to individuals, groups, or businesses including
architectural design, fashion design, graphic
design, interior design, industrial design, landscape
architecture, product DEVELOPMENT, software
DEVELOPMENT, urban design, and their substantial
equivalents.
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
special permit authorizing a design SERVICES PRINCIPAL
USE:
a). Appreciable methods to mitigate noise for
ABUTTING residential properties.
b). Location of loading, trash and recycling
storage, and the procedure for drop-off and
pickup.
c). The limitation of visitors to between the hours
of 7:00am to 9:00pm.
f. Shared Workspaces or Arts Education
The transfer of knowledge or skills related to the
creative enterprises through teaching, training,
or research; organizations providing collaborative
workplace facilities and business planning, finance,
mentoring, and other business or administrative
support services to creative enterprises; and multipurpose
facilities dedicated to providing space for
multiple creative enterprises. The shared workspace &
arts education category includes arts centers, CREATIVE
INCUBATORs, CULINARY INCUBATORs, design & FABRICATION
CENTERs, FABRICATION LABORATORIES, and their substantial
equivalents.
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
special permit authorizing a shared workspace &
arts education PRINCIPAL USE:
a). Appreciable methods to mitigate noise for
ABUTTING residential properties.
b). Location of loading, trash and recycling
storage, and the procedure for drop-off and
pickup.
c). The limitation of visitors to between the hours
of 7:00am to 9:00pm.
g. Work/Live CREATIVE STUDIO
CREATIVE STUDIO space consisting of up to one (1) room,
including an area for ACCESSory living, where the work
needs of creative industry activities within the same
BUILDING take precedence over any “quiet expectations”
of the residents and neighbors residing in work/live
CREATIVE STUDIOs within the same BUILDING. The following
standards apply:
i. Kitchen, dining, and bathroom facilities, excluding
work sinks, must be shared between the tenants
of each floor.
ii. Floor area for ACCESSory living space is limited to
200 sq. ft. or 30% of the total floor space of a
Work/Live Studio, whichever is less.
iii. The occupant(s) of the Work/Live CREATIVE STUDIO
must be a certified Artist with the Somerville Arts
Council.
iv. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
special permit authorizing a work/live CREATIVE STUDIO
PRINCIPAL USE:
a). Width of doorways and hallways to
accommodate the moving of large objects.
b). Weight capacity of elevators to accommodate
heavy equipment.
c). ACCESS to natural light within each studio with a
preference towards northern exposure.
d). Sound transmission co-efficients to prevent
the transmission of sounds from equipment or
repetitive tasks.
e). Ventilation and air handling techniques to
ensure the safety and health of residents,
visitors, and neighbors.
f). Ceiling heights that allow for the creation
of large works and equipment, including
machinery and lighting.
g). Weight-bearing capacity of the floor.
h). Ability to install flooring for specific USErs such
as dancers or performers.
3. Auto-Oriented Use Categories
a. Commercial Vehicle Repair or Maintenance
Repair, installation, or maintenance of the mechanical
components or the bodies of large trucks, mass transit
vehicles, large construction equipment, or commercial
boats.
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny
a special permit authorizing a Vehicle Repair or
Maintenance PRINCIPAL USE:
a). Location of driveways entrances and ACCESS
points in relation to the safety of pedestrians,
bicyclists, and motor vehicles.
b). Visual impact and quality of screening of
vehicles.
b. DISPATCH SERVICE
The storage and dispatch of ambulances, taxis,
limousines, armored cars, tow trucks, bUSEs, and
422 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
9. USE PROVISIONS
Use Definitions & Standards
similar vehicles for specialized transportation, including
where ambulance crews not located at a HOSPITAL or
fire department stand by for emergency calls, ANCILLARY
professional offices, and/or minor vehicle service and
maintenance repair. The following specific DISPATCH
SERVICE USEs are regulated differently than other USEs
classified within the DISPATCH SERVICE category:
i. Towing Service
Storage of towed vehicles and/or the parking and
dispatch of tow vehicles.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
towing service PRINCIPAL USE:
i). Compatibility of the towing service with
other surrounding properties.
ii). Location of driveways entrances and
ACCESS points in relation to the safety of
pedestrians, bicyclists, and motor vehicles.
iii). Visual impact and quality of screening of
vehicles.
iv). Sight lines needed by the driver of any
vehicle entering or exiting the SITE.
v). Procedures for controlling emission
of noxious or hazardous materials or
substance.
c. Gasoline Station
USEs engaged in the retail sales of personal or
commercial vehicle fuels.
d. Motor Vehicle Parking
The storage, for a limited period of time, of operable
motor vehicles. The specific USE types within the motor
vehicle parking USE category are:
i. Off-SITE ACCESSory Parking
Motor vehicle parking that supports a PRINCIPAL USE
on a different LOT.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing an
off-SITE ACCESSory parking PRINCIPAL USE:
i). Location of driveways entrances and
ACCESS points in relation to the safety of
pedestrians, bicyclists, and motor vehicles.
ii). Visual impact and quality of screening of
vehicles.
e. Personal Vehicle Repair or Maintenance
Repair, installation, or maintenance of the mechanical
components or the bodies of automobiles, small trucks
or vans, motorcycles, motor homes, or recreational
vehicles or that wash, clean, or otherwise protect the
exterior or interior surfaces of these types of vehicles.
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny
a special permit authorizing a Vehicle Repair or
Maintenance PRINCIPAL USE:
a). Location of driveways entrances and ACCESS
points in relation to the safety of pedestrians,
bicyclists, and motor vehicles.
b). Visual impact and quality of screening of
vehicles.
f. Vehicle Sales
Sale or rental of new or USEd automobiles, small trucks
or vans, motorcycles, motor homes, or recreational
vehicles. Examples of personal vehicle sales & rental
establishments include new and USEd automobile
dealers, and car rental agencies. The following
standards apply:
i. On-SITE vehicle maintenance and repair is
considered an additional PRINCIPAL USE.
ii. Vehicles for display, sale, or lease must be located
entirely within a building.
iii. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny
a special permit authorizing a Vehicle Repair or
Maintenance PRINCIPAL USE:
a). Location of driveways entrances and ACCESS
points in relation to the safety of pedestrians,
bicyclists, and motor vehicles.
b). Visual impact and quality of screening of
vehicles.
4. Cannabis Establishment Use Categories
a. The following standards apply to all specific USE types
in the Cannabis Establishment USE category:
i. Cannabis enterprises must be compliant with
M.G.L. 94G and M.G.L. 94I.
ii. Cannabis enterprises must be licensed by the
Massachusetts Cannabis Control Commission and
the Somerville Licensing Commission.
iii. Development review applications are not
considered complete until a Community Host
Agreement is granted by the City of Somerville.
b. CANNABIS CULTIVATION
The cultivation of soil for the production, planting,
caring for, treating, growing, and harvesting of
cannabis.
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 423
9. USE PROVISIONS
Use Definitions & Standards
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
special permit authorizing a cannabis retail sales
principal use:
a). Measures taken to eliminate offensive odors.
c. CANNABIS PRODUCT MANUFACTURING
The processing, assembly, treatment, or packaging of
cannabis products.
d. CANNABIS RETAIL SALES
The purchasing or selling cannabis or cannabis
products by and between Cannabis Establishments
or the selling or provision otherwise of cannabis or
cannabis products to consumers, including medical
marijuana facilities. The following standards apply:
i. Cannabis retail sales USEs must be located at least
three hundred (300) feet from any pre-primary,
primary, or secondary Educational Services USEs or
any Educational Services Protected by M.G.L. 40A.
Sec. 3.
ii. Cannabis retail sales USEs are not permitted to
occupy more than ten thousand (10,000) square
feet of floor area.
iii. SIGNage for cannabis retail sales USEs must comply
with 935 CMR 500 and M.G.L. c. 94c, §34.
iv. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
special permit authorizing a cannabis retail sales
principal USE:
a). Capacity of the local THOROUGHFARE network
providing ACCESS to the SITE and impact on
pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic and
circulation patterns in the neighborhood.
b). Location, visibility, and design of the PRINCIPAL
ENTRANCE.
v. The review boards may not grant a special permit
authorizing a cannabis retail sales USE within fivehundred
(500) feet of any pre-primary, primary,
or secondary Educational Services USEs or any
Educational Services Protected by M.G.L. 40A.
Sec. 3, without finding that the cannabis retail
sales USE is not detrimental to the Education
Services USE.
e. Cannabis Research & DEVELOPMENT
An academic institution, non-profit or domestic
corporation, or other entity authorized to conduct
business in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts that
conducts analyses, testing, and the DEVELOPMENT of
marijuana based products.
f. Cannabis Testing Laboratory
The controlled scientific analysis, research,
experimentation, or measurement of cannabis,
cannabinoids, and cannabis products.
5. Civic & Institutional Use Categories
a. COMMUNITY CENTER
A place for recreational, social, educational or cultural
activities operated by a non-profit or public agency.
b. HOSPITAL
An institution providing health services to patients and
offering inpatient (overnight) medical or surgical care.
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
special permit authorizing a HOSPITAL PRINCIPAL USE:
a). Compatibility with the level of activity
associated with surrounding properties.
b). Capacity of the local THOROUGHFARE network
providing ACCESS to the SITE and impact on
pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic and
circulation patterns in the neighborhood.
c). Location, visibility, and design of the PRINCIPAL
ENTRANCE, emergency room, patient drop-off
areas, and outdoor AMENITY SPACE for employees
or patients.
d). Location and adequacy of existing public
utilities and proposed changes to the sanitary
sewer system, storm drainage system, and
public water.
c. LIBRARY
A facility providing physical or digital ACCESS to
information resources for reference or borrowing by
the general public and often providing areas for study,
research, and collaboration.
d. MINOR UTILITY FACILITY
Public and quasi-public facilities and services that need
to be located in the area where the service is to be
provided, such as water and sewer pump stations;
electrical transforming substations; wind energy
conversion systems; solar collector systems; water
conveyance systems; gas regulating stations; storm
water facilities and conveyance systems; telephone
switching equipment; emergency communication
warning/broadcast facilities; and central heating
facilities.
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
special permit authorizing a minor utility PRINCIPAL
USE:
a). Need for a facility at the proposed SITE taking
into consideration the proximity of the area of
service of the utility.
b). Visual impact and quality of screening from
ABUTTING THOROUGHFAREs and surrounding
properties.
424 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
9. USE PROVISIONS
Use Definitions & Standards
c). Impact and mitigation of offensive noise,
vibration, smoke, dust or other pARTICULATE
matter, heat, humidity, glare or other
objectionable effects.
d). Location of ACCESS for servicing the facility.
e. MAJOR UTILITY FACILITY
InfraSTRUCTURE services that have substantial land USE
impacts on surrounding areas. Typical USEs include but
are not limited to water and wastewater treatment
facilities, major water storage facilities and electric
generation plants.
f. MUSEUM
A repository for a collection or collections of historical,
natural, scientific, or literary objects of interest. The
following standards apply:
i. ANCILLARY sales and the holding of meetings and
social events are permitted.
g. Private Non-Profit Club or Lodge
An organization, which is open to people upon
invitation, nomination, or payment of fees or dues for
social, recreational, or entertainment activities. The
following standards apply:
i. A non-profit club or lodge must be managed by
an association with elected officers and directors,
pursuant to a charter or bylaws, that generally
excludes the general public from its premises, and
which holds property for the common benefit of its
members.
ii. A non-profit club or lodge may serve meals or
alcohol on the premises for members and their
guests.
iii. A non-profit club or lodge must be open only to
members and their occasional guests.
iv. A non-profit club or lodge may USE one central
gathering area for rental for events or community
activities, including the service of meals or alcohol,
but such rentals and activities may not exceed
eighty (80) events per year and may not continue
past 1:00 AM Friday, Saturday, and Sunday nights
and 12:00 AM Monday through Thursday nights.
v. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
special permit authorizing a private, non-profit club
or lodge PRINCIPAL USE:
a). Compatibility with the level of activity
associated with the surrounding properties.
b). Location of ACCESS to the SITE and BUILDING.
c). Impact and mitigation of the production of
offensive noise and light.
d). Location of trash and recycling storage and the
procedure for pickup.
h. Public Service
Essential government services provided to the
community at large including municipal operations of
the City of Somerville, such as departmental offices,
social service facilities, and public works facilities;
public safety services, such as police and firefighting
headquarters and substations; and OPEN SPACEs reserved
for social and recreational activities or natural resource
protection.
i. Religious & Educational Services Protected by M.G.L.
40A. Sec. 3
Activities related to providing general or specialized
education, instruction, or training in subject areas,
skills, or vocations and the practice of religions,
including all ACCESSory and ANCILLARY activities
customarily included in the operations of educational
institutions and religious organizations. The following
standards apply:
i. Real property must be owned or leased by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, a religious sect
or denomination, or by a non-profit educational
corporation.
6. Commercial Services Use Categories
a. ANIMAL SERVICES
Any of the following: (1) grooming of dogs, cats,
and similar small animals, including dog bathing and
clipping salons and pet grooming shops; (2) animal
shelters, care services, and kennel services for dogs,
cats and small animals, including boarding kennels,
pet resorts/hotels, dog training centers, and animal
rescue shelters excluding those operated by the City of
Somerville; (3) animal HOSPITALs or veterinary services;
(4) hoUSEhold pet crematory services; or (5) taxidermy
services.
i. Commercial Kennel: animal rescue shelters,
boarding facilities, pet resorts or hotels, or training
services for dogs, cats, and other hoUSEhold pets.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
commercial kennel PRINCIPAL USE:
i). Methods or techniques for noise mitigation
to limit noise for other USErs of the building
and ABUTTING properties.
ii). Operational procedures for cleaning the
interior and exterior of the SITE and trash
storage and removal.
iii). Amount of on-SITE landscaping.
ii. Pet Grooming: The grooming of dogs, cats, and
similar hoUSEhold pets.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 425
9. USE PROVISIONS
Use Definitions & Standards
iii. Pet Day Care or Training: kennel and/or training
centers for animals operated on a daytime-only
basis.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
pet day care or training PRINCIPAL USE:
i). Methods or techniques for noise mitigation
to limit noise for other USErs of the building
and ABUTTING properties.
ii). Operational procedures for cleaning the
interior and exterior of the SITE and trash
storage and removal.
iii). Amount of on-SITE landscaping.
iv. Veterinarian: the diagnosis and treatment of
animal patients’ illnesses, injuries, and physical
malfunctions performed in an office setting. The
following standards apply:
a). Overnight boarding of animals is limited to
patients recovering from medical procedures.
b). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
veterinarian PRINCIPAL USE:
i). Methods or techniques for noise mitigation
to limit noise for other USErs of the BUILDING
and ABUTTING properties
ii). Operational procedures for cleaning the
interior and exterior of the SITE and trash
storage and removal.
iii). Amount of on-SITE landscaping.
b. ASSEMBLY OR ENTERTAINMENT
USEs that provide gathering places for participant
or spectator recreation, entertainment, or other
assembly activities including, but not limited to, a
theater, cinema, and/or venue of a professional or
semi-professional sports team. The following standards
apply:
i. Assembly and entertainment USEs may provide
incidental food or beverage service for on-SITE
consumption.
ii. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or
deny a special permit authorizing an ASSEMBLY OR
ENTERTAINMENT PRINCIPAL USE:
a). Compatibility with the level of activity
associated with the surrounding properties.
b). Location of designated outdoor smoking areas.
c. BANKING OR FINANCIAL SERVICES
USEs related to the exchange, lending, borrowing,
and safe-keeping of money. The following banking
& financial service specific USE types are regulated
differently than other USEs classified within the banking
& financial services category:
i. Personal Credit: Banking USEs providing short-term
loans and check cashing services without providing
traditional banking accounts.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
personal credit PRINCIPAL USE:
i). The demonstrated need for this service by
unbanked or underbanked members of the
community.
ii). Cost savings, transparency of services,
and customer service offered compared to
traditional banking & financial service USEs.
d. BROADCAST OR RECORDING STUDIO
USEs that provide studios for audio or video
production, recording, filming, or broadcasting of
radio or television programs over-the-air, cable, or
satellite. Telecommunications transmission TOWERs are
regulated according to the provisions of §6.C. Wireless
Communication STRUCTURES
e. BUILDING OR HOME REPAIR SERVICES
USEs that provide maintenance and repair services for
all structural and mechanical elements of STRUCTURES, as
well as the exterior spaces of a premise. Typical USEs
include janitorial, landscape maintenance, exterminator,
plumbing, electrical, HVAC, window cleaning, and
similar services.
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
special permit authorizing a BUILDING & home repair
services PRINCIPAL USE:
a). Visual impact and quality of screening of
parked business vehicles.
f. BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES
USEs that provide personnel services, printing, copying,
photographic services, or communication services
to businesses or consumers. Typical USEs include
employment agencies, copy and print shops, telephone
answering services, and photo developing labs.
g. CATERER OR WHOLESALE FOOD PRODUCTION
The preparation of food in significant quantities to be
delivered and served or sold off-SITE.
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
426 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
9. USE PROVISIONS
Use Definitions & Standards
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
special permit authorizing a caterer/wholesale food
production PRINCIPAL USE:
a). Location of driveway entrances and ACCESS
points in relation to the safety of pedestrians,
bicyclists, and motor vehicles.
b). Visual impact and quality of screening of
parked business vehicles.
c). Location of loading, trash and recycling storage
and the procedure for pickup and drop-off.
d). Ventilation and air handling techniques to
reduce the emission of odor or exhaust onto
neighboring properties.
h. DAY CARE SERVICES
USEs that provide licensed care, protection, and
supervision in a protective setting for children or adults,
with or without compensation, on a regular basis away
from their primary residence and for less than sixteen
(16) hours per day. The specific USE types within the day
care service USE category are:
i. ADULT DAY CARE CENTER: A day care service USE
providing custodial care of adults over eighteen
(18) years old, related or unrelated, who are in
need of supervision and/or assistance with routine
daily functions but who are not in need of regular
medical attention. The following standards apply:
a). All persons must be eighteen (18) years of age
or older.
ii. CHIld Day Care Center: A day care service as
defined in MGL 15D Section 1A.
i. Educational Services
The general or specialized pre-primary, primary,
secondary, vocational, or tertiary education, instruction,
or training in subject areas, skills, or vocations.
Facilities customarily provided by educational service
USEs in directly serving the needs of employees and
students are permitted including, but not limited to,
classrooms, administrative offices, research centers,
laboratories, auditoria, study halls, on-campus housing,
libraries, temporary structures, campus centers,
bookstores, laundry services, light manufacturing, retail
sales, Food & Beverage Services, banks, athletic fields,
parking facilities, and their substantial equivalents.
j. Maintenance or Repair Services
USEs that provide maintenance, cleaning, or repair
services for consumer goods. Typical USEs include
dry cleaning shops, tailors, shoe repair, vacuum
repair shops, electronics repair shops, and similar
establishments.
k. Personal Services
USEs that provide a variety of services associated
with personal grooming, personal instruction, and
the maintenance of fitness, health, and well-being.
The following PERSONAL SERVICES specific USE types are
regulated differently than other USEs classified within
the PERSONAL SERVICES USE category:
i. BODY ART SERVICES
USE of a space for the practice of physical
body adornment by permitted establishments
and practitioners using, but not limited to the
following techniques: PIERcing, tattooing, cosmetic
tattooing, branding and scarification. The following
performance standards apply:
a). Procedures considered ‘medical procedures’
by the Board of Registration in medicine, such
as implants under the skin, are prohibited in
Body-Art Services.
b). No Body Art establishment may be located
within 500 feet of an establishment selling
items primarily involving ‘sexual content’ as
defined by MGL 232 Section 31.
c). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
body art PRINCIPAL USE:
i). Design of storefront windows and
operations plans for ensuring the privacy of
patrons.
d). The review boards may not grant a special
permit authorizing a body art services PRINCIPAL
USE within five-hundred (500) feet of any other
body art services PRINCIPAL USE.
ii. Fitness Services
USE of space for physical exercise or training on an
individual or group basis, using exercise equipment
or open floor space, with or without an option for
having instruction with a personal trainer.
iii. Funeral Services
A facility where the deceased are prepared
for burial display and for rituals before burial or
cremation. Such facilities may include chapels,
crematoriums, and showrooms for the display
and sale of caskets, vaults, urns, and other items
related to burial services.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
Funeral Services PRINCIPAL USE:
i). Capacity of the local THOROUGHFARE network
providing ACCESS to the SITE and impact
on pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular
traffic and circulation patterns in the
neighborhood.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 427
9. USE PROVISIONS
Use Definitions & Standards
ii). Location, visibility, and design of the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE.
iv. Health Care Services
An office providing outpatient health services
involving the diagnosis and treatment of physical or
mental ailments and disorders, including doctors,
dentists, mental health practitioners, physical
therapists, and their substantial equivalents.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
Health Care Services PRINCIPAL USE:
i). Compatibility with the level of activity
associated with surrounding properties
ii). Location, visibility, and design of the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE, patient drop-off areas,
and outdoor AMENITY SPACE for employees or
patients.
l. Recreation Services
USE of indoor or outdoor space for the communal or
solitary, active or passive pursuit of leisure activities.
The following standards apply:
i. All outdoor lighting must be turned off when
outdoor facilities are not in USE, or by 10:00 p.m.
on Sundays through Thursdays, and by 11 p.m. on
Fridays and Saturdays, whichever is earlier.
ii. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny
a special permit authorizing a Recreation Services
PRINCIPAL USE:
i). Compatibility with the level of activity
associated with the surrounding
properties.
ii). Capacity of the local THOROUGHFARE network
providing ACCESS to the SITE and impact
on pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular
traffic and circulation patterns in the
neighborhood.
iii). Location and visibility of the PRINCIPAL
ENTRANCE and pedestrian circulation from all
exit points.
m. Vehicle Parking
The rent or lease of parking spaces for motor vehicles,
the USE of a RESERVED PARKING space for a fleet vehicle
of a car sharing service, and the USE of land for the
docking station of a bicycle-sharing service. The
specific USE types within the vehicle parking USE
category are:
i. BIKE-SHARE PARKING
Parking for bicycles that are made available for an
hourly rental fee as part of a business operating
ten (10) or more docking stations within the City
of Somerville or surrounding municipalities. The
following standards apply:
a). Docking stations must not interfere with the
reasonable visibility needs of drivers, the flow
of pedestrians traffic, or needs of businesses
on the same SITE.
ii. CAR-SHARE PARKING
Parking for motor vehicles that are made available
for hourly or daily rental fee to members of a car
sharing service.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
CAR-SHARE PARKING PRINCIPAL USE:
i). Compliance with any minimum parking
requirement of this Ordinance.
ii). Privacy of on-SITE or ABUTTING residential USEs
from the route of pedestrian ACCESS to the
CAR-SHARE PARKING space.
iii. COMMERCIAL PARKING
Parking spaces for motor vehicles that are rented
or leased through various offerings including, but
not limited to, monthly passes, overnight passes,
daily rates (weekday and weekend), or hourly fees
to residents, employees, and the public, twentyfour
(24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week,
three-hundred and sixty-five (365) days per year.
The following standards apply:
a). Reserved spaces must be subject to a price
premium that reflects the under-utilization
of that space as a shared resource that is
at least two hundred percent (200%) of the
demonstrated market rate for a parking space
reserved for a similar time period within a
reasonable market radius.
b). The review boards shall require the operator
of any permitted Commercial Parking USE to
submit an annual report to validate continued
compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance in accordance with the standards for
monitoring and annual reporting of the Director
of Mobility.
7. Food & Beverage Service Use Categories
a. BAR, RESTAURANT, OR TAVERN
An establishment, with our without live entertainment,
preparing and selling ready-to-consume food or
drinks and the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-
SITE consumption. The Bar, Restaurant, or Tavern USE
428 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
9. USE PROVISIONS
Use Definitions & Standards
category includes lounges, nightclubs, dance halls,
pubs, saloons and their substantial equivalents. The
following standards apply:
i. A license from the City Council
ii. is required to serve alcoholic beverages.
iii. Outdoor seating is permitted on the LOT or on a
public sidewalk subject to all City Ordinances as an
ANCILLARY activity. See §10.5 OUTDOOR CAFE SEATING
for more information.
b. Bakery, Cafe, or Coffee Shop
An establishment preparing and selling ready-toconsume
food and drinks. The following standards
apply:
i. Outdoor seating is permitted on the LOT or on a
public sidewalk subject to all City Ordinances as an
ANCILLARY activity. See §10.5 OUTDOOR CAFE SEATING
for more information.
8. Industrial Use Categories
a. DRY CLEANING OR LAUNDRY SERVICES
USEs that provide centralized dry cleaning or laundry
services for other industrial, commercial, or business
establishments.
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny
a special permit authorizing a commercial dry
cleaning or laundry services PRINCIPAL USE:
a). Capacity of the local THOROUGHFARE network
providing ACCESS to the SITE and impact on
pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic and
circulation patterns in the neighborhood.
b). Location of driveway entrances and ACCESS
points in relation to the safety of pedestrians,
bicyclists, and motor vehicles.
b. DATA CENTER
USEs providing information storage and processing
services to other businesses or end USErs through a
collection of computer servers and related information
technology infraSTRUCTURE.
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
special permit authorizing a DATA CENTER PRINCIPAL USE:
a). Mitigation of any negative aesthetic impacts
that might result from required security
measures and restrictions on visibility into the
BUILDING’s interior.
b). Ability for the USE to adequately contribute
towards increasing employment opportunities
in the city.
c. MANUFACTURING
The processing, assembly, treatment, or packaging
of mass produced finished parts or products primarily
through automation, mechanization, or assembly
line processes. Typical USEs include electronics and
electrical equipment assembly, food and beverage
processing and packaging, and the production of
parts and sub-assemblies for other products. The
following standards apply to all specific USE types in the
manufacturing USE category:
i. Operations may include the storage of materials
and the loading and unloading of new materials
and finished products.
ii. Showrooms and the ANCILLARY sales of goods
produced on-SITE are prohibited.
iii. The production or USE of large quantities of
hazardous or explosive materials is prohibited.
d. Moving or Storage Services
USEs engaged in the moving of hoUSEhold or office
furniture, appliances, and equipment from one location
to another, including the temporary storage of those
same items. Typical USEs include moving companies
and self-service and mini-storage warehoUSEs. The
following moving & self storage specific USE types are
regulated differently than other USEs classified within
the moving & self storage category:
i. Self Storage: The temporary storage of personal
possessions in containers or individual rentable or
leasable spaces. The following standards apply:
a). A self storage USE is only permitted in a BUILDING
with more than one (1) PRINCIPAL USE, excluding
another self storage USE.
b). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
self storage PRINCIPAL USE:
i). Mitigation of any negative aesthetic
impacts that might result from required
security measures and restrictions on
visibility into the BUILDING’s interior.
ii). Location of loading, trash, and recycling
storage, and the procedure for drop-off and
pickup.
iii). Ability for the USE to adequately contribute
towards SomerVision’s objectives for
increasing employment opportunities in
the city.
iv). Abnormal SITE conditions that make the
less than desirable for other USEs.
e. Recycling Collection
USEs that collect and temporarily store recyclable
hoUSEhold materials including glass, cardboard, paper,
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 429
9. USE PROVISIONS
Use Definitions & Standards
aluminum, tin, and plastics that are regularly moved off-
SITE to be processed elsewhere.
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny
a special permit authorizing a recycling collection
PRINCIPAL USE:
a). Compatibility with the level of activity
associated with the surrounding properties.
b). Capacity of the local THOROUGHFARE network
providing ACCESS to the SITE.
c). Location and screening of loading, the
procedure for drop-off and pickup, and the
impact on pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular
traffic and circulation patterns in the
neighborhood.
d). Visual impact and quality of screening of
parked business vehicles.
f. Salvage Yard
An area or BUILDING where JUNK, waste, or scrap
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled,
packed, disassembled, or handled for reclamation,
disposal, or other like purposes, including but not
limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags,
rubber tires, and bottles. A salvage yard includes an
auto wrecking yard or BUILDING.
g. Trucking or Transportation Depot
USEs engaged in the dispatching and long-term or
short-term storage of large vehicles. Minor repair and
maintenance of vehicles stored on the premises is also
included.
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or
deny a special permit authorizing a trucking &
transportation depot PRINCIPAL USE:
a). Compatibility with the level of activity
associated with the surrounding properties.
b). Capacity of the local THOROUGHFARE network
providing ACCESS to the SITE and impact on
pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic and
circulation patterns in the neighborhood.
c). Location of driveway entrances and ACCESS
points in relation to the safety of pedestrians,
bicyclists, and motor vehicles.
d). Sight lines needed by the driver of any vehicle
entering or exiting the SITE.
e). Visual impact and quality of screening of
parked business vehicles.
f). Ventilation and air handling techniques to
reduce the emission of odor or exhaust onto
neighboring properties.
h. Wholesale Trade or Distribution
USEs engaged in the wholesale collection, sorting,
processing, and distribution of bulk mail, packages
or commercial goods, storage, processing, and
distribution of bulk goods including, but not limited
to, furniture & home furnishings; professional and
commercial equipment; electrical goods; hardware,
plumbing, and heating equipment; paper and paper
products; sundries; apparel; food and beverages;
healthcare equipment and supplies; and their
substantial equivalents to retailers, commercial
services, and/or industrial businesses. The following
standards apply:
i. ANCILLARY retail sales and wholesale showrooms
are permitted.
ii. Activities may include physically assembling,
sorting, and grading goods into large LOTs and
breaking bulk for redistribution in smaller LOTs in
such a way that has minimal impact on surrounding
properties.
iii. The wholesale and/or storage or warehousing of
toxic and/or hazardous materials is prohibited.
9. Lodging Use Categories
a. BED & BREAKFAST
A single DWELLING UNIT residential STRUCTURE providing
rooms for temporary, overnight lodging, with or
without meals, for paying guests. The following
standards apply:
i. A BED & BREAKFAST lodging USE is only permitted in
an owner-occupied or manager-occupied historic
STRUCTURE located within a designated LOCAL HISTORIC
DISTRICT.
ii. A BED & BREAKFAST lodging USE may be located within
a PRINCIPAL BUILDING or an ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.
iii. A common gathering space, such as a parlor,
dining room, or living room must be maintained for
guest USE.
iv. Cooking facilities are not permitted in guest rooms.
v. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
special permit authorizing a BED & BREAKFAST PRINCIPAL
USE:
a). MOBILITY MANAGEMENT options provided to guests
and the on-SITE management of parking.
b). Compliance with the Somerville Historic
Preservation Commission’s requirements and
guidelines for any alterations to the STRUCTURE
or SITE.
c). Operational procedures for limiting noise
impacts on neighboring properties.
b. HOTEL OR HOSTEL
430 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
9. USE PROVISIONS
Use Definitions & Standards
A BUILDING providing temporary lodging in guest rooms
or apartments to persons who have residences
elsewhere for a fee. The following standards apply:
i. HOTEL OR HOSTEL employees must be on-SITE at all
times.
ii. A hostel must be associated with a national or
international hostel organization.
iii. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
special permit authorizing a HOTEL OR HOSTEL PRINCIPAL
USE:
a). Compatibility with the level of activity
associated with the surrounding properties.
b). Capacity of the local THOROUGHFARE network
providing ACCESS to the SITE and impact on
pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic and
circulation patterns in the neighborhood.
c). Location and visibility of the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE,
guest drop-off area, taxi queuing station,
outdoor AMENITY SPACE for guests or employees,
and pedestrian circulation from all exit points.
10. Office Use Categories
a. GENERAL OFFICE
The regular processing, manipulation, or application
of business information or professional expertise
predominantly for administrative, professional,
and clerical operations in accounting, advertising,
business to business brokerage and other BUSINESS
SUPPORT SERVICES, employment, finance, healthcare
administration, information technology and/or services,
insurance, internet content DEVELOPMENT and publishing,
law, real estate, urban DEVELOPMENT and their substantial
equivalents. Office activities may or may not provide
direct services to the public. The following standards
apply:
i. Office USEs do not include activities materially
involved in fabricating, assembling, or warehousing
physical products for the retail or wholesale
market.
b. Research & DEVELOPMENT or Laboratory
The analysis, testing, and DEVELOPMENT of products,
or services predominantly for scientific research
operations in biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, medical
equipment, communication & information technology,
electronics, computer hardware, and their substantial
equivalents. The following standard apply:
i. Research & DEVELOPMENT and/or Laboratory does
not include activities involved in fabricating,
assembling, warehousing, or sale of products for
the retail or wholesale market.
ii. ANCILLARY DEVELOPMENT of mock-up and prototype
products is permitted so long as the total floor area
devoted to their fabrication or assembly is limited
to twenty-five percent (25%) to the GROSS FLOOR
AREA occupied by the USE.
11. Residential Use Categories
a. HOUSEHOLD LIVING
Residential occupancy of a BUILDING or portion of a
BUILDING in DWELLING UNITs by any number of persons
related by blood, marriage, adoption, or foster care
agreement and up to three (3) additional unrelated
persons living together as a single hoUSEkeeping unit.
Rental of a DWELLING UNIT for less than one (1) month
requires compliance with all City Ordinances.
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny
a special permit authorizing a HoUSEhold Living
PRINCIPAL USE:
a). The suitability of the site for a household living
principal use compared to other potential
principal uses.
b). The ability of the development proposal to
meet the demand for DWELLING UNITS of various
types, sizes, and BEDROOM counts.
c). The increase or decrease in the number or
price of any previously existing ADUs.
d). The number of motor vehicle parking spaces
proposed for development within a Transit
Area.
b. GROUP LIVING
Residential occupancy of a BUILDING or portion of a
BUILDING in ROOMING UNITs by up to two (2) persons
related by blood, marriage, adoption, or foster care
agreement; in DWELLING UNITs by more than four
(4) unrelated persons; and any multi-unit housing
owned by or affiliated with an educational institution.
GROUP LIVING residential USEs are not permitted to be
offered as Short-Term Rentals. The GROUP LIVING USE
category includes any residential occupancy that is
not categorized as HOUSEHOLD LIVING and any residential
accommodations that provide a kitchen, dining room,
living room, or bathroom shared between ROOMING
UNITs.
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
special permit authorizing a Group Living PRINCIPAL
USE:
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 431
9. USE PROVISIONS
Use Definitions & Standards
a). The suitability of the site for a group living
principal use compared to other potential
principal uses.
b). The increase or decrease in the number or
price of any previously existing ADUs.
c). The number of motor vehicle parking spaces
proposed for development within a Transit
Area.
d). Mitigation proposed to alleviate any impacts
attributable to the proposed development.
The following GROUP LIVING specific USE types are
regulated differently than other USEs classified within
the GROUP LIVING category:
ii. COMMUNITY OR GROUP RESIDENCE
Residential occupancy of a DWELLING UNIT by
more than four (4) unrelated individuals that are
‘handicapped’ as defined in 42 U.S.C. §3602
or have a ‘disability’ as defined in 42 U.S.C.
§12102. Both terms are defined as a physical or
mental impairment that substantially limits one
or more major life activities; a record of such an
impairment; or being regarded as having such an
impairment not including current, illegal USE of or
addiction to a controlled substance.
iii. DORMITORY OR CHAPTER HOUSE
Residential occupancy of a BUILDING or portion of a
BUILDING in DWELLING UNITs or ROOMING UNITs exclusively
by full- or part-time students, faculty, and staff of
an educational institution and any housing owned
by or affiliated with an educational institution.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
DORMITORY OR CHAPTER HOUSE PRINCIPAL USE:
i). Proximity of the primary educational
institution to the SITE.
ii). Concentration of dormitories, fraternities,
or sororities in the neighborhood.
iv. HOMELESS SHELTER
A facility that has a primary function of providing
overnight sleeping accommodations in ROOMING
UNITs or bunk rooms to homeless people.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
HOMELESS SHELTER:
i). The current supply of overnight sleeping
accommodations available within the city.
ii). The need for additional resources to
properly address changes in demand.
v. NURSING HOME OR ASSISTED LIVING
Residential occupancy in ROOMING UNITs where room
and board, PERSONAL SERVICES, and skilled nursing
care is provided to tenants. Nursing homes include
hospice care, but specifically exclude HOSPITALs.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
nursing home/assisted living PRINCIPAL USE:
i). Characteristics of the local THOROUGHFARE
network in providing a walkable
environment and ACCESS for emergency
vehicles.
ii). Location, visibility, and design of the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE, resident drop-off area,
and outdoor AMENITY SPACEs.
iii). Provision of communal indoor seating
areas with a direct line of SITE to the
outdoors.
vi. Rooming HoUSE
Residential occupancy of four (4) or more ROOMING
UNITs by individuals or up to two (2) persons
related by blood, marriage, adoption, or foster
care agreement. Rooming hoUSEs include boarding
hoUSEs, lodging hoUSEs, and single room occupancy
(SRO) buildings. The following standards apply:
a). A license from the City Council is required.
b). The unit must be provided with the following:
i). HoUSE rules establishing quiet hours, the
maximum number of guests, and clean-up
requirements for guest pets, if allowed.
ii). A functioning fire extinguisher.
iii). Child-proofed electrical outlets.
iv). A map identifying fire escape routes.
v). Directions for operating the temperature
control system.
vi). Emergency contact information.
c). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
rooming house PRINCIPAL USE:
i). Path of ACCESS to the unit and the privacy of
residents and neighboring properties.
ii). Location of designated outdoor smoking
areas.
iii). Operations plan for maintaining the unit,
including the inspection schedule for
smoke and carbon monoxide detectors
and the hours of operation for cleaning
services.
432 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
9. USE PROVISIONS
Use Definitions & Standards
12. Retail Sales Use Categories
a. Building/Home Supplies or Equipment
USEs that sell or otherwise provide furniture,
appliances, equipment, and/or home improvement
goods needed to repair, maintain, or visually enhance a
structure or premises that are, typically, too large to be
carried by hand. The following standards apply:
i. OUTDOOR DISPLAY of products and merchandise is
permitted according to the following:
a). OUTDOOR DISPLAY is permitted in the FRONTAGE
AREA or on a public sidewalk subject to all City
Ordinances as an ANCILLARY activity.
b). OUTDOOR DISPLAY must be removed and placed
inside a fully-enclosed building at the end of
each business day.
c). Display areas extending more than eight feet
from the FACADE are prohibited.
d). A minimum four (4) foot wide clear path of
ACCESS must be maintained to the PRINCIPAL
ENTRANCE.
e). Display areas are permitted to occupy up to
thirty percent (30%) of the FRONTAGE AREA.
f). Display areas must comply with the sidewalk
standards of Article 8 PUBLIC REALM Standards.
ii. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
special permit authorizing a building/home supplies
& equipment retail PRINCIPAL USE:
a). Location of driveways entrances and ACCESS
points in relation to the safety of pedestrians,
bicyclists, and motor vehicles.
b). Capacity of the local THOROUGHFARE network
providing ACCESS to the SITE and impact on
pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic and
circulation patterns in the neighborhood.
c). Location of loading, trash and recycling
storage, and the procedure for drop-off and
pickup.
b. Consumer Goods
Selling or otherwise providing consumer goods,
functional or decorative, for USE in entertainment,
comfort, or aesthetics which are of a size that a
customer can typically carry by hand. Consumer goods
stores include, but are not limited to, stores selling
apparel and ACCESSories, sundries, pharmaceuticals,
hardware and hand tools, hoUSEkeeping supplies, plants
and other gardening products, convenience food and
beverage for off-SITE consumption, and their substantial
equivalents. The manufacturing, assembly, or packaging
of merchandise is prohibited unless ANCILLARY to the
sale of products from the same location. The following
standards apply:
i. OUTDOOR DISPLAY of products and merchandise is
permitted according to the following:
a). OUTDOOR DISPLAY is permitted in any storefront
frontage or on a public sidewalk subject to all
City Ordinances as an ANCILLARY activity.
b). OUTDOOR DISPLAY must be removed and placed
inside a fully-enclosed building at the end of
each business day.
c). Display areas extending more than eight feet
from the FACADE are prohibited.
d). A minimum four (4) foot wide clear path of
ACCESS must be maintained to the principal
entrance.
e). Display areas are permitted to occupy up to
thirty percent (30%) of the FRONTAGE AREA.
f). Display areas must comply with the sidewalk
standards of Article 8 PUBLIC REALM Standards.
The following consumer goods specific USE types are
regulated differently than other USEs classified within
the consumer goods category:
ii. Alcohol Sales: Any alcoholic beverage sales
establishment primarily involving the sale of alcohol
where beer, wine or distilled spirits are sold for
off-sale consumption and where more than five
(5) percent of the floor area of the establishment
is devoted to the sale, display or storage of beer,
wine or distilled spirits.
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
packaged liquor PRINCIPAL USE:
i). Concentration of packaged liquor USEs in
the neighborhood.
iii. Firearms Sales: A store selling, transferring, or
leasing; or advertising for sale, transfer, or lease, or
offering or exposing for sale, transfer, or lease, any
firearm and/or ammunition.
iv. Pet Store: USEs that sell or otherwise provide
hoUSEhold pets. The following standards apply:
a). The ANCILLARY sale of pet supplies is permitted.
b). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
pet store PRINCIPAL USE:
i). Building methods or techniques for noise
mitigation to limit noise for other USErs of
the building and ABUTters.
c. Fresh Food Market or Grocery Store
The self-service sales of food and hoUSEhold products
including, but not limited to, fresh and prepared meat,
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 433
9. USE PROVISIONS
Use Definitions & Standards
dairy, baked goods, fresh fruits and vegetables, canned
and/or frozen foods, and other regularly consumed
hoUSEhold products. The following standards apply:
i. Floor area devoted to the sale of non-food items
must not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the
sales floor.
ii. ANCILLARY prepared food and beverage service is
permitted.
d. Farm or Vendor Market
The direct sales of goods and/or products by farmers or
vendors to consumers from individual booths, tables,
or stands, whether indoors or outdoors.
13. Urban Agriculture Use Categories
a. Farming
The cultivation of soil for the production, planting,
caring for, treating, growing, and harvesting of any
aquacultural, horticultural, hydrocultural commodities.
The specific USE types within the farming USE category
are:
i. Commercial Farming
Farming for the purpose of selling produce for a
profit.
a). Sales are subject to compliance with local,
state, and federal regulations.
b). COMMERCIAL FARMING may be conducted
outdoors, in a greenhoUSE, or on the roof of a
principal or ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.
ii. COMMUNITY FARMING
FARMING by a non-profit agency with the intent of
selling produce.
a). Sales are subject to compliance with local,
state, and federal regulations.
b. COMMUNITY GARDENING
The practice of growing and cultivating plants; including
vegetables, flowers, and fruits; for display, enjoyment,
or private/personal consumption. The following
standards apply:
i. Sales, processing, and storage of plants or plant
products are prohibited on SITE.
14. Accessory Use Categories
a. The following standards apply to all ACCESSORY USEs
i. ACCESSORY USEs may not be established prior to the
establishment of a PRINCIPAL USE.
b. HOME OCCUPATIONs
The HOME OCCUPATIONs ACCESSORY USE category includes
limited business activities carried out incidental to
a HOUSEHOLD LIVING PRINCIPAL USE. HOME OCCUPATIONs
include, but are not limited to, the office of an
architect, attorney, engineer, instructor, realtor, sales
representative, software developer, teacher and their
substantial equivalents that do not involve persons
regularly visiting the property for business purposes,
but instead primarily involves the operator visiting
clients off-SITE. The following USEs are not considered a
HOME OCCUPATION: auto or appliance repair, contractor’s
shop or storage, barber shop, beauty parlors,
commercial stables or kennels, medical or dental
office, body art, massage, or acupuncture.
i. The following standards apply to all specific USE
types in the HOME OCCUPATION ACCESSORY USE category:
a). HOME OCCUPATIONs must be operated within
a completely enclosed principal or ACCESSORY
BUILDING TYPE owned or occupied by the resident
of the property where the HOME OCCUPATION is
located.
b). No storage of materials, supplies, or
equipment is permitted outdoors.
c). The production of offensive noise, vibration,
glare, odors, parking/loading demands,
traffic, or other negative impacts that
unreasonably interfere with any person’s “quiet
expectations” in enjoyment of their residence
is prohibited.
d). No display of products may be visible from the
right-of-way of any public THOROUGHFARE.
e). SHIPping and delivery is restricted to PARCEL and
small freight carriers.
f). One (1) OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE is permitted for
the HOME OCCUPATION.
g). HOME OCCUPATIONs conducted in an ACCESSORY
STRUCTURE are limited in size by the provisions
governing the ACCESSORY BUILDING TYPE (see
Garage or Workshop).
h). Products produced on-SITE must be grown,
fabricated, or assembled by hand.
i). HOME OCCUPATIONs USE must be operated by the
occupant of DWELLING UNIT on the LOT.
The specific USE types within the HOME OCCUPATION
ACCESSORY USE category are:
ii. CREATIVE STUDIO
A HOME OCCUPATION that generates and exploits
intellectual property through individual creativity,
skill, and talent; creates, produces, distributes,
rehearses, performs, sells, and/or teaches the
visual arts, performing arts, applied arts, literature,
heritage, media, or music; or creates, produces,
invents, designs, develops or prototypes content,
goods, or products.
iii. HOBBY KENNEL
A HOME OCCUPATION involving the raising and care of
four (4) or more dogs, excluding puppies younger
than three (3) months, for breeding, sale, training,
show, hunting, and other related purposes except
boarding. The following standards apply:
a). Up to six (6) dogs, excluding puppies younger
than three (3) months, are permitted.
434 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
9. USE PROVISIONS
Use Definitions & Standards
b). All dogs must be licensed and vaccinated as
required under the City’s laws.
c). The SITE will be subject to inspection at
reasonable times by the Animal Control Officer
to ensure that the standards and conditions of
approval of a special permit are met.
d). Boarding of animals or other commercial USEs
of the SITE are not permitted.
e). Dog waste must be disposed of daily, either
sealed and disposed of with trash or in a
maintained enzymatic dog waste system.
f). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
HOBBY KENNEL HOME OCCUPATION ACCESSORY USE:
i). Design of confinement of dogs to the
property.
ii). Design and size of the SITE to
accommodate the safety and comfort of
dogs.
iii). Amount of on-SITE landscaping.
iv). Operational procedures for controlling
barking, particularly between the hours of
9:00pm and 7:00am, including hours that
the dogs are outside, proper training and
frequency of walks.
iv. HOME-BASED BUSINESS
A HOME OCCUPATION carried on by the resident of a
DWELLING UNIT, where the occuPATIOn is secondary to
the USE of the DWELLING UNIT for residential purposes
and where the “quiet expectations” of neighbors
take precedence over work needs of the occuPATIOn
in question. The following standards apply:
a). Up to one (1) non-resident employee may be
present at any one time during the hours of
operation.
b). Retails sales to walk-in customers are
prohibited.
c). Client visits must be by appointment only and
business activities may not have more than
one (1) visitor car at a time.
v. HOME-BASED DAY CARE
A HOME OCCUPATION providing custodial care of
children under seven (7) years of age or children
under sixteen (16) years of age if such children
have special needs. Home day care does not
include the informal cooperative arrangement
for child care among neighbors or relatives, or
the occasional care of children with or without
compensation. The following standards apply:
a). Care may be provided for up to six (6) children
at a time, including any children living with the
residence providing home DAY CARE SERVICES.
vi. HOME OFFICE
A HOME OCCUPATION conducted solely by the
residents of the DWELLING UNIT without the
employment of other persons. The following
standards apply:
a). All sales, services, or work that requires the
presence of a partner, employee, or customer
must take place off-SITE.
c. Urban Agriculture
The urban agriculture ACCESSORY USE category includes
a range of food growing practices including FARMING
and the keeping of CHICKENs and/or bees, but not other
types of live stock. The specific USE types within the
urban agriculture ACCESSORY USE category are:
i. APICULTURE:
The maintenance of honey bee colonies,
commonly in hives. The following performance
standards apply:
a). APICULTURE is subject to all applicable rules
and regulations established by the Health
Department of the City of Somerville.
b). Permitted bee species are restricted to the
common domestic HONEYBEE (Apis mellifera).
c). Ownership, care, and control is the
responsibility of a resident of a DWELLING UNIT on
the LOT.
d). Up to two (2) honey bee colonies may be kept
on a LOT. Health regulations may further limit
the number and/or manner that bees are kept.
e). HONEYBEEs and beekeeping materials are not
permitted within 20 feet of a FRONT LOT LINE.
f). The sale of honey produced on SITE is permitted
between the hours of 7:00am to 9:00pm, May
1st through October 31st and up to three (3)
days per week for a total of twenty-five (25)
days per year.
ii. AVICULTURE:
The raising and care of birds. The following
performance standards apply:
a). AVICULTURE is subject to all applicable rules
and regulations established by the Health
Department of the City of Somerville.
b). Permitted bird species are restricted to the
common domestic CHICKEN (Gallus gallus
domesticus), specifically hens.
c). Roosters are prohibited.
d). Ownership, care, and control is the
responsibility of a resident of a DWELLING UNIT on
the LOT.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 435
9. USE PROVISIONS
Use Definitions & Standards
e). Up to six (6) hens may be kept on a LOT. Health
regulations may further limit the number and/or
manner that hens are kept.
f). Hens are not permitted within 20 feet of a
FRONT LOT LINE.
g). The on SITE sale of eggs produced on SITE is
permitted between the hours of 7:00am to
9:00pm, May 1st through October 31st and up
to three (3) days per week for a total of twentyfive
(25) days per year.
iii. COMMERCIAL FARMING:
The cultivation of soil and the production, planting,
caring for, treating, growing, and harvesting of any
aquacultural, horticultural, and/or HYDROCULTURAL
commodities. The following performance standards
apply:
a). FARMING is subject to all applicable rules
and regulations established by the Health
Department of the City of Somerville.
b). Sales are subject to compliance with local,
state, and federal regulations.
c). COMMERCIAL FARMING may be conducted
outdoors, in a greenhoUSE, or on the roof of a
principal or ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.
d). Ownership, care, and control of an outdoor,
greenhoUSE, or roof farm is the responsibility of
a resident of a DWELLING UNIT on the LOT.
e). The on SITE sale of agricultural commodities
produced on SITE is permitted between the
hours of 7:00am to 9:00pm, May 1st through
October 31st and up to (3) days per week for a
total of twenty-five (25) days per year.
f). Proof of annual soil testing is required to be
posted during all sales.
iv. Residential Gardening:
The practice of growing and cultivating plants;
including vegetables, flowers, and fruits;
for display, enjoyment, or private/personal
consumption. The following performance standards
apply:
a). Sales are prohibited.
b). Gardening may be conducted outdoors, in a
greenhoUSE, or on the roof of a principal or
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.
c). Ownership, care, and control is the
responsibility of a resident of a DWELLING UNIT on
the LOT.
d. Vehicle Parking
The vehicular parking ACCESSORY USE category includes
any storage, for a limited period of time, of operable
motor vehicles. The following specific vehicular parking
USEs are regulated differently than other USEs classified
within the vehicular parking ACCESSORY USE category:
i. Home Business Vehicle Parking
Parking for motor vehicles owned and operated in
connection with a business in an off-STREET parking
area that is ACCESSory to a residential USE. The
following standards apply:
a). Only one business-related vehicle is permitted
and must not exceed a one-ton carrying
capacity.
b). Tow-trucks are prohibited.
c). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
home business vehicle parking ACCESSORY USE:
i). Location of driveways entrances and
ACCESS points in relation to the safety of
pedestrians, bicyclists, and motor vehicles.
ii). Visual impact and quality of screening of
vehicles.
436 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
9. USE PROVISIONS
Use Definitions & Standards
10 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
10.1 LAND PLATTING .................................................439
Development Review 439
General 439
Thoroughfare Network 439
Blocks 439
Alley Access 439
Lots 440
10.2 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES ...............................441
General 441
Permitted Accessory Structures 441
10.3 LANDSCAPING ...................................................444
Purpose 444
Applicability 444
Landscape Installation 444
Landscape Maintenance 444
Site Landscaping 444
Landscape Buffers 445
Parking Lot Landscaping 446
10.4 GREEN SCORE ....................................................447
Overview 447
Applicability 447
Compliance & Enforcement 447
Calculation 447
Eligibility 448
Measurement 448
10.5 OUTDOOR CAFE SEATING .................................449
Applicability 449
Development Review 449
Cafe Area Dimensions 449
Furniture 449
Weather Protection 450
Enclosures 450
10.6 FENCES & WALLS ...............................................451
Fences 451
Retaining Walls 451
10.7 OUTDOOR LIGHTING .........................................452
Intent 452
Purpose 452
Applicability 452
Lighting Standards 452
10.8 SCREENING .........................................................456
Applicability 456
Loading Facilities 456
Service Areas 456
Mechanical Equipment 456
10.9 COMMERCIAL SIGNS .........................................457
Purpose 457
Applicability 457
Development Review 457
Address Signs 457
Exempt Signs 457
Prohibited Signs 457
Temporary Signs 458
Sign Maintenance 458
Removal 458
Sign Illumination 458
Blade Sign 459
Wall Sign 460
Awning or Canopy Sign 461
Suspended Sign 462
Sidewalk Sign 463
Window Sign 464
Display Case 465
Vertical Blade / Banner Sign 466
Yard Sign 467
Wall Mural 468
Roof or Skyline Sign 469
10.10 STEEP SLOPES ....................................................470
Intent 470
Purpose 470
Applicability 470
Development Review 470
10.11 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT .........................471
Applicability 471
Green Buildings 471
Green Roofs & Storm Water Management 471
Heat Island Reduction 471
Environmental Performance 471
10.12 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION ...........................472
Purpose 472
Applicability 472
Development Review 472
Wireless Communication Towers 472
Wireless Communication Antennas 472
Ancillary Structures 473
Design Guidelines 473
Abandonment 473

12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 439
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Land Platting
10.1 LAND PLATTING
1. Development Review
a. DEVELOPMENT review is subject to the provisions of
Article 15: Administration of this Ordinance.
b. Unless otherwise specified, all land platting, including
SUBDIVISION, LOT SPLITs, LOT MERGERs, and LOT LINE
ADJUSTMENTs, requires the submittal of a development
review application to the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the
issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance prior
any other DEVELOPMENT review.
2. General
a. The SUBDIVISION of land requires SUBDIVISION Plan
Approval. See §15.3.1 SUBDIVISION Plan Approval for
more information.
b. Unless otherwise specified, DEVELOPMENT SITEs over
four (4) acres in land area must be subdivided with
THOROUGHFAREs to create BLOCKs and LOTs conforming to
the provisions of this Section.
c. LOT SPLITs, LOT MERGERs, and LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTs require
Site Plan Approval. See §15.3.2 Site Plan Approval for
more information.
d. LOT SPLITs, LOT MERGERs, and LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTs to any
LOT designated as a LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT or identified
on the Massachusetts or National Registers of Historic
Places require a Special Permit.
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
Special Permit authorizing the LOT SPLIT, LOT MERGER,
or LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT of a LOT designated as a LOCAL
HISTORIC DISTRICT or identified on the Massachusetts
or National Registers of Historic Places:
a). The recommendations of the Somerville
Historic Commission.
3. Thoroughfare Network
a. The general location of all proposed THOROUGHFARES
must conform with official maps and exiting policy
plans of the City of Somerville.
b. All THOROUGHFAREs must intersect with other
THOROUGHFAREs, forming a network.
c. Where a DEVELOPMENT SITE adjoins unsubdivided land,
new THOROUGHFAREs must extend to or along SITE
boundaries to ensure future THOROUGHFARE connections
to the unsubdivided land in the event of its DEVELOPMENT.
d. THOROUGHFAREs within a DEVELOPMENT SITE must connect
to any existing or proposed THOROUGHFAREs on adjoining
SITEs.
e. Termination of a THOROUGHFARE at a “T” intersection is
permitted, provided that the overall connectivity of the
THOROUGHFARE network is maintained and intersections
are adequately spaced subject to the approval by the
Director of Mobility.
f. To every extent practicable, proposed THOROUGHFAREs
should align with intersections on adjacent SITEs to
provide for the continuation of THOROUGHFAREs from
adjoining areas.
g. Cul-de-sacs and other dead-end THOROUGHFARES are
prohibited.
h. THOROUGHFARES must be permanently open and
provide public ACCESS as part of an overall connected
THOROUGHFARE network.
i. The Planning Board may waive the intersection
requirements of §13.3.3.g on a case-by-case basis to
accommodate specific SITE conditions.
4. Blocks
a. Unless otherwise specified, BLOCKS may have individual
BLOCK FACES up to five-hundred (500) feet in width and a
total perimeter up to sixteen-hundred (1,600) feet.
b. BLOCK FACES are measured as the aggregate of all FRONT
LOT LINES and the width of ALLEYS, if present, on one side
of a BLOCK.
c. BLOCK perimeter is measured as the aggregate of all
BLOCK FACE lengths of an individual BLOCK.
d. BLOCKS should be rectangular in shape, but are
expected to respond to natural features.
e. The Planning Board may waive BLOCK size requirements
for portions of DEVELOPMENT SITEs ABUTTING areas of
undeveloped land, areas unsuitable for DEVELOPMENT,
pre-existing incomplete BLOCKs, or RAIL RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
f. BLOCK dimensions may be calculated at a reduced BLOCK
FACE or perimeter length where a mid-BLOCK passage
connecting oppoSITE sides of a BLOCK is installed as a
dedicated right-of-way or reserved with a permanent
ACCESS EASEMENT.
5. Alley Access
a. BLOCKs may be ACCESSed by ALLEYs in one of the
configurations defined below:
i. Common BLOCK: A BLOCK where parking and service
areas internal to the BLOCK are shared among
several LOTs and buildings.
ii. H - BLOCK: A BLOCK with three ALLEYs that intersect
to form an “H”, allowing DEVELOPMENT to front on
four BLOCK FACEs.
iii. T - BLOCK: A BLOCK with two perpendicular ALLEYs
that intersect to form a “T”, allowing DEVELOPMENT to
front on three BLOCK FACES.
iv. I - BLOCK: A BLOCK with one ALLEY servicing LOTs on
either side of a BLOCK, allowing DEVELOPMENT to front
on two BLOCK FACEs.
b. To every extent possible, ALLEY ACCESS into BLOCKS should
440 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Land Platting
be aligned on oppoSITE BLOCK FACES as well as with ALLEYS
on oppoSITE sides the STREET.
6. Lots
a. All LOTS must have frontage on a CIVIC SPACE or a
THOROUGHFARE, excluding ALLEYS.
i. LOTS ABUTTING only a CIVIC SPACE at the FRONT LOT LINE
must also ABUT an ALLEY at the rear or side.
b. LOTS must have a LOT WIDTH and LOT DEPTH appropriate
for one or more of the BUILDING TYPE(s) permitted for the
district where the LOT is located.
c. Unless otherwise specified, LOTS may be platted to
create a CORNER, INTERIOR, or KEY LOT.
d. FLAG LOTS are prohibited.
e. THROUGH LOTS are prohibited, except for LOTs intended
as a Through BLOCK Plaza CIVIC SPACE type or a BLOCK
BUILDING BUILDING TYPE.
f. To avoid creating irregular LOT shapes, LOTS must be
platted to be generally rectilinear, where the SIDE LOT
LINES are within 45 degrees of perpendicular to the
FRONT LOT LINE or to the tangent of a curved FRONT LOT
LINE, and generally straight throughout their length.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 441
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Accessory Structures
10.2 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
1. General
a. All DEVELOPMENT, excluding NORMAL MAINTENANCE, requires
the submittal of a development review application to
the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the issuance of a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance prior to the issuance of a Building
Permit or Certificate of Occupancy.
b. Unless otherwise specified, ACCESSory structures are
permitted by-right.
c. ACCESSory structures may not be constructed prior to
the following:
i. construction of a PRINCIPAL BUILDING; or
ii. issuance of a special permit for an ACCESSORY USE, as
applicable.
d. The BUILDING OFFICIAL shall determine when a structure
is ACCESSory to the PRINCIPAL BUILDING of a LOT. To
determine that a structure is accessory, the BUILDING
OFFICIAL must find that the structure:
i. is customarily found in association with a permitted
principal or ACCESSORY USE;
ii. is clearly incidental and subordinate to the PRINCIPAL
BUILDING in terms of area, size, function, and
location; and
iii. is operated and maintained under the same
ownership as the PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
e. Unless otherwise specified, ACCESSory structures are
permitted to ENCROACH any side or rear SETBACK, provided
that at least three (3) feet is maintained from the
vertical plane of any LOT LINE.
f. ACCESSory structures are not permitted to ENCROACH into
any maximum front SETBACK.
g. The combination of principal buildings
2. Permitted Accessory Structures
a. Amateur Radio Equipment
ANTENNAs located on ground-mounted TOWERs and
roof-mounted support structures USEd to broadcast an
amateur (ham) radio station licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC). The following
standards apply:
i. Ground-mounted TOWERs are permitted only in the
rear yard and must be located a minimum of ten
feet from any LOT LINE and any overhead electric
distribution or transmission lines. The TOWER must
be fully enclosed by a fence or wall of at least four
feet in height.
ii. Ground-mounted TOWERs may not exceed thirtyfive
(35) feet, measured from the base of the
supporting TOWER to its tallest point.
iii. A roof-mounted ANTENNA, when fully extended, is
limited to a maximum height of ten feet above the
height of the structure to which it is mounted.
iv. One (1) ANTENNA, whether ground-mounted or roofmounted,
is permitted per LOT.
b. Apiary
A structure for the keeping of HONEYBEEs. The following
standards apply:
i. Apiaries and other beekeeping supplies are not
permitted within twenty (20) feet of a front lot line.
c. Arbor or Trellis
A structure of latticework used to support climbing
plants or vines, whether a vertical wall or an arching
framework. The following standards apply:
i. In the NR District, arbors and trellises may be up to
eight (8) feet in height.
d. Carport
A roofed structure, whether attached to or detached
from a principal building, that provides weather
protection for surface parking of up to two (2) motor
vehicles. The following standards apply:
i. A carport must be set back at least 20 feet from
any front lot line.
ii. Where an improved alley is available, vehicular
access to the carport must take place from the
alley.
i. A carport may be up to twelve (12) feet in height.
ii. A carport must be set-back a minimum of three
(3) feet from any side or rear lot line unless
constructed of fireproof materials.
e. Chicken Coop (Hen House)
A free-standing structure for the keeping of chickens,
with nest boxes for egg-laying and perches where the
birds can sleep. The following standards apply:
i. Chicken coops may be up to eight (8) feet in height
and are not permitted within twenty (20) feet of a
front lot line.
f. Cold Frame
An unheated outdoor structure used for protecting
seedlings and plants from cold weather typically
consisting of, but not limited to, a wooden or concrete
frame built close to the ground and a glass or clear
plastic lid. The following standards apply:
i. Cold frames may be up to six and one-half (6.5)
feet in height.
g. Compost Bin
An outdoor container in which garden refuse and
other organic waste is deposited in order to produce
compost. The following standards apply:
i. Compost bins must have a ground gate and pest
proof lids.
h. Construction Trailer or Office
A temporary structure providing office space for project
management at a construction site. The following
standards apply:
i. Construction trailers and/or offices must comply
442 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Accessory Structures
with the setbacks applicable to principal buildings
for the appropriate district.
i. Donation Box
A container, usually made of metal, with a one-way
drop to allow donation of household items. The
following standards apply:
i. Donation boxes are not permitted in the
Neighborhood Residence or Urban Residence
districts.
ii. Only one (1) donation box is permitted per lot.
iii. Containers must be watertight and secured to the
ground.
j. Farm Stand
A temporary structure for the display and sale of clean,
whole, unprocessed produce, eggs, or honey cultivated
on site. The following standards apply:
i. One (1) farm stand is permitted per lot.
ii. A farm stand may be up to twelve (12) feet in
height.
k. Gazebo
A structure covered by a roof, occasionally enclosed
with screening, and intended for outdoor recreational
use. The following standards apply:
i. A gazebo may be up to twelve (12) feet in height.
l. Greenhouse
A structure, primarily of transparent material, in which
temperature and humidity can be controlled for the
cultivation or protection of plants or other horticultural
products. The following standards apply:
i. A greenhouse may be up to twelve (12) feet in
height.
ii. Green houses on the roofs of buildings must be
setback at least five (5) feet from the exterior walls
of any structure.
m. Hoop House
A structure typically made of, but not limited to, arching
framing covered with a translucent material for the
purpose of growing food or ornamental plants. The
following standards apply:
i. A hoop house may be up to six and one-half (6.5)
feet in height.
ii. The covering of a hoop house must be removed
and stored when plant cultivation is not in process.
n. Market Stand
A partially-enclosed structure used for retail sales of
products of an urban agriculture use. The following
standards apply:
i. A market stand may be up to twelve (12) feet in
height.
o. Outbuilding
A free-standing, fully-enclosed structure used for
accessory vehicle parking, a home occupation, or as
ancillary space for residential principal use including,
but not limited to, a playroom for children. The following
standards apply:
i. Outbuildings must be set back at least twenty (20)
feet from any front lot line.
ii. Where an improved alley is available, vehicular
access to the outbuilding must take place from the
alley.
iii. An outbuilding may be up to twelve (12) feet in
height.
iv. An outbuilding must be setback a minimum of
three (3) feet from any side or rear lot line unless
constructed of fireproof materials.
p. Pergola
A structure consisting of parallel colonnades supporting
an open roof or girders and cross rafters, often shading
an outdoor amenity area. The following standards
apply:
i. A pergola may be up to eight (8) feet in height.
q. Pool or Hot Tub
A structure filled with water used for recreation or
physical therapy. The following standards apply:
i. Pools and hot tubs must be set-back at least five
(5) feet from a side or rear lot line and ten (10) feet
from a front lot line.
ii. Uncontrolled access to pools or hot tubs must be
prevented using a wall, fence, or other acceptable
means.
r. Real Estate Trailer or Office
A temporary structure providing office space for the
sale or rental of real estate at a construction site. The
following standards apply:
i. Real Estate trailers and/or offices must comply
with the setbacks applicable to principal buildings
for the appropriate district.
ii. Sleeping and cooking facilities are prohibited.
s. Satellite Dish
A dish antenna for transmitting signals to a receiver or
receiving station or for receiving television, radio, data,
communication, or other signals from other antennas,
satellites, or services. Small satellite dish antennas are
one meter or less in diameter and large satellite dish
antennas exceed one meter in diameter. The following
standards apply:
i. One (1) satellite dish is permitted per unit.
ii. Satellite dish antennas must be permanently
installed as building-mounted or ground-mounted
structures and must not be portable or movable.
iii. Building-mounted satellite dishes may not be
installed on any facade unless such placement
is required for reception of an acceptable signal,
according to a written statement from a licensed,
authorized installer on company letterhead that
includes the installer’s signature.
iv. Roof-mounted satellite dish antennas must be
located a minimum of five feet from any roof edge.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 443
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Accessory Structures
v. Large satellite dish antennas are permitted only in
rear yards, and must be set back from all lot lines
a distance that is at least equal to the height of the
dish, or five feet, whichever is less.
t. Shed
A roofed structure used as a storage space. The
following standards apply:
i. Sheds may be up to twelve (12) feet in height.
u. Solar Collector
Any of a variety of structures designed to absorb solar
radiation for the purpose of heating water or buildings
or the producing electricity.
v. Temporary Shelter
A temporary, movable or wheeled structure used as a
residence. The following standards apply:
i. Occupancy is permitted as a Household Living us,
but is restricted to up to twelve (12) consecutive
months during the reconstruction of a principal
building or accessory building after a fire or
catastrophe.
444 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Landscaping
10.3 LANDSCAPING
1. Purpose
a. To ensure vegetation is properly planted and installed
in a timely manner.
b. To increase the compatibility of DEVELOPMENT in adjacent
zoning districts, minimize the potential adverse impacts
of adjacent land USEs, increase privacy, and minimize
the trespass of undue sound and light between
adjacent properties.
c. To protect existing trees and expand the city’s mature
tree canopy in order to enhance the quality of life
within Somerville.
d. To promote a healthy urban forest.
2. Applicability
a. This section is applicable to all DEVELOPMENT involving
the construction of a new PRINCIPAL BUILDING, SITE
improvements, or the construction or reconstruction of
a SURFACE PARKING LOT or CIVIC SPACE.
b. MODIFICATIONs to an existing PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE, the
addition of BUILDING COMPONENTS to an existing PRINCIPAL
BUILDING TYPE, changes in USE, and the construction
of a new ACCESSory STRUCTURES are permitted without
triggering the standards of this section.
c. NORMAL MAINTENANCE of an existing PRINCIPAL BUILDING
TYPE including, but not limited to painting, roof
replacement, re-siding, window replacement, and other
improvements deemed to be cosmetic in nature by the
BUILDING OFFICIAL, is permitted without triggering the
standards of this section.
d. Resealing or re-striping of a PARKING LOT, which does
not entail paving, resurfacing, or replacement of the
asphalt, concrete, or other surface paving material,
is permitted without triggering the standards of this
section.
e. When compliance is triggered for an existing SURFACE
PARKING LOT, the landscape standards of this section take
precedence over parking standards found elsewhere in
this Ordinance.
3. Landscape Installation
a. National Standards
i. Vegetation and other horticultural materials must
be installed in accordance with the latest edition of
the American Standard for Nursery Stock published
by American Hort.
b. Installation Prior to Occupancy
i. Landscaping required by this Ordinance must be
completed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy by the BUILDING OFFICIAL.
ii. If seasonal or abnormally inclement weather
conditions preclude complete installation, the
BUILDING OFFICIAL may grant a Certificate of
Occupancy if the APPLICANT provides letter of
commitment to complete installation by the next
planting season.
4. Landscape Maintenance
a. All vegetation must be maintained in healthy, growing
condition at all times by the PROPERTY OWNER(s) or their
designated agent(s).
b. Turf grass must be mowed and edged; PLANTING BEDs
must be weeded, and kept free of litter; all trees,
hedges, bushes, SHRUBS, and other vegetation must
be trimmed to prevent ENCROACHMENT by growth that
obstructs USE of the sidewalk of any public THOROUGHFARE
by pedestrians in any way.
c. Vegetation that is significantly damaged, missing,
infested, disease-ridden, or dead must be replaced
within one (1) year or by the next planting season,
whichever occurs first.
d. Vegetation that is deemed hazardous or unsafe or that
interferes with public utilities must be abated by the
PROPERTY OWNER as soon as practicable or within thirty
(30) days of notice by the BUILDING OFFICIAL.
e. The BUILDING OFFICIAL may remove any landscaping that
is an immediate peril to persons or property summarily,
without notice, and at the PROPERTY OWNER’s expense.
5. Site Landscaping
a. Ground Treatment
i. LOT AREA uncovered by structures or impermeable
surfaces must be landscaped with one (1) or more
of the following treatments:
a). Urban agricultural activities subject to Article 9.
USE Provisions;
b). Seeded or sodded turf grass maintained until
coverage is complete;
c). GROUNDCOVERs appropriate for the location that
are sized and spaced to provide at least fifty
percent (50%) coverage after the first full
growing season and complete coverage at
maturity;
d). Bushes, SHRUBS, vines, flowers, and other
horticultural materials that are sized and
spaced to provide at least fifty percent
(50%) coverage at the time of planting with
the remaining area covered by COARSE GRADE
GROUNDCOVER MULCH;
e). Trees;
f). Porous asphalt, pervious concrete, paving stones,
or grass pavers with appropriate bedding and an
aggregate sub-base;
g). Inorganic surfacing such as crushed stone,
gravel, shell, pea gravel, and washed stone
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 445
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Landscaping
covering up to ten percent (10%) of the
uncovered LOT AREA in total.
ii. Trails; naturally occurring stream beds, rock
outcroppings, and similar features typically lacking
in vegetation; clay or sand surfaces associated with
athletic fields; and water features are exempt.
b. Trees
i. New trees must be at least ten (10) feet in height
or two (2) inches in CALIPER when planted.
ii. The root flare of new trees must be exposed and
planted at grade.
c. Soils
i. Vegetation must be planted in soil of sufficient
volume, composition, and nutrient balance to
sustain health growth.
ii. Soils must be appreciably free of gravel, stones,
rubble, or trash.
iii. All compacted soil, contaminated soil, or road base
fill must be removed.
d. Mulch
i. GROUNDCOVER MULCHES certified by the Mulch & Soil
Council are highly recommended.
ii. The USE of fine grade and shredded soil
conditioning mulches as GROUNDCOVER MULCH is
prohibited.
iii. Mulch made from cypress, cocoa shells, and
rubber is prohibited.
e. Spacing
i. The spacing and placement of plants must be
adequate and appropriate for the typical size,
shape, and habit of the plant species at maturity.
f. Weather Protection
i. LANDSCAPE AREAs within six (6) feet of a paved
vehicular parking area or roadway of a THOROUGHFARE
must be raised or protected by curbing or edging at
least six (6) inches in elevation above the finished
pavement to protect plantings from traffic, de-icing
salts, and snow plowing operations common to the
winter season.
g. Water features
i. Constructed water features such as pools,
fountains, and ponds that operate with water
recirculation systems must be designed to prevent
seepage and leaks.
h. Restrictions
i. Invasive plant species to the State of
Massachusetts are prohibited and must be
removed if already existing on a DEVELOPMENT SITE.
ii. Vegetation with spines, thorns, or needles that
may present hazards to pedestrians are prohibited
from within two (2) feet of any FRONT LOT LINE.
iii. Nothing but GROUNDCOVER less than six (6) inches
in height may be planted or installed within any
underground or overhead utility or drainage
EASEMENT without consent of the utility provider or
EASEMENT holder and the City of Somerville.
iv. Nothing but GROUNDCOVER less than six (6) inches in
height may be planted or installed within three (3)
feet of any fire protection system.
v. Artificial plants and artificial turf are prohibited,
excluding civic space athletic fields that are subject
to intense USE and soil compaction that prohibits
the establishment of turf grass and areas where
paving or grass paving systems will not suffice
given the area’s purpose and level of USE.
6. Landscape Buffers
a. General
i. Any LOT ABUTTING the side or REAR LOT LINE of a LOT in
the NR district must be screened by a landscape
buffer.
b. Type
i. Landscape buffers must be designed as a Type A or
Type B buffer in accordance with Table 10.3.1.
c. Buffer Design Standards
i. Landscape buffers must be located along the outer
perimeter of the LOT, parallel to and extending
along one hundred percent (100%) of the length of
the LOT LINE.
ii. Three (3) small trees with a minimum caliper of
one and one-half (1.5) inches may be substituted
for each required large tree.
iii. Shrubs must be of at least a five (5) gallon
container size when planted and at least seventy
five percent (75%) of all shrubs must be evergreen.
iv. Required trees and SHRUBS may be installed at
varying distances to create a naturalistic landscape
design, so long as the per linear foot requirement
is applied as an average, and the landscape is
arranged to provide sufficient screening.
v. Fences and walls must be positioned exterior
to required landscaping and are subject to the
provisions of §10.6. Fences & Walls.
vi. Preexisting, substantially equivalent vegetation
that is preserved within the landscape buffer
may substitute for any required landscape buffer
plantings provided that the preexisting vegetation
is healthy and growing.
vii. Water, sanitary sewer, electrical, telephone, natural
gas, cable, storm drainage, or other service lines
are permitted within landscape buffers.
viii. SURFACE PARKING is prohibited within a required
landscape buffer.
7. Parking Lot Landscaping
a. General
i. The landscape standards of this section take
precedence over parking standards found
446 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Landscaping
elsewhere in this Ordinance.
b. Perimeter Planting
i. SURFACE PARKING must be screened from view
along any LOT LINE ABUTTING a public THOROUGHFARE,
excluding and ALLEY, using one of the following
landscape buffers.
a). Landscape Strip with Shrubs
i). A minimum six (6) foot wide landscape
strip planted with a continuous row of
shrubs and one (1) tree per thirty (30) feet
of lot line.
ii). Shrubs must be of at least a five (5) gallon
container size when planted and at least
seventy five percent (75%) of all shrubs
must be evergreen.
iii). Breaks for vehicular and pedestrian access
are permitted.
b). Landscape Strip with Fence
i). A minimum six (6) foot wide landscape
strip planted with a minimum three (3) foot
tall fence and one (1) tree per thirty (30)
feet of lot line.
ii). Fencing must be generally designed as
metal fence panels between masonry
pillars and constructed of permanent,
durable materials, such as brick, stone,
iron, steel, or aluminum.
iii). Breaks for vehicular and pedestrian access
are permitted.
c. Landscape Islands
i. A landscape island must be provided every five
(5) parking spaces and at the end of every row of
parking spaces.
ii. Landscape islands may be consolidated and
intervals may be adjusted as necessary to
preserve existing trees or facilitate storm water
management.
iii. Landscape islands ABUTTING a single row of parking
spaces must be at least eight (8) feet in width and
the same length as the parking spaces. Each island
must include one (1) LARGE TREE.
iv. Landscape islands ABUTTING a double row of parking
spaces must be at least eight (8) feet in width and
the same length as the parking spaces. Each island
must include two (2) LARGE TREEs.
Table 10.3.1 Landscape Buffers
Type A Type B
Width (min) 6 feet 6 feet
Fence/Wall Type n/a Fully Closed
Fence/Wall Height (min) n/a 6 feet
LARGE TREEs (min per 100 ft) 3 n/a
SHRUBS (min per 100 ft) 33 33
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 447
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Green Score
10.4 GREEN SCORE
1. Purpose
a. To incentive urban landscape elements that manage
storm water, filter pollutants, reduce the urban heat
island, provide habitat, sequester carbon dioxide, and
improve air quality.
2. Overview
a. GREEN SCORE is an environmental sustainability
performance standard for urban landscapes.
b. Green Score is measured as the combined weighted
value of all landscape elements to divided by the total
land area of a lot.
c. Landscaped areas that earn a higher green score
correlate to a higher environmental sustainability than
sites that earn a lower score.
3. Applicability
a. This section is applicable to the construction of any
new PRINCIPAL BUILDING and any SUBSTANTIAL RENOVATION of a
PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
4. Compliance & Enforcement
a. Real property must comply with the GREEN SCORE
indicated for each BUILDING TYPE. See the standards
for each BUILDING TYPE in each zoning district for more
information.
b. The BUILDING OFFICIAL shall establish standards for the
administration of this Section.
5. Calculation
a. GREEN SCORE is calculated as follows:
i. Determine total LOT AREA.
ii. Calculate the area of each proposed landscape
element for each category identified in the first
column of Table 10.4.1. Certain types of plantings
USE the number of individual plants multiplied by an
equivalent square footage when indicated in the
second column of Table 10.4.1.
iii. Multiply the actual square footage, or the
equivalent square footage, of each landscape
element by the multiplier specified for each
landscape element in the third column of Table
10.4.1 plus any bonus on Table 10.4.2 to determine
the weighted score of each element.
iv. Add the weighted score of all landscape elements
together.
v. Divide the resulting sum by the area of the LOT to
determine the final GREEN SCORE.
vi. If necessary, redesign the landscape plan to
achieve the required GREEN SCORE.
b. BonUSEs
i. Review Boards may establish additional bonUSEs
Table 10.4.1 Green Score Calculation
Credit Multiplier
Soils
Landscaped area with a
soil depth < 24 inches
actual sf 0.3
Landscaped area with a
soil depth => 24 inches
actual sf 0.6
Pervious Paving with 6 to 24
inches of subsurface soil or
gravel
actual sf 0.2
Pervious Paving with more
than 24 inches of subsurface
soil or gravel
actual sf 0.5
Groundcovers
Turfgrass, mulch, and
inorganic surfacing
materials
actual sf 0.1
Plants
Vegetation less than two (2)
feet tall at maturity
actual sf 0.2
Vegetation at least two (2)
feet tall at maturity
12 sf/plant 0.3
Trees
SMALL TREE 50 sf/tree 0.6
LARGE TREE 450 sf/tree 0.6
Preserved Tree 65 sf/tree 0.8
Engineered Landscape
Vegetated Wall actual sf 0.1
Rain gardens, bioswales,
and storm water PLANTERs.
actual sf 1.0
Green Roof with up to 6” of
growth medium
actual sf 0.1
Green Roof with 6”-10” of
growth medium
actual sf 0.4
Green Roof of 10”-24”
growth medium
actual sf 0.6
Green Roof of over 24”
growth medium
--
per
individual
landscape
elements
448 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Green Score
than those listed on Table 10.4.2 to achieve
other city policy objectives based on the
recommendations of the Director of Public Space
& Urban Forestry.
ii. Each additional bonus may have a multiplier up to
one-tenth (0.1) for each bonus.
6. Eligibility
a. All landscape elements must meet eligibility and
quality standards established by the Director of Public
Space and Urban Forestry to ensure the long-term
health, viability, and coverage of plantings.
7. Measurement
a. If multiple landscape elements identified in the first
column of Table 10.4.1 occupy the same area, for
example GROUNDCOVER under a tree, the full square
footage or equivalent square footage of each element
is counted.
b. For trees, large SHRUBS, and large perennials, USE the
equivalent square footage indicated on Table 10.4.1.
c. For vegetated walls, the area calculated is the
height times the width of the area to be covered by
vegetation.
d. For all elements other than trees, large SHRUBS, large
perennials, and vegetated walls, square footage is
calculated as the area of a horizontal plane that is over
the landscape element.
e. Landscape elements may qualify for bonus credits in
addition to the standard green factor categories USEd to
determine the green factor score.
Figure 10.4.1 Stacking of Landscape Elements
Table 10.4.2 Green Score Bonuses
Credit Multiplier
Bonus Credits
Publicly visible landscape -- 0.1
Native species -- 0.1
High value species -- 0.1
50% of irrigation is
harvested rainwater
-- 0.1
Food cultivation -- 0.1
De-paved LOT AREA -- 0.1
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 449
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Outdoor Cafe Seating
10.5 OUTDOOR CAFE SEATING
1. Applicability
a. This section is applicable to all OUTDOOR CAFE SEATING
located in a FRONTAGE AREA or on a public sidewalk.
2. Development Review
a. OUTDOOR CAFE SEATING is permitted by Site Plan Approval
only as an ANCILLARY activity of any Food & Beverage
Service PRINCIPAL USE.
3. Cafe Area Dimensions
a. OUTDOOR CAFE SEATING areas must be between six (6)
feet and fifteen (15) feet in depth from the FACADE the
BUILDING.
b. A minimum four (4) foot wide clear path of ACCESS must
be maintained to the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE.
c. OUTDOOR CAFE SEATING must be located adjacent to and
may not extend beyond the establishment it serves.
d. OUTDOOR CAFE SEATING areas must comply with the
sidewalk standards of Article 8 PUBLIC REALM Standards.
4. Furniture
a. Furnishings may only consist of movable tables,
movable chairs, movable umbrellas, required
enclosures, and portable or mounted heaters.
b. All furnishing must be commercial grade and
manufactured for outdoor USE of safe, sturdy, and
durable materials, such as wood, steel, or wrought
iron.
c. When not intended for USE during the winter months,
outdoor cafe furnishings must be removed and stored
indoors.
d. Tables and chairs for each establishment must match in
material and style.
e. Tables larger than three (3) feet six (6) inches in width
or diameter are not permitted.
f. Standing or stooled table ledges, if provided, must be
eighteen (18) inches in depth.
g. Heaters are encouraged to extend the USE of OUTDOOR
CAFE SEATING during colder weather. The following
standards apply:
Figure 10.5.1 Outdoor Cafe Seating
450 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Outdoor Cafe Seating
i. Heating fixtures require approval by the Fire
Department.
ii. Heaters may be freestanding or mounted to the
underside of an awning.
iii. Portable heaters must be stored indoors when the
business is closed.
h. Host stands should complement the chairs and tables
in material and style.
5. Weather Protection
a. Awnings or individual table umbrellas are encouraged
to provide protection from the weather.
i. Awnings must be secured to a storefront or other
exterior wall of a BUILDING.
ii. Awnings and umbrellas should be canvas or other
non-vinyl material.
iii. Awnings and umbrellas should provided shade
for at least fifty percent (50%) of the OUTDOOR CAFE
SEATING when provided.
b. Vertical wind breaks may be provided on each end of
the cafe area, provided that the wind break is attached
to and fits completely under an awning.
c. Any necessary frames or supports for awnings or
windbreaks are permitted.
6. Enclosures
a. The perimeter of OUTDOOR CAFE SEATING areas must be
defined and enclosed on all sides by any combination
of metal fencing, bollards and chain, or PLANTERs.
b. Metal Fencing
i. Fencing must be thirty-six (36) inches or less in
height.
ii. The maximum gap permitted between fence
segments is four (4) inches.
c. Bollards & Chain
i. Metal or wooden bollards must be thirty-six (36)
inches or less in height.
ii. Bollards may be linked with rope or chain that
hangs at least thirty (30) inches from the ground at
its lowest point.
d. PLANTER Boxes
i. PLANTERs or PLANTER enclosures must be between
eighteen (18) inches and twenty-four (24) inches in
height.
ii. The combined height of PLANTERs and live plants
must not exceed four (4) feet from sidewalk grade.
iii. Healthy, living plants are required.
iv. PLANTERs and flower boxes must be made of safe,
durable materials manufactured for outdoor USE.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 451
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Fences & Walls
10.6 FENCES & WALLS
1. Fences
a. General
i. Fences may be placed up to and along any LOT LINE.
ii. Fences installed directly onto a shared side or REAR
LOT LINE require consent of the ABUTTING PROPERTY
OWNER.
iii. Fences do not require a Building Permit and are
ERECTed at the property owners risk.
iv. Fence posts or supporting rails must face inward
toward the property being fenced and the finished
face must be oriented towards the abutting
property or thoroughfare.
b. INTERIOR LOTs
i. Fences located in the FRONTAGE AREA of a LOT may be
up to four (4) feet in height and up to fifty percent
(50%) opaque.
ii. Fences located behind the FRONTAGE AREA, internal to
the LOT, may be up to six (6) feet in height, unless
required as screening (see §10.8 Screening).
c. CORNER LOTs
i. Fences located in the FRONTAGE AREA of a LOT, for
both the primary and secondary frontage, may be
up to four (4) feet in height and up tp fifty percent
(50%) opaque.
ii. Fences located behind the FRONTAGE AREA, internal
to a LOT, may be up to six (6) feet in height, unless
required as screening (see §10.8 Screening).
d. Architectural Fence Features
i. Fence and gate posts that are architectural features
integrated into the design of a fence are permitted
up to four and one half (4.5) feet for fences in the
FRONTAGE AREA and up to six and one half (6.5) feet in
height for fences behind the FRONTAGE AREA.
e. Restrictions
i. Fences are prohibited within any existing or
required drainage or utility EASEMENT.
ii. Barbed wire and concertina wire are prohibited.
f. Privacy Fencing
i. The Review Boards may require fences located
behind the FRONTAGE AREA, internal to a LOT, to be up
to up to eight (8) feet in height as a condition of the
issuance of a Special Permit or Site Plan Approval
to address privacy concerns of neighbors.
2. Retaining Walls
a. Any portion of a RETAINING WALL that exists above the
ground level of a higher grade must comply with the
requirements for fences (see §10.6.1 Fences above).
b. When provided, RETAINING WALLs located in the FRONTAGE
AREA may be up to four (4) feet in height and successive
walls must be built with a minimum horizontal
separation distance of four (4) feet.
c. RETAINING WALLs may be built to any height behind the
FRONTAGE AREA.
Figure 10.6.1 Fence Orientation Figure 10.6.2 Fence Height
452 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Outdoor Lighting
10.7 OUTDOOR LIGHTING
1. Intent
a. To increase night sky visibility, improve nighttime vision
and the color rendition of outdoor light, and reduce the
impacts of outdoor lighting for people and wildlife.
b. To conserve energy and reduce the consumption of
electricity for lighting purposes.
2. Purpose
a. To reduce light pollution and glare from outdoor lighting
fixtures and reduce excessive light levels as existing
fixtures are replaced over time.
b. To permit the USE of outdoor lighting that does not
exceed the minimum levels specified by recommended
practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society (IES)
for night-time safety, utility, security, productivity,
enjoyment, and commerce.
c. To minimize adverse impacts of lighting such as light
trespass, obtrusive light spillover, and harmful glare.
d. To curtail light pollution, reduce sky-glow, and improve
the nighttime environment.
3. Applicability
a. This section is applicable to all outdoor lighting fixtures,
except for the following:
i. Lighting within rights-of-way or EASEMENTs for the
principal purpose of illuminating STREETs, ALLEYs,
mid-BLOCK passages, or CIVIC SPACEs;
ii. SIGN lighting (see §10.9. SIGNs);
iii. Lighting for public monuments and statuary;
iv. Holiday lighting;
v. Outdoor lighting USEd for emergency equipment
and work conducted in the interest of law
enforcement or for public health, safety, or welfare;
vi. Underwater lighting;
vii. Temporary lighting for theatrical, television,
performance areas and construction SITEs; and
viii. Low voltage landscape lighting controlled by an
automatic device that is set to turn the lights off at
one hour after the SITE is closed to the public.
4. Lighting Standards
a. General
i. Outdoor lighting is regulated by the amount of light
emitted, the color temperature of light, and the
design of light fixtures to achieve certain desired
environmental characteristics.
b. Amount of Light Emitted
i. The following standards are applicable for all
permitted BUILDING TYPEs in the NR district and all
permitted BUILDING TYPEs, excluding Apartment
Buildings, in the UR district:
a). At installation, individual LUMINAIREs may not
exceed the LUMEN limits specified on Table
10.7.1 (a) Permitted Lumens.
ii. The following standards are applicable to all other
buildings types in all districts:
a). At installation, the total LUMENs of all outdoor
lighting may not exceed the LUMEN limits
specified on Table 10.7.1 Permitted LUMENs.
c. Color
i. All LUMINAIREs in all districts must have LIGHT SOURCEs
with a color temperature or correlated color
temperature (CCT) of 3000 Kelvin or less.
ii. The color rendering index of all LUMINAIREs in all
districts must be sixty-five (65) or higher.
d. Light Fixtures
i. The following standards are applicable for all
permitted BUILDING TYPEs in the NR district and all
permitted BUILDING TYPEs, excluding Apartment
Buildings, in the UR district:
a). All outdoor LUMINAIREs must be full cutoff or
fully shielded to emit no light above horizontal
(ninety degrees (90°) above nadir), with the
following exceptions:
i). Up to two partly shielded or unshielded
LUMINAIREs at any PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE.
ii). Low voltage lighting that does not project
onto adjacent properties.
iii). Shielded directional flood lighting that is
aimed so that direct glare is not visible
from adjacent properties.
iv). Open flame gas LAMPs.
v). Lighting installed with a vacancy sensor,
which extinguishes the lights within fifteen
(15) minutes after the area is vacated.
b). Luminaries with the International Dark-Sky
Association’s Fixture Seal of Approval are
recommended.
ii. The following standards are applicable to all other
buildings types in all districts:
a). All LUMINAIREs must be rated and installed
according to Table 10.7.2, which identifies the
maximum backlight (B), uplight (U), and glare
(G), as rated by the LUMINAIRE manufacturer,
allowed in each zoning district.
b). BUG rating limits are based on the internal and
external design of a LUMINAIRE, its aiming, and
the initial LUMENs. The BUG ratings permitted
by Table 10.7.2 differ based on the distance
the LUMINAIRE is installed from the property
line, in multiples of the MOUNTING HEIGHT of the
LUMINAIRE.
c). LUMINAIREs equipped with adjustable mounting
devices permitting alteration of LUMINAIRE aiming
are prohibited.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 453
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Outdoor Lighting
Table 10.7.1 Permitted Lumens
NR UR MR3 MR4 MR5 MR6 HR FAB
Individual Luminaires
Unshielded Luminaires at
Principal Entrances
630
LUMENs
630
LUMENs
-- -- -- -- -- --
Unshielded Luminaires, any
other locations
315
LUMENs
315
LUMENs
-- -- -- -- -- --
Fully Shielded Luminaires
1,260
LUMENs
1,260
LUMENs
-- -- -- -- -- --
Landscape Lighting (total)
1,050
LUMENs
1,050
LUMENs
-- -- -- -- -- --
Landscape Lighting, Low
Voltage (total)
525
LUMENs
525
LUMENs
-- -- -- -- -- --
Shielded Directional Flood
Lighting
1,260
LUMENs
1,260
LUMENs
-- -- -- -- -- --
Total Site Lumens 1
Lumens/sf Impervious Surface
Area (per square foot of
illuminated area)
2.50
LUMENs
2.50
LUMENs
2.50
LUMENs
2.50
LUMENs
5.00
LUMENs
5.00
LUMENs
5.00
LUMENs
5.00
LUMENs
Building Entrances/Exits
(per door, installed within twenty
(20) feet of the door)
+2,000
LUMENs
+2,000
LUMENs
+2,000
LUMENs
+2,000
LUMENs
+4,000
LUMENs
+4,000
LUMENs
+4,000
LUMENs
+4,000
LUMENs
Building Facades
(per square foot of illuminated
facade, for luminaries aimed at
the facade)
+8/sf +8/sf +8/sf +8/sf +16/sf +16/sf +16/sf +16/sf
Outdoor Cafes
(per square foot of cafe area,
within two (2) mounting heights
of the luminaries)
+5/sf +5/sf +5/sf +5/sf +10/sf +10/sf +10/sf +10/sf
Outdoor Displays
(per square foot of outdoor sales
area, within two (2) mounting
heights of the luminaries)
+8/sf +8/sf +8/sf +8/sf +16/sf +16/sf +16/sf +16/sf
1 In the NR & UR districts, total site lumens is applicable only to Apartment Buildings and non conforming buildings
454 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Outdoor Lighting
Table 10.7.1 Permitted Lumens
CC CI CB CIV ASQ NP PSR TU
Individual LUMINAIREs
Unshielded LUMINAIREs at
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCEs
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Unshielded LUMINAIREs, any
other locations
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
FULLY SHIELDED LUMINAIREs -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Landscape Lighting -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Landscape Lighting, Low
Voltage (total)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Shielded Directional Flood
Lighting
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Total SITE LUMENs 1
LUMENs/sf Impervious Surface
Area (per square foot of
illuminated area)
5.00
LUMENs
5.00
LUMENs
5.00
LUMENs
2.50
LUMENs
5.00
LUMENs
5.00
LUMENs
5.00
LUMENs
5.00
LUMENs
BUILDING Entrances/Exits
(per door, installed within twenty
(20) feet of the door)
+4,000
LUMENs
+4,000
LUMENs
+4,000
LUMENs
+2,000
LUMENs
+4,000
LUMENs
+4,000
LUMENs
+4,000
LUMENs
+4,000
LUMENs
BUILDING FACADEs
(per square foot of illuminated
FACADE, for luminaries aimed at
the FACADE)
+16/sf +16/sf +16/sf +8/sf +16/sf +16/sf +16/sf +16/sf
Outdoor Cafes
(per square foot of cafe area,
within two (2) MOUNTING HEIGHTs of
the luminaries)
+10/sf +10/sf +10/sf +5/sf +10/sf +10/sf +10/sf +10/sf
OUTDOOR DISPLAYs
(per square foot of outdoor sales
area, within two (2) MOUNTING
HEIGHTs of the luminaries)
+16/sf +16/sf +16/sf +8/sf +16/sf +16/sf +16/sf +16/sf
1 In the NR & UR districts, total SITE LUMENs is applicable only to Apartment Buildings and non conforming buildings
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 455
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Outdoor Lighting
Table 10.7.2 Maximum Backlight, Uplight and Glare (BUG) Ratings
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
MR5
MR6
HR
FAB
CC
CI
CB
CIV
ASQ
NP
PSR
TU
Backlight 1
Greater than 2 MOUNTING HEIGHTs
from property line.
B4 B4 B4 B4 B5 B5 B5 B5 B5 B5 B5 B5 B5 B5 B5 B5
One (1) to less than two (2)
MOUNTING HEIGHTs from property
line2 and ideally oriented.
B3 B3 B3 B3 B4 B4 B4 B4 B4 B4 B4 B4 B4 B4 B4 B4
0.5 to 1 MOUNTING HEIGHTs from
property line2 and ideally
oriented.
B3 B3 B3 B3 B3 B3 B3 B3 B3 B3 B3 B3 B3 B3 B3 B3
Less than 0.5 MOUNTING HEIGHT
to property line2 and ideally
oriented.
B0 B0 B0 B0 B1 B1 B1 B1 B1 B1 B1 B1 B1 B1 B1 B1
Uplight
Allowed uplighting rating U2 U2 U2 U2 U3 U3 U3 U3 U3 U3 U3 U3 U3 U3 U3 U3
Allowed percentage light
emission above 90 degrees for
STREET or area lighting.
0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%
Glare 1
Allowed Glare Rating G2 G2 G2 G2 G3 G3 G3 G3 G3 G3 G3 G2 G3 G3 G3 G3
Any LUMINAIRE not ideally
oriented with 1 to less than
2 MOUNTING HEIGHTs to any
property line2 of concern.
G1 G1 G1 G1 G1 G1 G1 G1 G1 G1 G1 G1 G1 G1 G1 G1
Any LUMINAIRE not ideally
oriented with 0.5 to less than
1 MOUNTING HEIGHTs to any
property line2 of concern.
G0 G0 G0 G0 G1 G1 G1 G1 G1 G1 G1 G1 G1 G1 G1 G1
Any LUMINAIRE not ideally
oriented with less than
0.5 MOUNTING HEIGHTs to any
property line2 of concern.
G0 G0 G0 G0 G0 G0 G0 G0 G0 G0 G0 G0 G0 G0 G0 G0
1 An ‘ideally oriented’ LUMINAIRE must be mounted with its backlight portion of the light output oriented perpendicular and
towards the property line of concern.
2 An additional five (5) feet may be added to this calculation for any property line ABUTTING a CIVIC SPACE. Any property
line ABUTTING a THOROUGHFARE may be considered to be located at the centerline of the THOROUGHFARE for the purpose of
determining compliance with maximum BUG ratings.
456 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Screening
10.8 SCREENING
1. Applicability
a. Real property within the Commercial Industry district is
exempt from the provision of this Section.
2. Loading Facilities
a. Outdoor loading facilities, including all docks and areas
USEd for the storage and staging of materials must
be screened from view by a wall or fully closed fence
between six (6) and twelve (12) feet in height, as
necessary to sufficiently screen delivery vehicles, and
constructed of materials that are compatible with the
PRINCIPAL BUILDING in terms of texture, quality, and color.
b. Exterior entrances and ACCESS to loading facilities
that are fully enclosed within a BUILDING must have an
opaque, self closing door constructed of materials that
are compatible with the PRINCIPAL BUILDING in terms of
texture, quality, and color.
c. Loading facility doors are only permitted to be opened
during loading and unloading activities.
3. Service Areas
a. Trash collection, trash compaction, recycling collection
and other similar service areas must be fully enclosed
within a BUILDING or located to the side or rear of the
buildings.
b. Exterior entrances and ACCESS to service areas that
are fully enclosed within a BUILDING must have an
opaque, self closing door constructed of materials that
are compatible with the PRINCIPAL BUILDING in terms of
texture, quality, and color.
c. Outdoor service areas that are visible from a public
THOROUGHFARE (excluding an ALLEY), CIVIC SPACE, or ABUTTING
properties in the NR zoning district must be fully
screened by a wall or fully closed fence at least six
(6) feet in height with self-closing ACCESS doors and
constructed of materials that are compatible with the
PRINCIPAL BUILDING in terms of texture, quality, and color.
4. Mechanical Equipment
a. Roof-Mounted
i. Mechanical equipment, except roof-mounted
sustainable energy systems, and elevator/stairwell
penthoUSEs must be set back at least ten (10) feet
from the edge of the exterior wall of a BUILDING.
ii. New buildings must provide a parapet wall or other
architectural element constructed of materials
that are compatible with the PRINCIPAL BUILDING in
terms of texture, quality, and color that screens the
visibility of roof-mounted mechanical equipment
from any a public THOROUGHFARE (excluding an ALLEY)
or CIVIC SPACE.
b. Wall-Mounted
i. Mechanical equipment is not permitted on any
FACADE.
ii. Mechanical equipment on any surface that is
visible from a public THOROUGHFARE (excluding
an ALLEY) or CIVIC SPACE must be screened by
landscaping or an opaque screen constructed of
materials that are compatible with the PRINCIPAL
BUILDING in terms of texture, quality, and color.
c. Ground-Mounted
i. Mechanical equipment that is visible from a public
THOROUGHFARE (excluding an ALLEY) or CIVIC SPACE must
be screened by landscaping, a fence, or a wall
constructed of materials that are compatible with
the PRINCIPAL BUILDING in terms of texture, quality,
and color.
ii. Screening must be of a height equal to or greater
than the height of the mechanical equipment being
screened.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 457
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Commercial Signs
10.9 COMMERCIAL SIGNS
1. Purpose
a. To provide PROPERTY OWNERS and tenants reasonable and
effective means for identifying STREET address, business
name, goods sold or produced, and services provided
to the public.
b. To regulate the size, location, and physical design of
temporary and permanent SIGNs.
c. To preserve the cultural SIGNificance of architectural
resources for the enjoyment and enrichment of the
community.
d. To protect against the adverse impacts of visual clutter
and excessive and/or confusing SIGNs.
e. To promote legibility of the urban environment.
2. Applicability
a. Nothing contained in this Section is intended to be the
content-based regulation of SIGN messages prohibited
by the federal or state constitution, statues, or COURT
decisions.
b. Nothing contained in this Section in intended to conflict
with M.G.L. Chapter 85, Section 8 & 9 or M.G.L.
Chapter 93, Sections 29 through 33, as amended.
3. Development Review
a. General
i. The following commercial SIGN types are permitted
by Site Plan Approval:
a). Blade SIGN
b). Wall SIGN
c). Awning or Canopy SIGN
d). Suspended SIGN
e). Sidewalk SIGN
f). Window SIGN
g). Display Case
h). Vertical Blade or Banner SIGN
i). Yard SIGN
j). Wall Mural
k). Roof or Skyline SIGN
ii. SIGNs types not identified in this Section are
prohibited.
4. Address Signs
a. A SIGN, individual numerals or letters, or a nonelectrical
nameplate identifying the property address is required
for all real property as follows:
i. Each GROUND STORY non-residential USE must identify
the STREET address either on the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE
door or above or beside the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE of the
USE.
ii. All residential BUILDING TYPEs must identify the STREET
address either on the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE door, above
or beside the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE, or on a mailbox.
b. Address SIGNs must be made easily visible through
the USE of colors or materials that contrast with the
background material they are attached to and must
be conspicuously located to provide visibility from the
THOROUGHFARE that the BUILDING faces.
c. Address SIGNs must be twelve (12) inches in height or
less and may include the name of the occupant.
5. Exempt Signs
a. The following SIGNs are exempt from regulation under
this Section:
i. A public notice or informational SIGN required by
federal, state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance
and any special event, directional, or other SIGN
ERECTed by a government agency or public utility in
the performance of public duty;
ii. Names of buildings, dates of ERECTion,
commemorative tablets and the like when carved
into stone, made of cast metal, or other permanent
type of material;
iii. Credit card, trading stamp, or trade association
SIGNs not exceeding one-half (0.5) square feet each
and not exceeding ten per establishment;
iv. A clock, thermometer, barbershop pole or similar
device not part of a permanent SIGN;
v. The flag of any nation, state, or City if displayed in
a manner conforming to the Flag Code (4 USC §5
(2011) et seq.);
vi. Historic BUILDING identification;
vii. Holiday SIGNs or decorations, yard sale & garage
sale SIGNs;
viii. Political yard SIGNs; and
ix. Any sculpture, statue, relief, mosaic, or mural that
is a work of art or otherwise decorative and does
not include a commercial message or symbol.
6. Prohibited Signs
a. The following SIGNs are prohibited:
i. Any SIGN that flashes, moves, blinks, rotates,
simulates motion, features electronic SIGN copy, or
has illumination that changes intensity over time;
ii. SIGNs that emit audible sounds, odors, or visible
matter;
iii. SIGNs attached to nature or landscape elements,
including trees, rocks, and fences;
iv. The tacking, posting or otherwise affixing of SIGNs
to the exterior walls of buildings and STRUCTURES;
v. SIGNs that interfere with free passage from or
obstructs any fire escape, downspout, window,
door, stairways, ladder, or opening intended as a
means of ingress or egress or to provide light or
air;
458 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Commercial Signs
vi. Billboards or SIGNs advertising goods or services
not provided on the premises;
vii. Any SIGN and/or SIGN STRUCTURE that obstructs the
view of, is confusing with, or imitates official traffic
SIGN, SIGNal, or device;
viii. Inflatable SIGNs, such as balloons and other gas
inflated objects;
ix. SIGN STRUCTURES that no longer contain SIGNs;
x. SIGNs mounted to motor-vehicles that are not in
operation, including motor-vehicles painted or
skinned to function as a SIGN; and
xi. Outdoor advertising SIGNs that are not compliant
with M.G.L. Chapter 93, Section 29-33.
7. Temporary Signs
a. Unless otherwise specified, temporary SIGNs are
permitted for up to thirty (30) total days, subject to the
following standards:
i. Banner: A temporary SIGN that is printed or
displayed upon flexible material with or without
frames, that identifies a new business or
advertises a special sale, event, or activity.
a). One (1) banner SIGN up to forty (40) square feet
is permitted per LOT frontage.
b). Banners must be secured to a BUILDING FACADE
along all four sides at all times.
ii. Construction SIGN: A temporary SIGN intended to
provide information about current construction on a
SITE and the parties involved in the project.
a). One (1) construction SIGN up to twelve
(12) square feet per side is permitted per
DEVELOPMENT SITE.
b). A construction SIGN may be ERECTed only after
issuance of a BUILDING Permit, and must be
removed within two (2) days of issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
iii. Real Estate SIGN:
a). One (1) real estate SIGN up to twelve (12)
square feet is permitted per LOT frontage.
b). A real estate SIGN that advertises property
for lease or sale may be posted only for the
duration the property is offered for lease or
sale, and must be removed within seven days
of lease or closing.
8. Sign Maintenance
a. All SIGNs, including nonconforming SIGNs, together with
any supports, braces, anchors, and other supporting
hardware, must be maintained in good condition. Any
damage to or deterioration of a SIGN must be repaired
within 30 days of receipt of notice from the BUILDING
OFFICIAL.
b. When an existing SIGN is removed, replaced, or
repaired, all supports, braces, anchors, and other
supporting hardware that is not longer required must
be removed, and any surfaces baring evidence of
attachment must be repaired.
9. Removal
a. SIGNs must be removed within thirty (30) days of a USEr
vacating a property.
10. Sign Illumination
a. Conforming SIGNs may be illuminated according to the
following:
i. General
a). Illuminated SIGNs indicating if a business is
open must be turned off except during the
hours of operation.
ii. External Illumination
a). An externally illuminated SIGN is characterized
by the USE of artificial light reflected off the
surface of a SIGN.
b). External LIGHT SOURCEs must be shielded so that
they illuminate only the face of the SIGN and do
not shine directly onto a public right-of-way or
onto adjacent properties.
c). Light fixtures that project from the FACADE of
a BUILDING for externally illuminated SIGNs are
exempt from SETBACK requirements, but should
be simple and unobtrusive in design and not
obscure the SIGN content.
iii. Internal Illumination
a). An internally illuminated SIGN is characterized by
the USE of artificial light projecting through or
from behind the surface of a SIGN.
b). Channel letters may be internally lit or back-lit.
c). Blade SIGNs may be internally lit if the
background is opaque or of a darker color than
the message of the SIGN and the lettering is up
to 50% of the surface area of the SIGN
d). Exposed neon is only permitted for wall or
windows SIGNs.
iv. Raceways
a). If a raceway is necessary, it cannot extend in
width or height beyond the area of the SIGN.
b). A raceway must be finished to match the
background wall or canopy or integrated into
the overall design of the SIGN.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 459
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Commercial Signs
11. Blade Sign
a. A small, two-sided SIGN that is attached to and projecting perpendicularly from the FACADE of a BUILDING that identifies a
commercial establishment. Blade SIGNs are intended to be viewed by pedestrians on the same side of the STREET.
b. Standards
i. Blade SIGNs are prohibited for UPPER STORY
businesses.
ii. A blade SIGN must be located within ten (10)
feet of the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE for the business it
identifies.
iii. A blade SIGN, including any support hardware,
must be mounted below the sills of the
second STORY windows of multi-STORY buildings
or below the ROOF LINE, parapet wall, or CORNICE
of a single-STORY BUILDING.
iv. Any supports, braces, anchors, and other
supporting hardware must be integral to the
design of the SIGN.
v. Information type is limited to business name
and logo. Additional information is prohibited.
Size
Area (max) 6 sq. ft. / side
Width (max) 4 ft
Height (max) 3 ft
Thickness (max) 6 inches
Location
Clear Height over Sidewalk (min) 8 ft
Projection from FACADE (max) 4 ft
Number of SIGNs 1 per Tenant
460 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Commercial Signs
12. Wall Sign
a. A SIGN attached flat or mounted parallel to the FACADE of a BUILDING that identifies a commercial establishment. Wall
SIGNs are intended to be viewed by pedestrians on the oppoSITE side of STREET.
b. Standards
i. Wall SIGNs are only permitted for GROUND STORY
businesses.
ii. Internally illuminated SIGN cabinets are
prohibited.
iii. Wall SIGNs are prohibited from covering
windows or architectural details.
iv. No portion of a wall SIGN is permitted to extend
above the lower eave line of a BUILDING with a
pitched roof.
v. No portion of a wall SIGN is permitted to extend
above the ROOF LINE or parapet wall of a FLAT
ROOFed BUILDING.
vi. No portion of a wall SIGN is permitted to extend
above the CORNICE or expression line of the
base of a BUILDING.
vii. Information type is limited to business name
and logo. Additional information is prohibited.
Size
Area (max) 40 sq. ft.
Height (min/max) 1 ft 4 ft
Width (max) 90% of FACADE
width
Lettering
Width (max) 75% of SIGN width
Height (max) 75% of SIGN
height
Projection from FACADE (max) 6 inches
Raceway Height (max) 50% of Letter
Height
Location
Number of SIGNs
1 per Tenant
(2 per Corner
Tenant)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 461
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Commercial Signs
13. Awning or Canopy Sign
a. A SIGN that is painted, screen printed, sewn, or adhered onto the surface of a awning or attached above, below, or
to the face of an entry canopy that identifies a commercial establishment. Awning/canopy SIGNs are intended to be
viewed by pedestrians on the oppoSITE side of STREET.
b. Standards
i. SIGNs are not permitted on awnings or
canopies that do not conform to the
provisions for each type of BUILDING
component. See §3.D. BUILDING COMPONENTS for
more information.
ii. SIGNage located on the sloping portion of
an awning is only permitted for storefronts
where the typical area for a wall SIGN is
missing.
iii. SIGNage is prohibited on UPPER STORY awnings
and on the side of awnings with closed ends.
iv. Information type is limited to business name,
logo, and address. Additional information is
prohibited.
Size
Area --
Located on Valance (max) 50% coverage
Located on Awning Slope (max) 25% coverage
Projecting from Canopy (max) 1 sf. per width
of canopy
Lettering
Height --
Valance (max) 8 in
Awning Slope (max) 18 in
Projecting from Canopy (max) 12 in
Location
Number of SIGNs per Awning 1
Number of SIGNs per Canopy 1
462 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Commercial Signs
14. Suspended Sign
a. A small, two-sided SIGN mounted to the underside of an awning, canopy, or roof of a porch that identifies a
commercial establishment. Suspended SIGNs are intended to be viewed by pedestrians at close range on the same
side of the STREET.
b. Standards
i. A suspended SIGN may not extend beyond the
edge of the awning or canopy it is mounted
below.
ii. Information type is limited to business name
or logo. Additional information is prohibited.
Size
Area (max) 4 sq. ft. / side
Width (max) 3 feet
Height (max) 3 feet
Location
Clear Height over Sidewalk/Porch
(min) 7 feet
Number of SIGNs 1 per Tenant
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 463
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Commercial Signs
15. Sidewalk Sign
a. A portable, two-sided SIGN that is placed on the sidewalk to identify a commercial establishment or advertise daily
specials or sales. Sidewalk SIGNs are intended to be viewed at close range by pedestrians on the same side of the
STREET.
b. Standards
i. One (1) Sidewalk SIGN is permitted per GROUND
STORY tenant.
ii. Sidewalk SIGNs may be placed outdoors on SITE
or on a public sidewalk during business hours
and must be removed when the business is
closed.
iii. Sidewalks SIGNs displayed on a public sidewalk
are prohibited from ENCROACHing into the
walkway of the sidewalk or interfering with
pedestrian travel in any way.
iv. A sidewalk SIGN must be vertically oriented,
with a height greater than its width and made
of wood, metal, or slate (chalkboard).
v. A sidewalk SIGN is not permitted to be
illuminated or contain any electronic
components.
vi. A sidewalk SIGN may not be placed outdoors
when high winds, heavy rain, or heavy snow
conditions are present. The Department Public
Works may remove a sidewalk SIGN during
snow removal operations, and is not liable for
damage to a sidewalk SIGN caUSEd by snow
removal operations.
Size
Area (max) 6 sq. ft. / side
Width (max) 2 feet
Height (max) 3 feet
Location
Distance from PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE
(max) 8 feet
Number of SIGNs 1 per Tenant
464 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Commercial Signs
16. Window Sign
a. Individual letters, numerals, or a logo applied directly to the inside of a window or door to identify a commercial
establishment. Window SIGNs are intended to be viewed at close range by pedestrians.
b. Standards
i. Windows SIGNs must be applied directly to
inside of the windows glass, at or above eye
level, and have a transparent background.
ii. Information type is limited to business name,
logo, hours of operations, and product types.
Additional information is prohibited.
Size
Area (max of total window glass) 20%
Width (max) 5 feet
Height (max) 3 feet
Lettering
Height (max) 18 inches
Location
Height above Sidewalk (min) 5 feet
Number of SIGNs 1 per Window
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 465
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Commercial Signs
17. Display Case
a. A wall mounted, lockable, framed cabinet with a transparent window to display a changeable menu or list of event
show times. Display cases are intended to be viewed at close range by pedestrians.
b. Standards
i. Display cases must be attached to the FACADE
or wall of a recessed storefront entrance.
ii. Display cases may be internally or externally
illuminated.
Size
Area 6 sq. ft.
Width (max) 3 feet
Height (max) 3 feet
Location
Height above Sidewalk (min) 4 feet
Number of SIGNs 1 per Tenant
466 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Commercial Signs
18. Vertical Blade / Banner Sign
a. A tall, narrow, two-sided SIGN that is attached to and projecting perpendicularly from the FACADE of a BUILDING that
identifies a commercial establishment. Vertical blade/ banner SIGNs are intended to be viewed by pedestrians and
motorists from a distance.
b. Standards
i. No portion of the SIGN may project above the
roof-line of the FACADE to which it is attached.
ii. Information type is limited to business name
and logo. Additional information is prohibited.
Size
Width (max) 4 feet
Height (max) 10 feet
Thickness (max) 10 inches
Lettering
Width 75% of SIGN
Width
Location
Clear Height over Sidewalk (min) above 1st STORY
Projection from FACADE (max) 6 feet
Number of SIGNs
1 per 15 feet of
FACADE Width
(4 max)
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 467
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Commercial Signs
19. Yard Sign
a. A two-sided SIGN suspended from support hardware and mounted in a front yard between the FRONT LOT LINE and the
BUILDING FACADE. Yard SIGNs are intended to be viewed at close range by pedestrians on the same side of the STREET and
motorists.
b. Standards
i. Yard SIGNs work well for home based
or commercial businesses operating in
residential BUILDING TYPEs in mixed USE districts.
ii. Information type is limited to business name,
logo, and address. Additional information is
prohibited.
Size
Area (max) 6 sq. ft. / side
Width (max) 3 feet
Height (max) 3 feet
Location
Clear Height above Yard (min) 12 inches
Overall Height (max) 5 feet
Number of SIGNs 1 per LOT
468 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Commercial Signs
20. Wall Mural
a. A SIGN that is directly painted on to the exterior wall of a BUILDING or screen printed, sewn, or adhered onto a canvaslike
material that is mounted flush with the FACADE of a BUILDING that identifies a commercial establishment. Wall murals
are intended to be viewed by pedestrians and motor vehicles from a distance.
b. Standards
i. Up to twenty percent (20%) of the surface
area of the wall mural may be lettering or
logos.
ii. Only external illumination is permitted.
Size
Area (max) 1,000 sq. ft.
Width (max) 50 feet
Height (max) 50 feet
Location
Height above Ground (min) 1 STORY
Number of SIGNs 1 per BUILDING
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 469
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Commercial Signs
21. Roof or Skyline Sign
a. A SIGN erected on the roof or mounted to the uppermost horizontal architectural band of a BUILDING to identify the name
of the BUILDING or primary tenant. Roof/skyline SIGNs are intended to be viewed by pedestrians and motorists from a
distance and serve as an icon for the BUILDING.
b. Standards
i. Roof/skyline SIGNs are only permitted on HIGHRISE
buildings.
ii. No portion of a roof/skyline SIGN is permitted
to extend below the start of highest STORY
of a BUILDING or above the ROOF LINE, parapet
wall, or CORNICE of the top portion of a FACADE
and is prohibited from covering windows or
architectural details.
iii. Only internal illumination is permitted.
iv. Information type is limited to BUILDING or
primary tenant name. Additional information is
prohibited.
Size
Area (max) 250 sq. ft.
Width (max % of FACADE width) 75%
Height (max) 15 feet
Raceway Height (max) 50% of Letter
Height
Location
Number of SIGNs 1 per BUILDING
470 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Steep Slopes
10.10 STEEP SLOPES
1. Intent
a. To minimize storm water runoff and soil erosion
problems incurred by the grading of STEEP SLOPEs.
b. To maintain the natural topography and drainage
patterns of land.
c. To help protect real property at the base of a STEEP
SLOPE from damage caUSEd by erosion, mudslides, rock
slides, falling trees, and other harms.
2. Purpose
a. To require discretion in the permitting of DEVELOPMENT on
any property with a STEEP SLOPE.
3. Applicability
a. This section is applicable to real property in all zoning
districts.
4. Development Review
a. DEVELOPMENT on any LOT with a STEEP SLOPE requires a
special permit, except for the following:
i. MODIFICATIONs to a BUILDING TYPE that do not increase
the cumulative FLOOR PLATE (main mass plus
components) by more than two-hundred and fifty
(250) square feet, as identified by Building Permit
records maintained by the Inspectional Services
Department of the City of Somerville, within any
twelve (12) month period.
ii. SITE improvements, excluding excavation, to any LOT
that do not exceed five hundred (500) square feet,
as identified by Building Permit records maintained
by the Inspectional Services Department of the
City of Somerville, within any twelve (12) month
period.
b. In addition to the review criteria for all Special Permits
specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria, the review
board shall make findings considering the following
in its discretion to approve or deny a special permit
authorizing DEVELOPMENT on any LOT with a STEEP SLOPE:
i. Consistency of SITE disturbance with the intent and
purpose of this Section.
ii. Geo-technical, structural engineering, and ARBOReal
best practices for successfully and safely stabilizing
STEEP SLOPEs.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 471
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Sustainable Development
10.11 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
1. Green Buildings
a. New construction or MODIFICATION of any principal
building type greater than twenty five thousand
(25,000) square feet in GROSS FLOOR AREA must be LEED
Gold certifiable.
b. New construction or MODIFICATION of any principal
building type greater than fifty thousand (50,000)
square feet in GROSS FLOOR AREA must be LEED Platinum
certifiable.
c. DEVELOPMENT subject to the provisions of this Section
must meet the standards of the most current LEED
BUILDING rating system. During the twelve (12) month
time period after the adoption of a new version
of LEED, permit applications may be submitted
demonstrating compliance to either the immediately
previous or newly adopted version of the LEED BUILDING
rating system.
d. Development review applications for DEVELOPMENT
subject to the provisions of this Section must include:
i. A completed LEED checklist for the appropriate
LEED BUILDING standard to demonstrate how the
proposed DEVELOPMENT is anticipated to meet the
standards of this Section.
ii. A narrative indicating the mechanisms proposed
to achieve each of the credits and prerequiSITEs
of the appropriate LEED BUILDING standard and
demonstrating the anticipated methods by which
compliance with the requirements of this Section
will be achieved at the time of construction.
iii. An affidavit by a LEED-Accredited Professional
(LEED-AP) Project Manager or by appropriate
consultants stating that to the best of their
knowledge, the project has been designed to
achieve the stated LEED BUILDING standard.
e. Prior to the issuance of the first BUILDING Permit
and prior to the issuance of the first Certificate
of Occupancy, the LEED checklist and narrative
description outlining compliance with the certification
level required by this Section must be updated to
identify any design changes made subsequent to Site
Plan Approval and submitted to the BUILDING OFFICIAL
accompanied by an affidavit by a LEED-AP Project
Manager or appropriate consultants stating that, to the
best of their knowledge, the project has been designed
to achieve the stated LEED BUILDING standard.
2. Green Roofs & Storm Water Management
a. To every extent practicable, storm water should be
reUSEd on-SITE for irrigation or other purposes.
b. The review boards may authorize the City Engineer to
grant a credit to properties, against which any storm
water impact fees are imposed, equivalent to the
quantity of storm water that is removed from entering
the system through the USE of green roofs or other on-
SITE storm water management practices.
3. Heat Island Reduction
a. Roofs and parking covers must have a SOLAR
REFLECTANCE INDEX as specified on Table 10.11.1 for a
minimum of seventy five percent (75%) of the roof
area or parking spaces.
i. Roof area and parking spaces covered by solar
collectors and green roofs compliant with the
provisions of this Ordinance are exempt.
b. Uncovered SURFACE PARKING spaces must have an initial
SOLAR REFLECTANCE of at least 0.33 or a three (3) year
aged SOLAR REFLECTANCE of at least 0.28.
4. Environmental Performance
a. The review boards shall establish submittal
requirements for development review applications to
ensure the following:
i. That shadows cast by HIGH-RISE buildings do not
substantially and adversely limit ground level ACCESS
to sunlight on sidewalks and CIVIC SPACEs.
ii. That by HIGH-RISE buildings pedestrian level wind
velocities do not exceed acceptable levels for
various activities existing or proposed at particular
locations.
iii. That buildings do not caUSE visual impairment or
discomfort due to reflective spot glare and solar
heat buildup in any nearby buildings.
Table 10.11.1 Required SOLAR REFLECTANCE INDEX
Initial
SRI
3 year aged
SRI
FLAT ROOFS and roofs
pitched at or below
nine and one-half
degrees (9.5º; 2:12)
82 64
Roofs pitched above
nine and one-half
degrees (9.5º; 2:12)
39 32
Parking Cover 39 32
472 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Wireless Communication
10.12 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION
1. Purpose
a. To facilitate effective and efficient telecommunication
services throughout the city.
b. To encourage the co-location and joint USE of new and
existing wireless communication TOWERs and wireless
communication ANTENNA locations.
c. To minimize the total number of TOWERs throughout the
community.
d. To encourage the mounting of ANTENNAs to existing
STRUCTURES.
e. To ensure TOWERs and ANTENNAs are configured in a way
that minimizes adverse visual impacts and reduces
the impact of telecommunications STRUCTURES on public
health and safety.
f. To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from
TOWER and ANTENNA failure.
2. Applicability
a. This section is applicable to all wireless communication
TOWERs, wireless communication ANTENNAs, and ANCILLARY
STRUCTURES consistent with Sections 253 and 332(c)(7)
of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and
section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job
Creation Act of 2012.
b. Wireless communication TOWERs, wireless
communication ANTENNAs, and ANCILLARY STRUCTURES are
considered STRUCTURES and not regulated as a land USE.
3. Development Review
a. All DEVELOPMENT requires the submittal of a development
review application to the BUILDING OFFICIAL.
b. The DEVELOPMENT or MODIFICATION of a wireless
communication TOWER, wireless communication
ANTENNA, or ANCILLARY STRUCTURE requires a Special Permit
in accordance with the provisions of §10.2.1. Special
Permit, except as follows:
i. The DEVELOPMENT or MODIFICATION of eligible facilities
below the thresholds of Section 6409(a) of the
Middle Class Tax Relief Act of 2012 requires only
a pre-submittal meeting in accordance with the
provisions of §10.1.1. Pre-Submittal Meeting, but
does not require any further DEVELOPMENT review.
Upon completion of the review of required
application materials, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall
issue a Zoning Compliance Certificate to certify
compliance with the provisions and procedures of
this Ordinance.
c. The Zoning Board of Appeals is the review board
for the DEVELOPMENT or MODIFICATION of all wireless
communication TOWERs, wireless communication
ANTENNAs, and their ANCILLARY STRUCTURES.
d. APPLICANTs must submit a rendering or computersimulated
photograph illustrating the view of any
proposed WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWER or ANTENNA
from at least three (3) prominent locations along the
surrounding public THOROUGHFAREs.
e. In addition to the review criteria for all Special Permits
specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria, the review
board shall make findings considering the following
in its discretion to approve or deny a special permit
authorizing a wireless communication TOWER, wireless
communication ANTENNA:
i. Suitability of nearby, existing SITEs and/or the
feasibility of alternative technologies.
ii. Height and design of proposed TOWER or ANTENNA,
with particular concern for design solutions that
reduce or eliminate visual impact.
iii. Compatibility with the USEs associated with
surrounding properties and proximity of the
proposed TOWER or ANTENNA to properties in
residential USE.
iv. Topography, on-SITE vegetation, and the prominence
of proposed facility.
v. Proposed ingress and egress for maintenance.
4. Wireless Communication Towers
a. Wireless communication TOWERs approved according
to the provisions of this section may be built prior to or
independent of any PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE on a LOT.
b. DEVELOPMENT Standards
i. Wireless communication TOWERs are not permitted
to exceed the tallest BUILDING TYPE permitted for the
district where they are located.
ii. Lighting is prohibited, except as required by the
Federal Aviation Administration.
iii. SIGNs are prohibited, except as follows:
a). SIGNs required by the FAA, FCC, or other
applicable authority;
b). no trespassing SIGNs or other notifications that
alert the public to potential safety concerns; or
c). a nameplate or SIGN identifying the name and
phone number of the owner or operator.
iv. Wireless communication TOWERs must be set-back
from any property line a distance equal to their
height.
5. Wireless Communication Antennas
a. DEVELOPMENT Standards
i. Roof mounted ANTENNAs:
a). are not permitted to exceed ten (10) feet in
height;
b). must be SETBACK at least ten (10) feet from the
edge of the roof; and
c). are not permitted to project above a plane
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 473
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Wireless Communication
inclined at a forty-five degree (45º) angle from
vertical, beginning at edge of the roof.
ii. Wall or TOWER mounted ANTENNAs:
a). must be flush-mounted below any ROOF LINE of
the STRUCTURE they are attached to,
b). must be at least forty (40) feet above the
AVERAGE GRADE of the LOT, measured from the
ground to the base of the ANTENNA; and
c). must be painted or otherwise screened in
a way to match the colors or simulate the
materials of the BUILDING or TOWER on which they
are mounted.
iii. Lighting is prohibited, except as required by the
Federal Aviation Administration.
iv. SIGNs are prohibited, except as follows:
a). SIGNs required by the FAA, FCC, or other
applicable authority;
b). no trespassing SIGNs or other notifications that
alert the public to potential safety concerns; or
c). a nameplate or SIGN identifying the name and
phone number of the owner or operator.
6. Ancillary Structures
a. STRUCTURES serving or being USEd in conjunction
with a wireless communication TOWER or ANTENNA
are considered ANCILLARY. Examples include utility or
transmission equipment storage sheds or cabinets.
b. An ANCILLARY STRUCTURE for WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
does not require separate DEVELOPMENT review when
installed in conjunction with an approved wireless
communication TOWER or ANTENNA.
c. Any buildings, cabinets, or shelters may hoUSE only
equipment and supplies for operation of the wireless
communication TOWER or ANTENNA.
d. Any equipment not USEd in direct support of such
operation must not be stored on the SITE.
e. The STRUCTURE must be un-staffed.
f. SIGNs are prohibited, except as follows:
i. SIGNs required by the FAA, FCC, or other applicable
authority;
ii. no trespassing SIGNs or other notifications that alert
the public to potential safety concerns; or
iii. a nameplate or SIGN identifying the name and
phone number of the owner or operator.
7. Design Guidelines
a. TOWERs should only be USEd in circumstances where no
alternative BUILDING-mounted options are available.
b. TOWERs facilities should be designed to structurally
accommodate the maximum number of foreseeable
USErs.
c. TOWERs and ANTENNAs should be located as follows:
i. on properties owned or managed by the City of
Somerville or the Somerville Housing Authority;
ii. on properties located in the fabrication, commercial
industry, or any mixed-USE district;
d. When ANTENNAs for multiple service providers are
located on a single SITE, the ANTENNAs should be colocated
to reduce visual impact.
e. ANTENNAs should be interior-mounted so that they
are concealed from public view (e.g., inside church
steeples, cupolas, bell-TOWERs, or penthoUSEs), or sidemounting
onto existing STRUCTURES in the least obtrusive
location feasible, preferably with limited visibility from
ABUTTING STREETs.
f. Where existing ANTENNAs have been installed in stealth
enclosures, new equipment should be installed in
stealth enclosures designed to match those already on
the SITE.
g. Locations should be chosen with a sensitivity to
the surrounding topography and predominant view
corridors.
h. ANTENNA technology should be chosen to minimize the
visual effect of “massing” panels on a rooftop.
i. To every extent possible, new co-located equipment
should meet the same conditions applied to any
original special permit authorizing the wireless
communication TOWER or ANTENNA on the SITE.
j. Existing on-SITE vegetation should be preserved to the
maximum extent practical.
k. All network interconnections from the communications
SITE should be via underground lines.
8. Abandonment
a. If the owner of any WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWER or
ANTENNA communicates an intent to discontinue USE or
if any TOWER or ANTENNA is not operated for a continuous
period of twelve (12) months, the TOWER or ANTENNA,
and any ANCILLARY STRUCTURES and equipment must be
removed by the owner of the TOWER or ANTENNA within
ninety (90) days.
474 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
10. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
11 PARKING & MOBILITY
11.1 BICYCLE PARKING ..............................................477
General 477
Short-Term Bicycle Parking 477
Long-Term Bicycle Parking 478
Alternative Compliance 478
11.2 MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING ................................478
General 478
Parking Lots 480
Parking Structures 480
Flexible Use of Accessory Parking 480
Loading Facilities 481
Alternative Compliance 481
On-Street Parking in Transit Areas 481
11.3 SHARED PARKING ..............................................482
Purpose 482
Applicability 482
Restrictions 482
Reductions to Minimum Parking 482
Shared Parking Agreements 482
Signage 482
11.4 MOBILITY MANAGEMENT .................................483
Purpose 483
Applicability 483
Mobility Management Plan Required 483
Review Authority 483
Procedure 483
Mobility Management Plans 483
Annual Reporting & Monitoring 484
Compliance 484
Required Programs & Services 484
Definitions & Standards 484
Mobility Management Associations 486
Enforcement 486

12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 477
11. PARKING & MOBILITY
Bicycle Parking
11.1 BICYCLE PARKING
1. General
a. Design Guidance
i. The City of Somerville’s Bicycle Parking Guide and
the latest version of the Association of Pedestrian
and Bicycle Professionals Bicycle Parking
Guidelines should be referenced for guidance.
b. Size & Layout
i. Each bicycle parking space must be two (2) feet by
six (6) feet in size or the minimum required by the
manufacturer of a bicycle rack or locker, whichever
is more.
c. ACCESS
i. Areas designed for bicycle parking spaces must
have a hard, stabilized surface.
ii. Bicycle parking spaces must have at least one (1)
ACCESS aisle at least five (5) feet wide to allow room
for maneuvering. This ACCESS aisle must be kept
free from obstructions.
iii. Bicycle parking spaces must be ACCESSible without
moving another bicycle or lifting or carrying a
bicycle over any steps or stairs.
iv. Outdoor ACCESS routes must be appropriately
lighted to allow for safe nighttime USE.
d. Weather Protection
i. When provided, weather protection must be
permanent, designed to protect bicycles from
rainfall, and provide at least seven (7) feet of
CLEARANCE above ground level.
e. Bicycle Racks
i. All bike racks must:
a). Be a fixed-in-place stand that is securely
anchored to the ground;
b). Provide support to the bicycle frame, allowing
for both wheels to rest upon a stable surface
and for the bicycle to stand upright and not fall
over without the use of a kick-stand;
c). Be configured not to block handlebars and
baskets and to provide two points of contact
for locking the frame and at least one wheel
with a user-provided locking device;
d). Be constructed of materials that resist cutting,
rusting, bending, or deformation; and
e). Be arranged in rows (with bicycles parked sideby-
side) or in alignment (with bicycles parked
end-to-end).
f. Bicycle Lockers
i. All bicycle lockers must:
a). Be securely anchored to the ground;
b). Be configured to provide support to the
bicycle, allowing it to stand upright without the
USE of a kick-stand, and
c). Be secured by means of a lockable door or,
alternatively, configured internally to allow
locking of the frame and at least one wheel
with a USEr-provided locking device.
g. SIGNage
i. If required bicycle parking is not visible from the
STREET or PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE(s), a SIGN must be posted
at the PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE(s) indicating the location
of the parking. The D4-3 SIGN from the Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) is
recommended (see Figure 11.1.1).
2. Short-Term Bicycle Parking
a. SHORT-TERM BICYCLE PARKING may be provided in any
combination of bicycle racks and bicycle lockers. Racks
that are double height or require hanging of a bicycle
are prohibited for SHORT-TERM BICYCLE PARKING.
b. SHORT-TERM BICYCLE PARKING must be provided outside of a
PRINCIPAL BUILDING and within fifty (50) feet of the PRINCIPAL
ENTRANCE of the USE served by the parking.
c. SHORT-TERM BICYCLE PARKING must be at the same grade
as the ABUTTING sidewalk or at a location that can be
reached by an ACCESSible route from the sidewalk that
is a minimum of five (5) feet wide, with no steps and a
six percent (6%) slope or less.
d. Bike racks may be installed within the furnishing
zone of a sidewalk of an ABUTTING public THOROUGHFARE
provided that an ENCROACHMENT permit is granted by the
City Council. A rack may also consist of a hoop affixed
to a parking meter, with approval from the Director of
Mobility.
i. Any required SHORT-TERM BICYCLE PARKING provided in a
STRUCTURE or under cover must be:
a). Provided at ground level;
b). Provided free of charge;
Figure 11.1.1 Bicycle Parking Spaces
478 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
11. PARKING & MOBILITY
Motor Vehicle Parking
c). Clearly marked as bicycle parking;
d). Separated from vehicle parking by a physical
barrier to minimize the possibility of parked
bicycles being hit by a vehicle; and
e). Co-located in relative proximity to the nearest
vehicular parking spaces.
3. Long-Term Bicycle Parking
a. LONG-TERM BICYCLE PARKING may be provided through any
combination of racks or lockers.
b. LONG-TERM BICYCLE PARKING must be provided in a welllit,
secure location within the same BUILDING as the USE
the parking is intended to serve or within an ACCESSORY
STRUCTURE located within two-hundred (200) feet of the
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE of the BUILDING.
c. To provide security, LONG-TERM BICYCLE PARKING must
either be:
i. In a locked room;
ii. In an area that is enclosed by a fence with a locked
gate. The fence must be either 8 feet high, or be
floor-to-ceiling;
iii. Within view of an attendant or security guard;
iv. In an area that is monitored by a security camera;
or
v. In an area that is visible from employee work areas.
d. All required LONG-TERM BICYCLE PARKING spaces must
be designed to provide continuous shelter from the
elements.
e. LONG-TERM BICYCLE PARKING serving multiple USEs may be
combined into a single area or ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.
f. Where LONG-TERM BICYCLE PARKING is located adjacent
to MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING or loading facilities, a physical
barrier must be provided to prevent potential damage
to bicycles by other vehicles.
g. When twenty (20) or more long term bicycle parking
spaces are provided, a minimum of ten percent (10%)
of the spaces must be three (3) feet by eight (8) feet in
size.
h. Up to twenty five (25%) of long term bicycle parking
space may be provided as racks that require bicycles to
be hung or lifted off the ground or floor.
4. Alternative Compliance
a. The provisions of Section 11.1 may be modified
by Special Permit to accommodate alternative
technologies and methods for providing bicycle parking.
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
Special Permit to modify the provisions of Section
11.1 Bicycle Parking:
a). The ability of alternative technologies and
methods of bicycle parking to provide equal or
greater benefits to bicycle USErs.
11.2 MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING
1. General
a. Approval by the City Engineer Required
i. All CURB CUTs, driveways, parking spaces, and
PARKING LOTs must comply with the applicable
provisions of Chapter 11, Article II, Sec. 11-33
Driveway Construction of The Code of Ordinances,
City of Somerville, Massachusetts.
b. Permitted Types
i. Zoning districts include restrictions on the type of
off-STREET parking that is permitted in each district.
c. Parking SETBACKs
i. Unless other wise specified, all parking, excluding
underground STRUCTURED PARKING, must be located at
or behind the required parking SETBACK indicated for
each BUILDING TYPE.
ii. Parking is not permitted within a FRONTAGE AREA.
d. ACCESS
i. All off-STREET parking must have direct ACCESS to
a public THOROUGHFARE from an ALLEY, driveway,
maneuvering aisle, or permanent ACCESS EASEMENT.
ii. If an ALLEY is provided, all off-STREET parking must be
ACCESSed from the ALLEY.
e. Circulation
i. PARKING LOTs and STRUCTURES must be designed
so that vehicles enter or exit onto a public
THOROUGHFARE in a forward direction rather than
backing out into the roadway.
ii. Unless otherwise specified, ingress and egress
from individual parking spaces must be from a
Figure 11.1.1 MUTCD Figure D4-3
PARKI N G
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 479
11. PARKING & MOBILITY
Motor Vehicle Parking
Table 11.2.1 Parking Space & Drive Aisle Dimensions
90° 45°
60° 90°
Parallel 45 Degrees 60 Degrees 90 Degrees
A Stall Width (min) 8 ft N/A N/A 8 ft
B Stall Length (min) 16 ft 18 ft 18 ft 16 ft
C Drive Aisle, 1 Way (min) 12 ft 12 ft 12 ft N/A
D Drive Aisle, 2 Way (min) 20 ft N/A N/A 20 ft
E Vertical CLEARANCE (min) 7.5 ft 7.5 ft 7.5 ft 7.5 ft
Parallel
60 Degrees
45 Degrees
90 Degrees
drive aisle or driveway.
iii. Vehicles are not permitted to enter or exit parking
spaces directly from a public THOROUGHFARE except
as follows:
a). PARKING LOTs with six (6) or less parking spaces
may be designed to permit motor vehicles to
enter or exit a parking space directly from a
rear ALLEY by special permit.
b). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing
parking spaces that are directly ACCESSible from
a rear ALLEY:
i). Adequate ALLEY width and surface material
to accommodate vehicular turning
movements.
ii). Location of ALLEY intersections in relation
to the safety of pedestrians, bicyclists, and
480 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
11. PARKING & MOBILITY
Motor Vehicle Parking
motor vehicles.
iii). Sight lines needed by the driver of any
vehicle entering or exiting the SITE.
f. Parking Space & Drive Aisle Dimensions
i. All parking spaces and drive aisles must comply
with the minimum dimensional standards shown in
Table 11.2 (a), with the following exceptions:
a). Motorcycle and scooter parking stalls must
measure at least four (4) feet in width and
eight (8) feet in depth.
b). Mechanical ACCESS parking is exempt from
parking stall and drive aisle dimensional
requirements.
c). When the side of a parking space ABUTs a wall
or other obstruction that is taller than six (6)
inches, the width of the parking space must be
increased by one foot.
g. ACCESSibility
i. All parking spaces, LOTs, and STRUCTURES must
comply with relevant State and Federal regulations
for parking designed for persons with disabilities,
including 521 CMR 300.
h. Lighting
i. All off-STREET parking must be provided with
adequate light for USE at night in accordance with
the provisions of §6.H. Outdoor Lighting.
i. SIGNage
i. All traffic control SIGNs must be installed in
accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices (MUTCD).
2. Parking Lots
a. GENERAL
i. SURFACE PARKING LOTs are permitted by Site Plan
Approval
b. ACCESS
i. Pedestrian ACCESS from PARKING LOTs must lead
directly to a public sidewalk (i.e., not directly into a
BUILDING).
c. Design & Construction
i. No SURFACE PARKING LOT may have a grade in excess
of ten percent (10%).
ii. Individual parking spaces must be delineated with
paint or similar method and maintained in clear,
visible condition to identify the parking spaces
from drive aisles and other circulation features.
iii. Wheel stops, bumper guards, or other alternatives
must be installed to prevent vehicles from
damaging or ENCROACHing upon any sidewalk,
landscaping, fence, wall, or STRUCTURE and must be
properly anchored and secured into the ground.
iv. PARKING LOTs ABUTTING, within fifty (50) feet, or visible
from the right-of-way of a public THOROUGHFARE,
except ALLEYs, must be effectively screened by a
perimeter wall or fence.
a). Perimeter walls and fences may be up to four
(4) feet in height measured from the surface
of the LOT, at least fifty percent (50%) opaque,
and designed to allow surveillance over and
beyond the wall or fence by pedestrians
approaching or passing the PARKING LOT.
d. Capacity
i. Unless otherwise specified, the actual parking of
motor vehicles in excess of the number of parking
spaces delineated in a PARKING LOT is prohibited.
3. Parking Structures
a. Vehicular Entrances
i. Vehicular entrances to PARKING STRUCTURES may be up
to twenty four (24) feet in width.
b. ACCESS
i. Pedestrian ACCESS to STRUCTURED PARKING must lead
directly to a public sidewalk (i.e., not directly into a
BUILDING), except underground levels which may be
exited by pedestrians directly into a BUILDING.
c. FACADE Design
i. Unless SETBACK by space designed for occupancy
by non-parking USEs, the FACADE of any STORY of a
BUILDING occupied by MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING must be
designed as follows:
a). FENESTRATION must be vertically and horizontally
aligned and all floors fronting on the FACADE
must be level (not inclined).
b). The FACADE must include FENESTRATION designed
to appear as windows for between fifteen
percent (15%) and fifty percent (50%) of the
wall area of each floor.
c). Windows must be back-lit during evening
hours and internal LIGHT SOURCEs must be
concealed from view from public sidewalks.
d). The FACADE area masking the floors occupied
by MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING must be seamlessly
integrated into the architectural design of the
BUILDING’s FACADE.
4. Flexible Use of Accessory Parking
a. When existing ACCESSory parking spaces are not needed
to meet the parking demand of a PRINCIPAL USE (such
as when the PRINCIPAL USE is closed for business), the
PROPERTY OWNER may make the unUSEd or under-utilized
parking spaces available for other USEs, including
COMMERCIAL PARKING, when permitted in the district
where the LOT is located.
5. Loading Facilities
a. General
i. Buildings providing space for USEs that regularly
receive or distribute large quantities of goods must
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 481
11. PARKING & MOBILITY
Motor Vehicle Parking
provide loading facilities as required by the Director
of Mobility. Loading facilities must be sufficient to
adequately serve the intended USE(s).
ii. The Director of Mobility may authorize the USE of
an ALLEY for loading activities in lieu of requiring a
separate on-SITE loading facility.
iii. Loading and unloading activities are not permitted
within a public THOROUGHFARE except in a loading
zone during permitted hours designated by the
Director of Mobility.
b. Design & Construction
i. Loading facilities, including all docks and areas
USEd for the storing and staging of materials being
transported to or from the SITE, must be fully
enclosed within a BUILDING or located to the side or
rear of buildings and screened from view from any
public THOROUGHFARE (excluding ALLEYs) or CIVIC SPACE
according to §10.7. Screening.
ii. Common loading facilities may be shared by two
or more buildings or multiple USEs within the
same BUILDING with the approval of the Director of
Mobility.
c. Neighborhood Compatibility
i. Loading and unloading activities may not ENCROACH
on or interfere with the USE of sidewalks, drive
aisles, or parking areas, or public THOROUGHFAREs.
ii. Maneuvering aisles and driveways may serve both
required parking and loading bays if they meet the
design needs of each activity.
iii. Loading facilities requiring vehicles to back in from
a public THOROUGHFARE are permitted.
iv. Loading and unloading activities for LOTs ABUTTING
the NR or UR districts are limited to the hours
of the day between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. All
loading docks on these LOTs must be SIGNed to
indicate ‘no idling’.
6. Alternative Compliance
a. The provisions of Section 11.2 may be modified
by Special Permit to accommodate alternative
technologies and methods for providing MOTOR VEHICLE
PARKING.
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny a
Special Permit to modify the provisions of Section
11.2 Motor Vehicle Parking:
a). The ability of alternative technologies and
methods of MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING to provide
equal or greater benefits to motor vehicle
USErs.
7. On-Street Parking in Transit Areas
a. Upon the adoption of an official policy limiting on-STREET
residential parking permits in TRANSIT AREAs, the review
boards shall require the following as a condition(s) of
any discretionary or administrative permit:
i. that the APPLICANT complete and file formal
acknowledgment that all DWELLING UNIT(s) are
ineligible to participate in the Somerville
Residential Permit Parking program with the with
the Middlesex South Registry of Deeds or Land
COURT prior to the issuance of a building permit;
ii. that all DWELLING UNITs are advertised as ineligible
to participate in the Somerville Residential Permit
Parking program; and
iii. that all buyers grantees, lessees, renters, or
tenants are informed that all DWELLING UNIT(s)
is ineligible to participate in the Somerville
Residential Permit Parking program.
482 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
11. PARKING & MOBILITY
Shared Parking
Table 11.3 (a) SHARED PARKING Calculation
Time of Day
Commercial
Evening
Commercial Residential Total
6am - 9am ( X ) * 25% ( X ) * 0% ( Y ) * 100% = sum of this row
9am - 7pm ( X ) * 100% ( X ) * 50% ( Y ) * 65% = sum of this row
7pm - 11pm ( X ) * 25% ( X ) * 100% ( Y ) * 100% = sum of this row
11pm - 6am ( X ) * 0% ( X ) * 25% ( Y ) * 100% = sum of this row
11.3 SHARED PARKING
1. Purpose
a. To allow parking to be shared between USEs on the
same LOT or between buildings on the same BLOCK
when the actual demand for parking is less than the
total number of spaces required by this Ordinance for
each individual USE.
b. To help prevent land from being unnecessarily devoted
to the parking of motor vehicles.
c. To support the efficient USE of Somerville’s limited land
area for productive USEs that contribute toward the
City’s tax base.
d. To encourage the efficient USE of existing parking
resources.
e. To help reduce impermeable surfaces and associated
storm water runoff and pollution.
2. Applicability
a. This section is applicable to all real property located
outside of a TRANSIT AREA and subject to a minimum
parking requirement by this Ordinance.
b. MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces may be shared between
USEs on the same LOT and buildings on the same BLOCK
as specified elsewhere in this Ordinance.
3. Restrictions
a. ACCESSible parking space (for persons with disabilities)
may not be shared and must be provided on-SITE.
4. Reductions to Minimum Parking
a. DEVELOPMENT proposing to share parking may USE Table
11.3 (a) to reduce the number of MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING
spaces required for the combined USEs.
b. Activities qualifying as evening commercial include
all USEs from the ASSEMBLY OR ENTERTAINMENT, Bar/
Restaurant/Tavern, Hotel/Hostel, and Private, Non-Profit
Club or Lodge USE categories.
c. The reduction to minimum parking requirements due to
SHARED PARKING is calculated as follows:
i. Replace each ‘X’ on Table 11.3 (a) with the total
number of MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces required for
all commercial USEs. See the Vehicular Parking table
for the zoning district where the LOT is located to
determine this number.
ii. Replace each ‘Y’ on Table 11.3 (a) with the total
number of MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING spaces required for
all residential USEs. See the Vehicular Parking table
for the zoning district where the LOT is located to
determine this number.
iii. Multiple the number required by §11.3.3.i and
§11.3.3.ii (above) as indicated for each time sLOT for
all three columns of Table 11.3 (a).
iv. Add the result of each cell together for each row on
Table 11.3 (a).
v. The row (time period) with the highest total parking
requirement is the reduced minimum number of
parking spaces that are required for all participating
USEs.
5. Shared Parking Agreements
a. SHARED PARKING requires a written agreement among all
owners of record.
b. An attested copy of the agreement between the
owners of record must be submitted to the BUILDING
Department and in a form deemed acceptable by the
City Solicitors Office prior to and as a condition of the
issuance of a BUILDING Permit.
c. Revocation of an existing parking agreement will only
be accepted if the required OFF-STREET PARKING SPACEs
are provided in accordance with the standards for the
district where each property is located.
6. Signage
a. SHARED PARKING facilities must provide SIGNage identifying
the permitted USErs.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 483
11. PARKING & MOBILITY
Mobility Management
11.4 MOBILITY MANAGEMENT
1. Purpose
a. To improve transportation options available to travelers,
promote the USE of efficient travel modes, and reduce
the need to travel.
b. To decrease vehicular air pollutant emissions, conserve
energy resources, and reduce ambient noise levels by
reducing vehicular trips, total vehicle miles traveled,
and traffic congestion within the city.
c. To reduce automobile dependence and the associated
costs of owning, operating, and maintaining an
automobile.
d. To decrease costs associated with the construction,
repair, maintenance, and improvement of city
THOROUGHFAREs and parking facilities.
e. To decrease the cost of traffic enforcement and
promote traffic safety.
f. To reduce the demand for parking facilities and
increase the capacity and efficiency of existing
transportation infraSTRUCTURE.
g. To support a fiscal return on federal, state, and local
financial investment made in public transportation
infraSTRUCTURE by increasing ridersHIP of public
transportation services.
h. To incorporate transportation planning considerations
into DEVELOPMENT review.
i. To encourage the establishment of agencies or
associations to manage MOBILITY MANAGEMENT programs
and services implemented within the city.
2. Applicability
a. This Section is applicable to the following:
i. DEVELOPMENT of any BUILDING TYPE with fifty thousand
(50,000) gross square feet or more of commercial
floor area.
ii. DEVELOPMENT of any multi-tenant BUILDING that has
non-residential USEs with a combined total of fifty
(50) or more employees.
iii. Non-residential USEs with fifty (50) or more
employees.
iv. DEVELOPMENT of any BUILDING with twenty (20) or
more total DWELLING UNITs.
v. HOTEL OR HOSTEL USEs with fifty (50) or more rooms
or beds.
vi. COMMERCIAL PARKING USEs.
3. Mobility Management Plan Required
a. A MOBILITY MANAGEMENT plan (MMP) is required for all
DEVELOPMENT and for Master Plan Special Permits.
b. Development review applications are not considered
complete and will not be scheduled for a public
hearing until the Director of Mobility has approved the
proposed MOBILITY MANAGEMENT plan.
c. Review boards may not issue a special permit, Site
Plan Approval, or Hardship Variance; and the BUILDING
OFFICIAL may not issue a zoning compliance certificate,
BUILDING Permit, certificate of occupancy, or any other
permit; until the Director of Mobility has approved the
proposed MOBILITY MANAGEMENT plan.
4. Review Authority
a. The Director of Mobility, or their designee, is
responsible for reviewing, conditioning, approving, and
denying MOBILITY MANAGEMENT plans and annual reports.
5. Procedure
a. MOBILITY MANAGEMENT plans must be submitted to the
Director of Mobility prior to or simultaneously with
development review applications.
b. The Director of Mobility shall issue a written
preliminary decision within thirty (30) days of receipt
of the MOBILITY MANAGEMENT plan indicating approval,
approval with conditions, or denial of the proposed
plan.
c. The Director of Mobility shall issue a written final
decision within sixty (60) days of receipt of the MOBILITY
MANAGEMENT plan indicating approval, approval with
conditions, or denial of the proposed plan. The final
decision of the Director of Mobility must be posted on
the City webSITE.
d. Upon mutual agreement by the APPLICANT and the
Director of Mobility, the time limits required of the
Director to issue a preliminary and final decision may
be extended. Mutual agreement of extended time
limits must be recorded in writing.
e. Failure by the Director of Mobility to issue a written
final decision within sixty (60) days or any extended
time period, if applicable, is deemed to be constructive
approval of the proposed MOBILITY MANAGEMENT plan.
f. The commitments and obligations of an approved
MOBILITY MANAGEMENT plan are automatically transferred
to the new PROPERTY OWNER when real property subject
to the provisions of this Section is exchanged between
private parties.
g. The Director of Mobility shall issue a reconciliation
letter to address any conditions applied by the review
boards to a discretionary or administrative permit
approval required for DEVELOPMENT subject to the
provisions of this Section.
6. Mobility Management Plans
a. The Director of Mobility shall establish submittal
requirements for MMPs. The Director shall make the
submittal requirements available to the public on the
City webSITE.
b. MMPs for buildings or USEs must include, but may not
484 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
11. PARKING & MOBILITY
Mobility Management
be limited to, the following:
i. A commitment to control the percentage of trips
made by automobile at fifty percent (50%) or less.
ii. Identification of who, what, when, where, and how
each required or proposed program and service
will be implemented or, if unknown at that time,
establish a time-line with milestones for when
those outstanding questions will be answered.
c. The cost associated with drafting a MOBILITY MANAGEMENT
plan, annual updates, and all monitoring and reporting
is borne by PROPERTY OWNER.
7. Annual Reporting & Monitoring
a. MOBILITY MANAGEMENT plans must be updated on an
annual basis and submitted for approval to the Director
of Mobility to validate continued compliance with the
provisions of this Section.
b. If annual monitoring and reporting identifies a shortfall
in meeting the MMP’s commitments, adjustments to
existing programs and services or additional programs
and services must be implemented.
c. For the first two (2) years of occupancy or operations,
annual updates must identify existing SITE based
parking conditions, travel behavior of employees or
residents, and identify the metrics and methods USEd
for performance review.
d. After two (2) years of occupancy or operations, a
MOBILITY MANAGEMENT plan must also identify objective
targets to reduce parking demand, single-occupant
vehicle trips, vehicle miles traveled, or automobile
vehicle trips associated with DEVELOPMENT, based on the
performance review of previous years, and propose
adjustments to existing programs and services or
additional programs & services to achieve those
objectives.
e. To ascertain the level of success for implemented
programs and services, incentives, and other
measures, annual updates to MOBILITY MANAGEMENT plans
must include, but may not be limited to, the following:
i. A statistically valid travel survey of employees and
residents, as applicable.
ii. Annual reporting of parking utilization and
operations for any Commercial Service Vehicular
Parking facility.
iii. Biennial counts of automobile trips entering &
exiting any parking facilities.
iv. A status update on the implementation of
programs and services.
8. Compliance
a. The review boards shall require compliance to a
MOBILITY MANAGEMENT plan, as approved by the Director
of Mobility, as a condition of any discretionary or
administrative permit required for DEVELOPMENT subject
to the conditions of this Section.
b. The review boards may require the posting of a
bond or other performance guarantee to ensure
implementation of an approved MOBILITY MANAGEMENT
plan and compliance with the provisions of this section.
9. Required Programs & Services
a. Commercial PROPERTY OWNERS must provide the following
for their tenants:
i. On-SITE Transportation Coordinator
ii. Posted Information
iii. Distributed Information
iv. Unbundled Parking
v. Preferential Parking for Carpool/Vanpool
vi. Qualified Transportation Fringe Benefits
vii. Guaranteed Ride Home Program
viii. Annual Mobility Educational Meeting
b. Commercial PROPERTY OWNERS must require future
tenants to provide the following to their employees
through lease agreements:
i. Guaranteed Ride Home Program
ii. Qualified Transportation Fringe Benefits
c. Commercial USEs must provide the following for their
employees:
i. On-SITE Transportation Coordinator
ii. Posted Information
iii. Distributed Information
iv. Qualified Transportation Fringe Benefits
v. Guaranteed Ride Home Program
vi. Annual Mobility Educational Meeting
d. HOTEL OR HOSTEL USEs must provide the following:
i. Shuttle Services
e. COMMERCIAL PARKING USEs must provide the following:
i. Posted Information
ii. Preferential Parking for Carpool/Van-pool
f. Residential PROPERTY OWNERS with twenty (20) or more
DWELLING UNITs must provide the following:
i. Posted Information
ii. Distributed Information
iii. Unbundled Parking
iv. Car Share Vehicle Spaces
g. A MOBILITY MANAGEMENT plan may voluntarily include
additional programs and services.
h. Programs and services not identified in this section
may be proposed and included in a MOBILITY
MANAGEMENT Plan with the approval of the Director of
Mobility.
10. Definitions & Standards
a. Financial Incentives
i. Car-Sharing/Bike-Sharing MembersHIPs: Full or
partial EMPLOYER-funded monthly membersHIPs for
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 485
11. PARKING & MOBILITY
Mobility Management
local car-sharing and bike-sharing services.
ii. Parking Cash-Out Program: An EMPLOYER-funded
cash payment made available to employees who
choose not to USE a parking space in an EMPLOYER
subsidized PARKING LOT or facility.
iii. Qualified Transportation Fringe Benefits: A
‘Commuter Tax Benefit’ that allows EMPLOYERs to
save on payroll related taxes or employees to save
on federal income taxes in accordance with the
Internal Revenue Code through the provision of
either Pre-Tax Payroll Deductions for Transit Passes/
Van-pool Costs or Subsidized Transit Passes.
b. Shared Vehicle Services
i. Bikes at Work: Bicycles available on-SITE during the
workday for employee business and personal USE.
ii. Bike Share Station: Bike sharing vehicles available
on-SITE for public USE.
iii. Car Share Vehicle Spaces: On-SITE parking spaces
provided at no cost for car-sharing vehicles.
iv. Fleet Vehicle(s): Company owned vehicle(s)
available on-SITE during the workday for employees
that carpool, van-pool, bike, walk, or take transit.
v. Guaranteed Ride Home Program: An EMPLOYER
subsidized ride home for employees that carpool,
van-pool, bike, walk, or take transit.
a). Transportation must be provided to an
employee for:
i). Emergency situations of the employee or a
family member;
ii). Illness of the employee or a family
member;
iii). Unscheduled overtime; and
iv). Bicycle damage.
ii). Availability of the ride home service may be
restricted to at least four (4) times per calendar
year.
vi. Ride Matching Services: A no cost service to help
employees interested in carpooling locate other
interested carpoolers with similar schedules,
routes, and destinations.
vii. Shuttle Services: Smaller bUSEs or vans providing
complimentary transportation for employees and
guests.
viii. Visitor Commute Support: Full or partially funded
daily transit passes or daily membersHIPs for local
car-sharing and bike-sharing services.
c. Employment Programs
i. Flexible Work Hours: Compressed workweeks,
flexible work hours, and staggered work shifts.
ii. Teleworking: Policies to permit and encourage
employees to work from home or off-SITE.
d. Marketing & Education
i. Bike Commuting Training: Classes (education and
hands-on training) to encourage employee bike
commuting offered on-SITE or through a third party
provider.
ii. Distributed Information: Printed materials issued
annually to all tenants and employees, and to
new employees and tenants at the time of hire or
occupancy, providing the following information:
a). Current maps identifying station locations,
routes, and schedules for public transit serving
the SITE;
b). Bicycle route and facility information, including
regional/local bicycle maps;
c). A listing of facilities available for carpoolers,
vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders and
pedestrians at the SITE.
iii. On-SITE Transportation Coordinator: a person with
the responsibility to implement and administer the
programs and services of an approved MOBILITY
MANAGEMENT Plan and serve as a point of contact to
the City of Somerville.
iv. Posted Information: A bulletin board, display
case, or kiosk located in a BUILDING lobby, common
area, or other conspicuous location displaying the
following information:
a). Current maps identifying station locations,
routes, and schedules for public transit serving
the SITE;
b). Bicycle route and facility information, including
regional/local bicycle maps;
c). A listing of facilities available for carpoolers,
vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders and
pedestrians at the SITE.
v. Transportation SIGNage: Wayfinding providing
directions to and clearly identifying transportation
facilities such as TRANSIT STATIONs, bus stops, bicycle
parking, carpool spaces, etc.
e. Parking Management
i. Charging for Employee Parking: Elimination of
existing subsidies for off-SITE employee parking and
charging for on-SITE employee parking.
ii. Demand-Responsive Pricing: Adjustable hourly
rates charged for employee or customer parking to
manage parking availability.
iii. Parking Lease Adjustments: Rental of parking
spaces on a monthly rather than yearly basis.
iv. Preferential Parking for Carpool/Van-pool: Parking
spaces located in a preferential location and
reserved for registered carpool and van-pool
vehicles.
v. SHARED PARKING: Parking spaces shared by two (2) or
more USEs.
vi. Unbundled Parking: Parking spaces rented, leased,
or sold as an option rather than a requirement of
the rental, lease, or purchase of a DWELLING UNIT or
486 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
11. PARKING & MOBILITY
Mobility Management
non-residential floor space.
f. On-SITE Services
i. Bicycle Repair Station: On-SITE bike repair station or
room available for residents or employees.
ii. Child Care: The caring for and supervision of
children available on SITE for employees.
iii. Concierge Services: an employee of an apartment
BUILDING, hotel or office BUILDING providing services
to residents or employees.
iv. On-SITE Transit Pass Sales: Retail sales of public
transportation passes.
11. Mobility Management Associations
a. MOBILITY MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATIONs are organizations
formed to help individual USEs and PROPERTY OWNERS
collectively implement and administer the programs
and services required by this Section.
b. A representative from an approved MOBILITY
MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION may jointly represent EMPLOYERs,
parking facility operators, and PROPERTY OWNERS subject
to the provisions of this Section in place of a required
on-SITE transportation coordinator.
12. Enforcement
a. In accordance with §1.1.7. Fines & Penalties, the
BUILDING OFFICIAL shall consider each day as a separate
offense for DEVELOPMENT that is not in compliance with
the provisions of this Section.
12 DEVELOPMENT BENEFITS
12.1 AFFORDABLE HOUSING ...................................489
Purpose 489
Applicability 489
Enforcement 489
Required ADUs 489
ADU Price 489
Purchase & Tenancy Standards 490
ADU Development Standards 491
Implementation Plans and Covenants 492
Buyouts & Payments 492
Compliance 493
Performance Review 493
12.2 LINKAGE ..............................................................494
Applicability 494
Affordable Housing Linkage 494
Employment Linkage 494
Green Line Linkage 495
Civic Space Linkage 495
Performance Review 495

12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 489
12. DEVELOPMENT BENEFITS
Affordable Housing
12.1 AFFORDABLE HOUSING
1. Purpose
a. To implement the housing policy objectives of the
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN of the City of Somerville by
increasing the supply of affordable housing available to
existing and future residents.
b. To create a stock of affordable housing that is available
to qualifying households over the long-term.
c. To stabilize the cost of housing, including utilities,
parking, and on-site amenities for households that are
unable to afford market-rate housing prices without
becoming COST BURDENED.
d. To ensure that fractional buyouts and in-lieu payments
compensate for the additional costs of acquisition,
design, DEVELOPMENT, operations, and maintenance in
addition to the value of an AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT.
e. To recapture a public benefit from the increased value
of land resulting from the adoption of this Ordinance.
2. Applicability
a. This Section is applicable to all DEVELOPMENT required
to provide one (1) or more AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS
(ADUs) and to any SUBDIVISION or LOT SPLIT that results
in two or more LOTS intended for residential use, sale,
legacy, or DEVELOPMENT at any time.
b. DEVELOPMENT may not be segmented or phased in any
manner and APPLICANTS may not establish surrogate
or subsidiary entities to avoid compliance with this
Section.
c. Residential uses owned by an educational institution
for occupancy exclusively by its students, faculty, and
staff are exempt.
d. 100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING buildings are exempt.
3. Enforcement
a. The Director of Housing may establish additional
standards and procedures for the administration
enforcement of this Section.
4. Required ADUs
a. Unless otherwise specified, ADUs must be provided
as specified in Article 3: Residential Districts, Article 4:
Mid-Rise Districts, Article 5: High-Rise Districts, Article
7: Special Districts, and Article 8: Overlay Districts.
b. When the calculation for AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS
results in a fractional value, the fractional value is either
rounded up to the next whole number and regarded
as a whole unit or, alternatively, a buyout may be paid
for the fractional value in accordance with Section 12.3
Buyouts & Payments.
c. Applicants may request to make a payment in lieu of
providing one (1) or more required ADUs by Special
Permit in accordance with Section 12.3 Buyouts &
Payments.
d. DEVELOPMENT that results in elimination or
discontinuance of an existing ADU is required to
replace the unit(s) on a one-for-one basis or provide the
number required ADUs for the subject building type,
whichever is more.
5. ADU Price
a. Unless otherwise specified, ADUs required by this
Ordinance must be priced as specified on Table 12.1.4
(a) ADU Price Tiers.
b. The Director of Housing shall calculate, publish on the
City website, and annually update the following:
i. The maximum rent and maximum sales price for
each ADU price tier.
ii. Standard deductions for condominium fees,
homeowners insurance, private mortgage
insurance, real estate taxes, and parking fees for
ownership ADUs.
iii. Standard deductions for utilities, parking, and
amenities for rental ADUs.
c. The maximum affordable rent for each rental ADU price
tier is calculated as follows:
i. The Median Family Income (MFI) for the Boston-
Cambridge-Quincy, MA-NH HUD Metro FMR
Area published annually by the U.S Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) is
multiplied by the percentage specified on Table
12.1.5 (b) for the price tier and BEDROOM count of the
Table 12.1.5 (a) ADU Price Tiers
ADU Price Tier
1st ADU Tier 1
2nd ADU Tier 2
3rd ADU Tier 1
4th ADU Tier 2
5th ADU Tier 3
6th ADU Tier 1
7th ADU Tier 2
8th ADU Tier 1
9th ADU Tier 3
10th ADU Tier 2
11th ADU Tier 1
12th ADU Tier 2
13th ADU Tier 3
Repeating
490 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
12. DEVELOPMENT BENEFITS
Affordable Housing
subject ADU to determine the base price before
deductions.
ii. The product of the above is divided by twelve (12)
and the standard deductions for utilities, parking,
and amenities provided at additional cost to
tenants is subtracted from the result to determine
the maximum monthly rent. For example, the
estimated monthly rent of a Tier 1, two (2) BEDROOM
ADU would be $531.40 per month based on the
following:
a). $113,300 (the 2019 MFI for the Boston Metro
FMR Area) multiplied by 9.6% from Table
12.1.5 (b) ($10,876.80) divided by twelve
(12) months ($906.40) minus an estimated
standard deduction of three hundred and
seventy five dollars ($375) for utilities, parking,
and amenities.
d. The maximum affordable sales price for each
ownership ADU price tier is calculated as follows:
i. The Median Family Income (MFI) for the Boston-
Cambridge-Quincy, MA-NH HUD Metro FMR
Area published annually by the U.S Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) is
multiplied by the percentage specified on Table
12.1.4 (c) for the price tier and BEDROOM count of the
subject ADU.
ii. The the product of the above is then divided
by twelve and the standard deductions for
private mortgage insurance, real estate taxes,
condominium fees, homeowners insurance, and
parking fees, if any, are subtracted from the result
to determine a maximum monthly mortgage
payment. For example, the estimated maximum
monthly mortgage payment for a Tier 1, two (2)
BEDROOM ADU would be $1,105.45 per month based
on the following:
a). $113,300 (the 2018 MFI for the Boston Metro
FMR Area) multiplied by 15.68% from Table
12.1 (d) ($17,765.44) divided by twelve (12)
months ($1,480.45) minus an estimated
standard deduction of three hundred and
seventy five dollars ($375) for private mortgage
insurance, real estate taxes, condominium
fees, homeowners insurance, and parking fees.
iii. The result of the above is used to calculate a
maximum mortgage loan amount, assuming a
thirty (30) year term and a current conventional
interest rate, and the maximum mortgage loan
amount is multiplied by 1.03 to determine the
maximum affordable sales price.
6. Purchase & Tenancy Standards
a. The Director of Housing shall calculate, publish on the
City website, and annually update the following:
i. The actual maximum annual income eligibility
requirements for households selected to rent or
purchase an ADU:
b. The maximum eligible household income to rent an
ADU for each rental ADU price tier is calculated as
follows:
i. The Median Family Income (MFI) for the Boston-
Cambridge- Quincy, MA-NH HUD Metro FMR
Area published annually by the U.S Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) is
multiplied by the percentage specified on Table
12.1.5 (a) for the price tier and potential household
Table 12.1.5 (c) Ownership ADU Price Multiplier
Bedroom Count
ADU Tier Studio 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Tier 1: “Low Income” 11.76% 13.72% 15.68% 17.64% 19.60% 21.56% 23.52% 25.48% 27.44%
Tier 2: “Moderate Income” 16.66% 19.60% 22.40% 25.20% 28.00% 30.80% 33.60% 36.40% 39.20%
Tier 3: “Middle Income” 21.66% 25.48% 29.12% 32.76% 36.40% 40.04% 43.68% 47.32% 50.96%
Table 12.1.5 (b) Rental ADU Price Multiplier
Bedroom Count
ADU Tier Studio 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Tier 1: “Very Low Income” 7.14% 8.40% 9.60% 10.80% 12.00% 13.20% 14.40% 15.60% 16.80%
Tier 2: “Low Income” 12.50% 14.70% 16.80% 18.90% 21.00% 23.10% 25.20% 27.30% 29.40%
Tier 3: “Moderate Income” 17.85% 21.00% 24.00% 27.00% 30.00% 33.00% 36.00% 39.00% 42.00%
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 491
12. DEVELOPMENT BENEFITS
Affordable Housing
size for the specific unit available to determine
the maximum annual income permitted for a
household to qualify to lease the unit.
c. The maximum eligible household income to purchase
an ADU for each ownership ADU price tier is calculated
as follows:
i. The Median Family Income (MFI) for the Boston-
Cambridge- Quincy, MA-NH HUD Metro FMR
Area published annually by the U.S Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) is
multiplied by the percentage specified on Table
12.1.5 (b) for the price tier and potential household
size for the specific unit available to determine
the maximum annual income permitted for a
household to qualify to purchase the unit.
d. The selection of specific households to rent or
purchase an ADUs is subject to a selection system
administered by the City of Somerville. Households
selected must meet the income eligibility requirements
of this section, and any other certification requirements
established by the Director of Housing, at the time of
any purchase or the execution of any lease agreement.
e. The City of Somerville, or its designee reserves the
right of first refusal and option to purchase ADUs at the
time of the sale or any subsequent resale.
f. The review boards may require for-sale ADUs to be
sold to the City at a price per unit set per §12.1.4.d as
a condition of Discretionary or administrative permit
approval. The City may subsequently sell or rent these
ADUs at an equivalent or lower price than required by
this Section.
g. Except as provided in 12.1.6.e and 12.1..f, ADUs
established in accordance with this Section must be
rented or sold only to eligible households for as long as
the BUILDING containing the ADUs exists.
7. ADU Development Standards
a. Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this
Ordinance, ADUs must be provided on-site, intermixed
with the MARKET RATE UNITS in the DEVELOPMENT that
generated the requirement for AFFORDABLE DWELLING
UNITs. ADUs may not be overly concentrated on any
single STORY of a BUILDING without the approval of the
Director of Housing.
b. ADUs must be proportional to the corresponding
MARKET RATE UNITs with respect to tenure type (for-sale
or rental), unit size, number of bedrooms, and size of
rooms. The proportion of ADUs with two (2) or more
bedrooms may exceed the proportion provided for the
corresponding MARKET RATE UNITs for each tenure type.
c. Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this
Ordinance, any DEVELOPMENT with thirty (30) or more
DWELLING UNITs must provide at least twenty percent
(20%) of the ADUs with three (3) or more bedrooms.
Any fractional number resulting from this calculation is
rounded up to the next whole number and regarded as
a whole unit.
i. The Director of Housing shall establish quality
standards for three (3) BEDROOM ADUs. Quality
standards must include, but may not be limited to,
minimum floor area and the inclusion of certain
features such as the number of bathrooms and the
existence of built-in closets.
ii. The review boards shall require compliance to the
quality standards for three (3) BEDROOM ADUs as a
condition of Discretionary or administrative permit
Table 12.1.6 (a) Income Multiplier for Rental ADUs
Household Size
ADU Tier Studio 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Tier 1: “Very Low Income” 30% 35% 40% 45% 50% 55% 60% 65% 70%
Tier 2: “Low Income” 48% 56% 64% 72% 80% 88% 96% 104% 112%
Tier 3: “Moderate Income” 65% 77% 88% 99% 110% 121% 132% 143% 154%
Table 12.1.6 (b) Income Multiplier for Ownership ADUs
Household Size
ADU Tier Studio 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Tier 1: “Low Income” 48% 56% 64% 72% 80% 88% 96% 104% 112%
Tier 2: “Moderate Income” 65% 77% 88% 99% 110% 110% 132% 143% 154%
Tier 3: “Middle Income” 83% 98% 112% 126% 140% 140% 168% 182% 196%
492 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
12. DEVELOPMENT BENEFITS
Affordable Housing
approval.
d. Unit features including, but not limited to, finishes,
appliances, and outdoor amenity spaces must be
comparable to those provided in corresponding marketrate
units, but may be functionally equivalent rather
than identical provided that they are durable, of good
quality, and consistent with contemporary standards
for new housing with the approval of the Director of
Housing.
e. Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this
Ordinance, ADUs must have the same ACCESS to
amenities that are provided to the corresponding
market-rate units including, but not limited to, laundry
facilities, storage, fitness rooms, parking, and shared
outdoor amenity spaces.
8. Implementation Plans and Covenants
a. An Affordable Housing Implementation Plan (AHIP) is
required for all DEVELOPMENT subject this Section.
i. The Director of Housing shall establish submittal
requirements for AHIPs. Required information
must include, but may not be limited to, the
following:
a). Housing statistics including the total number
of DWELLING UNITs in the BUILDING; the number
of MARKET RATE UNITs by BEDROOM count with
average floor area for each; the unit number,
floor area, BEDROOM count; and the unit number,
floor area, BEDROOM count, interior amenities,
outdoor amenity spaces, accessibility features
and the price tier for each ADU.
b). Floor plans indicating the location of each ADU.
c). An ACCESS map indicating the location of all site
amenities.
d). Any agreements required of the APPLICANT
deemed to be necessary by the Director
of Housing to ensure compliance to the
provisions of this Section.
ii. The Director of Housing may, at their discretion,
require PROPERTY OWNERS of rental ADUs to submit
an annual report detailing ongoing compliance with
this section as a requirement of an AHIP.
iii. Development review applications are not
considered complete unless a preliminary AHIP
been submitted to the Director of Housing for
information purposes.
b. The review boards shall require Applicants to execute
and record a deed restriction limiting the sale or rental
of ADUs to eligible households in perpetuity with the
Middlesex South Registry of Deeds, or filed with the
Land Registration Office, and submit a final AHIP to the
Director of Housing for approval as a condition of any
Discretionary or administrative permit approval.
c. The BUILDING OFFICIAL will not issue a BUILDING Permit for
DEVELOPMENT subject to this Section until a final AHIP
has been approved by the Director of Housing.
d. The BUILDING OFFICIAL will not issue any Certificate of
Occupancy for DEVELOPMENT subject to this Section until
a deed restriction limiting the sale or rental of ADUs to
eligible households is executed and recorded with the
Middlesex South Registry of Deeds or filed with the
Land Registration Office.
i. The affordable housing covenant must be in a form
approved by the City Solicitor.
9. Compliance
a. Certificate of Occupancy
i. Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this
Ordinance, the BUILDING OFFICIAL may not issue a
Certificate of Occupancy for any MARKET RATE UNITs
of DEVELOPMENT subject to the provisions of this
Section until:
a). A proportional number of the required ADUs,
including any off-site ADUs, have obtained
Certificates of Occupancy; and
b). Payment for any fractional buyout required by
this Section has been made to the Somerville
Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
b. Annual Reporting
i. PROPERTY OWNERS must submit an annual report to
validate continued compliance with the provisions
of this Section in accordance with the standards
established by the Director of Housing.
c. Fines & Penalties
i. In accordance with §1.1.7. Fines & Penalties,
the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall consider each day as
a separate offense for DEVELOPMENT that is not in
compliance with the provisions of this Section.
ii. Fines must be paid to the Somerville Affordable
Housing Trust Fund.
10. Performance Review
a. The Director of Housing shall undertake a Needs
Assessment and Financial Feasibility Analysis to
determine the suitability and performance of the
provisions of this section for potential revision and
improvement prior to January 31, 2021 and at least
every three (3) years thereafter.
b. The Mayor shall submit recommended changes to
the provisions of this section to the City Council for
consideration.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 493
12. DEVELOPMENT BENEFITS
Linkage
12.2 LINKAGE
1. Applicability
a. Unless otherwise specified, this Section is applicable
to building types as specified in Article 3: Residential
Districts, Article 4: Mid-Rise Districts, Article 5: High-
Rise Districts, Article 7: Special Districts, and Article 8:
Overlay Districts.
b. DEVELOPMENT may not be segmented or phased in any
manner and APPLICANTS may not establish surrogate
or subsidiary entities to avoid compliance with this
Section.
2. Affordable Housing Linkage
a. Purpose
i. To mitigate the impact of the increased demand
for housing generated by employees of new
commercial DEVELOPMENT wanting to live within
Somerville.
ii. To support the DEVELOPMENT of affordable housing
that is available to qualifying households over the
long-term.
iii. To recapture a public benefit from the increased
value of land resulting from the adoption of this
Ordinance.
b. Applicability
i. This section is applicable to all non-residential
DEVELOPMENT, except the following:
a). Real property owned by the City of Somerville
b). Religious & Educational uses protected by
M.G.L. 40A. Sec. 3
c). CREATIVE STUDIOs
d). Accessory Vehicular Parking
c. Fees
i. General
a). All applicable DEVELOPMENT must pay an
affordable housing linkage fee of ten dollars
($10) per gross square foot, except as follows:
i). DEVELOPMENT with less than thirty thousand
(30,000) gross square feet is exempt.
ii). The first thirty thousand (30,000) gross
square feet of DEVELOPMENT that has more
than thirty thousand (30,000) gross square
feet in total is exempt.
b). MODIFICATIONs to an existing STRUCTURE that
increases the total GROSS FLOOR AREA to more
than thirty thousand (30,000) gross square feet
must pay the affordable housing linkage fee for
the additional square footage.
ii. Inflation Adjustment
a). The affordable housing linkage fee is adjusted
for inflation annually, beginning on March
1, 2019, based on the change in the Boston
Consumer Price Index. The Director of Housing
shall publish and annually update the adjusted
housing linkage fee on the City website.
iii. Payment
a). Affordable housing linkage fees must be paid
to the Somerville Affordable Housing Trust
Fund, in three (3) equal annual installments.
b). The BUILDING OFFICIAL may not issue a Certificate
of Occupancy for real property that has not
paid the first installment of the affordable
housing linkage fee.
c). Affordable housing linkage fee payments must
be paid annually on the anniversary of the first
payment, or the next business day if that date
falls on a weekend or federal, state, or local
holiday.
d. Compliance
i. The review boards shall require Applicants to
execute and record a covenant or deed restriction
agreeing to pay the housing linkage fee with the
Middlesex South Registry of Deeds or filed with
the Land Registration Office as a condition of any
Discretionary of Administrative permit approval.
ii. The BUILDING OFFICIAL may not issue any Certificate
of Occupancy for DEVELOPMENT subject to this
Section until a covenant or deed restriction
agreeing to pay the housing linkage fee is executed
and recorded with the Middlesex South Registry of
Deeds or filed with the Land Registration Office.
e. Enforcement
i. In accordance with §1.1.7. Fines & Penalties,
the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall consider each day as
a separate offense for DEVELOPMENT that is not in
compliance with the provisions of this Section.
ii. Fines must be paid to the Somerville Affordable
Housing Trust Fund.
f. Formula Recalculation
i. The Director of Planning & Zoning shall prepare a
Nexus Study every five (5) years to determine the
suitability and performance of the provisions of
this section and recommend any possible revisions
or improvements necessary to address changing
demand for affordable housing to the City Council.
3. Employment Linkage
a. Purpose
i. To create and maintain employment opportunities
within the city of Somerville for the residents of
Somerville.
ii. To mitigate the impact of large-scale DEVELOPMENTs
on the cost of housing.
iii. To provide training and services that will enable
residents to ACCESS employment opportunities that
will permit them to succeed and maintain adequate
incomes to continue to afford living in Somerville.
494 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
12. DEVELOPMENT BENEFITS
Linkage
iv. To expand resident ACCESS to employment
opportunities provided by new commercial
DEVELOPMENT.
v. To recapture a public benefit from the increased
value of land resulting from the adoption of this
Ordinance.
b. Applicability
i. This section is applicable to all commercial
DEVELOPMENT requiring site plan approval or a special
permit, except the following:
a). Real property owned by the City of Somerville
b). Religious & Educational uses protected by
M.G.L. 40A. Sec. 3
c). CREATIVE STUDIOs
d). Accessory Vehicular Parking
c. Fees
i. General
a). All applicable DEVELOPMENT must pay a job
creation and retention linkage fee (hereafter
referred to as “jobs linkage fee”) of two dollars
and forty-six cents ($2.46) per gross square
foot, except as follows:
i). DEVELOPMENT with less than fifteen
thousand (15,000) gross square feet is
exempt.
ii). The first fifteen thousand (15,000) gross
square feet of DEVELOPMENT that has more
than fifteen thousand (15,000) gross
square feet in total is exempt.
b). MODIFICATIONs to an existing STRUCTURE that
increases the total GROSS FLOOR AREA to more
than fifteen thousand (15,000) gross square
feet must pay the jobs linkage fee for the
additional square footage.
ii. Inflation Adjustment
a). The jobs linkage fee is adjusted for inflation
annually, beginning on March 1, 2019, based
on the change in the Boston Consumer Price
Index. The Director of Housing shall publish
and annually update the adjusted jobs linkage
fee on the City website.
iii. Payment
a). Jobs linkage fees must be paid to the
Somerville Municipal Job Creation and
Retention Trust Fund, in two (2) equal
installments.
b). The BUILDING OFFICIAL will not issue a BUILDING
Permit for DEVELOPMENT, beyond foundation
construction, until the first installment of the
jobs linkage is paid.
c). The BUILDING OFFICIAL will not issue a Certificate
of Occupancy for DEVELOPMENT until the second
installment of the jobs linkage fee has been
paid.
d. Compliance
i. The review boards shall require Applicants to
execute and record a covenant or deed restriction
agreeing to pay the jobs linkage fee with the
Middlesex South Registry of Deeds or filed with
the Land Registration Office as a condition of any
Discretionary of Administrative permit approval.
ii. The BUILDING OFFICIAL will not issue any Certificate
of Occupancy for DEVELOPMENT subject to this
Section until a covenant or deed restriction
agreeing to pay the jobs linkage fee is executed
and recorded with the Middlesex South Registry of
Deeds or filed with the Land Registration Office.
e. Enforcement
i. In accordance with §1.1.7. Fines & Penalties,
the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall consider each day as
a separate offense for DEVELOPMENT that is not in
compliance with the provisions of this Section.
ii. Fines must be paid to the Somerville Municipal Job
Creation and Retention Trust Fund.
f. Formula Recalculation
i. The Director of Planning & Zoning shall prepare a
Nexus Study every five (5) years to determine the
suitability and performance of the provisions of
this section and recommend any possible revisions
or improvements necessary to address changing
need for job training to the City Council.
4. Green Line Linkage
a. Reserved
5. Civic Space Linkage
a. Reserved
6. Performance Review
a. The Mayor shall undertake a Needs Assessment and
Financial Feasibility Analysis every five (5) years after
the adoption date of this Ordinance to determine the
suitability and performance of the provisions of this
Section and to recommend any possible revisions
or improvements necessary to achieve the stated
purpose of the established linkage requirements.
b. The Mayor shall submit recommended changes to
the provisions of this section to the City Council for
consideration.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 495
12. DEVELOPMENT BENEFITS
Buyouts & Payments
12.3 BUYOUTS & PAYMENTS
1. Compliance
a. The Building Official may not issue any Building Permit,
excluding a foundation permit, for development until
any authorized fractional buyout or in-lieu payment has
been made in accordance with this Section.
2. Open Space In Lieu Payments
a. Payment Calculation
i. The in-lieu payment for open space is calculated as
5*(A*B) where:
i). A is the square footage of open space not
provided; and
ii). B the average cost to acquire, design, and
develop land as a civic space.
b. Payments in-lieu of open space must be paid to
the Open Space Acquisition and Improvements
Stabilization Fund.
3. Civic Space In Lieu Payments
a. Payment Calculation
i. The in-lieu payment for civic space is calculated as
5*(A*B) where:
i). A is the square footage of civic space not
provided; and
ii). B the average cost to acquire, design, and
develop land as a civic space.
ii. The Director of Public Space & Urban Forestry shall
calculate, publish on the City website, and annually
update a fee schedule for a payment in lieu of civic
space.
iii. Payments in-lieu of open space must be paid to
the Open Space Acquisition and Improvements
Stabilization Fund.
b. Review Criteria
i. Master Planned Development
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
payment in lieu of civic space:
i). The goals and objectives of the City of
Somerville Open Space Plan.
ii). The availability and suitability of lots within
a development site for development as a
civic space.
iii). The plausible availability of sites located
elsewhere in the city that are suitable for
development as civic space.
iv). The need for funding to improve or
maintain existing civic spaces, particularly
athletic fields, located elsewhere in the
city.
ii. Contributing Lots in the MPD Overlay
a). In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review
Criteria, the review board shall make findings
considering the following in its discretion to
approve or deny a special permit authorizing a
payment in lieu of civic space:
i). Consistency with the approved Urban
Design Framework, as amended.
ii). If receipt of an in-lieu payment is
advantageous to the City in creating or
preserving civic space as compared to
the civic space that would have been
otherwise provided.
4. Commercial Space In Lieu Payments
a. Payment Calculation
a). The in-lieu payment for commercial floor area
is calculated as 10*(A*B) where:
i). A is the square footage of commercial
floor area not provided; and
ii). B is the difference between the average
price per square foot of non-residential
floor area rented or sold over the previous
twelve (12) months and the average price
per square foot of the market-rate dwelling
units proposed for the development.
5. ADU Fractional Buyouts
a. The fractional buyout for an ownership or rental ADU is
calculated as (A*B) where:
i. A is the amount of ADUs not provided; and
ii. B is the difference between the average sales price
of comparable market-rate units sold within the city
of Somerville over the previous twelve (12) months
and the sale price of an ADU in the ownership or
rental price tier that would have been provided, as
calculated according to §12.1.4 ADU Price.
b. The Director of Housing shall calculate, publish on the
City website, and annually update a fee schedule for a
fractional buyout of an ADU.
c. Buyouts must be paid to the Somerville Affordable
Housing Trust Fund or, alternatively, to the City of
Somerville for transfer to a Massachusetts Non-Profit
Housing Finance Corporation, at the discretion of the
Director of Housing.
6. ADU In-Lieu Payments
a. Applicants may request to make a payment in lieu of
providing one (1) or more required ADUs by Special
Permit.
496 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
12. DEVELOPMENT BENEFITS
Buyouts & Payments
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny
a special permit authorizing a payment in lieu of
ADUs:
a). If receipt of an in-lieu payment is advantageous
to the City in creating or preserving affordable
housing as compared to the ADUs that would
have been otherwise provided.
b. The in-lieu payment for an ownership ADU is calculated
as 2*(A*B) where:
i. A is the amount of ADUs not provided; and
ii. B is the difference between the average sales price
of comparable market-rate units sold within the city
of Somerville over the previous twelve (12) months
and the sale price of an ADU in the ownership or
rental price tier that would have been provided, as
calculated according to §12.1.4 ADU Price.
c. The lieu payment for a rental ADU is calculated as
2.5*(A*B) where:
i. A is the amount of ADUs not provided; and
ii. B is the difference between the average sales price
of comparable market-rate units sold within the city
of Somerville over the previous twelve (12) months
and the sale price of an ADU in the ownership or
rental price tier that would have been provided, as
calculated according to §12.1.4 ADU Price.
d. In-lieu payments must be paid to the Somerville
Affordable Housing Trust Fund or, alternatively, to the
City of Somerville for transfer to a Massachusetts Non-
Profit Housing Finance Corporation, at the discretion of
the Director of Housing.
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 497
12. DEVELOPMENT BENEFITS
DEVELOPMENT bonuses
12.4 DEVELOPMENT BONUSES
1. Reserved
498 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
12. DEVELOPMENT BENEFITS
DEVELOPMENT bonuses
13 PUBLIC REALM
13.1 CIVIC SPACE ........................................................499
Development Review 499
Standards for All Civic Spaces 499
Parks 501
Commons 506
Plazas 509
Civic Uses 514
13.2 THOROUGHFARES .............................................519
Development Review 519
Standards for all Thoroughfare Type 519
Standards for Specific Thoroughfare Types 519
Sidewalks 519
Mid-Block Passages 521
13. PUBLIC REALM
500 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
13. PUBLIC REALM
Civic Space
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 501
13.1 CIVIC SPACE
1. Development Review
a. The DEVELOPMENT of any CIVIC SPACE requires Site
Plan Approval followed by a Civic Space Permit, in
accordance with Chapter 15: Administration, and
is exempt from Chapter 11, Article II, Sec. 11-33
(b) of The Code of Ordinances, City of Somerville,
Massachusetts.
b. All DEVELOPMENT, excluding NORMAL MAINTENANCE, requires
the submittal of a development review application to
the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the issuance of a Certificate
of Zoning Compliance prior to the issuance of a Civic
Space Permit.
2. Standards for All Civic Spaces
a. Siting & Orientation
i. CIVIC SPACEs must be SITEd and oriented to maximize
their inherent exposure to the sun as follows:
a). CIVIC SPACEs are prohibited on LOTs that have
only one (1) NORTH-FACING, west-facing, or eastfacing
FRONT LOT LINE.
b. Design & Construction
i. CIVIC SPACES must be engineered and constructed as
required by the Director of Public Space & Urban
Forestry, in consultation with the City Engineer.
c. ACCESSibility
i. The design of all CIVIC SPACE must comply with the
Americans with Disabilities Act and the Rules and
Regulations of the Massachusetts ACCESS Board
(521 CMR), as amended.
ii. Sloping walkways are encouraged over ramps
when reasonably possible to provide for ACCESSible
grade changes.
d. Hours of ACCESS
i. CIVIC SPACEs must be ACCESSible to the public at all
times (twenty four (24) hours per day, seven (7)
days per week, three hundred and sixty-five (365)
days per year).
ii. The review boards may limit the hours of public
ACCESS when necessary for public health and safety
purposes and maintenance of the space by the
PROPERTY OWNER as a condition of Site Plan Approval.
e. Circulation
i. Entrances must be physically and visually ACCESSible
from surrounding SITEs, designed to make visitors
feel welcome and comfortable entering the
space, and oriented to preserve view corridors
and enhance visual connections to surrounding
properties or activities.
ii. Entrances adjacent to children’s activity areas must
be gated.
f. Landscape
i. All landscaping within CIVIC SPACEs must comply with
the provisions of Section 10.4 Landscaping.
ii. LARGE TREEs are required as indicated for each type
of CIVIC SPACE.
iii. Unless otherwise specified, trees must be planted
flush-to-grade or at grade within PLANTING BEDs. Tree
grates, raised curbs, railings, and resin-bonded
aggregate are prohibited.
iv. At least one thousand (1,000) cubic feet of SOIL
VOLUME must be provided for each tree within a
twenty seven (27) foot radius of the tree trunk.
a). Where SOIL VOLUMES within the maximum
allowable radii for adjacent trees overlap, up to
twenty-five percent (25%) of the required for
each tree may be shared between trees.
b). SOIL VOLUME provided under paved surfaces
must be provided through SUSPENDED PAVEMENTS
or STRUCTURAL CELLS. SAND-BASED STRUCTURAL SOIL
SYSTEM (SBSS) may be USEd with approval of the
Director of Public Space & Urban Forestry.
v. TREE PITS and PLANTERs must have an open soil area
centered at the tree trunk that is at least thirty six
(36) square feet (such as 6'x6'). Planting soil must
be provided to a depth of three (3) feet in the TREE
PIT or PLANTER.
vi. Coarse grade GROUNDCOVER MULCH must be applied
to the soil area at a depth of at least two (2) inches
and distributed to create a smooth, level cover over
the exposed soil at the time of planting.
a). A gap of approximately eight (8) inches must
be left between the mulch and the trunk of the
tree to avoid mounding above the trunk flare.
g. Hardscape
i. Surface materials must be approved by the
Director of Public Space & Urban Forestry.
ii. Pervious surfaces may be provided above
underground parking and any required cap/fill over
contaminated soils, but must be constructed as
required by the City Engineer and the Director of
Public Space & Urban Forestry.
h. Amenities and Furnishings
i. All amenities and public furniture must comply
with the City of Somerville’s Park Specifications
Handbook. The Director of Public Space & Urban
Forestry may authorize the USE of amenities
and furnishings that are proportional or better in
quality and function to those identified in the Park
Specifications Handbook, excluding dedication
plaques and SIGNage.
i. Seating
i. Seating is required as indicated for each type of
CIVIC SPACE. The provision of seating in excess of this
requirement is encouraged.
ii. Seating must be designed for the convenience and
comfort of visitors, located in support of gathering
13. PUBLIC REALM
Civic Space
502 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
spaces and along pedestrian paths, but should be
out of the flow of pedestrian traffic.
iii. When required to provide seating, CIVIC SPACEs
should offer a variety of seating types and seating
locations including places to sit in the sun, in the
shade, out of the wind, in groups, alone, close to
activity, and in relative seclusion to every extent
possible.
iv. Linear feet of seating may be provided through
movable chairs, fixed individual seats, fixed
benches with or without backs, seat walls, PLANTER
and fountain ledges, and/or seating steps.
v. Seat walls, PLANTER and fountain ledges, and/or
seating steps may not, in aggregate, represent
more than fifteen percent (15%) percent of the
linear feet of required seating.
vi. All seating must be at least eighteen (18) inches
in seat depth, at least sixteen (16) inches in seat
height, and may be up to twenty (20) inches above
the adjacent walking surface.
vii. Seating thirty (30) inches or more in depth is
counted as double the linear feet, provided there is
ACCESS to both sides.
viii. PLANTER or fountain ledges provided as seating
must be at least twenty two (22) inches in seat
depth.
ix. Seat backs must be a minimum of fourteen (14)
inches high and either contoured in form for
comfort or reclined between ten (10) to fifteen (15)
degrees from vertical. Walls located adjacent to a
seating surface do not count as seat backs.
x. Movable chairs are not permitted to be chained,
fixed, or otherwise secured while a CIVIC SPACE is
open to the public, however may be chained or
removed during the hours of 9:00pm to 7:00am.
xi. Steps provided for pedestrian circulation and the
seating of open air café areas do not count toward
seating requirements.
xii. Deterrents to seating, such as spikes, rails, or
deliberately uncomfortable materials or shapes,
placed on surfaces that would otherwise be
suitable for seating are prohibited.
xiii. Deterrents to skateboards, rollerblades and other
wheeled devices are permitted on seating surfaces
if they do not inhibit seating, maintain a minimum
distance of five feet between deterrents, and are
integrated into the seating surface at the time of
manufacture or construction.
j. Tables
i. Tables are required as indicated for each type of
CIVIC SPACE. The provision of tables in excess of this
requirements is permitted.
ii. All CIVIC SPACEs requiring tables must include a
minimum of one handicapped ACCESSible table.
k. Bicycle Parking
i. Bicycle parking must be provided as required by
Director of Public Space & Urban Forestry and is
subject to provisions of §12.1 Bicycle Parking.
l. SIGNage
i. Permanent SIGNage must be provided as
appropriate for each type of CIVIC SPACE.
ii. SIGNage should be located at entrances and at
significant locations to provide direction and
information for visitors and residents.
m. Litter Receptacles
i. Litter receptacles must be designed in such
a manner that USErs do not have to touch the
receptacle or push open a door in order to dispose
of litter.
ii. Litter receptacles must be constructed of durable
materials that are graffiti-, fire-, rust, and stainresistant.
iii. Litter receptacles must include a metal barrier to
prevent rodents from entering from the bottom.
iv. Litter receptacles should be located near entrances
to CIVIC SPACEs and within reasonable proximity to
seating areas.
v. Recycling receptacles are required in conjunction
with litter receptacles.
n. Lighting
i. Lighting that promotes personal safety and invites
pedestrian activity while adding visual ambiance
and character to civic and recreation spaces at
night must be provided.
ii. Lighting fixtures should be smaller-scale,
frequently placed, and scaled to pedestrians.
Fixture components (base, pole, luminaries)
should have stylistic compatibility, while varying
in form according to functional requirements.
The indiscriminate USE of bright lighting should be
limited.
o. Irrigation & Drainage
i. All irrigation systems must be designed to USE a
minimal amount of water.
ii. Drainage systems must be designed to return drain
water to the soil.
iii. All water holding and infiltration facilities must be
designed to meet the specific needs of each type
of CIVIC SPACE.
p. ACCESSory STRUCTURES
i. ACCESSory STRUCTURES common to CIVIC SPACEs,
including but not limited to, restrooms, openair
pavilions, gazebos, picnic shelters, outdoor
theaters/performance stages, field hoUSEs, and
their substantial equivalents are permitted.
13. PUBLIC REALM
Civic Space
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 503
3. Parks
a. A PARK is a CIVIC SPACE type designed for active and passive recreation, with its character defined by the USEs and
features provided to meet the needs of different USEr groups. There are four subtypes of parks: a Regional Park, a
Community Park, a Neighborhood Park, and a Pocket Park.
Lot Dimensions Vegetation
LOT Size (min/max) -- -- LARGE TREEs (min) --
Regional Park 10 acres N/A Regional Park 1 / 1,225 sf
Community Park 2 acres 10 acres Community Park 1 / 1,225 sf
Neighborhood Park 8,000 sf 2 acres Neighborhood Park 1 / 1,225 sf
Pocket Park 800 sf 10,000 sf Pocket Park 1 / 400 sf
Lot Development Furnishings
Landscaped Area (min/max) -- -- Seating (min) --
Regional Park 75% 100% Regional Park N/A
Community Park 75% 100% Community Park N/A
Neighborhood Park 50% 100% Neighborhood Park N/A
Pocket Park 70% 100% Pocket Park 1 linear foot / 75 sf.
PERVIOUS AREA (min) -- -- Tables (min) --
Regional Park 85% Regional Park N/A
Community Park 85% Community Park N/A
Neighborhood Park 85% Neighborhood Park N/A
Pocket Park 85% Pocket Park N/A
13. PUBLIC REALM
Civic Space
504 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
b. General to all Parks
i. DEVELOPMENT Standards
a). All parks must provide varied spaces that
accommodate a wide range of ages, physical
abilities, and programming.
b). All parks must have at least one (1) entrance
point from each ABUTTING THOROUGHFARE to
encourage ACCESS from the surrounding
neighborhood and from public transportation
routes.
c). Trees must be planted to provide shade during
summer months, especially in seating areas
and playgrounds.
d). A minimum of one (1) compacting combination
litter/recycling receptacle is required for every
ten thousand (10,000) square feet of park area.
e). Landscaping must consist of informally
arranged trees and SHRUBS. The topography may
be irregular.
ii. Design Guidelines
a). Entrances should be well designed to make
visitors feel welcome and comfortable entering
the space.
c. Regional Parks
i. DEVELOPMENT Standards
a). A regional park must include a wellconnected
network of paths that effectively
accommodates a variety of travel modes,
including walking, bicycling, and provisions to
ACCESS by maintenance vehicles.
b). One (1) highly-visible and distinct entryway,
entrance marker, or gateway is required on
each side of a regional park.
c). Regional parks must provide for a variety of
large and small group activities, as well as
smaller passive recreation areas for individual
and small group gatherings.
d). Regional parks must provide permanent
restroom facilities open to the public.
e). Wetland and riparian areas must be protected
by a 50-foot native vegetation buffer.
ii. Design Guidelines
a). Park features should allow for a diverse group
of USErs to participate in various recreation
activities simultaneously.
b). ACCESSory STRUCTURES should stylistically reflect
the SITE furnishings and be constructed of
quality materials that can withstand heavy USE.
c). Pathways should create anticiPATIOn and
visual interest by framing views and directing
attention to landscape features.
d). Regional parks should provide deliberate focal
points along all park routes and at all park
destinations.
i). Trees should be USEd in an informal manner
to spatially define primary USEr spaces and
to frame views sheds.
d. Community Parks
i. DEVELOPMENT Standards
a). A Community Park must provide varied spaces
that accommodate a wide range of ages,
physical abilities and programming.
b). A Community Park must have multiple
entrance points to encourage ACCESS from the
13. PUBLIC REALM
Civic Space
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 505
surrounding neighborhood and from public
transportation routes.
ii. Design Guidelines
a). Approximately two-thirds of a community
park should be reserved for active recreation
USEs such as: playgrounds, sports fields or
COURTs, areas for free play or physical fitness or
activities.
b). Varied play environments that foster the
DEVELOPMENT of children’s cognitive, physical and
social DEVELOPMENT are encouraged.
c). Water features and changes in topography are
encouraged.
d). Amenities and furnishings include, but are not
limited to: seating, drinking fountains, picnic
tables and benches, litter receptacles. SIGNage
should be placed at entrances or other points
where people gather.
e). In addition to active physical recreation,
Community Parks should provide opportunities
for public art, performance space and
community engagement in artistic and cultural
expression.
f). Trees should be planted to provide shade
during summer months, especially in seating
areas and playgrounds.
e. Neighborhood Parks
i. DEVELOPMENT Standards
a). A Neighborhood Park must provide varied
spaces that accommodate a wide range of
ages, physical abilities and programming.
b). A Neighborhood Park must have multiple
entrance points to encourage ACCESS from the
surrounding neighborhood and from public
transportation routes.
c). Trees must be planted to provide shade during
summer months, especially in seating areas
and playgrounds.
ii. Design Guidelines
a). Connectivity to the surrounding environment
in a Neighborhood Park is vital. Sidewalks, bike
paths, crosswalks and connections to larger
transportation systems should be established
and clear.
b). Wherever possible, spaces should be multi-USE
and flexible to accommodate as many different
USEs as possible.
c). Spaces in a Neighborhood Park should reflect
the desires of the surrounding residents and
provide programming that is relevant to that
neighborhood’s demographic and USEr groups.
d). Varied play environments that foster the
DEVELOPMENT of children’s cognitive, physical and
social DEVELOPMENT are encouraged.
e). Water features and changes in topography are
encouraged.
f). Amenities and furnishings may include, but
are not limited to: seating, drinking fountains,
tables, chairs and benches, movable tables and
chairs, litter receptacles, etc. SIGNage should
be placed at entrances or other points where
people gather.
g). Fencing and vegetation should preserve
privacy for ABUTTING yards while providing
13. PUBLIC REALM
Civic Space
506 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
resident visibility into the park.
h). In addition to active physical recreation,
Neighborhood Parks should provide
opportunities for public art, performance
space and community engagement in
artistic and cultural expression. Public art and
performances should reflect the neighborhood
and preserve a sense of neighborhood identity.
i). A neighborhood park should offer a variety of
seating types and seating locations, including
places to sit in the sun, in the shade, out of the
wind, in groups, alone, close to activity, and in
relative seclusion to every extent possible.
f. Pocket Parks
i. DEVELOPMENT Standards
a). A small seating area must be provided at the
entrance of a pocket park to allow USErs to
casually watch passing pedestrians without
fully entering the park.
b). The STREET-side boundary of a pocket park
must include a well-defined entry and provide
unobstructed views of what activities and
facilities are available within the space, but also
provide a sense of enclosure for USErs inside.
c). In residential areas, active or USAble portions
of a pocket park must be adequately screened
for privacy from adjacent residential properties
through the USE of keep-off GROUNDCOVERs,
SHRUB plantings, or fencing.
d). In non-residential areas, active or USAble
portions of a pocket park must extend to the
LOT LINEs and views into the park maintained to
promote casual surveillance.
e). Trees must be planted to provide shade during
summer months.
f). PLANTING BEDs and lawn areas must be bordered
with raised edges to prevent soil runoff and
damage to plants.
g). A drinking fountain ACCESSible to children and
adults must be included near the entrance to
the pocket park.
h). One bicycle rack designed for parking two
bicycles is required.
ii. Design Guidelines
a). Pocket parks should be designed in
consideration of the wide range of ages and
habits of the people who may USE the space
at different times of day or night, with primary
concern of the potential USErs living or working
within a five (5) minute walk whom most need
recreation space.
b). A community bulletin board should be included
near the entrance to the pocket park.
c). The entrance to the pocket park should be
emphasized through special planting, paving,
seating, or other design elements that draw
attention.
d). Paved surfaces should be paved with darker
colored paving material(s). The USE of concrete
should be minimized to reduce glare.
e). If ABUTTING properties have first floor windows
that would benefit from light and a filtered
view, chain link perimeter fencing and fast
growing vines should be USEd instead of any
13. PUBLIC REALM
Civic Space
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 507
solid fence materials.
f). In non-residential areas, the exterior walls of
surrounding buildings should be capitalized on
where possible.
g). Trees should be deciduous and of a species
that can tolerate being climbed by children.
h). Plantings should be fast growing, resilient,
easily maintained, and not poisonous.
i). Nighttime lighting should be sensitive to
ABUTTING USEs.
13. PUBLIC REALM
Civic Space
508 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
4. Commons
a. A Common is CIVIC SPACE type designed for passive recreation and civic purposes, with its character defined primarily
by vegetation. There are three subtypes of commons: a Public Common, a Public Square, and a Green. Public
Commons and Public Squares are often designed to also support active recreation.
Lot Dimensions Vegetation
LOT Size (min/max) -- -- LARGE TREEs (min) --
Public Common 20,000 sf 8 acres Public Common 1 / 1,225 sf
Public Square 10,000 sf 2 acres Public Square 1 / 1,225 sf
Green 6,000 sf 1 acre Green 1 / 1,225 sf
Lot Development Furnishings
Landscaped Area (min/max) -- -- Seating (min) --
Public Common 80% 100% Public Common 1 linear foot / 100 sf.
Public Square 50% 100% Public Square 1 linear foot / 75 sf.
Green 75% 100% Green 1 linear foot / 75 sf.
PERVIOUS AREA (min) -- -- Tables (min) --
Public Common 85% Public Common N/A
Public Square 85% Public Square N/A
Green 85% Green N/A
13. PUBLIC REALM
Civic Space
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 509
b. General to All Commons
i. DEVELOPMENT Standards
a). A minimum of one (1) compacting combination
litter/recycling receptacle is required for every
ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
ii. Design Guidelines
a). Reserved
c. Public Commons
i. DEVELOPMENT Standards
a). Reserved
ii. Design Guidelines
a). A PUBLIC COMMON should provide a substantially
sized and uninterrupted OPEN SPACE that is
landscaped with smooth GROUNDCOVERs, LARGE
TREEs, and little to no underSTORY plants. Both
paved and unpaved paths may be provided, as
well as a substantial water feature.
b). Large canopy trees should be USEd in an
informal manner to spatially define the
perimeter while also framing views of
neighboring buildings from within the PUBLIC
COMMON.
c). A PUBLIC COMMON should be designed to
promote options for children to engage in
different forms of play; provide locations where
sports, picnics, special events, and simple
relaxation can occur for adults; and may include
areas designed specifically to accommodate
the activities of a public market.
d). Paths should provide a variety of walking/
running circuits within the PUBLIC COMMON,
accommodate DESIRE LINES to surrounding USEs
on neighboring BLOCKS, and provide different
sensory experiences along their edge that
change over time and vary across the PUBLIC
COMMON.
e). Entrances should be well designed to make
visitors feel welcome and comfortable entering
the space, be physically and visually ACCESSible
from surrounding BLOCKs, and include areas for
congregating in groups.
d. Public Squares
i. DEVELOPMENT Standards
a). A minimum of one (1) linear foot of required
seating for every twenty (20) linear feet of
STREET frontage must be located within the
FRONTAGE AREA of a public square.
ii. Design Guidelines
a). A PUBLIC SQUARE should have design
characteristics in response to the surrounding
civic, commercial, and residential context of
surrounding buildings.
b). LARGE TREEs should be USEd to establish the
perimeter of the public square.
e. Greens
i. DEVELOPMENT Standards
a). A green must ABUT at least one public
THOROUGHFARE and one private LOT.
b). The first fifteen (15) feet of a Green measured
perpendicularly from any FRONT LOT LINE is
considered the FRONTAGE AREA. A minimum of
one (1) linear foot of required seating for every
twenty (20) linear feet of STREET frontage must
be located within the FRONTAGE AREA.
13. PUBLIC REALM
Civic Space
510 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
ii. Design Guidelines
a). LARGE TREEs should provide shade for most of
the area of the green.
b). Plantings should contribute to the spatial
definition of the space as an outdoor room.
c). Open areas intended for passive USE should be
primarily planted with grass.
d). Benches and seating ledges or walls should be
designed for the convenience and comfort of
visitors, located in support of gathering spaces
and along pedestrian circulation paths, but
should be out of the flow of pedestrian traffic.
13. PUBLIC REALM
Civic Space
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 511
5. Plazas
a. A Plaza is a CIVIC SPACE type designed for passive recreation, civic purposes, and commercial activities, with its
character defined primarily by hardscape. Plazas are generally located in activity centers or the nexus of major
circulation routes. There are three subtypes of plaza: a Central Plaza, Through BLOCK Plaza, and a Pocket Plaza.
Lot Dimensions Vegetation
LOT Size (min/max) -- -- LARGE TREEs (min) --
Central Plaza 8,000 sf 2 acres Central Plaza 1 / 1,000 sf
Through BLOCK Plaza 5,000 sf 10,000 sf Through BLOCK Plaza 1 / 1,500 sf
Pocket Plaza 2,000 sf 10,000 sf Pocket Plaza 1 / 400 sf
Lot Development Furnishings
Landscaped Area (min/max) -- -- Seating (min) --
Central Plaza 10% 30% Central Plaza 1 linear foot / 30 sf.
Through BLOCK Plaza 10% 30% Through BLOCK Plaza 1 linear foot / 75 sf.
Pocket Plaza 10% 30% Pocket Plaza 1 linear foot / 50 sf.
PERVIOUS AREA (min) -- Tables (min) --
Central Plaza 70% Central Plaza 1 / 4 movable chairs
Through BLOCK Plaza 70% Through BLOCK Plaza N/A
Pocket Plaza 70% Pocket Plaza 1 / 3 movable chairs
13. PUBLIC REALM
Civic Space
512 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
b. General to all Plazas
i. DEVELOPMENT Standards
a). Contiguous LOTs designed as plazas are
considered one single plaza.
b). A minimum of one (1) compacting combination
litter/recycling receptacle is required for every
five thousand (5,000) square feet of Pocket
Plaza area.
ii. Design Guidelines
a). Reserved
c. Central Plazas
i. DEVELOPMENT Standards
a). Plazas must be generally rectilinear in shape
(e.g. rectangular or square).
b). The major portion of a public plaza is the area
of a plaza that is largest in size and intended
for primary USE. Major portions of a plaza must
have an average width and depth of forty (40)
feet, may have a width up to three (3) times
the average depth, measured perpendicularly
from the ABUTTING sidewalk, and must occupy
at least seventy five percent (75%) of the
plazas total area. All points within the major
portion of a plaza must be visible when viewed
perpendicularly from the sidewalk of the
ABUTTING THOROUGHFARE.
c). Minor portions of a plaza are secondary areas
that allow for additional flexibility in the shape
and configuration of a plaza. Minor portions
must have an average width and depth of
fifteen (15) feet, may occupy up to twenty
five percent (25%) of the plazas total area,
and must be directly adjacent to the major
portion. All points within a minor portion must
be visible from within the major portion when
viewed perpendicularly from the major portion.
Minor portions that do not front onto the
same THOROUGHFARE as the major portion (plaza
alcoves) may have a width that is up to three
(3) times the average depth.
d). Visibility of major and minor portions of a plaza
is not affected by permitted obstructions.
e). Plazas must be open to the sky and
unobstructed for at least fifty percent (50%)
of the area of a plaza except for the following
features, equipment and appurtenances:
bicycle racks; lighting; litter receptacles;
PLANTERs, PLANTING BEDs, lawns, trees, and
other landscape features; outdoor cafes and
kiosks; public art; seating, including movable
chairs, fixed individual seats, fixed benches,
seat walls, PLANTER and fountain ledges, and/or
seating steps; stages; temporary exhibitions;
and water features.
i). Trees planted flush-to-grade and lawn,
turf, or grass areas that do not differ in
elevation from the surface of the plaza by
more than six (6) inches are not considered
obstructions.
ii). Obstructions that are non-permanent
or movable, such as movable furniture,
outdoor cafes, or temporary exhibitions are
considered within gross areas designated
on a SITE plan and not measured as
13. PUBLIC REALM
Civic Space
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 513
individual pieces of furniture.
iii). Approved BUILDING awnings, canopies, and
SIGNs are exempt.
f). The first fifteen (15) feet of a plaza measured
perpendicularly from any FRONT LOT LINE is
considered the FRONTAGE AREA of a plaza.
g). To facilitate pedestrian ACCESS, at least fifty
percent (50%) of the FRONTAGE AREA must be
free from obstructions.
h). Pedestrian circulation paths within a plaza must
provide for unobstructed circulation throughout
the major and minor portions of the plaza
and must, at minimum, connect any ABUTTING
sidewalk or CIVIC SPACEs to all major focal points
and activity areas of the plaza and PRINCIPAL
ENTRANCEs of ABUTTING buildings. At least one
circulation path of at least eight (8) feet clear
width must be provided.
i). The surface of a plaza must be equal to the
average elevation of the ABUTTING sidewalks,
publicly ACCESSible walkways, or other CIVIC
SPACEs. Minor changes beyond this elevation
not exceeding two (2) feet are permitted.
Plazas over ten thousand (10,000) square feet
in area may have up to twenty percent (20%)
of the plaza area elevated up to four (4) feet
above the grade of the ABUTTING sidewalk,
provided that the raised area is set back from
the FRONT LOT LINE at least twenty (20) feet.
j). Paving must be of non-skid, durable materials
that are decorative and compatible in color and
pattern with other design features of the plaza.
k). Each plaza must provide at least two types
of seating. Plazas over ten thousand (10,000)
square feet in size must provide movable
seating as one of the required seating types.
l). A minimum of one (1) linear foot of required
seating for every two (2) linear feet of plaza
frontage must be located within the FRONTAGE
AREA of a plaza. A minimum of fifty percent
(50%) of this seating must have seat backs and
at least fifty percent (50%) of the seating with
seat backs must face the sidewalk.
m). Seat walls and seating steps may not, in
aggregate, represent more than fifteen (15)
percent of the linear feet of required seating.
n). Steps provided for pedestrian circulation must
have a height (rise) between four (4) to six (6)
inches and a tread (run) of at least seventeen
(17) inches, except that steps with a height
(rise) of five (5) inches may have a tread (run) of
fifteen (15) inches.
o). Required open soil areas for trees may be
reduced or covered with the approval of the
Director of Public Space & Urban Forestry
using one of the following techniques:
i). Soil area for trees planted flush-to-grade
may be covered by cobblestones or other
permeable PAVERs that can be removed to
accommodate tree trunk and root growth
over time. PAVERs must be installed level
with the plaza surface and at minimum no
closer than eighteen (18) inches from the
tree trunk .
13. PUBLIC REALM
Civic Space
514 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
ii). Trees may be planted below the finished
surface of a plaza and the soil area covered
by a suspended PAVER grate system with a
minimum twenty-four (24) inch wide tree
opening and permeable PAVERs. Two- piece,
removable trim rings are permitted to cover
the tree opening.
p). Plazas that contain outdoor cafes or kiosks
providing food service must provide one (1)
additional litter receptacle and (1) additional
recycling receptacle for every one thousand
five-hundred (1,500) square feet of plaza area
occupied by such outdoor eating area.
ii. Design Guidelines
a). A plaza should contain substantial areas of
hardscape complemented by PLANTING BEDs or
arrangements of trees with open canopies.
b). Plantings should contribute to the spatial
definition of the space as an outdoor room.
c). Benches and seating ledges or walls should be
designed for the convenience and comfort of
visitors, located in support of gathering spaces
and along pedestrian circulation paths, but
should be out of the flow of pedestrian traffic.
d). The perimeter of a plaza should be well
integrated into its surroundings and free from
fences, hedges, and other barriers that would
impede movement into the space and obscure
visibility from adjacent STREETs or BUILDING
frontages.
d. Through BLOCK Plazas
i. DEVELOPMENT Standards
a). The first fifteen (15) feet of a through BLOCK
plaza measured perpendicularly from any FRONT
LOT LINE is considered the FRONTAGE AREA of a
through BLOCK plaza and must be free from all
obstructions.
b). The surface of a Through BLOCK Plaza must
be equal to the average elevation of ABUTTING
sidewalks or publicly ACCESSible walkways.
c). Through BLOCK plazas must contain an
unobstructed circulation path at least ten
(10) feet in width, connecting the two
THOROUGHFAREs on which the through BLOCK plaza
fronts.
d). A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of required
seating must have seat backs.
ii. Design Guidelines
a). Adjacent buildings should provide ground level
spaces fronting onto the through BLOCK plaza
for commercial USEs including, but not limited
to, the arts & creative enterprise, eating &
drinking, and retail USE categories.
b). Exterior walls fronting onto the through BLOCK
plaza should meet the GROUND STORY FENESTRATION
and BLANK WALL standards for the appropriate
BUILDING TYPE to every extent practicable.
c). UPPER STORY balconies and terraces overlooking
the through BLOCK plaza are encouraged for
adjacent buildings.
e. Pocket Plazas
i. DEVELOPMENT Standards
a). Contiguous LOTs designed as pocket plazas
are considered the central plaza type if, in
13. PUBLIC REALM
Civic Space
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 515
combination, the total land area exceeds the
maximum size standard for a single pocket
plaza.
b). Pocket Plazas must be generally rectilinear in
shape (e.g. rectangular or square).
c). Pocket Plazas must have an average width and
depth of forty (40) feet, may have a width up to
three (3) times the average depth, measured
perpendicularly from the ABUTTING sidewalk.
d). All points within a Pocket Plaza must be
visible when viewed perpendicularly from the
sidewalk of the ABUTTING THOROUGHFARE. Visibility
of a Pocket Plaza is not affected by permitted
obstructions.
e). Pocket Plazas must be open to the sky and
unobstructed except for the following features,
equipment, and appurtenances: bicycle racks;
lighting; litter receptacles; PLANTERs, PLANTING
BEDs, lawns, trees, and other landscape
features; outdoor cafes and kiosks; public
art; seating, including movable chairs, fixed
individual seats, fixed benches, seat walls,
PLANTER and fountain ledges, and/or seating
steps; stages; temporary exhibitions; and
water features.
i). Trees planted flush-to-grade and lawn,
turf, or grass areas that do not differ in
elevation from the surface of the plaza by
more than six (6) inches are not considered
obstructions.
ii). Obstructions that are non-permanent
or movable, such as movable furniture,
outdoor cafes, or temporary exhibitions are
considered within gross areas designated
on a SITE plan and not measured as
individual pieces of furniture.
iii). Approved BUILDING awnings, canopies, and
SIGNs are exempt.
f). The first fifteen (15) feet of a Pocket Plaza
measured perpendicularly from any FRONT LOT
LINE is considered the FRONTAGE AREA of a plaza.
At least fifty percent (50%) of the FRONTAGE AREA
must be free from obstructions.
g). Unobstructed pedestrian circulation paths
must connect any ABUTTING sidewalk to all
pocket plaza and BUILDING entrances.
h). The surface of a Pocket Plaza must be equal
to the average elevation of the ABUTTING
sidewalk, publicly ACCESSible walkways, or other
CIVIC SPACEs. Minor changes in elevation not
exceeding two (2) feet are permitted.
i). Paving must be of non-skid, durable materials
that are decorative and compatible in color
and pattern with other design features of the
Pocket Plaza.
j). Each pocket plaza must provide at least two
types of seating.
k). A minimum of one (1) linear foot of required
seating for every two linear feet of frontage
(FRONT LOT LINE) must be located within the
FRONTAGE AREA of a plaza. A minimum of fifty
percent (50%) of this seating must have
seat backs and at least fifty percent (50%)
of the seating with seat backs must face the
sidewalk.
l). Seat walls and seating steps may not, in
aggregate, represent more than fifteen (15)
percent of the linear feet of required seating.
m). Steps provided for pedestrian circulation must
have a height (rise) between four (4) to six (6)
inches and a tread (run) of at least seventeen
(17) inches, except that steps with a height
(rise) of five (5) inches may have a tread (run) of
fifteen (15) inches.
n). One bicycle rack designed for parking two
bicycles is required.
ii. Design Guidelines
a). A Pocket Plaza should contain areas of
hardscape complemented by PLANTING BEDs or
arrangements of trees with open, spreading
canopies.
b). Plantings should contribute to the spatial
definition of the space as an outdoor room.
c). Benches and seating ledges or walls should be
designed for the convenience and comfort of
visitors, located in support of gathering spaces
and along pedestrian circulation paths, but
should be out of the flow of pedestrian traffic.
Entrances should be well designed to make
visitors feel welcome and comfortable entering
the space.
d). Water features, including fountains and
waterfalls, are encouraged.
13. PUBLIC REALM
Civic Space
516 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
6. Civic Uses
a. General
i. The USE of CIVIC SPACE is permitted as specified on
Table 13.1.7 Permitted Civic USEs.
ii. CIVIC SPACEs may have one or more civic USEs to
meet the needs of a variety of USErs or only a
single USE intended for a specific USEr group, such
as an athletic field, community garden, dog park, or
playground.
iii. USE categories not identified on Table 13.1.7 may
be permitted by the review board by Site Plan
Approval.
b. DEVELOPMENT Review
i. The establishment of any civic USE, CHANGE IN USE,
and any expansion of an existing civic USE requires
the submittal of a development review application
to the BUILDING OFFICIAL.
ii. Civic USEs must comply with any USE-specific
standards applicable for each USE in §13.1.7 Civic
USE Definitions & Limitations.
iii. Civic USEs permitted by Special Permit require
additional DEVELOPMENT review in accordance with
§15.2.1 Special Permits.
c. Classification of USEs
i. Civic USEs are grouped into categories, and some
categories are further broken into a list of individual
civic USEs. For example, under the Passive Space
civic USE category is Botanical Garden, which is a
more strictly regulated civic USE than others in this
same category.
ii. Civic USEs are grouped into categories so that USEs
with similar functional or physical characteristics,
the type and amount of activity, the conduct of
visitors, and likely impact on surrounding properties
are regulated similarly.
iii. Civic USE categories are listed on Table 13.1.7 and
ordered in the text of this Section using the same
headings.
d. Civic USE Definitions & Standards
i. General
a). This Section provides definitions for civic USE
categories and individual USEs and identifies
standards applicable to either all USEs within a
category or specifically to an individual USE.
b). In some cases, a civic USE may include ANCILLARY
activities that are subordinate and incidental to
the day-to-day operations of the PRINCIPAL USE.
When identified, such ANCILLARY activities do
not require separate approval, but must comply
with any standards applicable to the civic USE.
ii. Athletic Fields
A facility providing for active recreation, athletic
activity, and competitive sports.
a). DEVELOPMENT Standards
i). Athletic fields must provide regulation field
and COURT sizes tailored to the needs of the
specific USEr groups the space is intended
to serve.
ii). The area of an athletic field is subtracted
from the total area of a CIVIC SPACE to
determine required trees, up to fifty
percent (50%) of the total area of a CIVIC
SPACE.
iii). The materials and construction methods
of any athletic field, including the choice
of natural turf or synthetic fields, must be
designed to accommodate the projected
carrying capacity of the field or COURT.
Particular attention must be paid to
permeability of subsurface materials, soil
compaction, and drainage.
b). Design Guidelines
i). Multi-purpose athletic fields that permit
more cost-effective maintenance and
shared amenities along with irrigation
and lighting infraSTRUCTURE are highly
encouraged.
ii). Choices for synthetic or natural turf should
take into account community desire,
maintenance and appropriateness to the
SITE.
iii). Playing surface for COURT games should
be designed with appropriate surfaces
such as clay, sand, and concrete, asphalt,
or synthetic materials without expansion
joints.
iv). The long axis of all recreation fields should
be oriented to the north-south to every
extent possible.
iii. Cafe Seating
A facility equipped with tables and chairs USEd for
passive recreational activities including, but not
limited to, sitting, eating, and game playing alone
or in groups.
a). DEVELOPMENT Standards
i). Cafe seating may occupy up to fifty
percent (50%) of the total area of a CIVIC
SPACE.
ii). The cafe seating area is subtracted from
the total area of a CIVIC SPACE to determine
required trees, up to fifty percent (50%) of
the total area of a CIVIC SPACE.
iii). Cafe areas with food service must
provide one (1) compacting combination
litter/recycling receptacle for every one
thousand five-hundred (1,500) square feet
of area occupied by seating.
b). Design Guidelines
13. PUBLIC REALM
Civic Space
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 517
i). Reserved
c). Cafe Seating for an Adjacent USE
i). Cafe seating may be permitted within a
CIVIC SPACE for adjacent Food & Beverage
Service PRINCIPAL USEs by Special Permit.
ii). In addition to the review criteria for all
Special Permits specified in §15.2.1.e.
Review Criteria, the review board shall
make findings considering the following
in its discretion to approve or deny cafe
seating within a CIVIC SPACE for an adjacent
Food & Beverage Service PRINCIPAL USE:
a. The percentage of the CIVIC SPACE
proposed to be occupied by the
café seating and the viability of the
remaining area to properly function as
the intended type of CIVIC SPACE.
b. Recommendations provided by
the Urban Design Commission for
the original Development Review
Application submitted for the CIVIC
SPACE.
iv. Dog Park
A facility designed for the active recreation of dogs
and their owners.
a). DEVELOPMENT Standards
i). Dog parks must be a minimum of ten
thousand (10,000) square feet in area.
ii). The area of a dog park is subtracted from
the total area of a CIVIC SPACE to determine
required trees.
iii). Dog parks are not permitted adjacent
to play grounds, recreation fields, and
community gardens.
iv). A dog park is not permitted to be less than
fifteen (15) feet in any dimension.
v). Dog parks must be fenced on all sides to
a minimum height of 60 inches. Fence
footings must be buried to a depth of one
(1) foot and fence panels must be buried
Table 13.1.7 Permitted Civic USEs
USE Category
Specific USE
Regional Park
Community Park
Neighborhood Park
Pocket Park
Public Common
Public Square
Green
Central Plaza
Through BLOCK Plaza
Pock(et Plaza
USE Specific
Standards
Civic USEs
Athletic Fields SP SP SP N SP N N N N N 13.1.7.d.ii
Cafe Seating P P P P P P P P P P 13.1.7.d.iii
Cafe Seating for an Adjacent USE SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP 13.1.7.d.iii.c
Dog Park P P P P N N N N N N 13.1.7.d.iv
Public Service P P P P P P P P P P 13.1.7.d.v
Landmark SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP 13.1.7.d.vi
Passive Space (except as noted below) P P P P P P P P P P 13.1.7.d.vii
Botanical Garden SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP 13.1.7.d.vii.c
Performance Space P P P P P P P P P P 13.1.7.d.viii
Playground P P P P P N N N N N 13.1.7.d.ix
School Yard P P P N N N N N N N 13.1.7.d.x
Skate Park/Rink P P P N P P N P N N 13.1.7.d.xi
Urban Agriculture P P P P P P P P N P 13.1.7.d.xii
Water Feature (except as noted below) P P P P P P P P P P 13.1.7.d.xiii
Pool SP SP SP N N N N N N N 13.1.7.d.xii.c
P - Permitted SP - Special Permit Required N - Not Permitted
13. PUBLIC REALM
Civic Space
518 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
to a depth of six (6) inches at all locations
except at entrances/exits.
vi). Dog parks must have two entrances/exits.
vii). Entrances/exits must have a safety gate,
with an outer and inner gate on either side
of a minimum sixteen (16) square-foot
“vestibule” area. This “vestibule” area
serves as a buffer between the entrance
and the rest of the park.
viii). One (1) litter receptacle and one (1) dog
valet must be provided near each entrance/
exit.
ix). A sub-base of crushed gravel or equivalent
that will compact to a dense, graded
permeable subsurface must be provided.
x). GROUNDCOVER must be decomposed
(crushed) granite or similar material that is
non water-absorbing and devoid of organic
material.
xi). PLANTING BEDs must be included along the
outside of the perimeter fence to help
screen the dog park and reduce potential
runoff.
xii). Dog parks must include a watering area
with a standard hose-bib.
xiii). Each dog park must have a permanent SIGN,
stating the hours of operation, rules, and
regulations for the dog park.
b). Design Guidelines
i). Separated play areas for small dogs and
large dogs are recommended.
c). DEVELOPMENT Review
i). The size of a Dog Park may be reduced by
Special Permit.
ii). In its discretion to approve or deny a
Special Permit authorizing a dog park under
ten thousand (10,000) square feet in size,
the Planning Board shall make findings
considering the following in addition to
the review considerations for all Special
Permits specified in §15.D.1.e. Review
Criteria:
a. Proximity to existing nearby properties
in residential USE.
b. Proximity of the proposed dog park to
larger existing dog parks that might
provide more running/activity space for
dogs.
c. The necessity to limit USE of the dog
park due to the decreased size.
d. The design quality of the proposed dog
park in relation to the decreased size.
e. The provision of adequate space for
the recreation of dogs.
v. Public Service
Essential government services provided to the
community at large including municipal operations
of the City of Somerville, such as departmental
offices, social service facilities, and public works
facilities; public safety services, such as police and
firefighting headquarters and substations; and OPEN
SPACEs reserved for social and recreational activities
or natural resource protection.
a). DEVELOPMENT Standards
i). Reserved
b). Design Guidelines
i). Reserved
vi. Landmark
A feature of a CIVIC SPACE designed to commemorate
an important event or important person in the
hiSTORY of the City of Somerville.
a). DEVELOPMENT Standards
i). Historic landmarks must be reviewed by
the Historic Commission.
ii). Landmarks recognizing veterans must be
reviewed by the Veteran’s Commission.
b). Design Guidelines
i). Landmarks can take many forms
including stone or metal memorials and
monuments, statues, plaques, SIGNage, or
landscape designs.
ii). Landmark design, size, and placement
should be appropriate and for the SITE.
iii). Maintenance of landmarks, including any
associated lighting, should be considered
in the design.
iv). Landmarks should be considered as
special features that bring people together
for a moment or longer and enliven the
experience of residents and visitors in
exploring the City of Somerville.
vii. Passive Space
A feature of a CIVIC SPACE designed to accommodate
passive recreational activities including, but not
limited to, exercising, laying, people-watching,
picnicking, reading, relaxing, standing, sitting, and
walking alone or in groups.
a). DEVELOPMENT Standards
i). Reserved
b). Design Guidelines
i). Reserved
c). Botanical Garden
A feature of a CIVIC SPACE designed specifically
for the cultivation of specimen plants for
scientific research, conservation, education,
and public display.
i). DEVELOPMENT Standards
a. Botanical gardens must be curated
13. PUBLIC REALM
Civic Space
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 519
by an institution with experience
managing collections of plants, or
associated with a school, public
committee, or private club.
ii). Design Guidelines
a. Reserved
viii. Performance Space
A feature of a CIVIC SPACE designed as an
outdoor venue for live performance of cultural
entertainment or artistic expression such as
singing, dancing, comedy, literary readings,
performance art, musical theater, live plays, and
concerts.
a). DEVELOPMENT Standards
i). Reserved
b). Design Guidelines
i). Reserved
ix. Playground
A facility primarily designed as a play area for
children.
a). DEVELOPMENT Standards
i). Playgrounds must be a minimum of two
thousand five hundred (2,500) and up to
twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet
in area.
ii). The area of a playground is subtracted
from the total area of a CIVIC SPACE to
determine required trees.
iii). Design and construction of a playground
must comply with the US Consumer
Product Safety Commission’s Public
Playground Safety Handbook.
iv). Only commercial grade play equipment
certified by the manufacturer is permitted.
v). Playground must include seating intended
for parents.
vi). Playground surfacing must be composed
of a shock-absorbing surface with a
maximum 2% slope except where
intentionally mounded for play activities.
The material must meet all federal, state
and local regulations.
b). Design Guidelines
i). Playgrounds should be designed to engage
children and adolescents in developing
their physical and social skills in a
stimulating and safe environment.
ii). Playgrounds should include equipment for
two at least age groups: play equipment
intended for children ages one (1) to five
(5), play equipment intended for children
ages six (6) to ten (10), and play equipment
for adolescents up to eighteen (18) years
in age.
iii). Playgrounds should be designed to meet
the widest range in needs of children of
different ages and abilities to every extent
possible.
iv). Parks that have playground equipment,
sports fields, and spray pads should be
ACCESSible to all children up to eighteen (18)
years in age.
v). Parks that have playground equipment,
sports fields, and spray pads should be
ACCESSible to all children up to eighteen (18)
years in age.
vi). Natural play areas constructed of boulders,
logs and land forms and playground
equipment made from one hundred
percent (100%) recycled plastic or steel is
recommended.
vii). Steel play STRUCTURES should be shaded by
trees or other shade STRUCTURES to decrease
their surface temperature in the summer
months.
x. School Yard
A facility designed to accommodate play and
learning by students of adjacent schools and by the
community during after-school hours or breaks.
a). DEVELOPMENT Standards
i). Reserved
b). Design Guidelines
i). Reserved
xi. Skate Rink/Park
A facility providing a level surface intended for
USE by ice or other type of skating or a collection
of ramps and other obstacles intended for USE by
skateboarders or bicyclists.
a). DEVELOPMENT Standards
i). Reserved
b). Design Guidelines
i). Reserved
xii. Urban Agriculture
A feature of a CIVIC SPACE designed as individual
garden pLOTs available to residents for agricultural
purposes, including storage facilities for necessary
equipment.
a). DEVELOPMENT Standards
i). Community gardens must be located
in areas that are agriculturally suitable,
including soil conditions, topography, and
solar ACCESS.
ii). Land area of a community garden must be
level enough to support the intended USE
and meet all Americans with Disabilities
Act requirements without the USE of
RETAINING WALLs that exceed three (3) feet in
height.
13. PUBLIC REALM
Civic Space
520 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
iii). A walkway must be provided adjacent to
each individual pLOT. All walkways must
be at least four (4) feet in width and all
walkways, paths, and landings must meet
ADA requirements.
iv). A permanent, visually transparent fence
must be provided at the perimeter of the
community garden. Fencing must provide
at least one (1) ACCESS gate and at least
eight percent (80%) free from vines or
other obstructions that will impede visual
ACCESS.
v). RefUSE areas must be provided and
screened to enclose all refUSE generated
from the garden pLOTs. Composters and
trash barrels must be rodent proof. Storage
areas for tools, fertilizers, equipment,
and other material must be enclosed and
located in relative proximity to the rear and
center of the SITE.
vi). A water meter and hose bibs must be
provided on SITE to provide ACCESS to all
pLOTs within the garden with the USE of a
twenty-five (25) foot hose. Hose bibs must
be secured to a post and include a hose
hanger.
vii). SIGNage constructed of commercial grade
outdoor materials must be posted at
the entrance to the community garden
providing the hours of operation, contact
name and phone number, community
garden rules, and the statement “on-SITE
sale of produce is not permitted.”
viii). Farm-stands and the on-SITE sale of
produce are prohibited.
ix). The maximum permitted height for
ACCESSory STRUCTURES, such as trellises,
ARBORs, or other plant supports, is six (6)
feet.
x). The maximum height of any STRUCTURE
intended for storage is eight (8) feet.
b). Design Guidelines
i). At least twelve (12) individual garden pLOTs
should be provided.
ii). A minimum of one ACCESSible pLOT should
be provided for every twelve (12) pLOTs.
iii). The minimum size of individual garden
pLOTs should be twenty-five (25) square
feet.
xiii. Water Feature
A feature of a CIVIC SPACE involving water including,
but not limited to, fountains, pools, ponds,
cascades, waterfalls, and streams.
a). DEVELOPMENT Standards
i). Reserved
b). Design Guidelines
i). Reserved
c). Pool
A facility for swimming.
i). DEVELOPMENT Standards
a. Reserved
ii). Design Guidelines
a. Reserved
13. PUBLIC REALM
Thoroughfares
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 521
13.2 THOROUGHFARES
1. Development Review
a. The DEVELOPMENT of any new THOROUGHFARE requires Site
Plan Approval followed by a Thoroughfare Permit, in
accordance with Chapter 15: Administration.
b. All DEVELOPMENT, excluding NORMAL MAINTENANCE, requires
the submittal of a development review application to
the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the issuance of a Certificate
of Zoning Compliance prior to the issuance of a
Thoroughfare Permit.
2. Standards for all Thoroughfare Type
a. THOROUGHFAREs, excluding ALLEYs, must include travel
lanes and sidewalks.
b. THOROUGHFAREs must be designed in accordance with
the current edition of the National Association of
City Transportation Officials (NACTO) STREET design
guidelines:
i. The Urban STREET Design Guide
ii. The Transit STREET Design Guide
iii. Urban Bikeway Design Guide
iv. Urban STREET Storm water Guide
c. THOROUGHFAREs must be engineered and constructed as
required by the City Engineer, in consultation with the
Director of Public Space & Urban Forestry.
d. All water and sewer utilities, storm water management
infraSTRUCTURE, public lighting, and public furniture must
be designed and constructed in accordance with all
standards established by relevant City Departments.
3. Standards for Specific Thoroughfare Types
a. Commercial STREET
i. The commercial STREET THOROUGHFARE type is referred
to as the Downtown 2-Way STREET by NACTO.
ii. The total right-of-way width must be a minimum of
seventy-four (74) feet.
a). If protected bike lanes are provided, the
minimum right-of-way width is increased to
eighty (80) feet.
iii. Commercial STREETs must include bicycle lanes in
each direction.
iv. Total right of way width may be reduced by seven
(7) feet for each parking lane that is not provided.
b. Local STREET
i. The local STREET THOROUGHFARE type is referred to as
a Neighborhood STREET by NACTO.
ii. The total local STREET right-of-way width must be a
minimum of sixty (60) feet.
iii. Total right of way width may be reduced by seven
(7) feet for each parking lane that is not provided.
c. Commercial Shared STREET
i. The commercial shared STREET THOROUGHFARE type
is referred to as a Commercial Shared STREET by
NACTO.
ii. The total local STREET right-of-way width must be a
minimum of fifty-two (52) feet.
iii. Total right of way width may be reduced by seven
(7) feet for each parking lane that is not provided.
d. ALLEYs
i. The ALLEY THOROUGHFARE type is referred to as a
Commercial ALLEY by NACTO.
ii. New ALLEYs must include travel lanes in each
direction, and may include sidewalks.
iii. The total ALLEY right-of-way width must be a
minimum of twenty (20) feet.
iv. On STREET parking is not permitted.
4. Sidewalks
a. General
i. All new and reconstructed sidewalks must
be ACCESSible to and usable by persons with
disabilities in accordance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act and the Rules and Regulations of
the Massachusetts ACCESS Board (521 CMR), as
amended.
ii. Sidewalks for new THOROUGHFAREs must include a
walkway and furnishing zone and may include an
edge and frontage zone as illustrated in Figure
13.2.4 (a) Sidewalks.
a). Walkways must be a minimum of six (6) feet in
width.
b). Furnishing zones must be a minimum of six (6)
feet in width.
c). Edge zones (ie. “curbwalks”) must be a
minimum of two (2) feet in width.
d). Frontage zones may be up to four and a half
(4.5) feet in width.
iii. Furnishing zones may be alternated with an on-
STREET parking area on commercial shared STREETs.
iv. Protected bike lanes must be separated from the
walkway of the sidewalk by a furnishing zone.
b. Existing THOROUGHFAREs
i. Installation of a STREET TREE into a sidewalk that
existed prior to the adoption date of this Ordinance
must be planted as required by the Director of
Public Space & Urban Forestry.
c. New THOROUGHFAREs
i. Sidewalks must include LARGE TREEs planted within
the furnishing zone, except for ALLEY sidewalks.
ii. Trees must be planted in a regularly-spaced ALLEE
pattern between thirty-five (35) and forty-five (45)
feet on center, as required by the Director of Public
Space & Urban Forestry depending on species or
CULTIVAR of tree.
a). Along retail frontages, STREET TREES may be
13. PUBLIC REALM
Thoroughfares
522 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
planted in an irregularly-spaced ALLEE pattern
to avoid visually obscuring storefront windows
and SIGNage.
b). The review boards may grant a WAIVER from the
STREET TREE requirements of this section only
for sidewalks in front of TERMINATED VISTAS and
ABUTTING CIVIC SPACEs.
iii. At least one thousand (1,000) gross cubic feet of
SOIL VOLUME space must be provided for each tree
within a maximum twenty-seven (27) foot radius of
the tree trunk.
a). Where required SOIL VOLUMES for nearby trees
overlap, up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the
required SOIL VOLUME per tree may be shared
between trees.
b). SOIL VOLUME under paved surfaces must be
provided through SUSPENDED PAVEMENTS or
STRUCTURAL CELLS. A SAND-BASED STRUCTURAL SOIL
SYSTEM may be USEd with approval of the
Director of Public Space & Urban Forestry.
iv. When planted, trees must be a minimum height of
ten (10) feet or two (2) inches in CALIPER.
v. TREE PITS must have an open soil area centered at
the tree trunk that is at least thirty six (36) square
feet (such as 6'x6').
vi. To reduce soil compaction, shield a tree’s trunk
from physical damage, and prevent pet waste from
entering the soil area, a TREE GUARD at least eighteen
(18) inches tall must be installed around the outer
perimeter of the TREE PIT.
a). For sidewalks without an edge zone (i.e.
‘Curbwalk’), TREE GUARDs must be three-sided
and positioned at least one foot short of the
Figure 13.2.4 (a) Sidewalks
Edge | Furnishing | Walkway | Frontage
Figure 13.2.4 (b) Structural Cell Example
13. PUBLIC REALM
Thoroughfares
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 523
outer edge of the curb, with the curbside
remaining open (not fenced).
b). For sidewalks with an edge zone, TREE GUARDs
must provide protection on all four sides of the
TREE PIT.
c). TREE GUARDs must allow for water to flow from
the sidewalk into the TREE PIT.
vii. Coarse grade GROUNDCOVER MULCH must be applied
to the soil area at a depth of at least two (2) inches
and distributed to create a smooth, level cover over
the exposed soil at the time of planting.
a). A gap of approximately eight (8) inches must
be left between the mulch and the trunk of the
tree to avoid mounding above the trunk flare.
viii. Trench drains located between the curb and
furnishing zone or between the furnishing zone
and walkway are recommended to maximize water
infiltration into the soil provided for STREET TREES.
5. Mid-Block Passages
a. Mid-BLOCK passages must connect the sidewalk of one
THOROUGHFARE to the sidewalk of another THOROUGHFARE
on oppoSITE sides of a BLOCK.
b. Mid-BLOCK passages may be designed as an open-air
passage between buildings, a covered atrium providing
continuous protection from the elements, or as an up
to two-STORY passage through a BUILDING.
c. Open air mid-BLOCK passages must be at least twenty
(20) feet in width, with a minimum ten (10) foot
wide paved walkway designed as a continuation of
the sidewalks they connect, including materials and
sidewalk furnishings.
d. A covered mid-BLOCK passage must be at least twenty
(20) feet in width.
e. All mid-BLOCK passages must be lighted using
footlights, bollard lights, BUILDING lights, or STREET lights
to provide for safety and visibility at night.
Figure 13.2.3 Example Tree Pits & Guards
13. PUBLIC REALM
524 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
14 NONCONFORMANCE
14.1 NONCONFORMITIES ..........................................525
General 525
Determination of Status 525
Basic Rights 525
Nonconforming Lots 525
Nonconforming Structures 525
Nonconforming Uses 526
Nonconforming Site Characteristics 526
Nonconforming Signs 527
Casualty 527
Abandonment 527

12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 527
14. NONCONFORMANCE
Nonconformities
14.1 NONCONFORMITIES
1. General
a. The adoption and occasional amendment of the
Somerville Zoning Ordinance and Official Zoning
Atlas, including the adoption of the City’s first zoning
ordinance, can caUSE previously lawfully conforming
LOTs, STRUCTURES, USEs, SITE characteristics, and SIGNs to
become nonconforming to new regulations.
b. This section explains the impact of this nonconforming
status on DEVELOPMENT.
2. Determination of Status
a. A LOT, STRUCTURE, USE, SITE characteristic, or SIGN that
existed prior to the establishment of zoning in
Somerville or that complied with the Somerville Zoning
Ordinance when platted, built, or established and
remains in compliance with subsequent amendments
to the Somerville Zoning Ordinance is lawfully
conforming.
b. A LOT, STRUCTURE, USE, SITE characteristic, or SIGN that
existed prior to the establishment of zoning in
Somerville or that complied with the Somerville Zoning
Ordinance when platted, built, or established but has
become non-compliant to a subsequent amendment
of the Somerville Zoning Ordinance is an existing
NONCONFORMITY.
c. The burden of proving that a LOT, STRUCTURE, USE, SITE
characteristic, or SIGN is an existing NONCONFORMITY rests
entirely with the PROPERTY OWNER.
d. APPLICANTs applying for DEVELOPMENT review required by
this section may be required to submit evidence of a
prior permit or other documentation showing that the
LOT, STRUCTURE, USE, SITE characteristic, or SIGN was legally
platted, built, or established prior to the effective date
of this Ordinance or any amendment to this Ordinance.
e. The BUILDING OFFICIAL shall determine whether reliable
evidence of nonconforming status has been provided
by the PROPERTY OWNER.
3. Basic Rights
a. Existing nonconforming LOTs, STRUCTURES, or USEs may
continue in the same form and USE so long as the
NONCONFORMITY remains otherwise compliant with this
Ordinance.
b. Status as a existing NONCONFORMITY runs with the
LOT, STRUCTURE, USE, SITE characteristic, or SIGN and is
not affected by changes in tenancy, ownership, or
management.
4. Nonconforming Lots
a. Description
i. A nonconforming LOT is a LOT that was lawfully
platted, but that no longer complies with the
provisions of this Ordinance due to its adoption or
amendment.
b. Unbuildable LOTs
i. DEVELOPMENT is prohibited for any vacant LOT that is
nonconforming to the LOT frontage requirement of
§10.1.6.a (frontage on a THOROUGHFARE or CIVIC SPACE)
or to the LOT width or LOT DEPTH requirements for
any BUILDING TYPE permitted for the zoning district
where the LOT is located.
c. Existing Structures
i. MODIFICATION of any existing PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE
into a different BUILDING TYPE is prohibited for any
LOT that is nonconforming to the LOT frontage
requirement of §10.1.6.a.
d. Land Platting
i. A LOT SPLIT, LOT MERGER, or LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT,
or SUBDIVISION that would result in a new
nonconforming LOT is prohibited.
ii. LOT SPLITs, LOT MERGERs, or LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTs to any
LOT that does not have frontage on a THOROUGHFARE
or a CIVIC SPACE is permitted only when the split,
merger, or adjustment dissolves the LOT or
increases the conformity of ABUTTING LOTs.
5. Nonconforming Structures
a. Description
i. A nonconforming structure is any PRINCIPAL BUILDING
TYPE, building component, ACCESSORY BUILDING TYPE,
or ACCESSory structure that was lawfully built, but
that no longer complies with the provisions of this
Ordinance due to its adoption or amendment.
b. Ordinary Repair and Maintenance
i. NORMAL MAINTENANCE of a nonconforming structure is
permitted.
c. MODIFICATIONs
i. Any MODIFICATION to an existing PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE,
building component, or ACCESSORY BUILDING TYPE that
is not one of the BUILDING TYPEs permitted in a zoning
district is prohibited, except as follows:
a). Any conforming building component permitted
within the same zoning district may be added
to a nonconforming principal or ACCESSORY
BUILDING TYPE by Special Permit.
b). MODIFICATIONs to a nonconforming principal
or ACCESSORY BUILDING TYPE USEd for religious or
educational activities per M.G.L. Chapter 40A,
Section 3 are permitted in accordance with the
largest permitted BUILDING TYPE.
ii. Any MODIFICATION to a permitted PRINCIPAL BUILDING
TYPE, BUILDING component, or ACCESSORY BUILDING TYPE
that is nonconforming to any standard for that
specific PRINCIPAL BUILDING TYPE, BUILDING component,
528 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
14. NONCONFORMANCE
Nonconformities
or ACCESSORY BUILDING TYPE is permitted, subject to
the following:
a). The creation of any new NONCONFORMITY is
prohibited.
b). Any increase in an existing NONCONFORMITY is
prohibited.
d. ACCESSory STRUCTURES
i. Any MODIFICATION that increases an existing
NONCONFORMITY or creates a new NONCONFORMITY is
prohibited.
ii. Any MODIFICATION that results in greater conformance
to this Ordinance is permitted.
e. Special Permits
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny
a special permit authorizing the MODIFICATION of a
nonconforming STRUCTURE:
a). The extent and nature of the proposed
alteration;
b). The ability of conforming alterations to meet
the demonstrated need of the APPLICANT;
c). Consistency of the proposed alterations with
the evolution of neighboring STRUCTURES.
d). Establishment of permeable LOT surface, to the
maximum extent possible.
e). Conformance to design guidelines applicable to
the district where the property is located.
ii. The review boards may not grant a special
permit authorizing any MODIFICATION to an existing
nonconforming structure that increases the
degree of an existing NONCONFORMITY of the
structure without finding that the alteration
is not substantially more detrimental to the
neighborhood.
6. Nonconforming Uses
a. Description
i. A nonconforming USE is a USE that was lawfully
established but that no longer complies with
applicable standards becaUSE of the adoption or
amendment of the Somerville Zoning Ordinance.
b. Change of USE
i. A nonconforming USE may change to a conforming
USE as indicated on Table 9.1 (see Article 9: USE
Provisions).
ii. A nonconforming USE may change to another
nonconforming USE that is from the same USE
Category as the existing nonconforming USE by
Special Permit.
iii. A nonconforming USE may not change to a different
nonconforming USE that is from a different USE
Category than the existing nonconforming USE
(eg. an existing BANKING OR FINANCIAL SERVICES USE
changing into a Restaurant, Bakery, or Cafe USE in a
district where neither is permitted).
c. Alterations
i. The alteration of a nonconforming USE within a
STRUCTURE may be permitted by Special Permit.
ii. A nonconforming USE is considered to be altered in,
but not limited to, the following circumstances:
a). any increase in GROSS FLOOR AREA;
b). any increase in the number of DWELLING UNITs;
c). a change from seasonal to full-time operation;
and,
d). any substantial increase in the number of
automobile trips generated by the USE.
e). any change in hours of operation beyond the
hours of 7:00am to 9:00pm
d. Special Permits
i. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny
a special permit authorizing the change of a
nonconforming USE to a different nonconforming
USE within the same USE Category as the existing
nonconforming USE:
a). The impact of the CHANGE IN USE to the
neighborhood when compared to the existing
nonconforming USE.
ii. In addition to the review criteria for all Special
Permits specified in §15.2.1.e. Review Criteria,
the review board shall make findings considering
the following in its discretion to approve or deny
a special permit authorizing alterations to a
nonconforming USE within a STRUCTURE:
a). The extent and nature of the proposed
alteration;
b). The ability of conforming alterations to meet
the demonstrated need of the APPLICANT;
c). Consistency of the proposed alterations with
the evolution of neighboring STRUCTURES.
d). the impact of the alteration to the
neighborhood when compared to the existing
nonconforming USE.
7. Nonconforming Site Characteristics
a. Immunity
i. Nonconforming SITE characteristics, including
parking and permeable area requirements, do
not caUSE STRUCTURES or USEs that are otherwise
conforming to the provisions of this Ordinance to
become nonconforming.
b. Alterations
i. Nonconforming PARKING LOTs cannot be expanded in
violation or further violation of maximum parking
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 529
14. NONCONFORMANCE
Nonconformities
requirements.
ii. Nonconforming landscape and permeable area
cannot be further reduced.
c. Improvement
i. Review boards may require nonconforming SITE
characteristics to be brought into conformance
with the provisions of this Ordinance as a condition
applied to a discretionary or administrative permit.
8. Nonconforming Signs
a. A nonconforming SIGN may alter content, but may not:
i. Be replaced with a SIGN that is larger in any
dimension than the existing SIGN;
ii. Alter lighting technology, except to bring the
technology into compliance with the ordinance.
b. No establishment with a nonconforming SIGN may add
additional SIGNs without bringing nonconforming SIGNs
into compliance.
9. Casualty
a. Lawfully existing nonconforming real property
destroyed by fire, explosion, weather, flooding, or act
of public enemy may be reconstructed or restored byright
subject to the following:
i. MODIFICATION to NONCONFORMITIES prior to destruction
are not permitted;
ii. reconstruction or restoration must be started
within two (2) years of the date of destruction
and must be continued in a timely fashion until
completed.
b. The BUILDING OFFICIAL shall not issue a Building Permit or
Certificate of Occupancy unless the No BUILDING Permit
shall be issued until a zoning permit has been granted
by the BUILDING OFFICIAL.
10. Abandonment
a. Lawfully existing nonconforming real property is
considered abandoned when one or more of the
following conditions exist:
i. the USE is changed to a USE permitted in the district
where the property is located;
ii. the USE is changed to a USE protected under MGL
40A, Section 3;
iii. the USE is discontinued, whether temporarily or
permanently, with or without intent to abandon, for
a period of two (2) years or more;
iv. equipment or furnishings necessary for the
operation of the nonconforming USE have been
removed and not replace for a period of one (1)
year or more or more;
v. utilities, such as water, gas, or electricity to the
property have been disconnected for over one (1)
year; and/or
vi. reconstruction or restoration does not start within a
period of two (2) years from the date of destruction
of lawfully existing nonconforming real property.
b. Nonconforming real property that has been abandoned
may not be reestablished or resumed until brought into
conformance with this Ordinance.
530 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
14. NONCONFORMANCE
Nonconformities
15 ADMINISTRATION
15.1 REVIEW PROCEDURES ......................................531
General 531
Pre-Submittal Meeting 531
Neighborhood Meeting 531
Design Review 532
Development Review Application 532
Application Review & Staff Report 533
Public Notice 534
Public Hearing 534
Decision 535
Appeal 535
Certification of Decision 535
Certificate of Zoning Compliance 535
15.2 DISCRETIONARY PERMITS ................................536
Special Permit 536
Master Plan Special Permit 537
Hardship Variance 538
Plan Revision 539
15.3 ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS ..............................540
Subdivision Plan Approval 540
Site Plan Approval 540
Thoroughfare Permit 541
Civic Space Permit 542
Building Permit 542
15.4 CERTIFICATES .....................................................544
Certificate of Zoning Compliance 544
Certificate of Occupancy 544
Written Interpretation 545
15.5 APPEALS ..............................................................546
Building Code Appeal 546
Administrative Appeal 546
Judicial Appeal 546
15.6 LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURES ..............................547
Land Conveyance 547
Zoning Text Amendment 547
Zoning Map Amendment 548
15.7 REVIEW BOARDS & OFFICIALS .........................549
Building Official 549
Zoning Board of Appeals 549
Planning Board 549
Urban Design Commission 550

15. ADMINISTRATION
Review Procedures
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 533
15.1 REVIEW PROCEDURES
1. General
a. All DEVELOPMENT, excluding NORMAL MAINTENANCE, requires
the submittal of a development review application to
the BUILDING OFFICIAL and the issuance of a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance prior to the issuance of a Building
Permit or Certificate of Occupancy.
b. Proposed DEVELOPMENT may or may not necessitate the
need for a Discretionary or administrative permit based
on the nature of the proposal.
c. This Section describes the various common procedures
required for development review applications. See
Section 15.2 Discretionary Permits and Section 15.3
Administrative Permits for the specific procedural steps
required for each type of permit.
2. Pre-Submittal Meeting
a. Purpose
i. To inform APPLICANTs of relevant development
review application criteria, standards, and
procedures.
ii. To examine previous development review
applications and permits for the subject property.
iii. To identify any potential concerns at the earliest
opportunity in the DEVELOPMENT review process.
b. Procedure
i. When a pre-submittal meeting is required by this
Ordinance, development review applications are
not considered complete until the pre-submittal
meeting has been held with Planning Staff.
ii. Unless otherwise specified, a required presubmittal
meeting must occur at least fourteen (14)
days prior to any required neighborhood meeting,
at least fourteen (14) days prior to any required
design review, and at least three (3) days prior to
submittal of a development review application.
iii. APPLICANTs or their representatives are required to
attend a pre-submittal meeting.
iv. APPLICANTs are required to bring all information
and materials required by the BUILDING OFFICIAL and
Director of Planning & Zoning to a pre-submittal
meeting.
3. Neighborhood Meeting
a. Purpose
i. To provide the public with an opportunity to review
a conceptual design proposal and identify and
discuss issues and potential impacts with the
APPLICANT prior to the DEVELOPMENT of more detailed
schematic design proposals.
ii. To provide the public with an opportunity to review
a chosen schematic design plan and identify and
discuss issues and potential impacts with the
APPLICANT prior to the submittal of a development
review application.
iii. Neighborhood meetings are required during the
schematic design process to promote the submittal
of a development review application that is more
responsive to community concerns, expedite
the review process, and to lessen the cost of
DEVELOPMENT review by reducing continuances and
appeals.
b. Procedure
i. When a neighborhood meeting is required by this
Ordinance, development review applications are
not considered complete until the neighborhood
meeting has been held.
ii. Development review applications must be
submitted within one hundred and twenty (120)
days of the neighborhood meeting. If an application
is not submitted in this time frame, the APPLICANT is
required to hold a new neighborhood meeting.
iii. Unless otherwise specified, a neighborhood
meeting must occur at least fourteen (14) days
prior to any required design review and at least
fourteen (14) days prior to formal submittal of a
development review application.
iv. Neighborhood meetings must be open to the
public.
v. Neighborhood meetings should be held at a
location in close proximity to the subject property
on a weekday evening after 6:00 p.m. or on
weekends at any reasonable time.
vi. Neighborhood meetings may not occur on a local,
state, or national holiday or election day.
vii. APPLICANTs or their representatives, along with the
designers, are required to attend a neighborhood
meeting.
viii. The APPLICANT is responsible for schedueling
a neighborhood meeting in consultation with
the Ward representative from the City Council,
the Director of Planning & Zoning, and any
NEIGHBORHOOD COUNCIL for the area where the
DEVELOPMENT SITE is located.
ix. The format and agenda of a neighborhood meeting
is at the discretion of the Applicant, in consultation
with the Ward representative from the City Council
and any NEIGHBORHOOD COUNCIL for the area where
the DEVELOPMENT SITE is located, subject to the
following:
a). Only one (1) DEVELOPMENT proposal may be
presented to the public at a neighborhood
meeting.
b). Attendees must be able to hear and discuss
each others feedback at the neighborhood
15. ADMINISTRATION
Review Procedures
534 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
meeting and opportunity must be provided for
substantive engagement between attendees
and the APPLICANT, including designers,
regarding the proposed DEVELOPMENT.
c). APPLICANTs are required to bring all information
and materials required by the BUILDING OFFICIAL
to a neighborhood meeting.
x. Multiple neighborhood meetings may be held on
the same day, one after another, at the discretion
of the Ward representative from the City Council.
xi. The Director of Planning & Zoning shall keep a
public record of the neighborhood meeting that
includes, but may not be limited to, the following:
a). A list of those persons and organizations
contacted about the meeting, and the manner
and date of contact.
b). The date, time, and location of the meeting;
c). A roster or SIGNature sheet of attendees at the
meeting.
d). Copies of all materials provided by the APPLICANT
at the meeting.
xii. The Director of Planning & Zoning shall record
minutes of the neighborhood meeting and provide
a summary of the comments, questions, and
concerns discussed at the meeting to the review
boards.
xiii. The BUILDING OFFICIAL and review boards shall
require APPLICANTs to submit a detailed response
to concerns raised at the neighborhood meeting
and a description of any changes to the proposed
DEVELOPMENT made as a result of the feedback.
4. Design Review
a. Purpose
i. To inform the selection of a preferred schematic
design from a number of options.
ii. To provide an APPLICANT with advice or
recommendations from peers in the professional
design community.
iii. To ensure that DEVELOPMENT protects and enhances
the PUBLIC REALM and human scale of the City.
b. Authority
i. Unless otherwise specified, the Urban Design
Commission (UDC) is the review board for Design
Review.
c. Procedure
i. When design review is required by this Ordinance,
development review applications are not
considered complete until review by the Urban
Design Commission (UDC) has been completed.
ii. Unless otherwise specified, design review must
occur at least fourteen (14) days prior to formal
submittal of a development review application.
iii. The Director of Planning & Zoning shall post any
plan drawings, presentations, or other materials
submitted to the UDC on the City webSITE.
iv. Staff of the Planning & Zoning Division shall serve
as staff to the UDC, as may be necessary to
perform its duties.
v. The UDC shall issue a written recommendation
to the Planning Board and the APPLICANT within
forty-five (45) days of the design review
meeting. Subsequent DEVELOPMENT review steps
are prohibited until the UDC has issued its
recommendation.
vi. The UDC shall keep a public record of the design
review meeting that includes, but may not be
limited to, the following:
a). A list of those persons and organizations
contacted about the meeting, and the manner
and date of contact.
b). The date, time, and location of the meeting;
c). A roster or SIGNature sheet of attendees at the
meeting.
d). Copies of all materials provided by the APPLICANT
at the meeting.
vii. The UDC shall record minutes of the design review
meeting and provide a summary of the comments,
questions, and concerns discussed at the meeting
to the review boards.
viii. The BUILDING OFFICIAL and review boards shall
require APPLICANTs to submit a detailed response
to concerns raised at the design review meeting
and a description of any changes to the proposed
DEVELOPMENT made as a result of the feedback.
d. Review Criteria
i. The Urban Design Commission’s written
recommendation to the review board must include,
but may not be limited to, the following:
a). Identification the preferred schematic design
supported by the UDC.
b). Identification of each design guideline that has
been achieved to the satisfaction of the UDC,
as voted by a majority of members present.
c). Any MODIFICATIONs necessary to remedy
outstanding design issues for guidelines that
have not been achieved to the satisfaction of
the UDC, as voted by a majority of members
present.
ii. In addition to addressing the design guidelines
of this Ordinance, the UDC shall provide
recommendations for any design guidelines
adopted by the review boards.
5. Development Review Application
a. Purpose
i. To provide the BUILDING OFFICIAL with all of
the information necessary to determine if a
15. ADMINISTRATION
Review Procedures
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 535
DEVELOPMENT proposal is permitted or necessitates
the need for additional DEVELOPMENT review in
accordance with this Ordinance.
b. Submittal
i. Development review applications must include
all necessary information and submittal materials
required by the BUILDING OFFICIAL and Review
Boards. The BUILDING OFFICIAL shall make all
application submittal requirements available to the
public on the City webSITE.
a). APPLICANTs must demonstrate ownership or
SITE control of a DEVELOPMENT SITE through one or
more of the following:
i). Fee ownership or consent of the fee owner
of a PARCEL;
ii). Leasehold interest;
iii). An EASEMENT agreement;
iv). An option to purchase or lease; or
v). A Land Disposition Agreement with
the Somerville ReDEVELOPMENT Authority
pursuant to a Revitalization Plan and the
provisions of 760 CMR 12.05.
c. Completeness
i. A development review application is not
considered complete until all necessary
information has been supplied by the APPLICANT and
all fees have been paid, including fees for costs
incurred by the City for public notice.
ii. Upon written request by an APPLICANT, the review
board may, in its discretion, waive any of the
information required when applying for DEVELOPMENT
review.
iii. Completed applications will be scheduled for a
public hearing, publicly noticed, or administratively
evaluated as indicated for each type of
discretionary or administrative permit.
iv. Incomplete applications will not be reviewed, will
not be publicly noticed, will not be scheduled for a
public hearing.
v. If an application reaches a public hearing and the
review board deems the submittal incomplete, the
board shall do one (1) of the following:
a). deny the application;
b). allow the APPLICANT to withdraw the application
without prejudice according to §15.1.5.e.
Withdrawal; or
c). allow the APPLICANT waive the procedural
time requirements according to §15.1.8.d
Continuance.
d. Withdrawal
i. An application may be withdrawn without prejudice
at any time prior to the issuance of the public
notice advertising the DEVELOPMENT review public
hearing where the application will be reviewed.
ii. Once the public notice advertising a DEVELOPMENT
review public hearing has been issued, a request
to withdraw an application can be granted only by a
four-fifths majority of the review board.
iii. Upon request to withdraw without prejudice,
the review board has the option to do one of the
following:
a). approve a request to withdraw without
prejudice; or
b). deny the request and proceed to evaluate
the application based on the merits of the
information submitted.
iv. Applications withdrawn prior to public notice are
not eligible for a refund of fees.
e. Repetitive Applications
i. A denied development review application will not
be reconsidered for a minimum of two (2) years
from the date final action was taken by the review
board unless the review board determines, in
accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 40A Section 16,
that specific and material changes in the conditions
upon which the prior denial was based, including,
but not limited to, substantial new evidence or
a significant mistake of law or of fact, justifies
reconsideration of the application.
ii. If the development review application is
resubmitted earlier than two (2) years from the
date of final action, the development review
application must include a detailed statement of
the evidence justifying its reconsideration.
iii. The review boards shall not regard the re-submittal
of development review applications withdrawn
without prejudice as a repetitive application.
6. Application Review & Staff Report
a. Upon receipt of a complete development review
application, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall review the
development review application and, if necessary, refer
the application to appropriate City Departments for
feedback.
b. For any proposed DEVELOPMENT that requires a
discretionary or administrative permit, the BUILDING
OFFICIAL shall forward the application to the Director of
Planning & Zoning to administer the required review
process with the review board(s).
c. The Director of Planning & Zoning shall post on the
City website and transmit to the review board(s) a staff
report that includes, but may not be limited to, the
following:
i. A summary overview of the proposed
development;
ii. identification of all required discretionary and
administrative permits; and
iii. a zoning compliance review.
15. ADMINISTRATION
Review Procedures
536 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
d. If a neighborhood meeting or design review meeting
was required for the proposed DEVELOPMENT, the staff
report must include also an account of the meeting
that includes, but may not be limited to, the following:
a). the date, time, and location of the meeting;
b). a roster of members of the Urban Design
Commission in attendance at the meeting;
c). a summary of issues discussed at the
meeting; and
d). a description of any changes to the proposed
DEVELOPMENT that the Director of Planning &
Zoning deems necessary as a result of the
meeting.
7. Public Notice
a. General
i. Public notice of a neighborhood meeting, public
meeting, or DEVELOPMENT review or legislative
procedure public hearing is provided to inform
the general public of the meeting or hearing
and to direct interested parties to any available
information concerning the DEVELOPMENT proposal.
ii. Costs incurred by the City for public notice must
be prepaid by the APPLICANT according to the review
boards rules of procedure.
b. Mailed Notice
i. APPLICANTs shall provide notice of a neighborhood
meeting as follows:
a). a). mailing notice to parties in interest.
b). mailing notice to direct ABUTters;
c). mailing notice to PROPERTY OWNERs within three
hundred (300) feet;
d). making best efforts to mail notice to the
residents of addresses owned by parties in
interest, as provided by the U.S. Postal Service;
e). making best efforts to hand deliver notice to
each direct ABUTter;
f). contacting individuals that have requested
to be notified about DEVELOPMENT in the
neighborhood via email or telephone; and
g). requesting local businesses to post notice in
their establishment.
ii. The Director of Planning & Zoning shall provide
notice of a public hearing or a design review public
meeting or as follows:
a). mailing notice to direct ABUTters;
b). mailing notice to PROPERTY OWNERs within three
hundred (300) feet or five hundred (500) feet
for DEVELOPMENT in the HIGH-RISE district; and
c). mailing notice to the Planning Board of any
ABUTTING City or Town sharing a municipal
boundary the City of Somerville within three
hundred (300) feet of the subject property.
iii. The Director of Planning & Zoning shall mail notice
of a public hearing for a LAND CONVEYANCE to direct
ABUTters.
iv. The Director of Planning & Zoning shall mail
notice of a public hearing for an amendment to
the Somerville Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Atlas
to the Planning Board of City or Town sharing a
municipal boundary with th City of Somerville,
the Massachusetts Department of Housing &
Community DEVELOPMENT, and the Metropolitan
Area Planning Council.
c. Published Notice
i. The Director of Planning & Zoning shall publish
notice of a public meeting or public hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City of
Somerville and the City of Somerville webSITE
at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the
scheduled hearing date, with a second notice the
following week.
d. Posted Notice
i. The Director of Planning & Zoning shall post notice
of a design review or neighborhood meeting in a
conspicuous place in City Hall at least seven (7)
days in advance of the scheduled meeting date.
ii. The Director of Planning & Zoning shall post notice
of a DEVELOPMENT review or legislative procedure
public hearing in a conspicuous place in City
Hall at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the
scheduled hearing date.
iii. Applicants shall post notice of a DEVELOPMENT review
public hearing in a conspicuous place at the subject
property at least fourteen (14) days in advance of
the scheduled meeting date.
e. Appeal for Improper Notice
i. Any aggrieved party may appeal the decision of any
review board or official when claiming improper
notice of a DEVELOPMENT review public hearing
required by M.G.L. Chapter 40A in accordance with
to the procedures of §15.5.3 Judicial Appeal.
ii. Judicial appeals claiming improper notice of a
DEVELOPMENT review public hearing or meeting must
be filed per MGL 40A.
8. Public Hearing
a. Procedure
i. A public hearing must be held within sixty-five (65)
days after receiving a completed development
review application that requires a Special Permit,
Master plan Special Permit, Hardship Variance, Site
Plan Approval, or SUBDIVISION Plan Approval.
ii. A public hearing must be held within ninety (90)
days after receiving a completed development
review application that requires a Neighborhood
DEVELOPMENT Plan Approval.
b. Hearing Administration
15. ADMINISTRATION
Review Procedures
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 537
i. Public hearings are conducted in accordance with
the procedures set forth in M.G.L. Chapter 40A,
as amended; any and all requirements of The Code
of Ordinances, City of Somerville, Massachusetts;
and the rules of the applicable review board.
c. ACCESS to Documents
i. The Director of Planning & Zoning shall post all
relevant development review application materials
on the City webSITE prior to the notice of a public
hearing.
ii. Physical copies of application information,
DEVELOPMENT plan documentation, and other related
correspondence are available to inspect or copy by
any party upon reasonable request and payment of
a fee to cover the cost of such copies.
d. Continuance
i. Upon mutual agreement by the APPLICANT and a fourfifths
majority of the review board, the following
procedural requirements may be extended:
a). the time limit required for commencement of a
public hearing;
b). the time limit required to make a decision.
ii. Mutual agreement of extended time limits must be
recorded in writing.
9. Decision
a. Action by a Review Board
i. Within ninety (90) days of the closing of a public
hearing, the review board must
a). make a decision to approve, approve with
conditions, deny, or grant withdrawal the
application for a Special Permit; and
b). file that decision with the Office of the City
Clerk.
b. Written Information
i. Decisions must include a detailed record of the
proceedings of the public hearing, indicate the vote
of each board member, the reason for the board’s
decision, and identify any official actions taken by
the board and conditions attached to the approval.
c. Notice of the Decision
i. The Director of Planning & Zoning shall mail
notification of the decision to the petitioner,
APPLICANT, or appellant, as applicable.
d. Filing of the Decision
i. Decisions must be filed with the Office of the City
Clerk within fourteen (14) days of the review board
making the decision. The City Clerk will date stamp
the decision, beginning the time period for which
an appeal may be filed.
10. Appeal
a. Appeals of a decision by the BUILDING OFFICIAL, Director
of Planning & Zoning, Zoning Board of Appeals, or
Planning Board must be carried out in accordance
with Section 15.2 Discretionary Permits, Section 15.3
Administrative Permits, and Section 15.5 Appeals of
this Article.
11. Certification of Decision
a. After the time period for an appeal has expired (see
Section 15.5 Appeals), the APPLICANT must take a copy
of the decision provided by the Planning Division to the
Office of the City Clerk for certification that no appeals
have been filed.
b. Once the Office of the City Clerk has certified that the
decision has not been appealed, or certified that the
decision was appealed and the APPLICANT decides to
proceed at risk, the APPLICANT must archive the decision
with the property authority as follows:
i. For unregistered land, the APPLICANT must submit
the certified copy of the decision to the Middlesex
South Registry of Deeds.
ii. For registered land, the APPLICANT must submit the
certified copy of the decision to the Land COURT.
12. Certificate of Zoning Compliance
a. The BUILDING OFFICIAL shall grant a Certificate of Zoning
Compliance for DEVELOPMENT that conforms to the
provisions and procedures of this Ordinance.
b. No certificate of zoning compliance will be issued
without physical evidence that the certified copy of the
decision has been properly filed with the Middlesex
South Registry of Deeds or Land COURT.
15. ADMINISTRATION
Discretionary Permits
538 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
15.2 DISCRETIONARY PERMITS
1. Special Permit
a. Purpose
i. A Special Permit authorizes DEVELOPMENT that is not
otherwise permitted, provided that it meets certain
criteria set out in this Ordinance.
b. Applicability
i. Special Permits are required for DEVELOPMENT as
indicated elsewhere in this Ordinance.
ii. The granting of a Special Permit authorizes the
BUILDING OFFICIAL to issue a certificate of zoning
compliance for DEVELOPMENT that is otherwise
compliant with the provisions and procedures of
this Ordinance.
iii. The BUILDING OFFICIAL may not issue a certificate of
zoning compliance for DEVELOPMENT that requires
a Special Permit until a Special Permit has been
granted by the review board in accordance with the
provisions of this Article.
c. Authority
i. The review board serving as the decision making
authority for a Special Permit is determined by
zoning district.
d. Procedure
i. The following review procedures are required:
a). Step 1: Development Review Application
b). Step 2: Application Review & Staff Report
c). Step 3: Public Notice
d). Step 4: Public Hearing
e). Step 5: Decision
f). Step 6: Appeal Period
g). Step 7: Certification of Decision
h). Step 8: Certificate of Zoning Compliance
ii. The following additional review procedures are
required prior to Step 1: Development Review
Application for all USE Special Permits, changes
to nonconforming USEs, DEVELOPMENT seeking
MODIFICATION to the minimum or maximum parking
standards, and all MODIFICATIONs to nonconforming
structures:
a). Pre-Submittal Meeting
b). Neighborhood Meeting
iii. The review procedures required for a Special
Permit may, at the discretion of the designated
review board, be conducted simultaneously
with the review procedures required for other
discretionary or administrative permits.
iv. The procedures required for Special Permits that
are necessitated by phases of DEVELOPMENT subject
to a Master Plan Special Permit may conducted
concurrently with the procedures required for a
Master Plan Special Permit at the discretion of the
review board.
e. Review Criteria
i. In its discretion to approve or deny a Special Permit
required by this Ordinance, the review board shall
make findings considering, at least, each of the
following:
a). The COMPREHENSIVE PLAN and existing policy plans
and standards established by the City.
b). The intent of the zoning district where the
property is located.
c). Considerations indicated elsewhere in this
Ordinance for the required Special Permit.
ii. When considering a revision to a previously
approved development review application that
required a Special Permit, the review board shall
limit their review to the proposed changes to the
previously approved application.
f. Conditions
i. The review board may attach conditions and
limitations that it deems necessary in order to
ensure compliance to the Board’s findings and the
standards for granting of a specific Special Permit
ii. Conditions must have a rational nexus to potential
impacts of the proposed DEVELOPMENT, and be
roughly proportional, both in nature and extent, to
the impacts of the proposed DEVELOPMENT.
g. Compliance
i. The Review Board may require the posting
of a bond or other performance guarantee to
ensure compliance with the development review
application and conditions, as approved.
h. Permit Duration and Extension
i. Special Permits remain valid for three (3) years
from the date the decision is filed with the Office
of the City Clerk, excluding any time required
awaiting the decision of an appeal.
ii. The review board may reduce the time period
that a Special Permit remains valid to a shorter
time period as a condition attached to the Special
Permit.
iii. The review board may extend the duration of
validity for a Special Permit upon making a finding
that a demonstrated hardship has prevented
utilization of the rights authorized by the Special
Permit.
iv. Requests for extension of the duration of validity
must be submitted to the Office of the City Clerk
on the appropriate forms provided by the Planning
Division.
i. Appeals
i. An aggrieved party may appeal the decision of
the BUILDING OFFICIAL in accordance with §15.5.2.
Administrative Appeal.
15. ADMINISTRATION
Discretionary Permits
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 539
ii. An aggrieved party may appeal the decision of
the Zoning Board of Appeals or Planning Board in
accordance with §15.5.3 Judicial Appeal.
2. Master Plan Special Permit
a. Purpose
i. A Master Plan Special Permit authorizes a
long term plan for future DEVELOPMENT and for
an APPLICANT to move forward with subsequent
DEVELOPMENT review required elsewhere in this
Ordinance.
b. Applicability
i. A Master Plan Special Permit is required for
DEVELOPMENT as indicated elsewhere in the
Ordinance.
ii. Approval of a Master Plan Special Permit authorizes
the BUILDING OFFICIAL to accept applications for
subsequent DEVELOPMENT review required by this
Ordinance only and does not establish any vested
right to develop property in accordance with the
plan.
c. Authority
i. The Planning Board is the decision making
authority for a Master Plan Special Permit.
d. Procedure
i. The following review procedures are required:
a). Step 1: Pre-Submittal Meeting
b). Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
c). Step 3: Development Review Application
d). Step 4: Application Review & Staff Report
e). Step 5: Public Notice
f). Step 6: Public Hearing
g). Step 7: Decision
h). Step 8: Appeal Period
i). Step 9: Certification of Decision
j). Step 10: Certificate of Zoning Compliance
ii. The review procedures required for a Master
Plan Special Permit may, at the discretion of
the designated review board, be conducted
simultaneously with the review procedures
required for other discretionary or administrative
permits, as indicated elsewhere in this Ordinance.
e. Review Criteria
i. In its discretion to approve or deny a development
review application requiring a Master Plan Special
Permit, the Planning Board shall make findings
considering, at least, each of the following:
a). The COMPREHENSIVE PLAN and existing policy plans
and standards established by the City.
b). The intent of the zoning district where the
property is located.
c). The proposed alignment and connectivity of
the THOROUGHFARE network.
d). The GROSS FLOOR AREA allocated to different USE
categories.
e). Mitigation proposed to alleviate any adverse
impacts on utility infrastructure.
f). Proposed DEVELOPMENT phasing.
g). Proposed on-STREET parking to address
demand by customers of Retail Sales, Food
& Beverage, or Commercial Services PRINCIPAL
USEs.
h). Considerations indicated elsewhere in this
Ordinance for the required Master Plan Special
Permit.
ii. When considering a revision to a previously
approved development review application that
required a Master Plan Special Permit, the review
board shall limit their review to the proposed
changes to the previously approved application.
f. Conditions
i. The review board may attach conditions and
limitations that it deems necessary in order to
ensure compliance to the Board’s findings and the
standards for granting of a Special Permit.
ii. Conditions must have a rational nexus to potential
impacts of the proposed DEVELOPMENT, and be
roughly proportional, both in nature and extent, to
the impacts of the proposed DEVELOPMENT.
iii. The Planning Board shall require APPLICANTs to
provide for infrastructure mitigation, transportation
mitigation, and community impact mitigation as a
condition of an any Master Plan Special Permit.
iv. The Planning Board shall establish construction
permitting requirements for the phasing of
DEVELOPMENT, if applicable, as a condition of any
Master Plan Special Permit.
g. Compliance
i. The Review Board shall require a performance
bond for one hundred and twenty five percent
(125%) of the estimated costs of all proposed civic
space and any required infrastructure mitigation or
transportation mitigation to guarantee satisfactory
completion of the approved master plan and
conditions.
ii. Upon provision of the proposed civic space or
required infrastructure mitigation or transportation
mitigation, in whole or in part, the performance
bond may be released or reduced subject to
§15.2.4 Plan Revision.
h. Permit Duration and Extension
i. Master Plan Special Permits remain valid for three
(3) years from the date the decision is filed with
the Office of the City Clerk, excluding any time
required awaiting the decision of an appeal, and
remain valid so long as progress is being made
in accordance with the approved phasing of
DEVELOPMENT.
15. ADMINISTRATION
Discretionary Permits
540 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
ii. The review board may reduce the time period that
a Master Plan Special Permit remains valid to a
shorter time period as a condition attached to the
permit.
iii. The review board may extend the duration of
validity for a Master Plan Special Permit upon
making a finding that a demonstrated hardship has
prevented utilization of the rights authorized by the
Special Permit.
iv. Requests for extension of the duration of validity
must be submitted to the Office of the City Clerk
on the appropriate forms provided by the Planning
Division.
i. Appeals
i. An aggrieved party may appeal the decision of
the BUILDING OFFICIAL in accordance with §15.5.2.
Administrative Appeal.
ii. An aggrieved party may appeal the decision of
the Zoning Board of Appeals or Planning Board in
accordance with §15.5.3. Judicial Appeal.
3. Hardship Variance
a. Purpose
i. A Hardship Variance authorizes DEVELOPMENT that
would otherwise be prohibited by the provisions of
this Ordinance, due to hardship.
b. Applicability
i. A Hardship Variance is required for DEVELOPMENT
that is not compliant with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
ii. The granting of a Hardship Variance authorizes the
BUILDING OFFICIAL to issue a certificate of zoning
compliance for DEVELOPMENT that is otherwise
compliant with the provisions and procedures of
this Ordinance.
iii. The BUILDING OFFICIAL may not issue a certificate of
zoning compliance for DEVELOPMENT that requires
a Hardship Variance until a Hardship Variance has
been granted by the review board in accordance
with the provisions of this Article.
iv. USE Hardship Variances are not permitted.
c. Authority
i. The Zoning Board of Appeals is the review board
for all Hardship Variances.
d. Procedure
i. The following review procedures are required:
a). Step 1: Pre-Submittal Meeting
b). Step 2: Development Review Application
c). Step 3: Application Review & Staff Report
d). Step 4: Public Notice
e). Step 5: Public Hearing
f). Step 6: Decision
g). Step 7: Appeal Period
h). Step 8: Certification of Decision
i). Step 9: Certificate of zoning compliance
ii. The following steps may be required prior to Step
2 Development Review Application submittal at the
discretion of the Director of Planning & Zoning or
Review Boards:
a). Neighborhood Meeting
b). Design Review
iii. The review procedures required for a Hardship
Variance may, at the discretion of the designated
review board, be conducted simultaneously
with the review procedures required for other
discretionary or administrative permits.
e. Review Criteria
i. The Zoning Board of Appeals may only grant a
Hardship Variance upon finding all of the following:
a). Special circumstances exist relating to the soil
conditions, shape, or topography of a PARCEL
of land or the unusual character of an existing
structure but not affecting generally the zoning
district in which the land or structure is located;
b). Literal enforcement of the provision of this
Ordinance for the district where the subject
land or structure is located would involve
substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to
the petitioner or appellant due to said special
circumstances; and
c). Desirable relief could be granted without
causing substantial detriment to the public
good and without nullifying or substantially
derogating from the intent and purpose of
a specific district in this Ordinance or the
Ordinance in general.
ii. When considering a revision to a previously
approved development review application that
required a Hardship Variance, the review board
shall limit their review to the proposed changes to
the previously approved application.
f. Conditions
i. The Zoning Board of Appeals may attach conditions
and limitations that it deems necessary in order to
ensure compliance to the Board’s findings and the
standards for granting of a Hardship Variance.
ii. Conditions must have a rational nexus to potential
impacts of the proposed DEVELOPMENT, and be
roughly proportional, both in nature and extent, to
the impacts of the proposed DEVELOPMENT.
g. Compliance
i. The Zoning Board may require the posting of a
bond or other performance guarantee to ensure
compliance with the development review
application and conditions, as approved.
h. Duration and Extension
i. Hardship Variances remain valid for one (1) year
from the date the decision is made by the Zoning
15. ADMINISTRATION
Discretionary Permits
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 541
Board of Appeals, not the date that the decision is
filed with the Office of the City Clerk, excluding any
time required awaiting the decision of an appeal.
ii. Upon written request by an APPLICANT, the Zoning
Board of Appeals may, in its discretion, extend the
time period that a Hardship Variance remains valid
for up to six (6) months.
iii. Requests for extension of a Hardship Variance
must be submitted to the Office of the City Clerk
on the appropriate forms provided by the BUILDING
OFFICIAL.
i. Appeals
i. An aggrieved party may appeal the decision of
the BUILDING OFFICIAL in accordance with §15.5.2.
Administrative Appeal.
ii. An aggrieved party may appeal the decision of
the Zoning Board of Appeals according to the
procedures of §15.5.3. Judicial Appeal.
4. Plan Revision
a. Purpose
i. Plan revision allows an APPLICANT to revise the
nature of a development review application that is
subject to a previously approved Discretionary or
administrative permit.
b. Applicability
i. Revisions to a previously approved development
review application may be submitted by an
APPLICANT in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
c. Authority
i. The Director of Planning & Zoning is the decision
making authority for a Plan Revision.
d. Procedure
i. The following review procedures are required:
a). Step 1: Pre-Submittal Meeting
b). Step 2: Development Review Application
ii. Within fourteen (14) days after revision to
a previously approved development review
application, the Director of Planning & Zoning
must review the application and determine if the
proposed revision is de minimus or significant
enough to be considered a major amendment to
the original proposal.
iii. Upon a determination that the proposed revision is
de minimus, the Director of Planning & Zoning will
approve or deny the proposed revisions in writing.
iv. Upon a determination that the proposed revision
is a major amendment, the Director of Planning
& Zoning shall notify the APPLICANT, in writing, and
forward the revised application to the designated
review board as a revision to a previously approved
development review application.
e. Review Criteria
i. The Director of Planning & Zoning may determine
the proposed revision is de minimus upon finding
that the revised application:
a). Does not contravene the previously published
public notice, any finding, or attached condition
made by the review board for the original
development review application;
b). Does not detrimentally impact matters of
substance identified in the meeting minutes of
the original public meetings or public hearings;
c). Features changes that are insignificant to the
degree that persons familiar with the original
application would not notice a substantial
change in operational or built outcome.
ii. When considering a revision to a previously
approved development review application, the
Review Boards shall limit their review to only the
changes to the previously approved application.
f. Conditions
i. The Director of Planning & Zoning may attach
conditions and limitations that are deemed
necessary in order to ensure compliance to a de
minimus revised development review application.
ii. Conditions must have a rational nexus to potential
impacts of the proposed DEVELOPMENT, and be
roughly proportional, both in nature and extent, to
the impacts of the proposed DEVELOPMENT.
g. Appeals
i. An aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the
Director of Planning & Zoning according to the
procedures of §15.5.2. Administrative Appeal.
15. ADMINISTRATION
Administrative Permits
542 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
15.3 ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS
1. Subdivision Plan Approval
a. Purpose
i. SUBDIVISION Plan Approval certifies that a final plat
plan showing the division(s) of a PARCEL of land
into new LOTs and the THOROUGHFAREs that provide
ACCESS to them conforms to the provisions of this
Ordinance.
ii. The SUBDIVISION Plan Approval process provides
APPLICANTs with the opportunity to submit a
preliminary plat plan to identify potential issues
and the need for WAIVERs prior to the submittal of a
more detailed final plat plan.
b. Applicability
i. Per Chapter 288 of the Acts of 1993, the provisions
of M.G.L. 41, 81K through 81GG, inclusive, do not
apply to the City of Somerville.
ii. No person shall subdivide any land within the City
of Somerville, proceed with the improvement or
sale of LOTs, construct THOROUGHFAREs, install utility
services, or undertake preliminary SITE preparation,
such as clearing of land or excavation, in a
DEVELOPMENT SITE requiring SUBDIVISION Plan Approval
until a final plat plan has been submitted to,
approved, and endorsed by the designated review
board and recorded in the Registry of Deeds or
Land COURT in accordance with the provisions of
this Article.
iii. Granting of a SUBDIVISION Plan Approval authorizes
a PROPERTY OWNER to file legal documents related
to the SUBDIVISION of real estate within the city of
Somerville with the Registry of Deeds or Land
COURT.
iv. SUBDIVISION Plan Approval does not apply to LOT
SPLITs, LOT MERGERs, and LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTs.
c. Authority
i. The Planning Board is the decision making
authority for a SUBDIVISION Plan Approval.
d. Procedure
i. SUBDIVISION Plan Approval requires a two (2) stage
permitting process that requires the submittal of a
preliminary plat plan as a prerequiSITE to submittal
of a final plat plan.
ii. The following review procedures are required for
preliminary plat approval:
a). Step 1: Pre-Submittal Meeting
b). Step 2: Development Review Application
c). Step 3: Application Review & Staff Report
d). Step 4: Public Notice
e). Step 5: Public Hearing
f). Step 6: Decision
g). Step 7: Appeal Period
iii. The following review procedures are required for
final plat approval:
a). Step 1: Draft & Submit Final Plat
b). Step 2: Planning Board Approval
c). Step 3: Certification of Decision
iv. The review procedures required for a SUBDIVISION
Plan Approval may, at the discretion of the Review
Board, be conducted simultaneously with the
review procedures required for other discretionary
or administrative permits.
e. Review Criteria
i. The Planning Board shall approve an application for
SUBDIVISION Plan Approval upon verifying that the
submitted plan conforms with the provisions of this
Ordinance and demonstrates consistency to the
following:
a). The COMPREHENSIVE PLAN and existing policy plans
and standards established by the City.
b). The intent of the zoning district where the
property is located.
c). Considerations indicated elsewhere in this
Ordinance for the required SUBDIVISION Plan
Approval.
ii. When considering a revision to a previously
approved development review application that
required a SUBDIVISION Plan Approval, the review
board shall limit their review to the proposed
changes to the previously approved application.
f. Conditions
i. The review board may attach conditions and
limitations that it deems necessary in order to
ensure compliance to the Board’s findings and
the standards for granting of a SUBDIVISION Plan
Approval.
ii. Conditions must have a rational nexus to potential
impacts of the proposed DEVELOPMENT, and be
roughly proportional, both in nature and extent, to
the impacts of the proposed DEVELOPMENT.
g. Compliance
i. The Review Board may require the posting
of a bond or other performance guarantee to
ensure compliance with the development review
application and conditions, as approved.
h. Appeals
i. An aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the
Planning Board according to the procedures of
§15.5.3. Judicial Appeal.
2. Site Plan Approval
a. Purpose
i. Site Plan Approval is the administrative review and
approval of a development review application that
is conforming to the provisions of this Ordinance to
15. ADMINISTRATION
Administrative Permits
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 543
address any potential DEVELOPMENT impacts.
ii. The Site Plan Approval process provides
an APPLICANT with the opportunity to submit
architectural, SITE, landscape, and engineering
plans so that compliance to the provisions of this
Ordinance can be determined prior to preparation
of construction documents.
iii. The Site Plan Approval process provides the City
with the opportunity to establish conditions to
address on-SITE or off-SITE impacts of DEVELOPMENT.
b. Applicability
i. Site Plan Approval is required as indicated
elsewhere in this Ordinance.
ii. Approval of a SITE DEVELOPMENT plan authorizes the
BUILDING OFFICIAL to issue a certificate of zoning
compliance for DEVELOPMENT that is otherwise
compliant with the provisions of this Ordinance.
iii. The BUILDING OFFICIAL may not issue a certificate of
zoning compliance for DEVELOPMENT that requires
Site Plan Approval until the Site Plan Approval
process has been completed in accordance with
the provisions of this Article.
c. Authority
i. The review board serving as the decision making
authority for a Site Plan Approval is determined by
zoning district.
d. Procedure
i. Unless otherwise specified, the following review
procedures are required:
a). Step 1: Pre-Submittal Meeting
b). Step 2: Neighborhood Meeting
c). Step 3: Design Review Meeting
d). Step 4: Neighborhood Meeting
e). Step 5: Development Review Application
f). Step 6: Application Review & Staff Report
g). Step 7: Public Notice
h). Step 8: Public Hearing
i). Step 9: Decision
j). Step 10: Appeal Period
k). Step 11: Certification of Decision
l). Step 12: Certificate of Zoning Compliance
ii. The review procedures required for a Site Plan
Approval may, at the discretion of the designated
review board, be conducted simultaneously
with the review procedures required for other
discretionary or administrative permits.
e. Review Criteria
i. The review board shall approve an development
review application requiring Site Plan Approval
upon verifying that the submitted plan conforms
with the provisions of this Ordinance and
demonstrates consistency to the following:
a). The COMPREHENSIVE PLAN and existing policy plans
and standards established by the City.
b). The intent of the zoning district where the
property is located.
c). Mitigation proposed to alleviate any impacts
attributable to the proposed DEVELOPMENT.
d). Considerations indicated elsewhere in this
Ordinance for the required Site Plan Approval.
ii. The review board may reject a application for Site
Plan Approval only when:
a). the submittal fails to furnish adequate
information required for approval;
b). the imposition of reasonable conditions would
not ensure compliance to standards, as
applicable; and/or
c). the submittal, although proper in form, includes
or creates an intractable problem so intrusive
on the needs of the public in one regulated
aspect or another and cannot be adequately
mitigated.
iii. When considering a revision to a previously
approved development review application that
required a Site Plan Approval, the review board
shall limit their review to the proposed changes to
the previously approved application.
f. Conditions
i. The review board may attach conditions and
limitations that it deems necessary in order to
ensure compliance with the Board’s findings and
the standards for granting of a Site Plan Approval.
ii. Conditions must have a rational nexus to potential
impacts of the proposed DEVELOPMENT, and be
roughly proportional, both in nature and extent, to
the impacts of the proposed DEVELOPMENT.
g. Compliance
i. The review board may require the posting of a
bond or other performance guarantee to ensure
compliance with the development review
application and conditions, as approved.
h. Appeals
i. An aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the
Planning Board according to the procedures of
§15.5.3. Judicial Appeal.
3. Thoroughfare Permit
a. Purpose
i. A THOROUGHFARE Permit certifies that the
construction documents for a proposed
THOROUGHFARE conforms with all departmental
standards and City Ordinances.
b. Applicability
i. DEVELOPMENT of any THOROUGHFARE is prohibited until
a THOROUGHFARE Permit has been issued by the City
Engineer.
ii. The City Engineer may not issue a THOROUGHFARE
Permit prior to the issuance of a certificate of
15. ADMINISTRATION
Administrative Permits
544 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
zoning compliance.
iii. The City Engineer may not issue a THOROUGHFARE
Permit if construction documents do not accurately
reflect the following:
a). plans submitted for a development review
application;
b). plans submitted for an approved discretionary
or administrative permit; and
c). conditions attached to any discretionary or
administrative permit.
c. Authority
i. The City Engineer issues all THOROUGHFARE Permits.
d. Procedure
i. Within thirty (30) days after receiving a completed
application for a THOROUGHFARE Permit, the City
Engineer shall issue such permit, or transmit, in
writing, the reasons for failure to issue such permit
to the APPLICANT.
e. Validity
i. Construction must begin within six (6) months
following the issuance of a THOROUGHFARE Permit
and continue towards completion in a continuous
and expeditious manner for the permit to remain
valid.
f. Inspections
i. Submittal of a construction permit application
provides consent, by the APPLICANT, for the City
Engineer, or their designee, to enter upon private
real property to conduct routine inspections as
needed.
g. Appeals
i. Any aggrieved party may appeal an interpretation,
order, requirement, direction, or failure to act by
the City Engineer according to the procedures of
§15.5.2. Administrative Appeal.
4. Civic Space Permit
a. Purpose
i. A Civic Space Permit certifies that the construction
documents for a proposed CIVIC SPACE conforms with
all departmental standards and City Ordinances.
b. Applicability
i. DEVELOPMENT of any CIVIC SPACE is prohibited until a
Civic Space Permit has been issued by the Director
of Public Space & Urban Forestry.
ii. The Director of Public Space & Urban Forestry may
not issue a Civic Space Permit prior to the issuance
of a certificate of zoning compliance.
iii. The Director of Public Space & Urban Forestry
may not issue a Civic Space Permit if construction
documents do not accurately reflect the following:
a). plans submitted for a development review
application;
b). plans submitted for an approved discretionary
or administrative permit; and
c). conditions attached to any discretionary or
administrative permit.
c. Authority
i. The Director of Public Space & Urban Forestry
issues all Civic Space Permits.
d. Procedure
i. Within thirty (30) days after receiving a completed
application for a Civic Space Permit, the Director
of Public Space & Urban Forestry shall issue such
permit, or transmit, in writing, the reasons for
failure to issue such permit to the APPLICANT.
e. Validity
i. Construction must begin within six (6) months
following the issuance of a Civic Space Permit and
continue towards completion in a continuous and
expeditious manner for the permit to remain valid.
f. Inspections
i. Submittal of a Civic Space Permit application
provides consent, by the APPLICANT, for the
Director of Public Space & Urban Forestry, or their
designee, to enter upon private real property to
conduct routine inspections as needed.
g. Appeals
i. Any aggrieved party may appeal an interpretation,
order, requirement, direction, or failure to
act by the Director of Public Space & Urban
Forestry according to the procedures of §15.5.2.
Administrative Appeal.
5. Building Permit
a. Purpose
i. A Building Permit certifies that the construction
documents for a proposed structure conforms with
the Massachusetts State Building Code 780 CMR
and all applicable City Ordinances.
b. Applicability
i. DEVELOPMENT of any LOT is prohibited until a Building
Permit has been issued by the BUILDING OFFICIAL.
ii. The BUILDING OFFICIAL may not issue a Building
Permit prior to the issuance of a certificate of
zoning compliance.
iii. The BUILDING OFFICIAL may not issue a Building
Permit for DEVELOPMENT if construction documents
do not accurately reflect the following:
a). any DEVELOPMENT plan documentation submitted
as part of a development review application.
b). conditions attached to any administrative or
discretionary DEVELOPMENT review approval.
c. Authority
i. The BUILDING OFFICIAL is the decision making
authority for a Building Permit.
d. Procedure
i. Within thirty (30) days after receiving a completed
15. ADMINISTRATION
Administrative Permits
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 545
application for a Building Permit, the BUILDING
OFFICIAL shall issue such permit, or transmit, in
writing, the reasons for failure to issue such permit
to the APPLICANT.
e. Validity
i. Construction must begin within six (6) months
following the issuance of a Building Permit and
continue towards completion in a continuous and
expeditious manner for the permit to remain valid.
f. Inspections
i. Submittal of a Building Permit application provides
consent, by the APPLICANT, for the BUILDING OFFICIAL,
or their designee, to enter upon private real
property to conduct routine inspections as needed.
g. Appeals
i. Any aggrieved party may appeal an interpretation,
order, requirement, direction, or failure to act by
the BUILDING OFFICIAL according to the procedures of
§15.5.2. Administrative Appeal.
ii. Any aggrieved party may appeal an interpretation,
order, requirement, direction, or failure to act by
the BUILDING OFFICIAL according to the procedures of
§15.5.1. Building Code Appeal.
15. ADMINISTRATION
Certificates
546 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
15.4 CERTIFICATES
1. Certificate of Zoning Compliance
a. Purpose
i. A certificate of zoning compliance certifies that
DEVELOPMENT plans conform to the provisions of
this Ordinance and that any additional type of
DEVELOPMENT review required by this Ordinance has
been completed in accordance with the provisions
of this Article.
b. Authority
i. The BUILDING OFFICIAL issues all Certificates of
Zoning Compliance.
c. Applicability
i. All DEVELOPMENT requires a certificate of zoning
compliance.
ii. The BUILDING OFFICIAL may not accept a
development review application that requires a
pre-submittal meeting, a neighborhood meeting, or
design review until those review procedures have
been completed in accordance with the provisions
of this Article.
iii. The BUILDING OFFICIAL may not issue a certificate of
zoning compliance for DEVELOPMENT that requires
a discretionary or administrative permit until that
permit has been granted by the appropriate review
board in accordance with the provisions of this
Article.
iv. The BUILDING OFFICIAL may not issue a Building
Permit, certificate of occupancy, or construction
permit prior to the issuance of a certificate of
zoning compliance.
v. In cases where both a Building Permit and a
certificate of occupancy are required, a certificate
of zoning compliance is only required prior to the
issuance of the Building Permit.
d. Procedure
i. The BUILDING OFFICIAL shall forward development
review applications that require a discretionary or
administrative permit to the appropriate review
board, subject to the applicable procedural
requirements of this Article.
ii. Within ten (10) days after receiving a completed
development review application that does not
require a discretionary or administrative permit, the
BUILDING OFFICIAL shall issue a certificate of zoning
compliance, or transmit, in writing, the reasons for
failure to issue such permit to the APPLICANT.
iii. When considering a revision to a previously
approved development review application, the
BUILDING OFFICIAL shall limit their review to the
proposed changes to the previously approved
application.
e. Validity
i. A certificate of zoning compliance remains valid for
ninety (90) days.
f. Review Criteria
i. The BUILDING OFFICIAL shall approve an application
for certificate of zoning compliance upon verifying
the following:
a). that the submitted plan conforms with the
provisions of this Ordinance;
b). the application is consistent with all prior
approvals for the subject property; and
c). any additional type of administrative or
discretionary DEVELOPMENT review required
by this Ordinance has been completed in
accordance with the provisions of this Article.
g. Inspections
i. Submittal of an application for a certificate of
zoning compliance provides consent, by the
APPLICANT, for the BUILDING OFFICIAL to enter upon
private real property to conduct routine inspections
as needed.
h. Appeals
i. Administrative Appeal
a). An aggrieved party may appeal the decision
of the BUILDING OFFICIAL according to the
procedures of §15.5.2. Administrative Appeal.
2. Certificate of Occupancy
a. Purpose
i. A certificate of occupancy certifies that a building
or structure is safe for occuPATIOn and/or USE
according to all applicable Ordinances and that
proper inspections have been carried out by
the BUILDING OFFICIAL during any construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, or DEMOLITION
activities permitted pursuant to a Building Permit.
b. Applicability
i. No real property may be occupied or USEd and no
existing USE of real property may be changed until
a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the
BUILDING OFFICIAL.
ii. The BUILDING OFFICIAL may not issue a certificate of
occupancy prior to the issuance of a certificate of
zoning compliance.
iii. The BUILDING OFFICIAL may not issue a final
certificate of occupancy DEVELOPMENT that does not
comply to the following:
a). plans submitted for a development review
application;
b). plans submitted for an approved discretionary
or administrative permit; and
c). conditions attached to any discretionary or
administrative permit.
15. ADMINISTRATION
Certificates
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 547
iv. DEVELOPMENT is not considered complete until a final
Certificate of Occupancy is issued.
c. Authority
i. The BUILDING OFFICIAL reviews and approves all
applications for a certificate of occupancy.
d. Procedure
i. The approval or denial of a certificate of occupancy
application is conducted administratively.
ii. Within ten (10) days after final inspection for a
certificate of occupancy, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall
issue such certificate, or transmit, in writing, the
reasons for failure to issue such certificate to the
APPLICANT.
e. Inspections
i. Submittal of a certificate of occupancy application
provides consent, by the APPLICANT, for the BUILDING
OFFICIAL to enter upon private real property to
conduct inspections, as needed, until such
certificate is issued.
f. Appeals
i. Administrative Appeal
a). Any aggrieved party may appeal an
interpretation, order, requirement, direction,
or failure to act by the BUILDING OFFICIAL in
accordance with the procedures of §15.5.2.
Administrative Appeal.
ii. Building Code Appeal
a). Any aggrieved party may appeal an
interpretation, order, requirement, direction, or
failure to act by the BUILDING OFFICIAL according
to the procedures of §15.5.1. Building Code
Appeal.
3. Written Interpretation
a. Purpose
i. A written interpretation is a formal explanation or
clarification of the regulations of this ordinance as
applied to specific cases.
b. Applicability
i. A written interpretation may be requested by the
public only for a pending application for DEVELOPMENT
review.
ii. The BUILDING OFFICIAL may issue, update, or amend
a written interpretation at their own initiative,
without petition from the public.
iii. A written interpretation does not require the
BUILDING OFFICIAL or any review board to reach
a particular decision for any application for
DEVELOPMENT review if the facts of the application,
property, location, or character of the DEVELOPMENT
proposal differ from those stated or assumed in a
previously issued written interpretation.
iv. Written interpretations must be consistent with
the intent and purpose of this Ordinance and may
not contradict or override any provision of this
Ordinance or any other City Ordinances.
v. The BUILDING OFFICIAL shall update or amend any
written interpretation substantive to the findings of
any administrative and judicial appeal.
c. Authority
i. The BUILDING OFFICIAL issues written interpretations.
d. Procedure
i. The issuance of a written interpretation is
conducted administratively.
ii. Within thirty (30) days after receiving a petition for
a written interpretation, the BUILDING OFFICIAL must
a). review the specific provision or provisions to
be interpreted and the facts of the specific
situation concerning the request for an
interpretation;
b). issue, in writing, meaningful explanation or
clarification of the provision in question;
c). file the written interpretation with the Office of
the City Clerk; and
d). post the written interpretation on the City
webSITE.
iii. The BUILDING OFFICIAL may require further facts and
information as are, in their judgment, necessary to
provide a meaningful interpretation of the provision
in question.
e. Appeals
i. Administrative Appeal
a). An aggrieved party may appeal the decision
of the BUILDING OFFICIAL in accordance with the
procedures of §15.5.2. Administrative Appeal.
15. ADMINISTRATION
Appeals
548 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
15.5 APPEALS
1. Building Code Appeal
a. Purpose
i. A building code appeal is a petition to rectify an
interpretation, order, requirement, direction, or
failure to act by the BUILDING OFFICIAL when an
alleged error or misinterpretation has been made
in the enforcement or application of the State
Building Code (780 CMR).
b. Procedure
i. Building code appeals must be filed with the State
Building Code Appeal Board in accordance with the
procedures set forth in M.G.L. Title XX, Chapter
143, Section 100, as amended.
2. Administrative Appeal
a. Purpose
i. An administrative appeal is a petition to rectify a
failure to act, denial of a permit, decision made,
or enforcement action taken by the BUILDING
OFFICIAL or Director of Planning & Zoning in an
administrative DEVELOPMENT review case when an
alleged error or misinterpretation has been made in
the enforcement or application of the provisions of
this Ordinance.
b. Authority
i. The Zoning Board of Appeals reviews and decides
all administrative appeals.
c. Procedure
i. Administrative appeals must be filed with the
Office of the City Clerk within twenty (20) days
after notice is served of an interpretation, order,
requirement, direction, or failure to act by the
BUILDING OFFICIAL or the filing of the decision of a
review board.
ii. The following review procedures are required:
a). Step 1: Development Review Application
b). Step 2: Application Review & Staff Report
c). Step 3: Public Notice
d). Step 4: Public Hearing
e). Step 5: Decision
f). Step 6: Appeal Period
g). Step 7: Certification of Decision
d. Judicial Appeal
i. An aggrieved party may appeal the decision of
the Zoning Board of Appeals according to the
procedures of §15.3. Judicial Appeal.
3. Judicial Appeal
a. Purpose
i. A judicial appeal is a petition to rectify the failure
to act, denial of a permit, decision made, or
enforcement action taken by a review board in a
discretionary DEVELOPMENT review case when an
alleged error or misinterpretation has been made in
the enforcement or application of the provisions of
this Ordinance.
b. Jurisdiction
i. Judicial appeals can be filed per MGL 40A, Sec. 17.
c. Procedure
i. Judicial appeals must be filed within twenty (20)
days after the filing of a decision with the Office of
the City Clerk.
15. ADMINISTRATION
Legislative Procedures
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 549
15.6 LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURES
1. Land Conveyance
a. Purpose
i. A LAND CONVEYANCE petition is a request for the City
to accept a voluntary offering of land for public
dedication.
b. Applicability
i. The approval or denial of a LAND CONVEYANCE petition
is a discretionary legislative act, subject to the
procedures of M.G.L 30B and other Massachusetts
law.
c. Authority
i. The City Council reviews and decides all LAND
CONVEYANCE petitions.
d. Procedure
i. Within fourteen (14) days of receiving a LAND
CONVEYANCE petition, the City Council must submit
the petition and accompanying plan documentation
to the Planning Board for review.
ii. Within sixty-five (65) days after submittal to the
Planning Board, the City Council must review the
petition and hold a public hearing.
iii. Within ninety (90) days of the closing of the public
hearing, the City Council must vote to accept or
reject the petition to convey the voluntary offering
of land for public dedication.
iv. If no vote is taken within ninety (90) days, the
review procedure must be started de novo.
v. The City Council shall abstain from taking a vote
until:
a). the Planning Board has submitted a report with
recommendations concerning the petition; or
b). twenty-one (21) days after the closing of the
public hearing without the Planning Board
submitting its report.
vi. A two-thirds vote by all of the members of the City
Council is required to accept a voluntary offering of
land for public dedication.
e. Recommendation
i. In developing its recommendation to the City
Council, the Planning Board shall make findings
considering, at least, each of the following:
a). the adopted COMPREHENSIVE PLAN of the City
of Somerville and existing policy, plans, and
standards established by the City, including the
OPEN SPACE & Recreation Plan.
b). the purpose of the district where the property
is located and of this Ordinance in general.
c). any demonstrated public interest in ownership
and the assumption of maintenance
responsibility for the land in question.
f. Conditions
i. The Planning Board may make recommendations
to the City Council for conditions that it deems
within the public interest in accepting a petition to
convey land to the City of Somerville.
2. Zoning Text Amendment
a. Purpose
i. A text amendment petition is a request to change
the provisions of the Somerville Zoning Ordinance
in response to changes in City policy or real world
conditions.
b. Applicability
i. The approval or denial of a zoning text amendment
is a discretionary legislative act.
c. Authority
i. The City Council reviews and decides petitions to
amend this Ordinance.
ii. The Director of Planning & Zoning may update
figures and photos; correct scriveners errors,
table and figure numbers, capitalization of defined
words, and cross references; and add or correct
street names or districts labels for maps without
City Council approval.
d. Procedure
i. Petitions for a text amendment may be submitted
by:
a). any member(s) of the City Council;
b). the Mayor;
c). the Zoning Board of Appeals;
d). the Planning Board;
e). a PROPERTY OWNER seeking to change the
entitlement of his/her own property; or
f). ten (10) registered voters in the City of
Somerville.
ii. Within fourteen (14) days of receiving a petition
to amend the text of this Ordinance, the City
Council must submit the petition and the proposed
changes, additions, or repeal of language to the
Planning Board for review.
iii. Within sixty-five (65) days after submittal to the
Planning Board, the City Council must review the
petition and hold a public hearing.
iv. Within ninety (90) days of the closing of the public
hearing, the City Council must vote to adopt,
reject, or amend and adopt the text amendment
petition.
v. If no vote is taken within ninety (90) days, the
review procedure must be started de novo.
vi. The City Council shall abstain from taking a vote
until:
a). the Planning Board has submitted a report with
recommendations concerning the petition; or
b). twenty-one (21) days after the closing of the
15. ADMINISTRATION
Legislative Procedures
550 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
public hearing without the Planning Board
submitting their report.
vii. Proposed amendments that are denied by the City
Council will not be reconsidered for a minimum of
two (2) years from the date final action was taken
by the Board, unless the proposed amendment is
supported by a positive recommendation from the
Planning Board.
e. Recommendation
i. In developing its recommendation to the City
Council, the Planning Board shall make findings
considering, at least, each of the following:
a). the adopted COMPREHENSIVE PLAN of the City
of Somerville and existing policy plans and
standards established by the City, including the
OPEN SPACE & Recreation Plan.
b). the purpose of the district where the property
is located and of this Ordinance in general.
c). any demonstrated public interest in ownership
and the assumption of maintenance
responsibility for the land in question.
3. Zoning Map Amendment
a. Purpose
i. A map amendment petition is a request to change
how zoning districts are mapped over real property
in response to changes in City policy or real world
conditions.
b. Applicability
i. The approval or denial of a zoning map amendment
is a discretionary legislative act.
c. Authority
i. The City Council reviews and decides petitions to
amend the Official Zoning Map.
d. Procedure
i. Petitions may be submitted by:
a). any member(s) of the City Council;
b). the Mayor;
c). the Zoning Board of Appeals;
d). the Planning Board;
e). a PROPERTY OWNER seeking to change the
entitlement of his/her own property; and
f). ten (10) registered voters in the City of
Somerville.
ii. Within fourteen (14) days of receiving a petition to
amend the Official Zoning Map, the City Council
must submit the petition and the proposed
changes, additions, or repeal of language to the
Planning Board for review.
iii. Within sixty-five (65) days after submittal to the
Planning Board, the City Council must review the
petition and hold a public hearing.
iv. Within ninety (90) days of the closing of the public
hearing, the City Council must vote to adopt,
reject, or amend and adopt the map amendment
petition.
v. If no vote is taken within ninety (90) days, the
review procedure must be started de novo.
vi. The City Council shall abstain from taking a vote
until:
a). the Planning Board has submitted a report with
recommendations concerning the petition; or
b). twenty-one (21) days after the closing of the
public hearing without the Planning Board
submitting its report.
vii. Proposed amendments that are denied by the City
Council will not be reconsidered for a minimum of
two (2) years from the date final action was taken
by the Board, unless the proposed amendment is
supported by a positive recommendation from the
Planning Board.
e. Recommendation
i. In developing its recommendation to the City
Council, the Planning Board shall make findings
considering, at least, each of the following:
a). the adopted COMPREHENSIVE PLAN of the City
of Somerville and existing policy plans and
standards established by the City;
b). the purpose of this Ordinance in general; and
c). the intent and purpose of the district(s) that
would be applied to the properties in question.
15. ADMINISTRATION
Review Boards & Officials
12/16/19 SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE | 551
15.7 REVIEW BOARDS & OFFICIALS
1. Building Official
a. Responsibilities
i. The BUILDING OFFICIAL is the enforcement authority
for this Ordinance.
ii. The BUILDING OFFICIAL may issue any enforcement
order, violation notice, request for compliance, or
other correspondence as necessary and institute
any appropriate inspection, action, or proceeding in
the name of the City of Somerville to:
a). prevent the unlawful ERECTion, relocation,
extension, enlargement, or alteration of any
structure or SIGN;
b). prevent the unlawful USE or occupancy of real
property;
c). prevent any illegal act, business, or USE in or
about any premises; and
d). prevent, correct, restrain, or abate violations of
this Ordinance.
iii. The BUILDING OFFICIAL establishes application forms,
fees, and requirements for DEVELOPMENT review
in collaboration with the Director of Planning &
Zoning and the review boards.
iv. The BUILDING OFFICIAL may classify certain home
improvements intended to keep an existing
structure in good physical condition to be NORMAL
MAINTENANCE, as defined in this Ordinance
b. Enforcement Actions
i. The BUILDING OFFICIAL shall not issue any written
interpretation, certificate of zoning compliance,
Building Permit, or certificate of occupancy in
violation of this Ordinance.
ii. Any written interpretation, certificate of zoning
compliance, Building Permit, or certificate of
occupancy may be revoked upon finding any
material misstatement of fact or misrepresentation
in plans or specifications by an APPLICANT.
iii. Upon finding evidence of a violation of this
Ordinance, the BUILDING OFFICIAL shall give written
notice to the PROPERTY OWNER demanding that the
violation be corrected or abated within a time
period deemed appropriate by the BUILDING OFFICIAL.
iv. The BUILDING OFFICIAL shall revoke any existing
certificate of occupancy or Building Permit already
in effect for any property that is in violation of
this Ordinance if that violation is not corrected or
abated within the required time period.
2. Zoning Board of Appeals
a. Establishment
i. The Zoning Board of Appeals is established, in
accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 12,
as amended.
b. Membership
i. The Mayor shall appoint five (5) members and two
(2) alternate members, subject to confirmation of
the City Council.
ii. Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals are
appointed for five (5) year terms.
c. Responsibilities
i. The Zoning Board of Appeals is the decision
making authority for discretionary and
administrative permitting as indicated elsewhere in
this Ordinance.
ii. The Zoning Board of Appeals is the decision
making authority for administrative appeals.
d. Board Rules
i. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall elect, at least,
a chair and a vice chair on an annual basis from
among its own number.
ii. The chair of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
designate an alternate member to sit in the place
of any member incapacitated by personal interest,
inability to act, or absence when necessary.
iii. The Zoning Board of Appeals, or its designee, shall
keep minutes of its proceedings.
iv. The Zoning Board of Appeals may adopt rules of
procedure and policy as it deems necessary to
conduct its affairs, including but not limited to the
following subjects:
a). rules and procedures governing applications
and fees, including required written and
graphical information;
b). rules and procedures pertaining to the
DEVELOPMENT review process;
c). rules and procedures of a minor a Site Plan
Approval process for DEVELOPMENT activities that
do not require the procedural steps for Site
Plan Approval, but that are still deserving of
plan review.
v. The adoption or amendment of rules of procedure
and policy is conducted administratively at a public
meeting.
3. Planning Board
a. Establishment
i. The Planning board is established by Chapter 2,
Article 5, Division 5 of the City of Somerville Code
of Ordinances, as authorized by M.G.L. Chapter 41,
Section 81A-81J, as amended.
b. MembersHIP
i. The Mayor shall appoint five (5) members and two
(2) alternate members, subject to confirmation by
the City Council.
ii. Members of the Planning Board are appointed for
15. ADMINISTRATION
Review Boards & Officials
552 | SOMERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE 12/16/19
three (3) year terms.
iii. The Planning Board, subject to appropriation and
subject to the approval of the Mayor, may employ
such technical and other assistants as may be
necessary to perform its duties.
c. Responsibilities
i. The Planning Board is the decision making
authority for discretionary or administrative permits
as indicated elsewhere in this Ordinance.
ii. The Planning Board, or its designee, is responsible
for the authoring, adoption, and periodic updating
of the COMPREHENSIVE PLAN for the City of Somerville
per M.G.L. 41, 81D.
iii. The Planning Board, or its designee, drafts the
official map of the City of Somerville per M.G.L.
41, 81E-J.
iv. The Planning Board provides advice and
recommendations to the City Council concerning
the following:
a). proposed amendments to the text or maps of
the Somerville Zoning Ordinance;
b). proposed changes to the official map of the
City of Somerville; and
c). the laying out, alteration, relocation, or
discontinuance of THOROUGHFAREs; and
d). the proposed conveyance of land to the City.
v. The Planning Board adopts an urban design
framework each for sub area within the Master
Planned DEVELOPMENT overlay district.
d. Board Rules
i. The Planning Board shall elect, at least, a chair and
a vice-chair on an annual basis from among its own
number.
ii. The chair of the Planning Board shall designate
an alternate member to sit in the place of any
member incapacitated by personal interest,
inability to act, or absence when necessary.
iii. The Planning Board, or its designee, shall keep
minutes of its proceedings.
iv. The Planning Board may adopt rules of procedure
and policy as it deems necessary to conduct its
affairs, including but not limited to the following
subjects:
a). rules and procedures governing applications
and fees, including required written and
graphical information;
b). rules and procedures pertaining to the
DEVELOPMENT review process;
c). rules and procedures for a minor a Site Plan
Approval process for DEVELOPMENT activities that
do not require the procedural steps for Site
Plan Approval, but that are still deserving of
plan review.
d). rules and procedures for SUBDIVISION, LOT SPLITs,
LOT MERGERs, and LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTs.
v. The adoption or amendment of rules of procedure
and policy is conducted administratively at a public
meeting.
4. Urban Design Commission
a. Establishment
i. This section establishes the Urban Design
Commission.
b. MembersHIP
i. The Mayor shall appoint five (5) members and two
(2) alternate members, subject to confirmation by
the City Council.
ii. Members of the Urban Design Comission are
appointed for five (5) year terms.
iii. Members and alternate members of the Urban
Design Commission must have professional
degrees or experience in architecture, urban
design, transportation engineering, landscape
architecture, or urban planning.
c. Responsibilities
i. The Urban Design Commission provides advice
and recommendations to the Zoning Board of
Appeals and Planning Board concerning how the
design of DEVELOPMENT projects affects the quality of
Somerville’s PUBLIC REALM.
ii. The Urban Design Commission provides advice
and recommendations to Staff when required by
a condition of a discretionary or administrative
DEVELOPMENT review decision.
d. Board Rules
i. The Director of Planning & Zoning and the
Director of PUBLIC REALM & Urban Foresty, or
their designee(s), shall serve as non-voting,
administrative co-chairs.
ii. The co-chairs of the Urban Design Commission
shall designate an alternate member to sit in the
place of any member incapacitated by personal
interest, inability to act, or absence when
necessary.
iii. The Urban Design Commission, or its designee,
shall keep minutes of its proceedings.
iv. The Urban Design Commission may adopt rules
of procedure and policy as it deems necessary to
conduct its affairs, including but not limited to the
following subjects:
a). rules and procedures pertaining to the
design review process, including information
and materials provided by APPLICANTs and
requirements for presentations made to the
commission.
v. The adoption or amendment of rules of procedure
and policy is conducted administratively at a public
meeting.
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
19
11
17 18
10 12
13 14 15 16
Date: December 12, 2019
The information contained in this map is compiled from
multiple sources and is believed to be accurate but
accuracy is not guaranteed. This map does not replace
information obtained by consulting the information's
official source or originating City department. In no event
shall the City of Somerville, Massachusetts be liable for
any damages, direct or consequential, from the use of the
information contained in this map.
The proposed Zoning Map of the City of
Somerville is established by the proposed
Section 1.3.
Residential Districts
(Article 3)
Mixed Use Districts
(Article 4)
Commercial Districts
(Article 6)
High Rise District
(Article 5)
Special Districts
(Article 7)
Civic (CIV)
Mid Rise 6 (MR6)
Mid Rise 5 (MR5)
Mid Rise 4 (MR4)
Mid Rise 3 (MR3)
Urban Residential
(UR)
Neighborhood Residential
(NR) High Rise (HR)
Fabrication (FAB)
Commercial Core 4 (CC4)
Commercial Core 5 (CC5)
Commercial Industry (CI)
Commercial Business (CB)
For overlay maps
see Article 8
²
Map not to scale.
PROPOSED
OFFICIAL
ZONING MAP
(NOT ADOPTED)
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE
MASSACHUSETTS
Commercial Core 3 (CC3)
Powderhouse School
(PS)
Assembly Square
(ASMD)
Tufts University
(TU)
MPD Overlay
SB Overlay
1 ¬«16
CIV
CIV
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
FAB
NR
NR
NR
NR
CB
NR
NR
NR
CIV
MR3
MR3
NR NR NR
NORTH ST
GORDON ST
WOODS AVE
FAIRFAX ST
ALEWIF E BROOK PKWY
HIGH ST
MYSTIC VALLEY PKWY
BOSTON AVE
STERLING ST
IRVINGTON RD
CAPEN ST
CAPEN CT
W Q UINCY ST
MEDFORD
ARLINGTON
¬«16
NR
UR
MR3
CIV
FAB
CB
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
OFFICIAL PROPOSED
ZONING
(UNADOPTED)
²
0 250 500
Feet
Date: December 12, 2019
2
CIV
NR
UR
NR
UR NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CB
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
CIV
UR NR
UR
NR
UR
NR
UR
UR
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
NR
UR
NR
UR
CIV
UR
UR
UR
UR
CIV
MR4
MR3
MR3
MR4
CIV
MR3
MR3
NR
UR
UR
NR
CB
CIV
MR3
BROADWAY
NORTH ST
VICTORIA ST
WARE ST
HIGH ST
RAYMOND AVE
POWDER HOUSE BLVD
CURTIS ST
CONWELL AVE
ALEWIFE BROOK PKWY
ENDICOTT AVE
GARRISON AVE
STERLING ST
FARRAGUT AVE
WATERHOUSE ST
W A DAMS ST
HILLSDALE RD
HOOKER AVE
CLARENDON AVE
NEWBURY ST
RUSSELL RD
FAIRFAX ST
BAILEY ST
HILL S T
HAMILTON RD
FAIRMOUNT AVE
BELKNAP ST
D OW ST
BARTON ST
MOORE ST
WESTON AVE
HARDAN RD
DICKSON ST
WATSON ST
CURTIS AVE
W QUINCY ST COLLEGE HILLRD
WOODS AVE
ARLINGTON
CAMBRIDGE
MEDFORD
SB Overlay
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
CIV
CB
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
OFFICIAL PROPOSED
ZONING
(UNADOPTED)
²
0 250 500
Feet
Date: December 12, 2019
3
TU
TU
TU
NR NR
TU
TU
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
TU
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
TU
NR
NR
TU
CIV
NR
PS
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CB
CIV
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
MR3
MR3
MR4
NR
NR
NR
NR
MR3
CIV
NR
MR3
MR4
MR4
CURTIS ST
PACKARD AVE
POWDER HOUSE BLVD
BROADWAY
TALBOT AVE
OSSIPEE RD
COLLEGE AVE
PROFESSORS ROW
PEARSON RD
ELECTRIC AVE
BROMFIELD RD
LATIN WAY
MASON ST
TEELE AVE
HILLSDALE RD
CHETWYND RD
SUNSET RD
UPLAND RD
LOWER CAMPUS RD
CURTIS AVE
SAWYER AVE
WHITMAN ST
WHITFIELD RD
CONWELL AVE
LOVELL ST
BURN HAM ST
RAYMOND AVE
DEARBORN RD
WARNER ST
WARE ST
LEONARD ST
WESTMINSTER ST
MEDFORD
SB Overlay
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
CIV
CB
TU
PS
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
OFFICIAL PROPOSED
ZONING
(UNADOPTED)
²
0 250 500
Feet
Date: December 12, 2019
4
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
MR3
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
UR
NR
CIV
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR NR
CB
MR3
MR4
UR
UR
NR
UR
MR4
MR3
MR3
MR4
UR
CIV
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR MR3
UR MR3
FAB
MR3
UR
NR
NR
NEWBURY ST
HOLLAND ST
CAMERON AVE
BROADWAY
CLARENDON AVE
ELMWOOD ST
MOORE ST
HOOKER AVE
ENDICOTTAVE
MEAD ST
CLAREMON ST
FARRAGUT AVE
WESTON AVE
GORHAM ST
MALVERN AVE
GLENDALE AVE
KINGSTON ST
CURTIS ST
YORKTOWN ST
CAMPBELL PARK
GARRISON AVE
HARRISON RD
ELMWOOD TER
CAMBRIDGE
ARLINGTON
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
CIV
FAB
CB
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
OFFICIAL PROPOSED
ZONING
(UNADOPTED)
²
0 250 500
Feet
Date: December 12, 2019
5
TU
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
CB
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CC4
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
PS
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
MR4
CC4
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
MR4
NR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
MR4
NR
CIV
MR4
MR3
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CC4
CIV
MR4
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
CC4
NR
NR
MR4
CIV
NR
UR
NR
CIV
NR
MR3
UR
MR4
NR
MR4
MR4
UR
MR4
FAB
UR
CIV
MR4
MR3
MR4
NR
CC4
NR
CC3
UR
MR3
MR6
MR4
UR
UR
CC4
MR3
CC4
UR
CIV
UR
MR3
CIV
MR4
UR
CIV
MR4
MR3
MR3
UR
MR3
UR
MR4
MR4
UR
UR
MR4
MR3
NR
NR
CIV
MR4
NR
UR
UR
FAB
CIV
MR3
MR3
MR4
MR3
NR
NR
CIV
MR3
NR
NR
NR
MR3
MR4
MR3
NR UR
MR4
MR4
MR4
NR
BROADWAY
HOLLAND ST
WILLOW AVE
MORRISON AVE
KIDDER AVE
DAY ST
ELM ST
IRVING ST
LIBERTY AVE
JOSEPHINE AVE
WALLACE ST
HALL AVE
ROGER S AVE
GROVE ST
LOWDEN AVE
PEARSON RD
DOVER ST
CHANDLER ST
BAY STATE AVE
JAY ST
WINSLOW AVE
ELECTRIC AVE
SIMPSON AVE
ORCHARD ST
POWDER HOUSE BLVD
PAULINA ST
MASON ST
COLLEGE AVE
HIGHLAND RD
GORHAM ST
MALLET ST
LEXINGTON AVE
WALKER ST
MEACHAM RD
BROMFIELD RD
OSSIPEE RD
CHESTER ST
HIGHLAND AVE
WEST ST
FOSKETT ST
WHITMAN ST
PARK AVE
APPLETON ST
PACKARD AVE
FRANCESCA AVE
ELMWOOD ST
BURNHAM ST
WARNER ST
KINGSTON ST
WINTER ST
BILLINGHAM ST
LEONARD ST
LOVELL ST
CUTTER AVE
CORINTHIAN RD
CLIF TO N ST
HAWTHORNE ST
HOWARD ST
THORNDIKE ST
CAMERON AVE
BUENA VISTA RD
HERBER T ST
NEWBERNE ST
CHAPEL ST
WHIPPLE ST
HENRY AVE
KENWOOD ST
PEARSON AVE
CAMPBEL L PARK
BOWERS AVE
PO WDER HOU SE TER
WESTMINSTER ST
CADY AVE
LESLEY AVE
LIBERTY RD
VILLA AVE
DAVIS SQ
LESTER TER
MORRISON PL
COLLEGE AVE
BROADWAY
MEDFORD
CAMBRIDGE
SB
Overlay
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
MR6
CIV
FAB
CC4
CB
TU
PS
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
OFFICIAL PROPOSED
ZONING
(UNADOPTED)
²
0 250 500
Feet
Date: December 12, 2019
6
NR
CIV
NR
CIV
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CIV NR
NR
UR
UR
MR4
MR4
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
UR
UR
MR4
CIV
UR
UR
UR
NR
NR
UR
NR
UR
NR
CIV
CC5
UR
MR4
UR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
UR
UR
MR4
NR
MR4
MR4
MR4
FAB
NR
NR
UR
MR4
NR
MR4
NR
MR4
NR
MR4
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
NR
FAB
FAB
MR4
CIV
MR3
MR4
CIV
UR NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
BROADWAY
CEDAR ST
BOSTON AVE
MEDFORD ST
HIGHLAND RD
PEARSON AV E
LOWELL ST
ROGERS AVE
HINCKLEY ST
PRICHARD AVE
TRULL ST
BROADWAY TER
KIDDER AVE
AD AMS ST
MAIN ST
PARTR IDGE AVE
CLYDE ST
BARTLETT ST
GLENWOOD RD
MURDOCK ST
FISK AVE
FRANEY RD
NASHUA ST
JOSEPHINE AVE
MORRISON AVE
WILTON ST
CENTRAL ST
CHARLES E RYAN RD
FREMONT ST
WARWICK ST
RICHARDSON ST
NORWOOD AVE
VINAL ST
CUTLER ST
LOWELL TER
MEDFORD
SB Overlay
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
CIV
FAB
CC5
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
OFFICIAL PROPOSED
ZONING
(UNADOPTED)
²
0 250 500
Feet
Date: December 12, 2019
7
I-93 S
I-93 N
HEATH ST
BAILEY RD
JAQUES ST
MYSTIC AVE
TEN HILLS RD
TEMPLE RD
FELLSWAY
PURITAN RD
MAIN ST
MORELAND ST
BROADWAY
PUTNAM RD
TEMPLE ST
FREMONT ST
MEACHAM ST
EDGAR AVE
BO ND ST
ASH AVE
E ALBION ST
SYDNEY ST
GOVERNOR WINTHROP RD
DERBY ST
MEMORIAL RD
FENWICK ST
SHORE DR
CENTRA L ST
GRANT ST
BROADWAY TER
RIVER RD
TAYLOR ST
CANAL LN
CENTURY ST
CONNORS DR
MIDDLESEX AVE
MELVILLE RD
CREST HILL RD
DOUGLAS AVE
MT VERNON AVE
PRIVATE DRIVE
FREMONT ST
FELLSW AY
UR
UR
NR
CIV
NR
UR
CIV
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
ASMD
NR
UR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
UR
MR5
UR
UR
UR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
UR
UR
MR4
NR
NR
UR
UR
NR
NR
NR
MR5
CIV
NR MR5
MR5
NR
NR
NR
UR
UR
MR5
MR3
NR
NR
UR
UR
MR4
UR
NR
MR5
CIV
UR NR
MEDFORD
§¨¦93 §¨¦93
¬«38
¬«28
¬«28
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
MR5
CIV
ASMD
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
OFFICIAL PROPOSED
ZONING
(UNADOPTED)
²
0 250 500
Feet
Date: December 12, 2019
8
FELLSWAY
CANAL ST
ARTISAN WAY
TEN HILLS RD
SHOR E D R
MIDDLESEX AVE
GREAT RIVER RD
NOONAN PL
ASSEMBLY ROW
GRAND UNION BLVD
CUMMINGS ST
ASSEMBLY ROW
GREAT RIVER RD
FELLSWAY
GRAND UNION BLVD
MEDFORD
EVERETT
ASMD
ASMD
CIV
CIV
ASMD
NR
CIV
CIV
NR
NR
NR
¬«28
¬«28
NR
CIV
ASMD
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
OFFICIAL PROPOSED
ZONING
(UNADOPTED)
²
0 250 500
Feet
Date: December 12, 2019
9
ELM ST
SUMMER ST
CEDAR ST
WILLOW AVE
CHERR Y ST
HANC OCK S T
DAY ST
LINDEN AVE
ORCHARD ST
MORRISON A VE
PORTER ST
LEXINGTON AVE
RUSSELL ST
CHESTER ST
BANKS ST
DOVER ST
GROVE ST
SOMERVILLE AVE
HALL ST
WEST ST
HAWTHORNE ST
BURNSIDE AVE
SPENCER AVE
ST JAMES AVE
WINDSOR RD
HIGH LAND RD
HIGHLAND AVE
COTTAGE AVE
ASHL AND ST
ELSTON ST
CUTTER AVE
CHARNWOOD RD
WHITE ST
LESLEY AVE ROGERS AVE
SARTWELL AVE
MOSSLAND ST
HENRY AVE
WINDOM ST
HERBERT ST
GUSSIE TER
WHIPPLE ST
CEDAR AVE
PEARSON AVE
BOWERS AVE
HOLYOKE RD
MILTON ST
WHITE ST PL
JOSEPHINE AVE
NEW BERNEST
WINSLOW AVE
ACADIA PARK
MEACHAM RD
LINDEN PL
DAVIS SQ
OLIVE AVE
GOULD AVE
PARKER PL
WADE CT
CARVER ST
FAIRLEE ST
GILSON TER
GOVE CT
ROSELAND ST
BEACON TER
ELLINGT ON RD
STEEVES CIR
PRIVATE DRIVE
CEDAR ST PL
ELM ST
CAMBRIDGE
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
NR NR
NR
NR
CC4
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
MR4
NR
NR
NR
MR4
NR
NR
NR
NR
MR4
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
CC4
NR
NR
NR
MR4
UR
NR
MR4
NR
MR4
NR NR
NR
MR4
MR4
UR
CIV
NR
NR
NR
UR
MR4
MR4
MR3
NR
UR
UR
MR3 CC4
UR
UR
MR4
MR3
UR
UR
UR
MR3
CC4
FAB
NR
NR
NR
UR
UR
UR
UR
MR3
UR
NR
NR
MR4
MR3
NR
FAB
MR3
MR3
MR3
UR
NR
MR4
MR3
MR4
MR3
MR4
MR4
MR3
MR3
MR4
MR3
UR
MR3
CIV
MR4
NR
MR3
MR4
UR
MR3
NR
SB Overlay
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
CIV
FAB
CC4
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
OFFICIAL PROPOSED
ZONING
(UNADOPTED)
²
0 250 500
Feet
Date: December 12, 2019
10 LOWELL ST
HIGHLAND AVE
C ENTRAL ST
ALBION ST
HUDSON ST
CEDAR ST
SUMMER ST
MEDFORD ST
PO RTER ST
SYC AMO RE ST
ALPINE ST
BARTLETT ST
VERNON ST
BEL MONT ST
OXFORD ST
TRU LL ST
BENTON RD
GLENWOOD R D
ADAMS ST
PARTRIDGE AVE
CRAI GIE ST
BROADWAY
MADISON ST
CLYDE ST
TENNYSON ST
CROWN ST
LINDE N AVE
AMES ST
LEE ST
BERKELEY ST
TOWER ST
WARWICK ST
GIBBENS ST
NASHUA ST
MONTROSE ST
BOSTON AVE
MURDOCK ST
BRASTOW AVE
ROBINSON ST
MORRISON AVE
BROADWAY TER
WILTON ST
HINCKLEY ST
RICHDALE AVE
SCHOOL ST
CROCKER ST
CAMBRIA ST
PRICHARD AVE
PRINCETON ST
PEARSON AV E
FORSTER ST
H END ERSON ST
AVON ST
LEXINGTON AVE
SPRING HILL TER
SILVEY PL
WESTWOOD RD
PEMBROKE ST
SPENCER AVE
WALDO ST
HIGHLAND R D
RICHARDSON ST
CONWELL ST
MINER ST
SPRING ST
CEDAR AVE
GUSSIE TER
WILLOUGHBY ST
TRULL LN
THU RSTON ST
BROWNING RD
EASTMAN RD
HERSEY ST
VINAL ST
MOUNTAIN AVE
JEROME ST
CENTRAL RD
CUTLER ST
PORTER AVE
MAXWELLS GREEN
ALBION PL
GOULD AVE
IBBETSON ST
CARVER ST
PRIVATE DRI VE
LOWELL TER
HILLSIDE CIR
LOWELL CIR
ALBION CT
PETERSON TER
NEWMAN PL
DIRENZO TER
ALBION TER
BELLEVUE TER
PRIVATE DRIVE
PRIVATE DRIVE
PRIVATE DRIVE
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
FAB
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
CIV
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
UR
CIV
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
UR
UR
NR
NR
UR
NR
UR
NR
CIV
MR4
CIV
NR
NR
NR
UR
UR
NR
NR
UR
UR
MR5
UR
NR NR
MR4
NR
CIV
UR
NR
NR
NR
MR4
UR
NR
UR
NR
NR
UR
FAB
UR
CIV
UR
NR
NR
CIV
UR
UR
MR3
UR
MR4
UR
MR4
UR
UR
NR
NR
UR
UR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
UR
MR4
NR
NR
MR4
UR
NR
MR4
UR
MR3
CIV
NR UR
UR
CIV
MR3
MR4
UR
NR
UR
UR
UR
NR
MR4
MR3
CIV
NR
UR
NR
NR
UR
MR4
MR3
NR
NR
FAB
MR3
MR3
UR
CIV
NR
MR3
MR3
MR4
NR
NR
MR3
NR
NR NR
NR
MR3
NR
SB Overlay
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
MR5
CIV
FAB
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
OFFICIAL PROPOSED
ZONING
(UNADOPTED)
²
0 250 500
Feet
Date: December 12, 2019
11
BROADWAY
I-93 S
I-93 N
SCHOOL ST
JAQUES ST
MCGRATH HWY
MEDFORD ST
PEARL ST
HEATH ST
WALN UT ST
GRANT ST
TEMPLE ST
MARSHALL ST
FELLSWAY W
DERBY ST
TH URSTON ST
WHEATLAND ST
MYSTIC AVE
OTIS ST
DARTMOUTH S T
SYCAMORE ST
CROSS S T
BAILEY RD
DANA ST
FELLSWAY
RUSH ST
BOND ST
MAIN ST
GARFIELD AVE
BONAIR ST
BRADLEY ST
SYDNEY ST
GLEN ST
EVERGREEN AVE
SEWALL ST
EVERETT AVE
SARGENTAVE
FEN WICK ST
CROSS ST E
HIGHLAND AVE
TEN HILLS RD
BROOK ST
MELVIN ST
HOWE ST
RADCLIFFE RD
LEE ST
WESLEY ST
RICHDALE AVE
BLAKELEY AVE
JACKSON RD
CENTRAL ST
WIGGLESWORTH ST
EDMANDS ST
AUTUMN ST
EDGAR AVE
BROADWAY TER
BROWNING RD
JAMES ST
MEMORIAL RD
STICKNEY AVE
MONTROSE ST
OAKLAND AVE
TAYLOR ST
MADISON ST
PURITAN RD
VIRGINIA ST
MACARTHUR ST
GILMAN TER
FORSTER ST
KENSINGTON AVE
JASPER ST
TEMPLE RD
MAPLE AVE
GOVERNOR WINTHROP RD
ESSEX ST
LANGMAID AVE
GILMAN ST
MINNESOTA AVE
SUNNYSIDE AVE
McGREGOR AVE
WELLINGTON AVE
SKILTON AVE
ROYCE PL
ELLSWORTH ST
PEARL ST PL
FAIRVIEW TER
MORTIMER PL
CROSS ST PL
WINTER HILL CIR
BRADFORD AVE
SELLON PL
BISHOP PL
FELLSWAY
THURSTON ST
OTIS ST
BONAIR ST
EVERGREEN AVE
§¨¦93
§¨¦93
¬«28
¬«38
¬«28
CIV
CIV
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
CB
CB
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
UR
NR NR
CIV
ASMD
NR NR
UR
NR
NR
CIV
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
MR5
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
UR
UR
NR
MR5
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
MR5
NR
MR4
NR
UR
NR
NR
MR3
UR
CIV
MR5
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
UR
MR5
MR5
NR
NR
NR
UR
FAB
MR4
CIV
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
UR
NR
UR
NR
UR
NR
UR
NR
MR5
MR5
NR
UR
UR
MR5
NR UR
MR5
MR4
UR
NR
NR
MR5
UR
NR
MR5
MR5
NR
MR5
UR
UR
UR
UR
UR
UR
MR5
CIV
MR5
NR
MR5
MR4
MR3
MR4
NR
UR
MR5
NR
MR4
UR
CIV
NR
NR
NR
MR5
UR
NR
MR5
NR
CIV
MR4
MR5
MR3
NR
UR
MR4
MR5
NR
FAB
MR3
MR3
NR
MR5
MR5
MR4
MR3
UR
UR
FAB
MR5
UR
CIV
CIV UR UR
UR
CIV
NR
FAB
NR
MR3
MR4
MR3
MR5
MR3
NR
MR3
MR3
MR3 NR
NR
MR3
MR3
MR3
MR3
CIV
NR
UR
MR3
NR
NR
SB Overlay
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
MR5
CIV
FAB
CB
ASMD
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
OFFICIAL PROPOSED
ZONING
(UNADOPTED)
²
0 250 500
Feet
Date: December 12, 2019
12
I-93 S
I-93 N
MYSTIC AVE
BROADWAY
FOLEY ST
ASSEMBLY SQ DR
GRAND UNION BLVD
FELLSWAY
REVOLUTION DR
GLEN ST
PENNSYLVANIA AVE
CANAL ST
ARTISAN WAY
GREAT RIVER RD
CROSS ST E
SHERMAN S T
AUSTIN ST
CUTTER ST
ASSEMBLY ROW
GARFIELD AVE
RUSH ST
ILLINOIS AVE
MICHIG AN AVE
MINNESO TA AVE
INDIANA AVE
WISCONSIN AVE
CUMMINGS ST
NOONAN PL
MIDDLESEX AVE
FRANKLIN S T
MAINE TER
HATH ORN ST
N UNION ST
MCGRATH HWY
BROOK ST
BENEDICT ST
LINCOLN ST
MAINE AVE
BROADWAY PL
KENSINGTON AVE
ALFRED A LOMBARDI WAY
CONNECTICUT AVE
RHODE ISLAND AVE
BISHOP PL
MYSTIC AVE
ASSEMBLY ROW
BROADWAY
ASSEMBLY SQ DR
ASSEMBLY ROW
FELLSWAY
BOSTON
EVERETT
MEDFORD
§¨¦93
§¨¦93
¬«38
¬«28
¬«38
ASMD
CI
CIV
ASMD
ASMD
ASMD
NR
NR
CB
CIV
NR
UR
NR NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CB
MR6
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
ASMD
MR5
FAB
MR5
ASMD
NR
NR
MR6
MR5
NR
MR4
MR5
CIV
MR3
NR
CIV
FAB
CIV
MR5
MR3
MR5
UR
MR6
MR3
MR3
CIV
MR4
MR4
MR5
CIV
MR4
NR
UR
NR
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
MR5
MR6
CIV
FAB
CI
CB
ASMD
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
OFFICIAL PROPOSED
ZONING
(UNADOPTED)
²
0 250 500
Feet
Date: December 12, 2019
13
ELM ST
BEACON ST
SOMERVILLE AVE
PORTER ST
LINDEN AVE
HARRIS ST
CRAIGIE ST
MILLER ST
MOSSLAND ST
CEDAR ST
GUSSIE TER
HOLYOKE RD
ACADIA PARK
EUSTIS ST
OXFORD ST
PARKER PL
SACRAMENTO ST
CARVER ST
FOREST ST
GREENWOOD TER
OAK TER
ROSELAND ST
EVERGREEN SQ
BEACON TER
HAYDEN TER
CAMBRIDGE
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
UR
FAB
UR
MR4
NR
UR
UR
NR
UR
UR
FAB
MR3
UR
UR
UR
FAB
MR4
MR3
MR3
UR
NR
MR4
NR
MR3
NR
MR3
MR4
MR3
CIV
MR4
UR
MR3
NR
NR
MR3
MR3
MR3
SB Overlay
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
CIV
FAB
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
OFFICIAL PROPOSED
ZONING
(UNADOPTED)
²
0 250 500
Feet
Date: December 12, 2019
14
SUMMER ST
SOMERVILLE AVE
BEACON ST
SCHOOL ST
CEN TR AL ST
AVON ST
LOWELL ST
DANE ST
PARK ST
BELMONT ST
HIGHLAND AVE
OXFORD ST
CRAIGIE ST
WASHINGTON ST
BERKELEY ST
CHURCH ST
LAUREL ST
LAKE ST
PITMAN ST
QUINCY ST
PO RTE R ST
BOW ST
BENT ON RD
HANSON ST
SPR ING ST
MADISON ST
PR ESCOTT ST
DANE AVE
HARVARD ST
IVALOO ST
ATHERTON ST
GIBBENS ST
IBBET SON ST
SKEHAN ST
HARRISON ST
TYLER ST
PRESTON RD
CAMBRIA ST
LORI NG ST
KNAPP ST
DURHAM ST
PUTNAM ST
GRANITE ST
BEECH ST
KENT ST
OSGOOD ST
VILLAGE ST
ELIOT ST
MILLER ST
SILVEY PL
LELAND ST
KENT CT
WESTWOOD RD
MONMOU TH ST
CLEVELAND ST
ELM ST
PA RK PL
GARDEN CT
KIMBALL ST
MORGAN ST
GREENE ST
PERRY ST
GUSSIE TER
PR O PERZI WAY
CARLTON ST
TRULL LN
ELM PL
MONTROSE ST
BLEACHE RY CT
BOW ST PL
BOWDOIN ST
NEVADAAVE
HERSEY ST
MONDAMIN CT
KILBY ST
SYCAMORE ST
PARKER ST
ROSE ST
LAUREL TER
LANDERS ST
SACRAMENTO ST
PARKDALE S T
MUSEUM ST
ARNOLD CT
ALLEN CT
GOULD AVE
HANSON AVE
CARTER TER
BELMONT PL
SPRING HILL TER
PRIVATE DRIVE
HILLSIDE CIR
DANTE TER
LOWELL CIR
MARDELL CIR
CRAIGIE TER
BELMONT TER
HODGDON P L
BECKWITH CIR
OLIVE SQ
BELMO NT SQ
KENT ST
SACRAMENTO ST
PROPERZI WAY
CAMBRIDGE
NR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
NR
FAB
NR
NR
FAB
CB
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
FAB
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
NR
NR
FAB
NR
FAB
NR
UR
NR
NR
FAB
NR
NR
NR
UR
UR
NR
FAB
UR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
UR
NR
CIV
FAB
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
FAB
NR
CIV
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
UR
NR
MR3
NR
CIV
MR5
UR
NR
NR
UR
UR
MR5
UR
UR
UR
UR CIV
CIV
NR
NR
NR
FAB
NR
UR
MR4
UR
UR
FAB
NR
UR
MR5
NR
UR
UR
FAB
NR
UR
UR
MR5
UR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
UR
NR
UR
UR
NR
UR
NR
UR
UR
CIV
NR
FAB
UR
NR
NR
CIV
CB
UR
UR
MR3
NR
MR3
MR5
MR5
UR
MR4
MR4
UR
MR3
CIV
UR
MR4
UR
UR
NR
NR
NR
UR
UR
NR
CIV
NR
UR
UR
NR
CB
NR
MR4
NR
MR3
UR
NR
UR
NR
UR
FAB
MR4
NR
NR
UR
MR3
UR
UR
FAB
NR
UR
UR
MR4
NR
NR
MR3
MR3
MR3
NR
FAB
NR
UR
UR
NR
CIV
MR3
NR
NR
CIV
FAB
UR
UR
UR
UR
UR
NR
NR
MR3
UR
UR
UR
UR
UR
NR
UR UR
CIV
NR
FAB
UR
UR
CIV
MR3
UR
MR3
MR3 UR
NR
MR3
MR4
UR
NR
FAB
UR
MR4 NR
CIV
NR
UR
NR
MR3
CIV
MR3
MR3
NR
UR
MR3
MR3
MR5
NR
NR
FAB
FAB
NR
UR
SB Overlay
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
MR5
CIV
FAB
CB
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
OFFICIAL PROPOSED
ZONING
(UNADOPTED)
²
0 250 500
Feet
Date: December 12, 2019
15
WALNUT ST
GLEN ST
CROSS ST
MCGRATH HWY
FLINT ST
PEARL ST
MEDFORD ST
BOSTON ST
HIGHLAND AVE
VINA L AVE
GILMAN ST
MUNROE ST
JOY ST
PUT NAM ST
SCHOOL ST
TUFTS ST
BOW ST
OLIVER ST
OTIS ST
DANA ST
FRANKLIN ST
COLUMBUS AVE
SUMMER ST
PRESCOTT ST
RUSH ST
BONAIR ST
SOMERVILLE AVE
STONE AVE
EVERETT AVE
DELL ST
ALSTON ST
WARREN AVE
WASHINGTON ST
BROOK ST
WESLEY ST
LAKE ST
GREENVILLE ST
SUMMIT AVE
UNION SQ
FOUNTAIN AVE
BROADWAY
FRANKL IN AVE
THORPE ST
PLEASANT AVE
ALDERSEY ST
AUBURN AVE
VIRGINIAST
ALDRICH ST
JAMES ST
NEW WASHINGTON ST
GRAND VIEW AVE
BONNER AVE
MONTROSE ST
MADISON ST
WIGGLESWORTH ST
KNOWLTON ST
MANSFIELD ST
PROSPECT HILL AVE
EVERETT ST
GILMAN TER
JASPER ST
WEBSTER AVE
KINGMA N RD
WE SLEY PARK
LINWOOD ST
MORTON ST
ROSSMORE ST
MERRIAM ST
BRADLEY ST
WEBSTER ST
BOW ST PL
FLINT AVE
AUTUMN ST
KILBY ST
SANBORN AVE
SUNNYSIDE AVE
PROSPECT HILL PKWY
BIGELOW ST
RADCLIFFE RD
HOMER SQ
SKILTO N AVE
COBBLE HILL RD
WASHINGTON TER
RANDOLPH PL
ROYCE PL
DELAWARE ST
ELLSWORTH ST
AVON PL
SANBORN CT
PEARL TER
PEARL ST PL
HILLSIDE AVE
HADLEY CT
REED CT
PALMER AVE
LAWSON TER
MCGRATH HWY
SOMERVILLE AVE
RUSH ST
WASHINGTON ST
PEARL ST
OTIS ST
BROADWAY
KNOWLTON ST
¬«28
CIV
CI
NR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
NR
NR
CIV
CIV
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CI
NR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
FAB
NR
NR
NR
CI
NR
NR NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
UR
NR
NR
CIV
CIV
NR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
CC5
NR
CIV
CI
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
MR5
UR
NR
NR
NR
FAB
NR
NR
MR3
NR
NR
UR
NR
CIV
MR5
CIV
MR4
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
MR4
CC4
UR
UR
NR
NR
UR
NR
UR
NR
MR4
CI
NR
CIV
NR
UR
UR
CI
UR
UR
NR
NR
NR NR
NR
UR
CI
CC5
UR
MR5
NR
MR5
CIV
MR3
UR
CC4
NR
UR
MR5
FAB
MR5
UR
UR
MR4
CC4
MR5
UR
NR
NR
NR
UR
UR
MR5
UR
UR
UR
UR
CC4
NR
UR
UR
NR
UR
UR
UR
UR
UR
MR5
FAB
CIV
NR
UR
UR
CC5
MR3
CC4
UR
UR
MR5
NR
NR
UR
NR
UR
MR4
MR4
MR4
UR
CIV
UR
UR
UR
MR5
UR
MR4
UR
MR4 NR
NR
UR
NR
CC4
MR3
MR5
CIV
UR
MR4
UR
CIV
NR
UR
NR
NR
MR4
UR
MR3
UR
MR4
FAB
NR
NR
CIV
NR
FAB
MR3
MR3
MR5
UR
NR
MR5
UR
NR
NR
UR
FAB
MR3
NR
CIV
CIV UR
CIV
UR
UR
UR
CI
UR
MR4
NR
UR
CIV
NR UR
FAB
MR3
NR
MR3
NR
NR
UR
MR5
UR
NR
MR3
NR
NR
MR3
UR
MR3
NR
CIV
MR3
MR3
MR3 NR
UR
CIV
MR3
MR3
MR3
MR3
MR3
UR
UR
MR4
UR
UR
NR
MR3
MR5
CC4 NR
MR5
SB
Overlay
MPD
Overlay
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
MR5
CIV
FAB
CC4
CC5
CI
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
OFFICIAL PROPOSED
ZONING
(UNADOPTED)
²
0 250 500
Feet
Date: December 12, 2019
16
MYSTIC RIVER
I-93 S
I-93 N
BROADWAY
FRANKLIN ST
PEARL ST
MYRTLE ST
PERKINS ST
GLEN ST
FLORENCE ST
PINCKNEY ST
INNER BELT RD
WASHINGTON ST
MYSTIC AV E
MT VERNON ST
CUTTER ST
NEW WASHINGTON ST
SHERMAN ST
LINCOLN ST
AUSTIN ST
MT P LEASANT ST
WEBSTER ST
FRANKL IN AVE
RUSH ST
CRESCENT ST
LINCOLN AVE
COBBLE HILL RD
INDIANA AVE
ASSEMBLY SQ DR
ILLINOIS AVE
FIRST AVE
ARLINGTON ST
PENNSYLVANIA AVE
HATHORN ST
FLINT ST
GEORGE ST
N UNION ST
WHEELER ST
MICHIGAN AVE
BROOK ST
BENEDICT ST
WASHINGTON AVE
BROADWAY PL
ALFRED A LOMBARDI WAY
PINCKNEY PL
PERKINS PL
REMICK CT
BISHOP PL
MYRTLE PL
MT VERNON ST
PEARL ST
BROADWAY
MYSTIC AVE
BOSTON
§¨¦93
§¨¦93
¬«38
¬«38
CI
CI
CI
UR CI
CI
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CI
CIV
UR
NR
NR
NR
UR
ASMD
CIV
UR
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
CIV
UR
CI
NR
NR
NR
UR
UR
NR
UR NR
MR6
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
MR5
NR
MR5
NR
NR UR
MR6
NR
MR6
UR
MR6
NR
MR5
NR
CI
NR
MR3
NR
UR
NR
MR4
NR
MR3
UR
CIV
MR3
UR
MR4
MR5
MR3
UR
MR3
UR
CI
CIV
MR5
MR6
CIV
UR
CIV
MR3
MR3
NR
CIV
MR3
CIV
UR
UR
MR4
UR
ASMD
MR3
MR4
UR
MR3
UR
NR
MR5
MR4
UR
MR3MR3
NR
CIV
CI
MR5 NR
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
MR5
MR6
CIV
CI
ASMD
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
OFFICIAL PROPOSED
ZONING
(UNADOPTED)
²
0 250 500
Feet
Date: December 12, 2019
17
BEACON ST
LINE ST
WASHINGTON ST
DIMICK ST
LAKE ST
MARION ST
CONCORD AVE
DANE ST
OAK ST
HANSON S T
PERRY ST
CALVIN ST
DANE AVE
ROSE ST
WYATT ST
SKEHAN ST
SPRINGFIELD ST
PROPERZI WAY
LEWIS ST
PARK ST
ADRIAN ST
DICKINSON ST
HARO LD ST PA RK DALE ST
MAGN US AVE
DURHAM ST
VILLAGE ST
LELAND ST
LINCOLN PKWY
EL IOT ST
BOWDOIN ST
WALDO AVE
COONEY ST
SMITH AVE
TAUNTON ST
NEVADAAVE
HAMMOND ST
PARKER ST
LEON ST
BUCKINGHAM ST
BEACON PL
MORGAN ST
CHURCH ST
ARNOLD CT
CALDWELL AVE
HANSON AV E
WYATT CIR
PRIVATE DRIVE
HOLTS AVE
HOD GDO N PL
OLIVE SQ
HOLDEN GREEN
CAMBRIDGE
CIV
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
FAB
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
CB
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
CIV
CB
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
MR5
UR
CB
NR
FAB
NR
MR4
FAB
CB
UR NR
FAB
UR
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
UR NR FAB
UR
MR4
MR4
NR
MR3
MR4
CIV
NR
CB
NR
UR
NR
NR
NR
NR
NR
UR
UR FAB
FAB
UR
MR6
NR
CIV
MR5
MR3
NR
NR
FAB
UR
MR3
FAB
FAB
MR3
MR4
UR
CB
UR
CIV
MR3
MR3
NR
FAB
MR5
MR5
SB
Overlay
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
MR5
MR6
CIV
FAB
CB
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
OFFICIAL PROPOSED
ZONING
(UNADOPTED)
²
0 250 500
Feet
Date: December 12, 2019
18
SOMERVILLE AVE
MCGRATH HWY
JOY ST
PRO SPECT ST
WE BSTER AVE
LINWOOD ST
OAK ST
SOUTH ST
MEDFOR D ST
ALLEN ST
CHESTNUT ST
LINDEN ST
CLARK ST
MANSFIELD ST
NEWTON ST
COLUMBIA ST
WASHINGTON ST
POPLAR ST
WARD ST
LAKE ST
TRE MO NT ST
UNION SQ
BOLTON ST
MERRIAM ST
ADRIAN ST
JOSEPH ST
STONE AV E
HORA CE ST
SOMERVILLE AVE EXT
CONCORD AVE
ROSSMORE ST
HOUGHTON ST
HARDIN G ST
COLUMBUS AVE
BONNER AVE
EVERETT ST
BO STON ST
KINGMAN RD
BOW ST
MUNROE ST
NORFO LK ST
BEACH AVE
WARREN AVE
COLUMBIA CT
HOMER SQ
COBBLE HILL RD
WAS HINGTON TER
WILL OW ST
SANBORN CT
BEDFORD ST
HOLTS AVE
HUN TING ST
WARREN ST
MCGRATH HWY
SOMERVILLE AVE
MCGRATH HWY
NEWTON ST
MCGRATH HWY
MERRIAM ST
CAMBRIDGE
¬«28
¬«28
CI
CI
CB
CB
CI
NR CI
CI
CIV CI
CI
FAB
UR
FAB
MR6
CI
NR
NR
CI CI
CI
UR
NR
NR
CIV
NR
UR
NR
CIV
UR
MR6
NR
CIV
NR
NR CIV
CC5
FAB
UR
MR5
MR4
HR
NR
CB
NR
MR4
MR5
CC4
CI
NR
NR
NR
UR
NR
NR
UR
NR
MR5
CI
NR
UR
NR
CI
CC5
MR5 CI
NR
CC4
MR4
MR5
CC5
FAB
MR5
MR6
CC4
UR
CC4
NR
UR MR5
UR
UR
UR
MR5
CC4
CI
NR
MR5
UR
MR5
NR
MR5
NR
MR4
UR
NR
MR4
NR
NR
MR4
MR4
MR4
UR
MR4
UR
MR4
MR4
NR
NR
UR
CIV
UR
UR
UR
CC4
FAB
MR5
CIV
NR
CB
NR
CIV
MR4
MR4
NR
NR
CC4
CC4
CIV NR
MR3
CIV
UR
NR
CI
MR4
UR
NR
MR5
UR
NR
CIV
MR4
CIV
UR
UR
NR
MR4
UR
MR3
CIV
MR3
NR
UR
CIV
FAB
NR
UR
NR
UR
UR
NR
MR5
MR5
MR5
SB
Overlay
MPD
Overlay
NR
UR
MR3
MR4
MR5
MR6
HR
CIV
FAB
CC4
CC5
CI
CB
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
OFFICIAL PROPOSED
ZONING
(UNADOPTED)
²
0 250 500
Feet
Date: December 12, 2019
19
I-93 S
I-93 N
THIRD AVE
MCGRATH HWY
INNER BELT RD
RUFO RD
NEW WASHINGTON ST
CHESTNUT ST
COBBLE HILL RD
FIRST AVE
FITCHBURG ST
LINWOOD ST
BOSTON
CAMBRIDGE
§¨¦93
§¨¦93
¬«28
¬«28
CI
CIV
CI
CI
CI
CB
CI
HR
UR CI
CI
CIV
FAB
CIV
FAB
HR
MR5
FAB
CI
HR
CI
MPD Overlay
UR
MR5
HR
CIV
FAB
CI
CB
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
OFFICIAL PROPOSED
ZONING
(UNADOPTED)
²
0 250 500
Feet
Date: December 12, 2019
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
19
11
17 18
10 12
13 14 15 16
Station Area Walkshed
Quarter Mile
Half Mile
Date: November 25, 2019
²
Map not to scale.
PROPOSED
OFFICIAL
TRANSIT AREA
MAP
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE
MASSACHUSETTS
The information contained in this map is compiled from
multiple sources and is believed to be accurate but
accuracy is not guaranteed. This map does not replace
information obtained by consulting the information's
official source or originating City department. In no event
shall the City of Somerville, Massachusetts be liable for
any damages, direct or consequential, from the use of the
information contained in this map.
The proposed map of the City of Somerville
is established by the proposed Section 1.3.
See the Vehicular Parking table in District Articles
for applicability of the Transit Area Map.
1 ¬«16
MEDFORD
ARLINGTON
NORT H ST
GORDON ST
WOODS AVE
FAIRFAX ST
MYSTIC VALLEY PKWY
ALEWIF E BROOK PKWY
HIGH ST
BOSTON AVE
STERLING ST
IRVINGTON RD
W Q UINCY ST
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
TRANSIT AREA
MAP
²
Date: November 25, 2019
WALKSHED
Quarter Mile
Half Mile
2 ARLINGTON
CAMBRIDGE
MEDFORD
BROADWAY
NORTH ST
ALEWIFE BROOK PKWY
POWDER HOUSE BLVD
VICTORIA ST
WARE ST
HIGH ST
RAYMOND AVE
CURTIS ST
CONWELL AVE
ENDICOTT AVE
GARRISON AVE
STERLING ST
FARRAGUT AVE
WATERHOUSE ST
W A DAMS ST
HILLSDALE RD
HOOKER AVE
CLARENDON AVE
NEW BURY ST
RUSSELL RD
HO LLAND ST
FAIRFAX ST
BAILEY ST
HILL S T
HAMILTON RD
FAIRMOUNT AVE
BELKNAP ST
D OW ST
BARTON ST
MOORE ST
WESTON AVE
HARDAN RD
DICKSON ST
WOODSTOCK ST
WATSON ST
W QUINCY ST COLLEGE HILLRD
WOODS AVE
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
²
WALKSHED
Half Mile
TRANSIT AREA
MAP
Date: November 25, 2019
3
MEDFORD
CU RTIS ST
PACKARD AVE
POWDER HOUSE BLVD
BROADWAY
TALBOT AVE
OSSIPEE RD
COLLEGE AVE
PROFESSORS ROW
PEARSON RD
ELECTRIC AVE
BR OMFIELD RD
MASON ST
TEELE AVE
H ILLSDALE RD
CHETWYND RD
SUNSET RD
UPLAND RD
CURTIS AVE
SAWYER AVE
WHITMAN ST
WHITFIELD RD
HOLLAND S T
CONWELL AVE
LOVELL ST
BURN HAM ST
RAYMOND AVE
DEARBORN RD
WARNER ST
WARE ST
LATIN WAY
LEONARD ST
WESTMINSTER ST
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
²
WALKSHED
Quarter Mile
Half Mile
TRANSIT AREA
MAP
Date: November 25, 2019
4
CAMBRIDGE
ARLINGTON
NEWBURY ST
HOLLAND ST
CAMERON AVE
BROADWAY
CLARENDON AVE
ELMWOOD ST
MOORE ST
HOOKER AVE
ENDICOTT AVE
MEAD ST
CLAREMON ST
FARRAGUT AVE
WESTON AVE
GORHAM ST
MALVERN AVE
GLENDALE AVE
TANNERY BROO K ROW
CURTIS ST
YORKTOWN ST
VICTORIA ST
GARRISON AVE
HARRISON RD
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
²
WALKSHED
Quarter Mile
Half Mile
TRANSIT AREA
MAP
Date: November 25, 2019
5
MEDFORD
CAMBRIDGE
BROADWAY
HOLLAND ST
WILLOW AVE
MORRISON AVE
KIDDER AVE
DAY ST
ELM ST
IRVING ST
LIBERTY AVE
JOSEPHINE AVE
WALLACE ST
HALL AVE
ROGERS AVE
GROVE ST
LOWDEN AVE
PEARSON RD
DOVER ST
CHANDLER ST
BAY STATE AVE
JAY ST
WINSLOW AVE
ELECTRIC AVE
SIMPSON AVE
ORCHARD ST
POWDER HOUSE BLVD
PAULINA ST
MASON ST
COLLEGE AVE
HIGHLAND R D
GORHAM ST
MALLET ST
LEXINGTON AVE
WALKER ST
MEACHAM RD
BROMFIELD RD
OSSIPEE RD
CHESTER ST
HIGHLAND AVE
WEST ST
FOSKETT ST
WHITMAN ST
PARK AVE
APPLETON ST
PACKARD AVE
FRANCESCA AVE
ELMWOOD ST
BURNHAM ST
WARNER ST
KINGSTON ST
WINTER ST
BILLINGHAM ST
LEONARD ST
LOVELL ST
CUTTER AVE
CORINTHIAN RD
CLIF TO N ST
HAWTHORNE ST
SUMMER ST
HOWARD ST
THORNDIKE ST
BUENA VISTA RD
HERBERT ST
NEWBERNE ST
CHAPEL ST
WHIPPLE ST
HENRY AVE
KENWOOD ST
PEARSON AVE
CAMPBELL PARK
BOWERS AVE
PO WDER HOU SE TER
COTTAGE AVE
WESTMINSTER ST
CURTIS ST
CADY AVE
GLOVER CIR
LESLEY AVE
LIBERTY RD
VILLA AVE
LESTER TER
MORRISON PL
DAVIS SQ
ELLIN GTON RD
PRIVATE DRIVE
COLLEGE AVE
BROADWAY
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
²
WALKSHED
Quarter Mile
Half Mile
TRANSIT AREA
MAP
Date: November 25, 2019
6
MEDFORD
BROADWAY
CEDAR ST
BO STON AVE
MEDFORD ST
HIGHL AND RD
PEARSON AV E
LOWELL ST
ROGERSAVE
H INCKLEY ST
PRICHARD AVE
TRULL S T
BROADWAY TER
KIDDER AVE
ADAMS S T
MAIN ST
PARTR IDGE AVE
CLYDE ST
BARTLETT ST
GLENWOOD RD
MURDOCK ST
FISKAVE
FRANEY RD
NASHUA ST
JOSEPHINE AVE
MORRISON AVE
WILTON ST
CENTRAL ST
CHARLES E RYAN RD
FREMONT ST
WARWICK ST
HENDERSON ST
WILLOW AVE
RICHARDSON ST
WILSON AVE
NORWOOD AVE
VINAL ST
CUTLER ST
PRIVATE DRIVE
NEWMAN PL
ALBION ST
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
²
WALKSHED
Quarter Mile
Half Mile
TRANSIT AREA
MAP
Date: November 25, 2019
7
MEDFORD
§¨¦93 §¨¦93
¬«38
¬«28
¬«28
HEATH ST
SHORE DR
BAILEY RD
JAQUES ST
TEN HILLS RD
TEMPLE RD
PURITAN RD
MAIN ST
MORELAND ST
BROADWAY
PUTNAM RD
TEMPLE ST
FREMONT ST
MEACHAM ST
EDGAR AVE
BOND ST
ASH AVE
E ALBION ST
MEMORIAL RD
SYDNEYST
GOVERNOR WINTHROP RD
DERBY ST
FENWICK ST
CENTRAL ST
GRANT ST
TAYLOR ST
CANAL LN
CENTURY ST
MIDDLESEX AVE
MELVILLE RD
CREST HILL RD
DOUGLAS AVE
MT VERNON AVE
PRIVATE DRIVE
FREMONT ST
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
²
WALKSHED
Half Mile
TRANSIT AREA
MAP
Date: November 25, 2019
8
MEDFORD
EVERETT
¬«28
¬«28
ARTISAN WAY
MIDDLESEX AVE
CANAL ST
SHORE DR
TEN HILLS RD
GRAND UNION BLVD
GREAT RIVER RD
ASSEMBLY ROW
CUMMINGS ST
GREAT RIVER RD
GRAND UNION BLVD
ASSEMBLY ROW
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
²
WALKSHED
Quarter Mile
Half Mile
TRANSIT AREA
MAP
Date: November 25, 2019
9
CAMBRIDGE
ELM ST
SUMMER ST
C EDA R ST
WILLOW AVE
CHERR Y ST
HANC OCK S T
DAY ST
LINDEN AVE
ORCHARD ST
MORRISON AVE
PORTER ST
LEXINGTON AVE
RUSSELL ST
CHESTER ST
BANKS ST
DOVER ST
GROVE ST
SO MERVILLE AVE
HALL ST
WEST ST
HAWTHORNE ST
BURNSIDE AVE
SPENCER AVE
ST JAMES AVE
WINDSOR RD
HIGHLAND R D
HIGHLAND AVE
COTTAGE AVE
ASHL AND ST
ELSTON ST
CUTTER AVE
CHARNWOOD RD
WHITE ST
LESLEY AVE ROGERS AVE
SARTWELL AVE
MOSSLAND ST
HENRY AVE
WINDOM ST
HERBERT ST
WHIPPLE ST
BOWERS AVE
HOLYOKE RD
MILTON ST
WHITE ST PL
JOSEPHINE AVE
NEW BERNEST
WINSLOW AVE
ACADIA PARK
BEACON ST
MEACHAM RD
LINDEN PL
ABERDEEN RD
WADE CT
FAIRLEE ST
GILSON TER
GOVE CT
ELLINGT ON RD
PRIVATE DRIVE
ELM ST
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
²
WALKSHED
Quarter Mile
Half Mile
TRANSIT AREA
MAP
Date: November 25, 2019
10 LOWELL ST
HIGHLAND AVE
CENTRAL ST
ALBION ST
HUDSON ST
CEDAR S T
SUMMER ST
MEDFORD ST
PORTER ST
SYC AMO RE ST
ALPINE ST
BARTLETT ST
VERNON ST
BELMONT ST
OXFORD ST
TRU LL ST
BENTON RD
GLENWOOD RD
ADA MS ST
PARTR IDGE AVE
CRAIGIE ST
BROADWAY
MADISO N ST
CLYDE ST
TENNYSON ST
CROWN ST
LINDEN AVE
AMES ST
LEE ST
BERKELEY ST
TOWER ST
WARWICK ST
GIBBENS ST
NASHUA ST
MONTROSE ST
BOSTON AVE
MURDOCK ST
BRASTOW AVE
ROBINSON ST
MORRISON AVE
WILTON ST
HINCKLEY ST
RICHDALE AVE
SC HOOL ST
CROCKER ST
CAMBRIA ST
PRICHARD AVE
PRINCETON ST
PEARSON AVE
FORSTER ST
HENDERS ON ST
AVON ST
LEXINGTON AVE
SPRING HILL TER
SILVEY PL
WESTWOOD RD
PEMBROKE ST
SPENCER AVE
WALDO ST
H IGHLAND RD
RICHARDSON ST
CONWELL ST
MINER ST
SPRING ST
WILLOUGHBY ST
TRULL LN
EASTMAN RD
HERSEY ST
VINAL ST
MOUNTAIN AVE
JEROME ST
CENTRAL RD
CUTLER ST
PORTER AVE
ALBION PL
IBBETSON ST
PRIVATE DRI VE
LOWELL TER
HILLSIDE CIR
ALBION CT
PETERSON TER
NEWMAN PL
ALBION TER
BELLEVUE TER
PRIVATE DRIVE
PRIVATE DRIVE
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
²
WALKSHED
Quarter Mile
Half Mile
TRANSIT AREA
MAP
Date: November 25, 2019
11
§¨¦93 §¨¦93
¬«28
¬«38
¬«28
BROADWAY
SCHOOL ST
JAQUES ST
MEDFO RD ST
PEARL ST
HEATH ST
WALN UT ST
GRANT ST
TEMPLE ST
MARSHALL ST
FELLSWAY W
DERBY ST
TH URSTON ST
OTIS ST
WHEATLAND ST
DARTMOUTH S T
SYCAMORE ST
CROSS ST
BAILEY RD
DANA ST
RUSH ST
BOND ST
MAIN ST
GARFIELD AVE
BONAIR ST
BRADLEY ST
SYDNEY ST
GLEN ST
EVERGREEN AVE
SEWALL ST
EVERETT AVE
SARGENTAVE
FEN WICK ST
CROSS ST E
HIGHLAND AVE
TEN HILLS RD
BROOK ST
MELVIN ST
HOWE ST
RADCLIFFE RD
LEE ST
WESLEY ST
RICHDALE AVE
BLAKELEY AVE
MCGRATH HWY
JACKSON RD
CENTRAL ST
WIGGLESWORTH ST
EDMANDS ST
AUTUMN ST
EDGAR AVE
BROWNING RD
JAMES ST
MEMORIAL RD
STICKNEY AVE
MONTROSE ST
OAKLAND AVE
TAYLOR ST
PURITAN RD
VIRGINIA ST
MACARTHUR ST
GILMAN TER
KENSINGTON AVE
JASPER ST
TEMPLE RD
MAPLE AVE
GOVERNOR WINTHROP RD
ESSEX ST
LANGMAID AVE
GILMAN ST
SUNNYSIDE AVE
McGREGOR AVE
WELLINGTON AVE
SKILTON AVE
ROYCE PL
PEARL ST PL
FAIRVIEW TER
MORTIMER PL
WINTER HILL CIR
BRADFORD AVE
SELLON PL
FLORENCE TER
BONAIR ST
OTIS ST
EVERGREEN AVE
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
²
WALKSHED
Quarter Mile
Half Mile
TRANSIT AREA
MAP
Date: November 25, 2019
12 §¨¦93
§¨¦93
¬«38
¬«28
¬«38
BOSTON
EVERETT
MEDFORD
BROADWAY
FOLEY ST
ASSEMBLY SQ DR
GLEN ST
PENNSYLVANIA AVE
GREAT RIVER RD
ARTISAN WAY
CROSS ST E
CANAL ST
GRAND UNION BLVD
AUSTIN ST
CUTTER ST
ASSEMBLY ROW
GARFIELD AVE
RUSH ST
REVOLUTION DR
ILLINOIS AVE
MICHIG AN AVE
MINNESO TA AVE
INDIANAAVE
WISCONSIN AVE
CUMMINGS ST
MIDDLESEXAVE
FRANKLIN S T
MAINE TER
HATH ORN ST
N UNION ST
MCGRATH HWY
LINCOLN ST
MAINE AVE
BRO ADWAY PL
BE NEDICT AVE
KENSINGTON AVE
ALFRED A LOMBARDI WAY
CONNECTICUT AVE
RHODE ISLAND AVE
SIBLEY CT
BROADWAY
ASSEMBLY ROW
ASSEMBLY SQ DR
GREAT RIVER RD
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
²
WALKSHED
Quarter Mile
Half Mile
TRANSIT AREA
MAP
Date: November 25, 2019
13 CAMBRIDGE
ELM ST
BEACON ST
SOMERVILLE AVE
PO RT ER ST
LINDEN AVE
HARRIS ST
CRAIGIE ST
MILLER ST
MOSSLAND ST
CEDAR ST
HOLYOKE RD
ACADIA PARK
EUSTIS ST
OXFORD ST
STANFOR D TER
FOREST ST
ADELAIDE RD
ROSELAND ST
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
²
WALKSHED
Quarter Mile
Half Mile
TRANSIT AREA
MAP
Date: November 25, 2019
14
CAMBRIDGE
SUMMER ST
SOMERVILLE AVE
BEACON ST
SCHOOL ST
CENTRAL ST
AVON ST
LOWELL ST
DANE ST
PARK ST
BELMONT ST
HIGHLAND AVE
OXFORD ST
CRAIGIE S T
WASHINGTON ST
BERKELEY ST
CHURCH ST
LAUREL ST
LAKE ST
PITMAN ST
QUINCY ST
PORTER ST
BOW ST
BENTON RD
HANSON ST
SPR ING ST
MADISON ST
PRESCOTT ST
DANE AVE
HARVARD ST
IVALOO ST
ATHERTON ST
GIBBENS ST
IBBET SON ST
SKEHAN ST
HARRISON ST
TYLER ST
PRESTON RD
CAMBRIA ST
LORI NG ST
KNAPP ST
DURHAM ST
PUTNAM ST
GRANITE ST
BEECH ST
KENT ST
OSGOOD ST
VILLAGE ST
ELIOT ST
SILVEY PL
LELAND ST
KENT CT
WESTWOOD RD
MONMOU TH ST
CLEVELAND ST
ELM ST
PA RK PL
GARDEN CT
KIMBALL ST
MORGAN ST
GREENE ST
PERRY ST
PR O PERZI WAY
CARLTON ST
TRU LL LN
ELM PL
BOW ST PL
BOWDOIN ST
HERSEY ST
MONDAMIN CT
KILBY ST
SYCAMORE ST
PARKER ST
ROSE ST
LAUREL TER
LANDERS ST
SACRAMENTO ST
PARKDALE S T
MUSEUM ST
ARNOLD CT
ALLEN CT
HANSON AVE
CARTER TER
SPRING HILL TER
HILLSIDE CIR
MARDELL CIR
BELMONT TER
HODGDON P L
BECKWITH CIR
PRIVATE DRIVE
BELMO NT SQ
KENT ST
PROPERZI WAY
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
²
WALKSHED
Quarter Mile
Half Mile
TRANSIT AREA
MAP
Date: November 25, 2019
15
¬«28
WALNUT ST
GLEN ST
CROSS ST
FLINT ST
PEARL ST
MEDFO RD ST
BOSTON ST
HIGHLAND AVE
VINAL AVE
GILMAN ST
MUNROE ST
JOY ST
PUTNAM ST
SCHOOL ST
TUFTS ST
BOW ST
OLIVER ST
OTIS ST
MCGRATH HWY
DANA ST
FRANKL IN ST
COLUMBUS AVE
SUMMER ST
PRESCOTT ST
RUSH ST
BONAIR ST
STONEAVE
UNION SQ
EVERETT AVE
DELL ST
ALSTON ST
WARREN AVE
WASHINGTON ST
BROOK ST
WESLEY ST
LAKE ST
GREENVILLE ST
SOMERVILLE AVE
SUMMIT AVE
FOUNTAIN AVE
BROADWAY
FRAN KLIN AVE
THORPE ST
PLEASANT AVE
ALDERSEY ST
AUBURN AVE
VIRGINIA ST
ALDRICH ST
JAMES ST
NEW WASHINGTON ST
GRAND VIEW AVE
BONNER AVE
MONTROSE ST
WIGG LESWORTH S T
MANSFIELD ST
KNOWLTON ST
PROSPECT HILL AVE
EVERETT ST
GILMAN TER
JAS PER ST
WEBSTER AVE
KINGMAN RD
WESLEY PARK
LINWOOD ST
PROSPECT ST
MORTON ST
ROSSMORE ST
MERRIAM ST
BRADLEY ST
BO W ST PL
FLINT AVE
AUTUMN ST
KILBY ST
SANBORN AVE
SUNNYSIDE AVE
PROSPECT HILL PKWY
RADCLIFFE RD
BIGELOW ST
HOMER SQ
SKILTON AVE
WASHINGTON AVE
RANDOLPH PL
ROYCE PL
DELAWARE ST
AVON PL
PEARL TER
PEARL ST PL
HILLSIDE AVE
HADLEY CT
REED CT
PALMER AVE
PEARL ST
WASHINGTON ST
SOMERVILLE AVE
OTIS ST
RUSH ST
KNOWLTON ST
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
²
WALKSHED
Quarter Mile
Half Mile
TRANSIT AREA
MAP
Date: November 25, 2019
16 BOSTON
§¨¦93
§¨¦93
¬«38 ¬«38
BROADWAY
FRANKLIN ST
PEARL ST
MYRTLE ST
PERKINS ST
GLEN ST
FLORENCE ST
PINCKNEY ST
INNER BELT RD
WASHINGTON ST
MT VERNON ST
CUTTER ST
NEW WASHINGTON ST
LINCOLN ST
AUSTIN ST
MT P LEASANT ST
WEBSTER ST
FRANKL IN AVE
RUSH ST
CRESCENT ST
LINCOLN AVE
INDIANA AVE
ASSEMBLY SQ DR
ILLINOIS AVE
FIRST AVE
ARLINGTON ST
HATHORN ST
FLINT ST
GEORGE ST
N UNION ST
WHEELER ST
MICHIGAN AVE
WASHINGTON AVE
BROADWAY PL
BENEDICT AVE
ALFRED A LOMBARDI WAY
PINCKNEY PL
PERKINS PL
MYRTLE PL
PEARL ST
MT VERNON ST
BROADWAY
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
²
WALKSHED
Quarter Mile
Half Mile
TRANSIT AREA
MAP
Date: November 25, 2019
17
CAMBRIDGE
BEACON ST
LINE ST
WASHINGTON ST
DIMICK ST
LAKE ST
MARION ST
CONCORD AVE
DANE ST
OAK ST
HANSON ST
PERRY ST
CALVIN ST
DANE AVE
ROSE ST
WYATT ST
SKEHAN ST
SPRINGFIELD ST
PROPERZI WAY
LEWIS ST
PARK ST
ADRIAN ST
DICKINSON ST
HARO LD ST PA RK DALE ST
MAGN US AVE
DURHAM ST
VILLAGE ST
LELAND ST
LINCOLN PKWY
EL IOT ST
BOWDOIN ST
WALDO AVE
COONEY ST
SMITH AVE
TAUNTON ST
HAMMOND ST
PARKER ST
LEON ST
BUCKINGHAM ST
BEACON PL
MORGAN ST
CHURCH ST
ARNOLD CT
CALDWELL AVE
HANSON AVE
WYATT CIR
HOD GDO N PL
HOLDEN GREEN
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
²
WALKSHED
Quarter Mile
Half Mile
TRANSIT AREA
MAP
Date: November 25, 2019
18
CAMBRIDGE
¬«28
¬«28
SOMERVILLE AVE
JOY ST
PRO SPECT ST
WE BSTER AVE
LINWOOD ST
OAK ST
SOUTH ST
MEDFO RD ST
MCGRATH HWY
ALLEN ST
CHESTNUT ST
UNION SQ
LINDEN ST
CLARK ST
MANSFIELD ST
NEWTON ST
COLUMBIA ST
WASHINGTON ST
POPLAR ST
WARD ST
LAKE ST
TRE MO NT ST
BOLTON ST
MERRIAM ST
ADRIAN ST
JOSEPH ST
STONE AVE
HORA CE ST
SOMERVILLE AVE EXT
CONCORD AVE
ROSSMORE ST
HOUGHTON ST
HARDIN G ST
BONNER AVE
EVERETT ST
BO STON ST
KINGMAN RD
BOW ST
MUNROE ST
NORFO LK ST
BEACH AVE
WARREN AVE
COLUMBIA CT
HOMER SQ
BENNETT ST
WILL OW ST
BEDFORD ST
HUN TING ST
WARREN ST
NEWTON ST
SOMERVILLE AVE
MERRIAM ST
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
²
WALKSHED
Quarter Mile
Half Mile
TRANSIT AREA
MAP
Date: November 25, 2019
19
BOSTON
CAMBRIDGE
§¨¦93
§¨¦93
¬«28
¬«28
¬«28
¬«28
THIRD AVE
INNER BELT RD
NEW WASHINGTON ST
CHES TNUT ST
FIRST AVE
FITCHBURG ST
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
²
WALKSHED
Quarter Mile
Half Mile
TRANSIT AREA
MAP
Date: November 25, 2019
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
19
11
17 18
10 12
13 14 15 16
Pedestrian Streets
Date: November 25, 2019
²
Map not to scale.
See District Articles and Article 9 Uses for applicability
of the Pedestrian Streets Map.
PROPOSED
OFFICIAL
PEDESTRIAN
STREET MAP
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE
MASSACHUSETTS
The information contained in this map is compiled from
multiple sources and is believed to be accurate but
accuracy is not guaranteed. This map does not replace
information obtained by consulting the information's
official source or originating City department. In no event
shall the City of Somerville, Massachusetts be liable for
any damages, direct or consequential, from the use of the
information contained in this map.
The proposed map of the City of Somerville
is established by the proposed Section 1.3.
1 ¬«16
MEDFORD
ARLINGTON
NORTH ST
GORDON ST
WOODS AVE
FAIRFAX ST
ALEWIF E BROOK PKWY
HIGH ST
MYSTIC VALLEY PKWY
BOSTON AVE
STERLING ST
IRVINGTON RD
CAPEN ST
CAPEN CT
W Q UINCY ST
¬«16
Pedestrian
Streets
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
PEDESTRIAN STREET
MAP
²
Date: November 25, 2019
2 ARLINGTON
CAMBRIDGE
MEDFORD
BROADWAY
NORTH ST
VICTORIA ST
WARE ST
HIGH ST
RAYMOND AVE
POWDER HOUSE BLVD
CURTIS ST
CONWELL AVE
ALEWIFE BROOK PKWY
ENDICOTT AVE
GARRISON AVE
STERLING ST
FARRAGUT AVE
WATERHOUSE ST
W A DAMS ST
HILLSDALE RD
HOOKER AVE
CLARENDON AVE
NEWBURY ST
RUSSELL RD
HO LLAND ST
FAIRFAX ST
BAILEY ST
HILL S T
HAMILTON RD
FAIRMOUNT AVE
BELKNAP ST
D OW ST
BARTON ST
MOORE ST
WESTON AVE
HARDAN RD
DICKSON ST
WOODSTOCK ST
WATSON ST
CURTIS AVE
W QUINCY ST COLLEGE HILLRD
WOODS AVE
NORTH ST CT
Pedestrian
Streets
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
PEDESTRIAN STREET
MAP
²
Date: November 25, 2019
3
MEDFORD
CURT IS ST
PACKARD AVE
POWDER HOUSE BLVD
BROADWAY
TALBOT AVE
OSSIPEE RD
COLLEGE AVE
PROFESSORS ROW
PEARSON RD
ELECTRIC AVE
BROMFIELD RD
LATIN WAY
MASON ST
TEELE AVE
HILLSDALE RD
CHETWYND RD
SUNSET RD
UPLAND RD
LOWER CAMPUS RD
CURTIS AVE
SAWYER AVE
WHITMAN ST
WHITFIELD RD
HOLLAND S T
CONWELL AVE
LOVELL ST
BURN HAM ST
RAYMOND AVE
DEARBORN RD
WARNER ST
WARE ST
LEONARD ST
WESTMINSTER ST
Pedestrian
Streets
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
PEDESTRIAN STREET
MAP
²
Date: November 25, 2019
4
CAMBRIDGE
ARLINGTON
NEWBURY ST
HOLLA ND ST
CAMERON AVE
BROADWAY
CLARENDON AVE
ELMWOOD ST
MOORE ST
HOOKER AVE
ENDICOTTAVE
MEAD ST
CLAREMON ST
FARRAGUT AVE
WESTON AVE
GORHAM ST
MALVERN AVE
GLENDALE AVE
KINGSTON ST
TANNERY BROO K ROW
CURTIS ST
YORKTOWN ST
CAMPBELL PARK
VICTORIA ST
GARRISON AVE
HARRISON RD
ELMWOOD TER
Pedestrian
Streets
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
PEDESTRIAN STREET
MAP
²
Date: November 25, 2019
5
MEDFORD
CAMBRIDGE
BROADWAY
HOLLAND ST
WILLOW AVE
MORRISON AVE
KIDDER AVE
DAY ST
ELM ST
IRVING ST
LIBERTY AVE
JOSE PHINE AVE
WALLACE ST
HALL AVE
ROGER S AVE
GROVE ST
LOWDEN AVE
PEARSON RD
DOVER ST
CHANDLER ST
BAY STATE AVE
JAY ST
WINSLOW AVE
ELECTRIC AVE
SIMPSON AVE
ORCHARD ST
POWDER HOUSE BLVD
PAULINA ST
MASON ST
COLLEGE AVE
HIGHLAND RD
GORHAM ST
MALLET ST
LEXINGTON AVE
WALKER ST
MEACHAM RD
BROMFIELD RD
OSSIPEE RD
CHESTER ST
HIGHLAND AVE
WEST ST
FOSKETT ST
WHITMAN ST
PARK AVE
APPLETON ST
PACKARD AVE
FRANCESCA AVE
ELMWOOD ST
BURNHAM ST
WARNER ST
KINGSTON ST
WINTER ST
BILLINGHAM ST
LEONARD ST
LOVELL ST
CUTTER AVE
CORINTHIAN RD
CLIF TO N ST
HAWTHORNE ST
SUMMER ST
HOWARD ST
THORNDIKE ST
CAMERON AVE
BUENA VISTA RD
HERBERT ST
NEWBERNE ST
CHAPEL ST
WHIPPLE ST
HENRY AVE
KENWOOD ST
PEARSON AVE
CAMPBEL L PARK
BOWERS AVE
PO WDER HOU SE TER
COTTAGE AVE
WESTMINSTER ST
CURTIS ST
CADY AVE
LESLEY AVE
CLAREMON ST
LIBERTY RD
VILLA AVE
DAVIS SQ
LESTER TER
BRISTO L RD
MORRISON PL
ELLIN GTON RD
PRIVATE DRIVE
BROADWAY
COLLEGE AVE
Pedestrian
Streets
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
PEDESTRIAN STREET
MAP
²
Date: November 25, 2019
6
MEDFORD
BROADWAY
CEDAR ST
BOSTON AVE
MEDFORD ST
HIGHLAND RD
PEARSON AV E
LOW ELL S T
ROGERS AVE
H INCKL EY ST
PRICHARD AVE
TRULL S T
BROADWAY TER
KIDDER AVE
AD AMS ST
MAIN ST
PARTR IDGE AVE
CLYDE ST
BARTLETT ST
GLENWOOD RD
MURDOCK ST
FISKAVE
FRANEY RD
NASHUA ST
JOSEPHINE AVE
MORRISON AVE
WILTON ST
CENTRAL ST
CHARLES E RYAN RD
FREMONT ST
WARWICK ST
HENDERSON ST
WILLOW AVE
RICHARDSON ST
WILSON AVE
NORW OOD AVE
VINAL ST
CUTLER ST
BRISTOL RD
PRIVATE DRIVE
LOWELL TER
NEWMAN PL
ALBION ST
Pedestrian
Streets
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
PEDESTRIAN STREET
MAP
²
Date: November 25, 2019
7
MEDFORD
I-93 S
I-93 N
HEATH ST
BAILEY RD
JAQUES ST
MYSTIC AVE
TEN HILLS RD
TEMPLE RD
FELLSWAY
PURITAN RD
MAIN ST
MORELAND ST
BROADWAY
PUTNAM RD
TEMPLE ST
FREMONT ST
MEACHAM ST
EDGAR AVE
BO ND ST
ASH AVE
E ALBION ST
SYDNEY ST
GOVERNOR WINTHROP RD
DERBY ST
MEMORIAL RD
FENWICK ST
SHORE DR
CENTRA L ST
GRANT ST
BROADWAY TER
RIVER RD
TAYLOR ST
CANAL LN
CENTURY ST
CONNORS DR
MIDDLESEX AVE
RAM P I -93 N TO RT 28 N
MELVILLE RD
RAMP RT 28 S TO I-93 S
CREST HILL RD
DOUGLAS AVE
MT VERNON AVE
PRIVATE DRIVE
FREMONT ST
FELLSW AY
§¨¦93 §¨¦93
¬«38
«¬28 «¬28
Pedestrian
Streets
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
PEDESTRIAN STREET
MAP
²
Date: November 25, 2019
8
MEDFORD
EVERETT
FELLSWAY
CANAL ST
ARTISAN WAY
TEN HILLS RD
SHOR E D R
MIDDLESEX AVE
GREAT RIVER RD
NOONAN PL
ASSEMBLY ROW
GRAND UNION BLVD
CUMMINGS ST
RAM P I-93 N TO RT 2 8 N
ASSEMBLY ROW
GREAT RIVER RD
FELLSWAY
GRAND UNION BLVD
¬«28
¬«28
Pedestrian
Streets
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
PEDESTRIAN STREET
MAP
²
Date: November 25, 2019
9
CAMBRIDGE
ELM ST
SUMMER ST
CEDAR ST
WILLOW AVE
CHERR Y ST
HANC OCK S T
DAY ST
LINDEN AVE
ORCHARD ST
MORRISON A VE
PORTER ST
LEXINGTON AVE
RUSSELL ST
CHESTER ST
BANKS ST
DOVER ST
GROVE ST
SOMERVILLE AVE
HALL ST
WEST ST
HAWTHORNE ST
BURNSIDE AVE
SPENCER AVE
ST JAMES AVE
WINDSOR RD
HIGH LAND RD
HIGHLAND AVE
COTTAGE AVE
ASHL AND ST
ELSTON ST
CUTTER AVE
CHARNWOOD RD
WHITE ST
LESLEY AVE ROGERS AVE
SARTWELL AVE
MOSSLAND ST
HENRY AVE
WINDOM ST
HERBERT ST
GUSSIE TER
WHIPPLE ST
CEDAR AVE
PEARSON AVE
BOWERS AVE
HOLYOKE RD
MILTON ST
WHITE ST PL
JOSEPHINE AVE
NEW BERNEST
WINSLOW AVE
ACADIA PARK
MEACHAM RD
LINDEN PL
DAVIS SQ
OLIVE AVE
GOULD AVE
PARKER PL
WADE CT
CARVER ST
FAIRLEE ST
GILSON TER
GOVE CT
ROSELAND ST
BEACON TER
ELLINGT ON RD
STEEVES CIR
PRIVATE DRIVE
CEDAR ST PL
ELM ST
Pedestrian
Streets
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
PEDESTRIAN STREET
MAP
²
Date: November 25, 2019
10 LOWELL ST
HIGHLAND AVE
C ENTRAL ST
ALBION ST
HUDSON ST
CEDAR ST
SUMMER ST
MEDFORD ST
PO RTER ST
SYC AMO RE ST
ALPINE ST
BARTLETT ST
VERNON ST
BEL MONT ST
OXFORD ST
TRU LL ST
BENTON RD
GLENWOOD R D
ADAMS ST
PARTRIDGE AVE
CRAI GIE ST
BROADWAY
MADISON ST
CLYDE ST
TENNYSON ST
CROWN ST
LINDE N AVE
AMES ST
LEE ST
BERKELEY ST
TOWER ST
WARWICK ST
GIBBENS ST
NASHUA ST
MONTROSE ST
BOSTON AVE
MURDOCK ST
BRASTOW AVE
ROBINSON ST
MORRISON AVE
BROADWAY TER
WILTON ST
HINCKLEY ST
RICHDALE AVE
SCHOOL ST
CROCKER ST
CAMBRIA ST
PRICHARD AVE
PRINCETON ST
PEARSON AV E
FORSTER ST
H END ERSON ST
AVON ST
LEXINGTON AVE
SPRING HILL TER
SILVEY PL
WESTWOOD RD
PEMBROKE ST
SPENCER AVE
WALDO ST
HIGHLAND R D
RICHARDSON ST
CONWELL ST
MINER ST
SPRING ST
CEDAR AVE
GUSSIE TER
WILLOUGHBY ST
TRULL LN
THU RSTON ST
BROWNING RD
EASTMAN RD
HERSEY ST
VINAL ST
MOUNTAIN AVE
JEROME ST
CENTRAL RD
CUTLER ST
PORTER AVE
MAXWELLS GREEN
ALBION PL
GOULD AVE
IBBETSON ST
CARVER ST
PRIVATE DRI VE
LOWELL TER
HILLSIDE CIR
LOWELL CIR
ALBION CT
PETERSON TER
NEWMAN PL
DIRENZO TER
ALBION TER
BELLEVUE TER
PRIVATE DRIVE
PRIVATE DRIVE
PRIVATE DRIVE
Pedestrian
Streets
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
PEDESTRIAN STREET
MAP
²
Date: November 25, 2019
11
BROADWAY
I-93 S
I-93 N
SCHOOL ST
JAQUES ST
MCGRATH HWY
MEDFORD ST
PEARL ST
HEATH ST
WALN UT ST
GRANT ST
TEMPLE ST
MARSHALL ST
FELLSWAY W
DERBY ST
TH URSTON ST
WHEATLAND ST
MYSTIC AVE
OTIS ST
DARTMOUTH S T
SYCAMORE ST
CROSS S T
BAILEY RD
DANA ST
FELLSWAY
RUSH ST
BOND ST
MAIN ST
GARFIELD AVE
BONAIR ST
BRADLEY ST
SYDNEY ST
GLEN ST
EVERGREEN AVE
SEWALL ST
EVERETT AVE
SARGENTAVE
RAMP RT 28 S TO I-93 S
FEN WICK ST
CROSS ST E
HIGHLAND AVE
TEN HILLS RD
BROOK ST
MELVIN ST
HOWE ST
RADCLIFFE RD
LEE ST
WESLEY ST
RICHDALE AVE
BLAKELEY AVE
JACKSON RD
CENTRAL ST
WIGGLESWORTH ST
EDMANDS ST
AUTUMN ST
EDGAR AVE
BROADWAY TER
BROWNING RD
JAMES ST
MEMORIAL RD
STICKNEY AVE
MONTROSE ST
OAKLAND AVE
TAYLOR ST
MADISON ST
PURITAN RD
VIRGINIA ST
MACARTHUR ST
GILMAN TER
FORSTER ST
KENSINGTON AVE
JASPER ST
TEMPLE RD
MAPLE AVE
GOVERNOR WINTHROP RD
ESSEX ST
LANGMAID AVE
GILMAN ST
MINNESOTA AVE
SUNNYSIDE AVE
McGREGOR AVE
WELLINGTON AVE
SKILTON AVE
ROYCE PL
ELLSWORTH ST
PEARL ST PL
FAIRVIEW TER
MORTIMER PL
CROSS ST PL
WINTER HILL CIR
BRADFORD AVE
SELLON PL
BISHOP PL
FELLSWAY
THURSTON ST
OTIS ST
BONAIR ST
EVERGREEN AVE
§¨¦93
§¨¦93
¬«28
¬«38
¬«28
Pedestrian
Streets
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
PEDESTRIAN STREET
MAP
²
Date: November 25, 2019
12
BOSTON
EVERETT
MEDFORD
I-93 S
I-9 3 N
MYSTIC AVE
BROADWAY
FOLEY ST
RAM P RT 28 S TO I-93 S
ASSEMBLY SQ DR
GRAND UNION BLVD
FELLSWAY
REVOLUTION DR
GLEN ST
PENNSYLVANIA AVE
CANAL ST
ARTISAN WAY
GREAT RIVER RD
CROSS ST E
RAMP I-93 S TO MYSTIC AVE
RAMP MYSTIC AVE TO I-93 N
SHERMAN ST
AUSTIN ST
CUTTER ST
ASSEMBLY ROW
GARFIELD AVE
RUSH ST
ILLINOIS AVE
MICHIG AN AVE
MINNESOTA AVE
INDIANAAVE
WISCONSIN AVE
CUMMINGS ST
NOONAN PL
MIDDLESEXAVE
FRANKLIN S T
MAINE TER
HATH ORN ST
N UNION ST
BROOK ST
MCGRATH HWY
BENEDICT ST
LINCOLN ST
MAINE AVE
BRO ADWAY PL
KENSINGTON AVE
ALFRED A LOMBARDI WAY
CONNECTICUT AVE
RHODE ISLAND AVE
BISHOP PL
MYSTIC AVE
FELLSWAY
ASSEMBLY ROW
ASSEMBLY ROW
BROADWAY
ASSEMBLY SQ DR
§¨¦93
§¨¦93
¬«38
¬«28
Pedestrian
Streets
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
PEDESTRIAN STREET
MAP
²
Date: November 25, 2019
13 CAMBRIDGE
ELM ST
BEACON ST
SOMERVILLE AVE
PORTER ST
LINDEN AVE
HARRIS ST
CRAIGIE ST
MILLER ST
MOSSLAND ST
CEDAR ST
GUSSIE TER
HOLYOKE RD
ACADIA PARK
EUSTIS ST
OXFORD ST
PARKER PL
SACRAMENTO ST
CARVER ST
FOREST ST
GREENWOOD TER
OAK TER
ROSELAND ST
EVERGREEN SQ
BEACON TER
HAYDEN TER
Pedestrian
Streets
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
PEDESTRIAN STREET
MAP
²
Date: November 25, 2019
14
CAMBRIDGE
SUMMER ST
SOMERVILLE AVE
BEACON ST
SCHOOL ST
CEN TR AL ST
AVON ST
LOWELL ST
DANE ST
PARK ST
BELMONT ST
HIGHLAND AVE
OXFORD ST
CRAIGIE ST
WASHINGTON ST
BERKELEY ST
CHURCH ST
LAUREL ST
LAKE ST
PITMAN ST
QUINCY ST
PO RTE R ST
BOW ST
BENT ON RD
HANSON ST
SPR ING ST
MADISON ST
PR ESCOTT ST
DANE AVE
HARVARD ST
IVALOO ST
ATHERTON ST
GIBBENS ST
IBBET SON ST
SKEHAN ST
HARRISON ST
TYLER ST
PRESTON RD
CAMBRIA ST
LORI NG ST
KNAPP ST
DURHAM ST
PUTNAM ST
GRANITE ST
BEECH ST
KENT ST
OSGOOD ST
VILLAGE ST
ELIOT ST
MILLER ST
SILVEY PL
LELAND ST
KENT CT
WESTWOOD RD
MONMOU TH ST
CLEVELAND ST
ELM ST
PA RK PL
GARDEN CT
KIMBALL ST
MORGAN ST
GREENE ST
PERRY ST
GUSSIE TER
PR O PERZI WAY
CARLTON ST
TRULL LN
ELM PL
MONTROSE ST
BLEACHE RY CT
BOW ST PL
BOWDOIN ST
NEVADAAVE
HERSEY ST
MONDAMIN CT
KILBY ST
SYCAMORE ST
PARKER ST
ROSE ST
LAUREL TER
LANDERS ST
SACRAMENTO ST
PARKDALE S T
MUSEUM ST
ARNOLD CT
ALLEN CT
GOULD AVE
HANSON AVE
CARTER TER
BELMONT PL
SPRING HILL TER
PRIVATE DRIVE
HILLSIDE CIR
DANTE TER
LOWELL CIR
MARDELL CIR
CRAIGIE TER
BELMONT TER
HODGDON P L
BECKWITH CIR
OLIVE SQ
BELMO NT SQ
KENT ST
SACRAMENTO ST
PROPERZI WAY
Pedestrian
Streets
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
PEDESTRIAN STREET
MAP
²
Date: November 25, 2019
15
WALNUT ST
GLEN ST
CROSS ST
MCGRATH HWY
FLINT ST
PEARL ST
MEDFORD ST
BOSTON ST
HIGHLAND AVE
VINAL AVE
GILMAN ST
MUNROE ST
JOY ST
PU TNAM ST
SCHOOL ST
TUFTS ST
BOW ST
OLIVER ST
OTIS ST
DANA ST
FR ANKLIN ST
COLUMBUS AVE
SUMMER ST
PR ES COTT ST
RUSH ST
BONAIR ST
SOMERVILLE AVE
STONE AVE
EVERETT AVE
DELL ST
ALSTON ST
WARREN AVE
WASHINGTON ST
BROOK ST
WESLEY ST
LAKE ST
GREENVILLE ST
SUMMIT AVE
UNION SQ
FOUNTAIN AVE
BROADWAY
FRAN KLIN AVE
THORPE ST
PLEASANT AVE
ALDERSEY ST
AUBURN AVE
VIRGINIA ST
ALDRICH ST
JAMES ST
NEW WASHINGTON ST
GRAND VIEW AVE
BON NER AVE
MONTROSE ST
MADISON ST
WIGGLESWORTH ST
MANSFIELD ST
KNOWLTON ST
PROSPECT HILL AVE
EVERETT ST
GILMAN TER
JAS PER ST
WEBSTER AVE
KINGMAN RD
WESLEY PARK
LINWOOD ST
MORTON ST
ROSSMORE ST
MERRIAM ST
BRADLEY ST
WEBSTER ST
RAMP-RT 28 SB TO SOMERVILLE AVE
BO W ST PL
FLINT AVE
AUTUMN ST
KILBY ST
SANBORN AVE
SUNNYSIDE AVE
PROSPECT HILL PKWY
RADCLIFFE RD
BIGELOW ST
HOMER SQ
SKILTO N AVE
COBBLE HILL RD
WASHINGTON AVE
WASH INGTON TER
RANDOLPH PL
ROYCE PL
DELAWARE ST
ELLSWORTH ST
AVON PL
SANBORN CT
PEARL TER
PEARL ST PL
HILLSIDE AVE
HADLEY CT
REED CT
PALMER AVE
LAWSON TER
MCGRATH HWY
SOMERVILLE AVE
RUSH ST
WASHINGTON ST
PEARL ST
OTIS ST
BROADWAY
KNOWLTON ST
¬«28
Pedestrian
Streets
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
PEDESTRIAN STREET
MAP
²
Date: November 25, 2019
16 BOSTON
I-93 S
I-93 N
BROADWAY
FRANKLIN ST
PEARL ST
MYRTLE ST
PERKINS ST
GLEN ST
FLORENCE ST
PINCKNEY ST
INNER BELT RD
WASHINGTON ST
MYSTIC AV E
MT VERNON ST
CUTTER ST
NEW WASHINGTON ST
SHERMAN ST
LINCOLN ST
AUSTIN ST
MT P LEASANT ST
WEBSTER ST
FRANKL IN AVE
RUSH ST
CRESCENT ST
LINCOLN AVE
COBBLE HILL RD
INDIANA AVE
ASSEMBLY SQ DR
ILLINOIS AVE
FIRST AVE
ARLINGTON ST
PENNSYLVANIA AVE
HATHORN ST
FLINT ST
GEORGE ST
N UNION ST
WHEELER ST
MICHIGAN AVE
BROOK ST
BENEDICT ST
WASHINGTON AVE
BROADWAY PL
ALFRED A LOMBARDI WAY
PINCKNEY PL
PERKINS PL
REMICK CT
BISHOP PL
MYRTLE PL
MT VERNON ST
PEARL ST
BROADWAY
MYSTIC AVE
§¨¦93
§¨¦93
¬«38
¬«38
Pedestrian
Streets
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
PEDESTRIAN STREET
MAP
²
Date: November 25, 2019
17 CAMBRIDGE
BEACON ST
LINE ST
WASHINGTON ST
DIMICK ST
LAKE ST
MARION ST
CONCORD AVE
DANE ST
OAK ST
HANSON S T
PERRY ST
CALVIN ST
DANE AVE
ROSE ST
WYATT ST
SKEHAN ST
SPRINGFIELD ST
PROPERZI WAY
LEWIS ST
PARK ST
ADRIAN ST
DICKINSON ST
HARO LD ST PA RK DALE ST
MAGN US AVE
DURHAM ST
VILLAGE ST
LELAND ST
LINCOLN PKWY
EL IOT ST
BOWDOIN ST
WALDO AVE
COONEY ST
SMITH AVE
TAUNTON ST
NEVADAAVE
HAMMOND ST
PARKER ST
LEON ST
BUCKINGHAM ST
BEACON PL
MORGAN ST
CHURCH ST
ARNOLD CT
CALDWELL AVE
HANSON AV E
WYATT CIR
PRIVATE DRIVE
HOLTS AVE
HOD GDO N PL
OLIVE SQ
HOLDEN GREEN
Pedestrian
Streets
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
PEDESTRIAN STREET
MAP
²
Date: November 25, 2019
18
CAMBRIDGE
SOMERVILLE AVE
MCGRATH HWY
JOY ST
PRO SPECT ST
WE BSTER AVE
LINWOOD ST
OAK ST
SOUTH ST
MEDFOR D ST
ALLEN ST
CHESTNUT ST
LINDEN ST
CLARK ST
MANSFIELD ST
NEWTON ST
COLUMBIA ST
WASHINGTON ST
POPLAR ST
WARD ST
LAKE ST
TRE MO NT ST
UNION SQ
BOLTON ST
MERRIAM ST
ADRIAN ST
JOSEPH ST
STONE AV E
HORA CE ST
SOMERVILLE AVE EXT
CONCORD AVE
ROSSMORE ST
HOUGHTON ST
RAMP-RT 28 SB TO SOMERVILLE AV E
HARDIN G ST
COLUMBUS AVE
BONNER AVE
EVERETT ST
BO STON ST
RAMP-RT 28 NB TO WASHINGTON ST
KINGMAN RD
BOW ST
MUNROE ST
NORFO LK ST
BEACH AVE
WARREN AVE
COLUMBIA CT
HOMER SQ
COBBLE HILL RD
WAS HINGTON TER
WILL OW ST
SANBORN CT
BEDFORD ST
HOLTS AVE
HUN TING ST
WARREN ST
MCGRATH HWY
SOMERVILLE AVE
MCGRATH HWY
NEWTON ST
MCGRATH HWY
MERRIAM ST
¬«28
¬«28
Pedestrian
Streets
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
PEDESTRIAN STREET
MAP
²
Date: November 25, 2019
19
BOSTON
CAMBRIDGE
I-93 S
I-93 N
THIRD AVE
MCGRATH HWY
INNER BELT RD
RUFO RD
NEW WASHINGTON ST
CHESTNUT ST
COBBLE HILL RD
FIRST AVE
FITCHBURG ST
LINWOOD ST
§¨¦93
§¨¦93
¬«28
¬«28
Pedestrian
Streets
1
6 8
2 3
4 5 7
9
17 18 19
10 11 12
13 14 15 16
0 250 500
Feet
CITY OF
SOMERVILLE, MA
PEDESTRIAN STREET
MAP
²
Date: November 25, 2019

RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR ALL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITIES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR ALL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Note— Included herein are the amended material approved by the zoning board of appeals, March 16, 2011 and the planning board March 17, 2011 to the general rules and regulations for all permit granting authorities. These provisions derived from amendment of June 4, 2008 and amendment of June 29, 2010. Further amendments to the general rules and regulations for all permit granting authorities indicated by parenthetical history notes. 
 
Section 1. - Introduction. 
A.  Purpose. In accordance with the City of Somerville Code of Ordinances and the Massachusetts General Laws, certain bodies and/or administrators have been established and authorized to review, deliberate, make findings, determinations, and recommendations and grant or deny zoning appeals and petitions. These bodies shall be known as Special Permit Granting Authorities (SPGAs), and are synonymous with the same term used in Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws. This document herein establishes the Rules and Regulations for SPGAs serving the City of Somerville, as well as the Design Review Committee that makes recommendations to the SPGAs. 
The Rules and Regulations of the Special Permit Granting Authorities are intended to serve as a guide for the actions of all permit granting authorities in the City of Somerville, with reference to zoning appeals and petitions, and other planning and zoning issues, including but not limited to the issuance of special permits. The Rules and Regulations are also designed to facilitate the orderly and efficient conduct of business by these permit granting authorities by the specifying standard procedures to be used in their business affairs with the public. 
B.  Organization and the "Principal Body" of the Rules and Regulations. The Rules and Regulations are organized in several Chapters. Each SPGA has adopted its own general Rules and Regulations dedicated as a separate chapter herein. In addition, certain Chapters establish Rules pertaining to a specific type of permitting process, over which only one (1) SPGA governs. These rules will also be set forth as discrete Chapters, and be adopted only by the appropriate administering SPGA. The Design Review Committee, as an advisory committee to the SPGAs, need only adopt their own separate chapter. 
The following Chapters are the "principal body" of the Rules and Regulations and shall govern the actions of all SPGAs. These chapters are designed for adoption by all SPGAs, but need not be adopted by the Design Review Committee: 
Chapter 1 - General Rules and Regulations for All Special Permit Granting Authorities. 
Chapter 2 - Rules and Regulations for Zoning Petitions. 
Chapter 3 - Rules and Regulations for Inclusionary Housing. 
C.  Adoption and Amendment. As the Principal body of the Rules and Regulations, the Chapters listed immediately above shall take effect only upon the adoption by each and every SPGA duly authorized and appointed to serve within the City of Somerville. Adoption by the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) shall be deemed to automatically include "adoption" of the same by any Zoning Administrator serving under the auspices of the of the ZBA as authorized by MGL Ch. 40A and the Somerville Zoning Ordinance (SZO). Approval of the above listed Chapters shall require an affirmative vote of four (4) members of each five (5) member SPGA, or two thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of any SPGA having other than five (5) members. The "principal body" of these Rules and Regulations shall take effect upon adoption by all SPGAs. 
Amendment(s) to the "principal body" Chapters of the Rules and Regulations may be proposed or sponsored by the Planning Director or any member of the SPGA. Amendment(s) shall be made under the same procedures specified immediately above for adoption, requiring affirmation by each and every SPGA before taking effect. 
D.  Recordation and Inspection by the Public. At the beginning of each Chapter, a cover sheet shall be provided specifying which SPGAs adopted said Chapter, on what date(s), and attested to by the appropriate SPGA Chairperson, or by the senior administrative official if the SPGA is a zoning administrator or an agency or department of the City of Somerville. 
Upon adoption, a true copy of the Rules and Regulations shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk, including any amendment(s). The Rules and Regulations shall be available for public inspection at the offices of the Planning Division, City Clerk, and Inspectional Services. A copy of the Rules and Regulations, or any individual Chapter thereof, may be purchased at the Office of the City Clerk for a nominal fee to cover publishing cost.  
Section 2. - Definitions. 
Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA). The City of Somerville Zoning Board of Appeals, established in accordance with MGL Ch40A, Sec. 12, and with the City Code of Ordinances. 
Housing Director. The Director of the Housing Division of the Office of Strategic Planning and Community Development. The Housing Director may delegate tasks identified in these Rules and Regulations to a designated staff member of the Housing Division. 
IH. Inclusionary Housing units (see Chapter 3 of the Rules & Regulations). 
OSPCD. The Office of Strategic Planning and Community Development. 
Planning Board (PB). The City of Somerville Planning Board, established in accordance with MGL Ch 41B, Secs. 81A-81J, and within the City Code of Ordinances. 
Planning Director (or "Director"). The Director of the Planning Division of OSPCD. The Planning Director may delegate tasks identified in these Rules and Regulations to a designated staff member of the Planning Division. 
SPGA. Special Permit Granting Authority; a body and/or administrator established and authorized to review, deliberate, make findings, recommendations and determinations, and grant or deny zoning appeals and petitions including but not limited to special permits. 
SZO. Zoning Ordinance of the City of Somerville.  
Section 3. - Designation of the special permit granting authorities. 
As authorized under the Massachusetts General Laws, and in compliance with the Somerville City Code of Ordinances and Zoning Ordinance of the City of Somerville (SZO), appeals, petitions or applications related to the SZO or to decisions of its enforcing officers shall be presented to and heard before the relevant special permit granting authority (SPGA). 
Within the City of Somerville, the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) and Planning Board (PB) serve as Special Permit Granting Authorities, and are responsible for the appeals, petitions, applications and/or special permits shown below: 
A.  Board of Appeals (ZBA). The Board of Appeals (ZBA) hears cases for: 
1)  Variances - every petition for the relief by variance as provided by SZO Article 5 and MGL Chapter 40A, Section 10; 
2)  Special Permit Applications except where the Planning Board is designated in the SZO as the SPGA (see below) including special permit with design review and, special permit with site plan review; 
3)  Appeals by aggrieved parties of administrative or enforcement decisions; 
4)  Comprehensive Permit Petitions filed in accordance with MGL Chapter 40B, Secs. 2-23. 
B.  Planning Board (PB). The Planning Board (PB), in addition to its statutory role in approving the City's Comprehensive Master Plan and providing recommendations on Zoning Amendments to the Board of Aldermen also hears cases for: 
1)  Special Permit Applications in any Planned Unit Development (PUD) district, any Corridor Commercial (CCD) or Transit Oriented (TOD) district, Assembly Square Mixed Use District, Union Square Overlay District, Arts Overlay District and any other district, use, dimensional requirement or other purpose for which the SZO specifically identifies the Planning Board as the SPGA including special permit with design review, and special permit with site plan review. ? 
2)  Site Plan Approval - any petition for site plan approval (SZO Article 5) and any appeal of a decision by an administrative official delegated to administer a minor site plan approval process established under SZO Article 5 and Chapter 6 of the Rules and Regulations. 
(Amend. of 11-15-2017(1) )  
Section 4. - Reserved.  
Section 5. - Application form. 
The Planning Director shall prepare an Application Form for Planning Board and Zoning Board of Appeals Approval to be used in filing any appeal or petition to the SPGAs. The form should provide basic instructions to the Applicant and shall be designed to document the ownership of the property in question, the Assessor's map and parcel number(s) and the name, address and telephone number(s) of the Applicant(s) and their Agent(s), as applicable. The application form should provide space for the Applicant to clearly identify the nature of the appeal or petition (also refer to Section 7 herein). The application form shall be available to the public at the offices of the Planning Division, City Clerk, and Inspectional Services Division, and on the City of Somerville Web Site. 
The Director of Transportation and Infrastructure shall prepare submittal requirements for Mobility Management Plans to be used in the filing of any appeal or petition to the SPGAs. The requirements should provide basic instructions to the Applicant and require general background information about the proposed development and the transportation context, mode split/trip generation information, details about proposed programs and services, requirements for monitoring and annual reporting, and explanation that if commitments are not met on an annual basis that additional mobility management programs and services must be implemented. The submittal requirements must be available to the public at the offices of the Transportation and Infrastructure Division, the Planning Division, and on the City of Somerville Web Site. 
(Amend. of 11-15-2017(1) )  
Section 6. - Filing fees. 
A.  Establishment of Filing Fees. Accompanying each application or petition to the SPGA shall be a filing fee reflective of processing expenses, as indicated by the schedule attached herein as "Appendix 1A. Schedule of Filing Fees." No petition will be processed with out the requisite fee. 
Applicants should consult with the Planning Division to determine the applicable fee before officially filing the application with the City Clerk. 
B.  Advertising and Notification Fee. In addition to the filing fee, Applicants must also pay the cost to publish legal notice of the hearing in the newspaper, and to cover mailing costs to notify abutters to the subject property and neighboring cities and towns. The calculation of the advertising and notification fee shall be as follows: 
Newspaper: Fees for newspaper advertising should reflect the actual cost of the advertisement or shall be established by the Planning Division to reflect a pro-rated portion of the total cost of all application advertisements over the period of one year. 
Mailed Notices: Fees for mailed notice shall be $2 for all required to receive notice, including: 
• Each abutter on certified abutter list; 
• Applicant, Agents, and Owner listed on Application; and 
• The Town of Arlington, Boston Redevelopment Authority, City of Cambridge, City of Everett, City of Medford, Metropolitan Area Planning Council, and Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development as they are required to receive notice under Chapter 40A of MGL. 
C.  Reserved. 
D.  Project Review Fees. 
1.  In accordance with M.G.L. c.44 §53G, the SPGA may require that Applicants pay the reasonable cost for the SPGA to employ outside consultants with respect to the review of a proposed project. 
2.  The SPGA may use the Project Review Fee to engage experts, other than attorneys, as outside consultants to assist the SPGA in its work. 
3.  The Project Review Fee shall be deposited with the City Treasurer who shall establish a special account in accordance with M.G.L. Ch. 44 §53G. Expenditures from this special account may be made at the direction of the SPGA without further appropriation. Expenditures from this special account shall be made only for services rendered in connection with a specific project or projects for which a Project Review Fee has been or will be collected from the Applicant. Accrued interest may also be spent for this purpose. Failure of an Applicant to pay a required Project Review Fee shall be grounds for denial of the application. 
4.  At the completion of the SPGA's review of a project, any excess amount in the account, including interest, attributable to a specific project, shall be repaid to the Applicant or the Applicant's successor in interest. The SPGA shall provide the Applicant or the Applicant's successor in interest with a final report of said account. An Applicant's successor in interest shall provide the SPGA with documentation establishing such succession in interest. 
5.  Any Applicant may make a written administrative appeal from the selection of the outside consultant to the Board of Aldermen within twenty (20) days after the SPGA has mailed or hand delivered notice of the selection to the Applicant. The grounds for such an appeal shall be limited to claims that the consultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum, required qualifications. The minimum qualifications shall consist either of an educational degree in, or related to, the field at issue or three (3) or more years of practice in the field at issue or a related field. The required time limit for action upon an application by the SPGA shall be extended by the duration of the administrative appeal. In the event that no decision is made by the Board of Aldermen within one (1) month following the filing of the appeal, the selection made by the SPGA shall stand.  
Section 7. - Basic procedure for filing an application with the SPGA. 
A.  Completing Application form and Minimum Submission Requirement. At minimum, any application to the SPGA shall consist of: 
• An application Form for Planning Board and Zoning Board of Appeals Approval (as established under Section 5 herein), completed to the satisfaction of the Planning Division; 
• the requisite review fee as stipulated under these Rules and Regulations, and 
• information as required under the SZO and these Rules and Regulations for the specific type petition, including: 
º A boundary survey plat or bank mortgage plan, and 
º a copy of the deed for the property. 
º For special permits, the minimum information identified in the application form. 
º For appeals of administrative decisions, a petitioner should clearly state the nature of the decision being appealed and present a, brief, written summary of the rationale or basis for the appeal. 
B.  Official Filing of Application with City Clerk. The Applicant shall present his/her application (as noted above) at the Planning Division, then to the offices of the City Clerk. Copies of the application shall be submitted, as required on the application form. The City Clerk will affix an official stamp on the application (including copies) stating the date received, and this stamp shall designate the official filing date. 
Only one (1) copy of specialized, project-specific items such as architectural material samples shall be required. 
Notwithstanding the above, the SPGA or its designees may request extra copies of application materials at any point during the official review period.  
Section 8. - Application involving traffic of parking review. 
Additional copies of the application may be required in the official filing in certain cases where review by the Director of Traffic and Parking is required. At minimum, this will apply in the following cases: 
1)  An application or a special permit to modify parking requirements, pursuant to SZO Section 9.13; 
2)  A petition involving development where a new curb cut is proposed, or where an existing curb cut onto a public street is relocated; 
3)  A petition for a parking variance of three (3) or more parking spaces; or, 
4)  When there is a request by the SPGA or its designee for a traffic study.  
Section 9. - Additional rules pertaining to applicants and petitioners. 
A.  Failure of Applicant to Appear. Should an Applicant of Petitioner, or his/her representative(s) or agent(s), fail to appear at a scheduled public hearing before the designated SPGA, then the SPGA may consider his/her failure to appear as a withdrawal of his/her application. Such failure to appear will not entitle the Applicant to a refund of the filing fees paid hereunder. An Applicant who fails to appear shall be entitled to file a new application upon compliance with the requirements herein. 
B.  Incomplete Applications. Failure to file all information required by the Somerville Zoning Ordinance and these Rules and Regulations, in the office of the City Clerk or subsequently with the Planning Division within ten (10) days after the initial application, means the application will be deemed incomplete, and will not be processed further. Applications must be complete to the satisfaction of Planning Staff twenty (20) days before the hearing for which the application was submitted, or the incomplete application will not be scheduled for that hearing. If applications are still not complete to the satisfaction of the Planning Staff twenty (20) days before the following hearing, the Planning Staff will request that the Applicant submit a written request to waive the timeframe requirements of MGL Chapter 40, Section 9, and request that the hearing be scheduled at a time when the application is complete. 
To meet the statutory timeframes of MGL Chapter 40A, Section 9, incomplete applications that have not received an extension of time will automatically be scheduled for the last meeting of the SPGA that will still meet the required application timeframe, and will be forwarded with a staff report that indicates that the Planning Staff is unable to recommend approval of a the project because the application is incomplete. 
Additional application materials submitted within 19 days of the first scheduled hearing will not be incorporated into the Planning Division's recommendation to the SPGA except at the discretion of the Planning Staff. 
If an application reaches the SPGA and the SPGA deems it incomplete, the SPGA shall have full authority to deny the petition or relief sought due to an insufficient level of information in which to conduct a fair, complete analysis, but shall specify the incomplete components of the application in accordance with the requirements of the SZO. 
Notwithstanding their right to disapprove an incomplete application, the SPGA may allow the Applicant to choose one of the following options: 
1)  Withdrawal of the application, and re-filing when sufficient information is available and application materials are complete; a second filing fee will be required and the withdrawal and re-filing shall be subject to the provisions of "C" below; or 
2)  Mutual Agreement between the Applicant and the SPGA to waive the time requirements for public hearing and SPGA action, and to extend these to allow the Applicant to complete his/her application and allow the SPGA sufficient time to review the application and reschedule the meeting and/or public hearing. 
C.  Application Withdrawal. An Applicant may withdraw his/her application without prejudice prior to the publication of the notice of a public hearing thereon, but thereafter it may be withdrawn without prejudice only in writing and with the approval of four (4) members of the SPGA. Withdrawal will not entitle an Applicant to a refund of the filing fees paid hereunder. An Applicant who withdraws his/her application shall be entitled to file a new application upon compliance with the requirements herein, including the payment of fees in accordance with the fee schedule then in effect. 
D.  Mutual Agreement for Extension of Time. In accordance with MGL Chapter 40A, Sections 9 and 15, and SZO Sections 3.2.7 and 5.3.4, the required time limits for a public hearing and SPGA action on a given application, petition, or appeal may extended by mutual agreement of the SPGA and the Applicant. The mutual agreement shall be in writing and must be executed on the document form provided by the SPGA for such purpose. The mutual agreement for extension of the time shall apply concurrently to both the time limit for public hearing and time limit for decision of action by the SPGA, and shall specify definitively the deadlines mutually agreed upon. At least four (4) members of the SPGA must consent to this extension of time. The SPGAs hereby grant authority to establish the document form to accept a mutual agreement for extension of time and upon a vote of the relevant SPGA grant the Planning Director the authority to sign and certify that the SPGA has agreed to the time extension. 
The mutual agreement may include a provision that there be notification of a rescheduled public hearing in accordance with MGL Ch 40A and the SZO, and that reasonable costs of the re-notification of abutters, parties in interest, etc. relative to a delayed public hearing shall be borne by the Applicant. 
Upon execution of the written mutual agreement for the extension of time, a copy of the document shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk as well as with the Planning Division. 
E.  Continuance. Applicants and Petitioners may request continuance of a public hearing or other meeting relative to their application so long as the continued hearing or meeting may be conducted within the prescribed statutory time limits. The Applicant or Petitioner should demonstrate good cause for the continuance, and this form of continuance is purely at the discretion of the SPGA, requiring a vote of consent of at least four (4) members. The SPGA shall determine an appropriate date and time for rescheduling the continued hearing or meeting, and is under no obligation to give future priority to an Applicant that requests continuance. 
If there is a need for the re-notification of a rescheduled public hearing in accordance with MGL Ch40A and the SZO, reasonable costs of the re-notification of abutters, parties-in-interest, etc. relative to a delayed public hearing shall be borne by the Applicant. 
At the discretion of the Planning Director, the Applicant may be assessed additional costs related to delays in public hearings caused by the Applicant's incomplete application, multiple amended applications, and/or other acts or omissions by the Applicant which create extensive additional work for the Planning Director and the Board that is far in excess of the value of the initial application fee. 
At the discretion of the Planning Director the City may bear the cost of re-notification for a public hearing when an error in notice occurs that is not the fault of the Applicant.  
Section 10. - Payment in lieu of parking. 
In accordance with SZO Section 6.1.22.G, the Rules and Regulations of the SPGAs shall designate the in-lieu fee for parking. The fee per parking space is $18,500. The monies collected through this provision will be held in a stabilization fund. Payment options are specified in the applicable section of the zoning ordinance.  
Section 11. - Payment in Lieu of Civic Space. 
In accordance with SZO Section 6.8.6.A.3, the Planning Board shall establish a fee schedule for payments in lieu of civic space, based upon recommendations of the Director of Transportation and Infrastructure. The fee per square foot will be $100.00. The monies collected through this provision will be held in a stabilization fund. 
(Amend. of 11-15-2017(1) )  
Section 12. - Effective Date. 
These amended Rules and Regulations shall take effect on April 8, 2011, and shall be valid for all cases for which legal advertisements have not been published on or before April 1, 2011. 
(Amend. of 11-15-2017(1) ) 
Appendix 1A. Schedule of Filing Fees 
Application Fees 	Base Fee 	Additional Fee (Per Square Foot/Unit) 
For mixed use, apply residential and commercial fees 	Waive Additional Fee If: 	Max Fee* 
Special Permits & Special Permits with Design Review 
Dimensional 	$185 	20 cents per new square foot 
(residential or commercial) 	1 or 2 family homes 	$3,000 
Sign 	$185 	$1.50 per square foot over allowed 		$6,000 
Parking 	$185 	$100 per space 	Shared or Offsite Parking 	$7,500 
Wireless Communication Facility 	$2,500 			
Change or Establish Use 	$185 	15 cents per new or existing 
commercial square foot or 
$125 per new dwelling unit 	1 or 2 family home 	$3,000 
Special Permit with Site Plan Review 
Change or Establish Use 	$300 	20 cents per new or existing 
commercial square foot or 
$125 per new dwelling unit. 	1 or 2 family home 	$4,000 
Variances 
Dimensional 	$250 	20 cents per new square foot 
(residential or commercial) 	1 or 2 family home 	$3,000 
Sign 	$250 	$1.25 per square foot over allowed 		$7,500 
Parking 	$250 	$100 per space 	Shared or Offsite Parking 	$7,500 
Planned Unit Developments 
Master Plan 	$250 	$450 per acre 		$7,500 
Revision to Master Plan 	$125 	$225 per acre 		$7,500 
SPSR for each Phase 	$250 	20 cents per new commercial square foot of $100 per new dwelling unit. 		$12,500 
Minor Amendment to PUD 	$250 			
Site Plan Approval 
Minor Project 	$125 			
Site Plan Approval 	$175 	17 cents per new commercial square foot or $100 per new dwelling unit. 		$6,000 
Subdivision of Recorded Land 	$225 	$50 per new lot proposed 	Lot Line Adjustment 	
Subdivision of Registered Land 	$400 	$50 per new lot proposed 	Lot Line Adjustment 	
Revisions 
De Minimis 	$125 			
Revision with Notice 	75% Application Fee - Not less than $125 			$1,250 
Technical Review/Assistance 
Design Review Committee 	$125 	For First Requisite Meeting 		
Pre-Application Technical Review Meeting (SPSR) 	$125 	For First Requisite Meeting 		
Pre-Application Review Meeting (PUD) 	$400 	For First Requisite Meeting 		
Other 
Administrative Appeal 	$125 			
Comprehensive Permit 	$225 	$100 per new dwelling unit 		
				
* Total fees for an Applicant seeking any combination of a Special Permit, Variance, or SPSR shall not exceed $18,000. 
 
  	BASE FEE 	ADDITIONAL 
FEE 	MAX FEE 	AD FEE 	ABUTTERS 
FEE 	DECISION 
FEE 
Review/Final Submittal 	$300 	$500/acre 	$8,500 	$350 	$25 	$0.25/page + $6.65 per property owner 
Revision/ Major Amendment 	$20 	$250/acre 	$8,500 	$350 	$25 	$0.25/page + $6.65 per property owner 
Revision / Minor Amendment (de minimis) 	$150 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 
 
(Amend. of 6-4-2008; Amend. of 6-29-2010; Amend. of 6-23-2011; Amend. of 11-15-2017(1) )  
Chapter 2 - RULES AND REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO ZONING PETITIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— Included herein are the amended material approved by the zoning board of appeals, March 16, 2011 and the planning board March 17, 2011 to zoning petitions. Further amendments pertaining to zoning petitions indicated by parenthetical history notes. 
 
Section 1. - Zoning petition. 
Unless specifically stated otherwise, as used hereinafter the terms "petition" or "application" shall be deemed to include any petition or application for any kind of special permit, including a special permit related to a nonconforming use or structure, special permit with design review, and special permit with site plan review, as well as any permit for a site plan review, variance, comprehensive permit, planned unit development or administrative appeal from a decision of the Superintendent of Inspectional Services.  
Section 2. - Planning director—Designation of administrative authorities and responsibilities. 
The SPGA designates the Planning Director with the following authorities and responsibilities relevant to zoning petitions. 
1.  Review and prepare a staff report and recommendations to the SPGA; 
2.  Reserved; 
3.  Reserved; 
4.  Serve as the SPGA's designee regarding Sections 5.1.2 and 5.2.3. of the SZO in determining information and submittal requirements of an application, and determining if an application is complete, per Section 9 of Chapter 1 of these Rules and Regulations (the Planning Director's determinations may be overruled by the SPGA); 
5.  Ensure and document compliance with the procedures of SZO Section 5.3 and with relevant provisions of these Rules and Regulations, particularly those related to public notice, keeping record of Planning Board proceedings, and filing of Planning Board decisions; 
6.  Serve as the SPGA liaison with other relevant agencies and designated entities referred to in the SZO or elsewhere in these Rules and Regulations; 
7.  Provide technical analysis and advice, as requested or where appropriate, to the SPGA. 
The Director may assign a person of his/her staff to coordinate review of any given petition.  
Section 3. - General provisions for all applications. 
A.  Meeting with Director. Although not mandatory, Applicants are encouraged to meet with the Director (or his/her staff designee) prior to submitting an application to determine specific information that should be included in the application. As a matter of policy, the SPGA authorizes the Planning Director to determine adequacy of the information submitted with a petition to allow proper professional review and to schedule the complete application on the SPGA agenda. 
B.  Reserved. 
C.  Reserved. 
D.  Director to Review Information Submitted in Application. The Director shall review each zoning petition for its informational content and determine adequacy of that information for his/her report to the SPGA. 
The Director should endeavor to identify missing or incomplete information as soon as possible after the application is officially filed, and to notify the Applicant expeditiously. Depending on the nature of the proposed development project, additional information may be requested by the Planning Director in keeping with SZO Sections 5.1.2 and 5.2.3. 
Requests for additional information and information required for a complete application shall be provided to an Applicant within five (5) business days after the initial application submission deadline date in the application information sheet; however, the Director reserves the right to ask for additional information after this date. Applications must be complete twenty (20) days before the hearing date to be scheduled. 
The Director may also waive any and all of the information outlined under SZO Sections 5.1.2 or 5.2.3, as applicable, using his/her professional judgment as to the applicability to a given petition. 
E.  Applicant Request for Waiver of Information Submittal Requirements. An Applicant may submit a written request for waiver of certain information submittal items, provided the request is included in the official filing or, preferably, addressed to the Planning Director prior to the official filing. Within ten (10) business days of receipt of the waiver request, the Planning Director should notify the Applicant in writing of his/her decision regarding the request. 
If an Applicant is dissatisfied with response of the Planning Director, he/she may file a written statement in the offices of the SPGA, specifying the nature of disagreement on submission of information, and requesting that the application be reviewed based on the information that is submitted, even if such information is deemed incomplete by the Director. In submitting such a request, an Applicant acknowledges that he/she is proceeding at risk of the SPGA denying the special permit on the basis of an incomplete application (SZO Sections 5.1.4 and 5.2.5). The SPGA alone shall determine the merits of an information waiver request and/or an application deemed incomplete by the Director and submitted by the Applicant under the above terms. 
F.  Reserved. 
G.  Additional Requirements for SPD and SPSR Applications. The following additional requirements shall apply: 
For SPSR applications, it will be considered normal procedure that there be a meeting between the Applicant and Director (or his/her designee) prior to official filing. The Director should be available upon reasonable notice for such a meeting, or designate one of his/her staff members to arrange a meeting when requested by an Applicant. An Applicant for SPSR should meet with the Director and provide one (1) copy of his/her application for the purpose of reviewing its completeness in form and minimum submission requirements, and determine any further information that will be necessary for proper review. 
For all SPSR and SPD applications for new construction, the project shall be required to undergo a minimum of one (1) review by the Design Review Committee either prior to the opening of the public hearing or before the public hearing process is concluded.  
Section 4. - Reserved.  
Section 5. - Review of special permit petitions. 
A.  Review and recommendations of Planning Director. Upon receipt of an official copy of an application from the City Clerk's Office, the Planning Director shall conduct a formal review of the application and prepare a report and recommendations on its disposition. The Director is granted discretion as to the most desirable formats and methods of communication. 
The Planning Director should always communicate with other relevant City Departments, which may wish to comment on a given application (in particular, Inspectional Services, Fire Prevention, Traffic and Parking, and the Engineering departments. The Planning Director should seek to establish a regular project review meeting with these departments. The Director's report should incorporate these comments to the maximum extent practical. 
The Planning Director may also document in his/her report the comments or Position of the Ward Alderman (for the area the development site is located within) and any other record of support or opposition received during the review. 
The Planning Director may submit a preliminary recommendation and update the report to the SPGA, to incorporate comments and suggest conditions that would address concerns raised during the public hearing process. 
B.  Scheduling Hearings and/or Review. The SPGA shall schedule review of petitions consistent with the requirements of MGL Chapter 40A and all relevant state and local statutes. The SPGA shall make best efforts to schedule all submitted petitions for the meeting for which they were submitted. But, in rare cases where an agenda cannot accommodate additional cases, petitions shall be scheduled in the order received, on a first-come, first-served basis unless the application qualifies for fast-tracking under the SZO section 13.6.2 (see Section 6 below for rules pertaining to fast-tracking of special permit applications). 
C.  Reserved. 
D.  Reserved. 
E.  Public Hearing. All hearings shall be open to the public and shall comply with the relevant sections of the Open Meeting Law. No person shall be excluded unless he/she is considered by the Chair to be a "serious hindrance" to the workings of the Board. 
The Chair may limit the length of comments at public hearings, by imposing a reasonable per person time limit for comments when a large number of persons desire to comment on a particular hearing. The Chair may also encourage participants to provide written comments to ensure that more extensive information is reviewed by the Board in a hearing where speaking time is limited. The Chair shall ensure that public comment is permitted in circumstances where new information is provided to the Board and the public at a subsequent meeting. 
Minutes shall be taken at all meetings of the SPGAs. Additionally, audio and/or video recordings shall be made of all public hearings, unless it is technically not practical to do so. Citizens may listen to such recordings by appointment at the Office of the Planning Division. These recordings will also be available to allow members that missed meetings to remain qualified to participate in hearings per MGL Chapter 39 Section 23D. 
The Planning Staff shall be responsible for the preparation of the minutes of public meetings. The minutes shall include all votes of the SPGA, names of individuals who spoke at the meetings, and a brief summary of important points and public testimony. 
A record will be made of all persons offering testimony. To the degree practical, a record should also be made of all other persons in attendance. 
F.  Findings and Determinations. The SPGA shall make appropriate findings and determinations under each applicable item of the application it reviews. 
G.  Written Record of Determination and Decision. The Planning Division staff shall, for the SPGAs, prepare a written record of each finding and determination made by the SPGA, and of the decision as to the granting of the requested zoning relief. 
H.  Filing of Decision. The written decision of the SPGA regarding a zoning petition shall be filed with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days of the decision. Copies of the decision shall be sent to the parties specified under SZO Section 5.3.5. Planning Division staff shall advise Applicants whether decisions must be filed at the Southern Middlesex County Registry of Deeds and/or with the Land Court. 
(Amend. of 11-15-2017(1) )  
Section 6. - Fast-tracking procedures for special petitions including affordable housing. 
A.  Purpose and Eligibility. While all cases are to be handled expeditiously, the SZO establishes two classes of special permit petitions eligible for fast-tracking: 
1)  Under SZO Section 5.3.1, any special permit application including at least 25% affordable housing units; and 
2)  Under SZO Section 13.6.2, any inclusionary housing project (requiring special permit with site plan review) that exceeds the minimum requirements for affordable ("inclusionary") housing units as set forth therein. 
B.  Identify Eligibility. The Applicant shall identify his/her application as eligible for fast-tracking at the time of the official filing of his/her application or, preferably, in advance by confirmation from the Planning Director. The Planning Director is delegated the authority to determine eligibility and state such ruling in his/her reports. 
It is desirable that the Applicant identifies the project as potentially eligible for fast-tracking in early meetings with the Director. This will expedite the determination of eligibility. 
C.  Notice of Fast-tracking. The Applicant shall submit, in his/her official filing with the City Clerk a notice of intent to fast track the application. The Planning Director shall confirm eligibility and forward a copy of the notice to appropriate reviewing boards and departments, the Ward Alderman in whose ward the development is being planned and to the Housing Director. 
D.  Expedited Review of Request for Eligibility. The Planning Director shall take special care to expeditiously rule on any Applicant's request for fast-tracking eligibility. Upon certification of eligibility for fast-tracking, the Planning Director shall immediately notify the Housing Director of the receipt of a fast-tracking application, and the two Directors shall expeditiously review the preliminary filing to determine what information is missing and necessary for review, with the goal of providing feedback to the Applicant within two (2) business days of receipt of the filing. 
E.  Scheduling Planning Board and SPGA Review. The Planning Director shall schedule that Board's review of the application within thirty-one (31) days of the official filing deadline date, provided the submitted application is complete. The Planning Director shall undertake all normal and proper legal advertising of the of the SPGA public hearing on the application as specified elsewhere in these Rules and Regulations. 
The SPGA shall make every effort to make its findings and determinations and act on the fast-track application at the public hearing or as soon thereafter as possible.  
Chapter 3 - RULES AND REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO INCLUSIONARY HOUSING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— Included herein are the amended material approved by the zoning board of appeals, March 16, 2011 and the planning board, March 17, 2011 to inclusionary housing. Further amendments pertaining to inclusionary housing indicated by parenthetical history notes. 
 
Section 1. - Designation of planning and housing directors' authorities. 
A.  General. The SPGA hereby designates the Planning Director and the Director for Housing (hereafter referred to as the "Housing Director"), or their respective staff designees, with the charge of administrative and procedural review of all Inclusionary Housing Applications submitted under the terms of Article 5 and 13 of the Zoning Ordinance (SZO), and reporting of recommendations of such plans to the SPGA. 
An inclusionary housing application requires special permit with site plan review (SPSR). In keeping with standard procedures for SPSR review, the Planning Director shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with the provisions of SZO Article 5. The Planning and Housing Directors shall together be responsible for administering and documenting compliance with the provisions of SZO Article 5. The Planning and Housing Directors shall together be responsible of Article 13 up to the point of SPGA review of the Inclusionary Housing Application, and they shall have the authority to determine the most efficient means of dividing the review workload amongst their respective departments. The Planning and Housing Directors shall ensure compliance with the application/review procedures of these rules and regulations as well. The Housing Director shall have the specific responsibility of administering the provisions of Chapter 3, Section 5 of these Rules and Regulations. 
B.  Recommendations and Technical Advice to SPGA. The Planning and Housing Directors shall make a report to the SPGA on conformance of an inclusionary housing proposal with all applicable sections of the SZO. They shall make every effort to coordinate their respective reviews so that the recommendations on both the SPSR application elements and the more specific Inclusionary Housing application elements are completed and presented together to the SPGA. In order to streamline the review process for Applicants, the Planning and Housing Directors shall serve as the SPGA liaison with other relevant agencies and designated entities referred to in the SZO or elsewhere in these Rules and Regulations, including the Somerville Housing Authority and the Affordable Housing Trust Fund Directors. The Planning and Housing Directors shall provide technical advice to the SPGA on planning, development, and housing issues (including relevant state or federal programs) on an as-needed basis. 
C.  Administration/Enforcement Related to the Implementing Inclusionary Housing Units in an Approved Development. Upon approval of inclusionary housing development, the Housing Director shall oversee compliance of the inclusionary housing component of the project, including compliance of the project with all relevant terms of Article 13 and any conditions of the special permit related to the affordable housing units.  
Section 2. - Procedure for filing an inclusionary housing petition. 
A.  Preliminary Meeting with Planning and Housing Directors. The SPGA strongly encourages Applicants to meet with the Planning and Housing Directors, or their designees, at least three (3) weeks prior to submitting an application. This meeting will be considered standard procedure. 
Inclusionary housing projects undergo a very specific and sometimes complicated review process. Early communication on the part of an Applicant will prove highly worthwhile to his/her understanding of both procedural and substantive requirements. The Planning and Housing Directors or members of their respective staffs shall be available to any Applicant upon reasonable notice to coordinate review with the Applicant. 
B.  Special Permit with Site Plan Review (SPSR) Application. As established in the SZO, an inclusionary housing project by its nature requires SPSR review under Article 5 of the SZO. Therefore, an inclusionary housing Applicant shall submit all applicable information required in Article 5 for SPSR and follow the procedures outlined in Chapter 2 of these Rules and Regulations for SPSR applications. 
C.  Inclusionary Housing Application. Applicants should complete and file the "Inclusionary Housing Application" application included in the "Inclusionary Housing Developer's Kit," available at the Planning Department and at the Office of Housing and Community Development. Applicants will find it worthwhile to meet with the Planning and Housing Directors for assistance in completing the application. 
D.  Official Filing. Chapter 2 of these Rules and Regulations shall govern the procedures to follow in officially filing the petition with the City Clerk, except that five (5) copies of the application shall be filed instead of the normal four (4) copies. The City Clerk shall distribute four copies as noted in Chapter 2, with the officially stamped copy sent to the Housing Director. 
E.  Petition for Fast Tracking (SO Section 13.6.3.) See Chapter 2, Section 6 herein for the rules and regulations governing the processing and scheduling of eligible fast track inclusionary housing petitions. 
F.  Reserved.  
Section 3. - Formal review of the inclusionary housing petition. 
A.  Planning Director Review. Upon receipt of a copy of the SPSR/Inclusionary Housing Petition officially filed in the City Clerk's Office, the Planning Director shall conduct a formal review of the application and prepare a report under the normal procedures for SPSR review outlined in Chapter 2 of these Rules and Regulations, and shall be responsible for coordinating and incorporating the review comments of the other agencies and departments as appropriate. 
B.  Housing Director Review. The Housing Director shall also review the SPSR/Inclusionary Housing Petition, with specific emphasis on determining that the inclusionary housing application component (particularly the "implementation plan") is complete enough in form to be analyzed for recommendations to SPGA. If information is deemed to be insufficient, or the Housing Director requires additional information for proper review, he/she will communicate the need for submission of additional information to the Applicant under the same procedures normally employed for special permit review (see Chapter 2 of these Rules and Regulations) The Housing Director should make every effort to clearly itemize, in writing the missing components and/or additional requested information that will bring the Inclusionary Housing Application component to the satisfaction of the Housing Director. 
The Housing Director shall prepare preliminary recommendations to the SPGA within thirty-five (35) days of the official filing date. The Housing Director may request that the Applicant provide additional information and/or meet with him/her during this review. 
C.  SPGA Public Hearing and Review. The SPGA shall conduct its public hearing and the advertisement/notification of such under standard procedures for an SPSR application. SZO Section 5.3 and Chapter 2 of these Rules and Regulations shall govern the responsibilities for public notification, scheduling the requisite public hearing, and advising the SPGA as to time deadlines for action. 
If the inclusionary housing petition qualifies for fast tracking under section 13.6.2 of the petitioner has duly applied for such fast tracking the guidelines of Section 4 below provide information of scheduling fast-tracking applications.  
Section 4. - Inclusionary Housing Developer Application Kit. 
A.  Housing Director to Provide Developer's Application Kit. The Housing Director will prepare the "Inclusionary Housing Developer's Application Kit" and make this available at the Housing Division, Planning Division and on the City of Somerville web site. The Housing Director will provide assistance to Applicants in completing their inclusionary housing applications. 
B.  Contents of Developer Kit and Applicant Responsibility to Provide Complete Information. The Developer's Kit shall include the following items (at minimum), and the Applicant shall complete the Inclusionary Housing Application and provide all required information to the best of his/her ability. The Applicant must submit a completed Inclusionary Housing Application in order to be reviewed. 
1)  Inclusionary Housing Application Forms, designed to obtain information from the Applicant related to Article 13 of the Somerville Zoning Ordinance (SZO) and these Rules and Regulations. 
2)  Household income and Affordability Standards. Scheduled current income, rent and sales price information for Somerville, which establishes definitive affordability levels for low and moderate-income households, in compliance with SZO Article 13 (e.g. current maximum sales prices and rents which may be considered for inclusionary housing units). Applicants must use this information to complete the application, must use the forms provided for collecting income information of all household members who will occupy the inclusionary housing units. 
3)  Implementation Plan (SZO Section 13.3.1). An Applicant must provide an Implementation Plan as part of the application. Forms for documenting information required in the implementation plan will be included in the Developer's Kit. 
4)  Legal documents and forms for the Applicant's use in documenting compliance with implementing procedures of those Rules and Regulations and with long-term affordability requirements.  
Section 5. - Specific standards administered by housing director. 
A.  Housing Director Authority. The Housing Director, or designated staff of the Housing Division, is delegated the authority and responsibility to oversee compliance with the provisions of this Section 5 of Chapter 3 of the Rules and Regulations. 
B.  Household Income (SZO) Section 13.3.2. The Housing Director shall establish current income figures for households eligible for low and moderate income units, based upon percentages of median Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area household income stipulated in SO Section 13.3.2. These standards and figures will be presented in the Developer's Kit, and will be update annually (minimum) by the Housing Division. Applicants must use the form provided in the Developer's Kit to collect income information for all household members. 
A "household" is defined the same as the definition for "family" in SZO Article 2. 
C.  Affordability (SZO Section 13.3.3. The Housing Director shall establish current maximum sales prices and rents that developers may charge for affordable housing units in an inclusionary housing development. These figures will be presented in the Developer's Kit, which will be updated annually (at a minimum) by the Housing Division. A developer must submit evidence to OHCD that sales prices or rents are in compliance prior to applying for a certificate of occupancy for any units in an inclusionary housing project. 
D.  Quantity and Distribution of Units (SZO Section 13.3.4). 
1)  At time of Application: As part of the Inclusionary Housing Application, an Applicant shall present the total number of inclusionary housing units required and the proposed breakdown of low-income sand moderate units. Applicants may obtain assistance from the Housing Division or Planning Division staff in determining these numbers. Applicants must also specify the number of bedrooms proposed in each inclusionary housing unit - the number of one, two, or three (or more) bedroom units. The number of bedrooms in the inclusionary housing units shall be comparable to or exceed the number of bedrooms typical in the balance of the development. 
2)  Inspection and Certificate of Occupancy: Developers will notify the Housing Director prior to applying for certificates of occupancy and will identify the actual inclusionary housing units at the time, so that the Housing Division staff may inspect and approve the units. The Housing Division will inspect units within three (3) business days of being notified by the developer. Inspectional Services (ISD) will grant certificates of occupancy on the inclusionary housing units only after the Housing Director notifies ISD that the Applicant has selected income-eligible tenants or buyers. 
Developers may apply to ISD for certificates of occupancy for the market rate units only upon Housing Division approval of the inclusionary units and only after the Housing Director has approved the developer's long-term affordability protective mechanisms. 
At the time of application for a certificate of occupancy, a developer of a project with homeownership units shall record in the Middlesex Registry of Deeds the required deed restrictions on the inclusionary units as a condition for certificate of occupancy of any unit. In rental projects, the exact location of the inclusionary housing units may change over time, as a result of changes in tenant's income; therefore, the initial designation of Inclusionary Housing units will not be permanent (see item "H" below). 
E.  Disposition (SZO Section 13.3.5). 
1)  At time of Application and Approval: As part of the Inclusionary Housing Application, an Applicant shall submit a plan for disposition of units in accordance with the provisions of SZO Article 13. The disposition plan will become part of the SPSR/Inclusionary Housing approval. As part of its approval, the SPGA may delegate the Housing Director with the authority to approve modifications to the dispositions plan, provided such modifications still result in a plan complying with these Rules and Regulations. 
2)  Marketing Plan: Developers or their marketing agents must market inclusionary housing units according to the criteria in SZO Section 13.3.5. Households will be eligible to purchase or rent units where the number of bedrooms does not exceed the household size. Prior to applying for a certificate of occupancy, developers must submit a marketing plan to the Housing Division that meets the guidelines in the Developers Packet for advertising, non-discrimination and affirmative fair marketing, lottery priorities and preference categories, and documentation. 
3)  Rental Units: Owners of rental units may require a security deposit equal to one (1) month's rent (except where any subsidy program requirements would prohibit it) and the payment of the first month's rent at the time a lease is signed with an eligible tenant. A tenant shall not be charged leasing or broker fees. The Housing Division staff will revise lease forms to ensure compliance with the terms of SZO Article 13. 
4)  Management and Maintenance: Inclusionary Housing Units must be maintained at the same level as other units and must comply with state Sanitary and Building codes. Applicants must specify the name of the management company, if any, in the inclusionary Housing Application. 
F.  SPGA Right of First Refusal/Option to Purchase (SZO Sec. 13.3.5). 
1)  SPGA Designee: The SPGA will specifically designate the appropriate party to exercise its option on any specific inclusionary housing project, in writing or on the official record of an SPGA meeting. Alternatively, if no party is designated, the Housing Director will be its agent, and the Housing Director may determine an appropriate party to exercise the purchase option. The Housing Director shall report on the status of any designated party excising the City's option to purchase. 
2)  Notice of Completion and Exercise of Rights: Prior to applying for a certificate of occupancy for inclusionary housing units, developers must officially notify the SPGA designee and the Housing Director of completion of the units, so that the SPGA's designee may exercise its right of first refusal to purchase or lease the units. The SPGA or its designee must provide notice of notification by the developer and must exercise its option within ninety (90) days of such notice. 
G.  Long-term Affordability (SZO Section 13.3.6). The City of Somerville shall enforce the long term affordability requirement of Article 13 through deed restrictions - including restrictions on use and resale, as well as the City's right of first refusal and option to purchase - or other legal methods as the Housing Director may determine in consultation with the Housing Division's attorney's or the City Solicitor's Office. Developers shall show evidence of recording such deed restrictions using legal documents provided in the Developer's Packet or approved by the Housing Division as a precondition to receiving a certificate of occupancy. 
In addition, developers shall cooperate with the City in its application to the Massachusetts Executive Office of Communities and Development for designation on Inclusionary Housing Units under the Chapter 774 Local Initiatives Unit Program. 
H.  Rental Units - Redeterminations and Annual Report. 
Developers/owners of rental projects which include inclusionary housing units must submit to the Housing Division an annual statement of rent level, rental income and verification of tenant income. The annual report shall state any changes in income of tenants in affordable units, proposed changes in rent levels or proposed changes in designation of specific units. The following rules shall apply: 
1)  Owners may make rent determinations no more than twice annually. 
2)  Tenants occupying inclusionary housing units who become "over-income" or "under-income" for the unit they occupy may not be displaced, but they may be charged rents appropriate to their income level upon approval by the Housing Division (i.e. low-income, moderate-income market or market rate.) 
3)  If the annual redetermination results in an imbalance in the number of low-income and moderate-income inclusionary housing units in the project, next the vacant unit of the appropriate bedroom size shall be rented or leased to an income-eligible tenant at a rate necessary to restore the balance of ten percent (10%) inclusionary housing units, with at least five percent (5%) of the total project units maintained as low income household units - or if bonus density has been granted under SZO section 13.5, to maintain a minimum fifty percent (50%) of the increased amount of inclusionary housing units as low income units. 
4)  If no appropriately sized units are available at the time of the redetermination, causing imbalance in low-income and moderate-income units the owner will make payments to the Affordable Housing Trust Fund in an amount equal to the difference between the total rent which would be charges at then-current rates for inclusionary housing units and the average market-rate rent within the project units of the same size. This payment will be made quarterly until such a time as a vacancy within the project allows of low income and moderate-income units to be restored. Because the intention of Article 13 is to always maintain the minimum required five percent (5%) of low-income units and the minimum required ten percent (10%) total inclusionary units - or when bonus density is granted, to maintain a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the increased amount of inclusionary housing units - in lieu rent payments are allowed only as an interim step to avoid displacement of tenants when their income change. 
I.  Alternative Methods of Compliance (SZO Section 13.4). Developers seeking permission to use an alternative method of compliance must submit as part of the Inclusionary Housing Application a specific justification for why Inclusionary Housing units cannot be provided on site. Developers must also submit a plan outlining which alternative method will be used and how it meets the requirements of SZO section 13.4.2. Because the intention of Article 13 is to provide inclusionary housing units on site within the residential development, the SPGA will only grant permission to utilize alternative methods of compliance in extreme cases or when there is a required fractional affordable unit of less than 0.5. 
Applicants must use the cash payment formula in Section 13.4.2, subsection B.3 to determine payment due if calculation of the number of Inclusionary Housing units yields a fraction of 0.1-0.4 units or if SPGA grants permission to use cash payment as an alternative method for compliance. Required payments will be calculated by the Housing Director at the time of the SPGA's review of the Inclusionary Housing Trust Fund prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
Related to the dollar value formula stipulated in SZO Section 13.4.2.B, the Housing Director shall provide in the Developers Packet, the current values for "B" (median market sales price for comparable unit types of the preceding four (4) quarters) and "C" (purchase price affordable to a moderate-income household with an income of sixty-five percent (65%) of the Boston area SMSA median income). The Housing Director shall utilize monthly market sales date published by County Home Data, Banker and Tradesman or other comparable source to determine median market sales prices, and update the information provided to Applicants at least every six (6) months. 
Because of fluctuations in market values over time, the SPGA reserves the right for the Housing Director to adjust an "in-lieu" fee for a specific project if more than twelve (12) months passes between the date of the SPGA's approval of the special permit with site plan review for inclusionary housing and the date the Applicant seeks to obtain a certificate of occupancy for development including temporary certificate of occupancy for the development. An Applicant may also request that the fee be determined with information current at the time of application for a certificate of occupancy. Any unpaid fee balance must be paid prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy for the development. 
J.  Incentive to Provide Additional Affordable Units (SZO Sec. 13.5). Developers seeking a density bonus for providing more than the required ten percent (10%) inclusionary housing units shall submit a plan for the additional units as part of the inclusionary Housing Application, demonstrating with SZO Section 13.5. Any Applicant seeking such bonus density should confer with the Housing Division or Planning Division prior to making his/her preliminary submission required elsewhere in these Rules and Regulations. In review the application, the Housing Director should confer with the Planning Director to verify calculations of affordable and market rate units.  
Chapter 4 - RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Note— Included herein are the amended material approved by the zoning board of appeals, March 16, 2011 from amendment of July 9, 2008. Further amendments pertaining to the zoning board of appeals indicated by parenthetical history notes. 
 
Section 1. - Purpose of rules. 
The General Rules and Regulations of the Somerville Zoning Board of Appeals (referred to in this Chapter 4 as the "Board" or "ZBA") are intended to be a reference source to interested citizens, to assure an orderly conduct of business matters by the Board, to provide for the most efficient use of Board and staff time, and to facilitate the decision-making processes of the Board. The Rules are established pursuant to Section 12 of MGL Ch 40A. 
Should any provisions contained in this document conflict with the provisions of Chapter 39, Sections 23A, 23B, and 23C of the Massachusetts General Laws as amended (commonly referred to as the Open Meeting Law) or to Chapter 40A as amended, those aforesaid chapters shall govern.  
Section 2. - Organization. 
A.  General. The Board consists of five (5) members and two (2) associate members appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Board of Aldermen. The members of the Board shall be appointed for five (5) year terms and associate members shall be appointed for two-year terms, except that the terms of the initial appointees shall be shortened and so arranged that the term of one (1) member and one (1) associate member shall expire annually. 
B.  Officers. At the first regular annual meeting, the Board shall elect all Officers of the Board to include a Chair and a Clerk. Associate members do not participate in this act, unless their participation is required to reach a quorum. Members and associate members are paid for their services, which include attendance at meetings and public hearings, site visits, and all work necessary for deliberating on cases and other Board matters. 
The Chair shall call for the vote on all matters coming before the Board, and shall himself/herself vote and be recorded. Subject to these Rules, he/she shall decide all points of order, unless overruled by a majority of the Board in session at the time. He/she shall appoint such committees as may be found necessary or desirable. 
In addition to powers granted by general laws and local ordinances, and subject to these Rules further instructions of the Board, the Chair shall transact the official business of the Board, request necessary help, direct the work of all subordinates, and exercise general supervisory power. At each meeting he/she shall report on all official transactions that have not otherwise come to the attention of the Board. 
If the Chair is absent from a meeting, those Board members present will designate from amongst themselves a chairperson to serve temporarily at such meeting. 
The Clerk shall be a member of the Board, designated by the Board, subject to the direction of the Board and its Chair. The Clerk's duties include officially reading petitions and public notices at meetings, for the Board record. 
C.  Staff to the Board. The Board is staffed the Planning Division of OSPCD, which maintains an office at City Hall, 93 Highland Avenue, Somerville, MA 02143. The phone number is 617-625-6600 X2500. The hours are Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday 8:30 - 4:30, Thursday 8:30 - 7:30 and Friday 8:30 - 12:30. 
The Planning Division staff shall be responsible for maintaining records of applications to the Board proceedings, taking minutes of Board meetings, keeping a record of Board proceedings, and filing Board decisions with the City Clerk's office and other parties as required by law. 
The Planning Division staff shall ensure and document compliance with relevant provisions of the SZO (Particularly SZO section 3.2.6) and these Rules and Regulations related to proper notification and advertisement of public hearings. 
The Planning Division staff is responsible for ensuring and documenting compliance with the SZO and for making a record and filing of the ZBA's proceedings relevant to applicable sections of the SZO. 
D.  Associate Members. The Chair of the Board shall designate, in his/her discretion, an appointed associate member to sit on the various cases such that he/she may fulfill the obligations of any member incapacitated by conflict of interest, inability to act, or absence. For the purposes of deliberations, associate members may participate in any discussion on any matters before the Board regardless of whether he/she will be designated vote on the particular matter.  
Section 3. - Meetings. 
A.  Quorum and Voting Procedure. Four (4) Board members shall constitute a quorum. A concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order or decision of any administrative official or to effect any variance in the application of any ordinance. The decision of the Board for a variance shall be made within one hundred (100) days after the date of the filing of an application. 
A special permit shall be granted only upon a favorable vote of approval by at least four (4) members of the Board. The decision of the Board on a special permit petition shall be made within ninety (90) days following the closing date of the public hearing on the petition. 
Rules of procedure will generally be governed by Robert's Rules of Order, although the Board may choose to decide upon matters other than those detailed above in a less formal manner. 
B.  Regular Meetings. Regular meetings of the Board of Appeals are generally held on alternate Wednesday evenings or at the discretion of the Chair. Meetings are duly advertised by posting a notice on the City Bulletin Board on the first floor of City Hall at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the meeting, consistent with the open meeting law, a copy of which will be on file at the City Clerks office. 
An agenda indicating the subjects to be discussed shall be drawn up by the Planning Division staff prior to the meeting. Any Board member may request that an item be placed on the agenda for consideration. The Board may deviate from the agenda with concurrence of a majority of the Board members in attendance. Minutes shall be taken of all Board meetings. 
C.  Special Meetings. Special meetings may be called by the Chair, or at the request of three (3) members. Written notice thereof shall be given to each member at least forty-eight (48) hours before the time set. Notices shall be posted publicly as required by law. 
D.  Staff Report and Recommendations. The Planning Staff shall report its recommendations to the Board on all cases or matters involving Board review, such as variances and special permit applications, as well as other matters over which the Board members exercise statutory review. These reports shall generally be in writing and be delivered to Board Members in advance of the of the meeting whenever feasible; at a minimum, staff reports will be presented to Board Members at the meeting for which a given topic is scheduled for review. A copy of the staff report to the Board may be provided to any Alderman requesting such, but only after the report has been delivered to Zoning Board members as noted above. 
E.  Staff Report Presentation. The Planning Staff shall provide a short explanation of the staff report and recommendation for each case after the applicant presentation but before the comments from the public. The Planning Staff shall focus on how the application meets or does not meet the goals of the City, the findings for the particular permit as well as conditions that were designed to address abutter concerns and comments. The Board may, at their discretion, waive the staff presentation.  
Section 4. - Reserved.  
Section 5. - Public hearings. 
A.  Notice. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall give due notice of the date, time, and place of its public hearing in accordance with the specific procedures set forth in Chapter 40A, Sec 11 of the Massachusetts General Laws and in accordance with the Somerville Zoning Ordinance (SZO) by: 
1)  Publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Somerville, not less than fourteen (14) days in advance of the hearing, with a second notice the following week; and 
2)  Mailing notice to all parties in interest as defined in Article 2 of the Somerville Zoning Ordinance; and 
3)  Mailing notice to all abutters and abutters-to-abutters within (300) feet of the legal boundaries of a subject property; and 
4)  Posting notice in a conspicuous place in the City Hall for a period of not less than fourteen (14) days before the day of the hearing. 
B.  Hearings to be Public. All hearings shall be open to the public and subject to the provisions of Section 5E of Chapter 2 of the Rules and Regulations. 
C.  Representation and Absence. An Applicant may appear in his own behalf, or be represented by an agent or attorney. In the absence of any appearance without due cause on behalf of an Applicant, the Board will decide on the matter using the information it has otherwise received (also see Chapter 1 of these Rules and Regulations, concerning failure of an Applicant to appear). 
D.  Order of Business. The following steps will be the usual conduct of business on a case: 
1)  Reading of petition and legal notices by the clerk, together with presentation of exhibits, if any; 
2)  Applicants presentation; 
3)  Presentation of staff recommendation from Planning Staff; 
4)  Testimony from any elected official; 
5)  Public Testimony; 
6)  Applicant's rebuttal; 
7)  Questions from Members of the Board; 
8)  Closing of public hearing, followed by deliberations / discussion by the Board; 
9)  Motion and vote. 
Board members should make efforts to visit project sites prior to the start of the hearing. If a formal review is required by the Board it will be scheduled and duly noticed as required. 
When deemed appropriate, the Board may request additional written testimony, to allow for further elaboration, within such time thereafter as may be fixed by the Board. If a timeframe is set for accepting written testimony that expires prior to the start of the next Board meeting, the Board may close the public hearing at the conclusion of the timeframe to accept written testimony.  
Section 6. - Disposition by the board. 
A.  Voting Requirement. The record shall show the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact. In addition, the record shall set forth clearly the reason(s) for Board decisions. 
B.  Application Withdrawal. See Chapter 1 of these Rules and Regulations. 
C.  Repetitive Petition. In order to have a petition that was denied or withdrawn with prejudice reheard before the Board of Appeals within two (2) years, the petitioner must request permission from the Zoning Board showing new evidence that substantially alters the conditions and circumstances of the original petition. At least four (4) members of the Zoning Board must agree that this requirement has been met before proceeding in the normal manner. 
D.  Reserved. 
E.  Submission Deadlines for New or Revised Materials. In the event that new or revised materials are submitted by the Applicant to the Planning Staff for comment by City Staff, such materials shall be submitted no later than the close of business on Monday of the week prior to the hearing at which the Applicant's application is to be considered. Should the new or revised material require additional time for the City Staff's review, Planning Staff at their discretion may recommend that the Board continue the matter to a subsequent hearing date. 
Planning Staff shall forward all written recommendation and/or materials to the Board no later than close of business on the Friday prior to the hearing date. Board members must receive all recommendations and/or materials for review no later than Monday the week of the hearing.  
Section 7. - Amendments and waivers. 
A.  Amendments to the Rules and Regulations. The Board of Appeals may, from time to time, amend the Rules and Regulations promulgated in this Chapter 4 by simple majority vote, and then filing written copy of the amended Rules with the City Clerk. 
B.  Waivers. The Board may waive any of these Rules and Regulations by a concurring vote of four (4) members, except that the Board may not waive any requirement of M.G.L. Chapter 40A or any other provision of state law or the Somerville charter, SZO, or Code of Ordinances.  
Chapter 5 - RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE PLANNING BOARD[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Note— Included herein are the amended material approved by the planning board, March 17, 2011. Further amendments pertaining to the planning board indicated by parenthetical history notes. 
 
Section 1. - Purpose of rules. 
The General Rules and Regulations of the Somerville Planning Board (referred to in this Chapter 5 as the "Board") are intended to be a reference source to interested citizens, to assure an orderly conduct of business matters by the Board, to provide for the most efficient use of Board and staff time, and to facilitate the decision-making processes of the Board. The Somerville Planning Board is established pursuant to Chapter 41, Section 70 of the Massachusetts General Laws (MGL) via Sections 2-231 through 2-235 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Somerville. The Planning Board shall serve as the Special Permit Granting Authority for cases as designated in the SZO and shall also participate in making recommendations for amendments to the SZO, ruling on repetitive petitions, site plan approvals and subdivisions and participating in master plan activities as identified in MGL and/or the SZO. 
Should any provisions contained in this document conflict with the provisions of Chapter 39, Sections 23A, 23B, and 23C of Massachusetts General Laws as amended (commonly referred to as the Open Meeting Law) or Chapter 40A as amended or the portions of Chapter 41 that are applicable to the City of Somerville, those aforesaid chapters shall govern.  
Section 2. - Organization. 
A.  General. The Planning Board consists of five (5) members and one (1) alternate member, each appointed by the Mayor for five (5) year terms on a staggered basis. Members are paid for their services, which include attendance at meetings and public hearings, site visits, and all work necessary for deliberating on cases and other Board matters. 
B.  Officers. The Board shall annually, as soon as practical after February first of each year, elect from among its own number a Chair, Vice-chair and a Clerk. 
The Chair, or his/her designee, shall chair all meetings and public hearings and shall be responsible for ensuring they are run in an orderly and professional manner. The Chair shall call for the vote on all matters coming before the Board, and shall himself/herself vote and be recorded. Subject to these Rules, the Chair shall decide all points of order, unless overruled by a majority of the Board in session at the time. He/she shall appoint such committees as may be found necessary or desirable. 
In addition to powers granted by general laws and local ordinances, and subject to these Rules and further instructions of the Board, the Chair shall transact the official business of the Board, request necessary help, direct the work of all subordinates, and exercise general supervisory power. At each meeting he/she shall report on all official transactions that have not otherwise come to the attention of the Board. 
The Vice-Chair shall perform the role and responsibilities of the Chair when so directed by the Chair or in the absence of the Chair due to illness, vacation or other such disability. 
The Clerk shall read for the record copies of all legal public notices or petitions at public hearings. 
C.  Staff to the Board. The Board is staffed by the Planning Division of OSPCD, which maintains an office at City Hall, 93 Highland Avenue, Somerville, MA 02143. The phone number is 617-625-6600 X2500. The hours are Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday 8:30 - 4:30, Thursday 8:30 - 7:30 and Friday 8:30 - 12:30. 
The Planning Division staff shall be responsible for maintaining records of applications to the Board proceedings, taking minutes of Board meetings, keeping a record of Board proceedings, and filing Board decisions with the City Clerk's office and other parties as required by law. 
The Planning Division staff shall ensure and document compliance with relevant provisions of the SZO and these Rules and Regulations related to proper notification and advertisement of public hearings. 
The Planning Division staff is responsible for ensuring and documenting compliance with the SZO, and for making a record and filing of the Planning Board's proceedings relevant to applicable sections of the SZO. 
D.  Alternate. The alternate shall sit on the various cases where he/she may fulfill the obligations of any member incapacitated by conflict of interest, inability to act, or absence. For the purposes of deliberations, the alternate may participate in any discussion on any matters before the Board regardless of whether he/she will be designated to vote on the particular matter.  
Section 3. - Reserved.  
Section 4. - Meetings. 
A.  Scheduling and Posting Meetings. Regular meetings of the Planning Board are generally held on alternate Thursday evenings or at the discretion of the Chair. Meetings are duly advertised by posting a notice on the City Bulletin Board on the first floor of City Hall at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the meeting, consistent with the open meeting law, and by filing a copy of said notice in the City Clerk's office. 
An agenda indicating the subjects to be discussed shall be drawn up by the Planning Staff and distributed to Board Members prior to the meeting. Any Board member may request that an item be placed on the agenda for consideration. The Board may take agenda items out of order, at the discretion of the chair. Minutes shall be taken of all Board Meetings by the Planning Staff and shall be approved or amended by a majority vote of the Board members attending that meeting. 
Special meetings may be called by the Chair, or at the request of three (3) members. Written notice thereof shall be given to each member at least forty-eight (48) hours before the time set. Notices shall be posted publicly as required by law. 
B.  Staff Report and Recommendations. The Planning Staff shall report its recommendations to the Board on all cases or matters involving Board review, such as site plan approval and subdivisions, special permit applications, Zoning Ordinance amendments proposals, master plan and urban plans, and other matters over which the Board members exercise statutory review. These reports shall generally be in writing and be delivered to Board Members in advance of the of the meeting whenever feasible; at a minimum, staff reports will be presented to Board Members at the meeting for which a given topic is scheduled for review. A copy of the staff report to the Board may be provided to any Alderman requesting such, but only after the report has been delivered to Planning Board members as noted above. 
The Planning Staff shall provide a short explanation of the staff report and recommendation for each case after the applicant presentation but before the comments from the public. The Planning Staff shall focus on how the application meets or does not meet the goals of the City, the findings for the particular permit as well as conditions that were designed to address abutter concerns and comments. The Board may, at their discretion, waive the staff presentation. 
C.  Quorum and Voting. In general, three (3) Board members shall constitute a quorum. Decisions on all matters within the Board's statutory responsibilities shall be made by majority vote of seconded motions or when only three (3) members are present, by unanimous vote, except that in matters where the Planning Board is the Special Permit Granting Authority, approval of any special permit(s) shall require a favorable vote of at least four (4) members of the five (5) member Board. 
Rules of procedure shall be governed by Roberts Rules of Order, except that the Board may choose to decide upon matters in a less formal manner. 
(Amend. of 11-15-2017(1) )  
Section 5. - Public hearings. 
A.  Notice. The Planning Board shall give due notice of the date, time, and place of its public hearing in accordance with the specific procedures set forth in Chapter 40A, Sec 11 of the Massachusetts General Laws and in accordance with the Somerville Zoning Ordinance (SZO) by: 
1)  Publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Somerville, not less than fourteen (14) days in advance of the hearing, with a second notice the following week; and 
2)  Mailing notice to all parties in interest as defined in Article 2 of the Somerville Zoning Ordinance; and 
3)  Mailing notice to all abutters and abutters-to-abutters within (300) feet of the legal boundaries of a subject property; and 
4)  Posting notice in a conspicuous place in the City Hall for a period of not less than fourteen (14) days before the day of the hearing. 
B.  Hearings. Public hearings held pursuant to the statutory powers of the Planning Board will normally be scheduled to occur during the regular meeting of the Board. Hearings will be advertised in accordance with the specific procedures set forth in the Somerville Zoning Ordinance (SZO) and elsewhere in these Rules and Regulations. All hearings shall be open to the public and subject to the provisions of Section 5E of Chapter 2 of the Rules and Regulations 
C.  Representation and Absence. An Applicant may appear in his/her own behalf, or be represented by an agent or attorney. In the absence of any appearance without due cause on behalf of an Applicant, the Board will decide on the matter using the information it has otherwise received (also see Chapter 1 of these Rules and Regulations, concerning failure of an Applicant to appear). 
D.  Order of Business. The following steps will be the usual conduct of business on a case: 
1)  Reading of petition and legal notices by the clerk, together with presentation of exhibits, if any; 
2)  Applicants presentation; 
3)  Presentation of staff report from Planning Staff; 
4)  Testimony from any elected official; 
5)  Public Testimony; 
6)  Applicant's rebuttal; 
7)  Questions from Members of the Board; 
8)  Closing of public hearing, followed by deliberations / discussion by the Board; 
9)  Motion and vote. 
Board members should make efforts to visit project sites prior to the start of the hearing. If a formal review is required by the Board it will be scheduled and duly noticed as required. 
E.  Additional Information. The following steps will be used to conduct business in subsequent meetings on a topic previously discussed, in circumstances where revised material is provided to the Board per Section 6D, below: 
1)  Presentation of updated material (from applicant or staff); 
2)  Presentation of updated staff report from Planning Staff (if applicable); 
3)  Testimony from any elected official; 
4)  Public Testimony; 
5)  Applicant's rebuttal; 
6)  Questions from Members of the Board; 
7)  Closing of public hearing, followed by deliberations/discussion by the Board; 
8)  Motion and vote. 
The chair may limit public testimony to the topic of the new or revised material that has been provided to the Board. 
(Amend. of 11-15-2017(1) )  
Section 6. - Disposition by the Board. 
A.  Voting Requirement. The record shall show the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact. In addition, the record shall set forth clearly the reason(s) for Board decisions. 
B.  Application Withdrawal. See Chapter 1 of these Rules and Regulations. 
C.  Repetitive Petition. In order to have a petition that was denied or withdrawn with prejudice reheard before the Planning Board within two (2) years, the petitioner must request permission from the Planning Board showing new evidence that substantially alters the conditions and circumstances of the original petition. At least four (4) members of the Planning Board must agree that this requirement has been met before proceeding in the normal manner. 
D.  Submission Deadlines for New or Revised Materials. In the event that new or revised materials are submitted by the Applicant to the Planning Staff for comment by City Staff, such materials shall be submitted no later than the close of business on Monday of the week prior to the hearing at which the Applicant's application is to be considered. Should the new or revised material require additional time for the City Staff's review, Planning Staff at their discretion may recommend that the Board continue the matter to a subsequent hearing date. 
Planning Staff shall forward all written recommendation and/or materials to the Board no later than close of business on the Friday prior to the hearing date. Board members must receive all recommendations and/or materials for review no later than Monday the week of the hearing.  
Section 7. - Amendments and waivers. 
A.  Amendments. The Planning Board may, from time to time, amend its own Rules and Regulations (promulgated herein this Chapter 5) in accordance with its normal voting procedures, and by filing a written copy of the amended Rules with the City Clerk. 
B.  Waivers. The Board may by a majority vote of the members present and voting or, if only three (3) members are present, by unanimous vote, waive any of these Rules and Regulations except that the Board may not waive any requirements of MGL Chapter 40A, the provisions of MGL Chapter 41 that apply in the City of Somerville or any other provision of state law, the SZO, the Somerville charter or the Code of Ordinances.  
Chapter 6 - RULES AND REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO DESIGN AND SITE PLAN REVIEW[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Included herein is the amended material approved by the planning board, March 17, 2011, for site plan approval. Further amendments pertaining to site plan approval are indicated by parenthetical history notes.  Subsequently, Amendment adopted Feb. 16, 2017, changed the title of Ch. 6 from "Rules and regulations pertaining to site plan approval" to "Rules and regulations pertaining to design and site plan review". 
 
Section 1. - Planning board serves as permit authority. 
The Planning Board shall serve as the review authority for design and site plan review. The Planning Board will review and grant design and site plan review in accordance with SZO Section 5.4 and the Rules and Regulations herein. The Planning Board may specifically delegate authority to the Planning Director to grant minor design and site plan review, upon adoption of such a provision in this Chapter of the Rules and Regulations. 
All subdivisions, lot splits and lot mergers require design and site plan review, unless specifically excluded by the Somerville Zoning Ordinance. Some subdivisions, lot splits and lot mergers are permitted to be approved as minor projects, per Section 3, below. All others require a full review. 
(Amend. of  2-16-2017(1) )  
Section 2. - Planning director coordinates procedural review. 
The Planning Director, or his/her staff designee, shall administer the procedural standards for all design and site plan review petitions as established in SZO Section 5.4 and these Rules and Regulations. The Planning Director shall provide an application form for design and site plan review, which should inform the Applicant of information requirements and recommended procedures. The Planning Director, or his/her staff designees, should be available to meet with Applicants during normal business hours. 
(Amend. of  2-16-2017(1) )  
Section 3. - Minor projects (SZO SEC. 3.5.4.D.4). 
A.  Establishment of Minor Project Classification. The Planning Board shall normally conduct full review of development projects requiring design and site plan review. However, as allowed under SZO Section 3.5.4.D.4, the Planning Board hereby establishes a class of minor development projects under design and site plan review for which full Board review shall not be necessary, unless requested by at least two (2) members of the Board. The minor project classification is limited to the following cases where special permit review, special permit with design review, or special permit with site plan review are not required under the SZO: 
1.  New Structures or additions/extensions to existing structures of up to five hundred (500) gross square feet in area. 
2.  Applications for facade alterations only, up to five hundred (500) linear feet of building face. 
3.  Mechanical enclosures and horizontal improvements (parking lots, accessways, walkways, landscaping and the like), unless the horizontal improvement involves a new or relocated curb cut into a public street or significant changes in vehicle and/or pedestrian circulation in and around the building. 
4.  Establishment or change in use within a lawfully existing structure, where there is no increase in the structure's square footage in area. 
5.  Lot splits resulting in the creation of only one (1) additional lot (e.g. an existing lot divided into two (2) lots-creating one (1) new lot). 
6.  Lot mergers that merge two (2) lots into one (1) lot. 
7.  Lot Splits and Lot Merges that move less than 500 feet of lot area from one lot to an adjacent lot. 
8.  New municipal structures or additions/extensions to existing municipal structures of up to five thousand (5,000) gross square feet in area. 
(Amend. of 10-22-2015(1)) 
Design and site plan review for the above listed minor projects shall not be subject to public hearing requirements. Minor projects shall, however, be subject to full compliance with approval standards and criteria of SZO Section 5.4.6 and all other applicable standards of the SZO. 
B.  Designation of Planning Director Authority. For Administrative efficiency, the Planning Board designates the Planning Director as the review authority for minor development projects as noted in "A" above. The Planning Director shall determine the applicability of the minor design and site plan review classification to any given development proposal. 
C.  Application for Minor Project Design and Site Plan Review. Application for minor design and site plan review shall be made under the normal procedures for submission and filing noted in these Rules and Regulations, with the following exceptions: 
1.  The Planning Director shall have authority to waive any information requirements he/she deems unnecessary to determine compliance with the standards of SZO Sec. 5.4.6. 
2.  The Official filing with the City Clerk requires only two (2) copies of the site plan submission, which the City Clerk will transmit to the Planning Director after officially stamping. 
D.  Review and Action of Application. The Planning Director shall make every effort to expedite the review of a minor project application within ten (10) business days of official filing. The Director shall provide a written record of his/her review of the application and decision to the Applicant, including any conditions attached to an approval or reasons for denial as stipulated in SZO Section 5.4.4.C. The Planning Director shall submit a report to the Planning Board at its first subsequent regular meeting of any action taken regarding design and site plan review of minor projects. 
E.  Appeals. An Applicant for minor design and site plan review may appeal the Planning Director's decision before the Planning Board by submitting a written request noting what aspect(s) of the Director's decision is disputed. Such an appeal shall effectively constitute a request for full Planning Board consideration of design and site plan review for the development project, and as such is subject to the normal public hearing and due notice requirements set forth herein (Sections 5 and 6 of this Chapter 6). If an Applicant is dissatisfied with any action taken by the Planning Board, he/she may further pursue the normal appeals available and as set forth in Article 3 of the SZO. 
(Amend. of  2-16-2017(1) )  
Section 4. - Submission procedure (Reference SZO SEC. 5.4.4). 
A.  Preliminary Meeting with the Planning Director. Applicants seeking design and site plan review, particularly for larger development projects, are strongly encouraged to meet with the Planning Director (or his/her designated staff) at least once prior to official filing. This will help to expedite the ensuing process by determining procedures, information requirements, level of review necessary, and applicability of review standards, criteria and design guidelines. When meeting to make a formal submission, the Applicant should schedule a meeting with the Planning Director to insure all applicable information is in satisfactory form for official filing. This will minimize potential delays to the Applicant or disapproval of an application as incomplete. 
B.  Official Filing. The Applicant shall file four (4) copies of the required site plan submission (see "C" below) in the office of the City Clerk, during normal business hours. The stamp of the City Clerk shall establish the official date of filing. The Clerk shall forward the documents to the Planning Director who shall forward one (1) copy to the Director of Traffic and Parking, and one (1) copy to the City Engineer. Only one (1) copy of the specialized items such as photos or architectural material samples shall be required; these should be presented separately at the offices of the Planning Division, which will review and forward the materials to any other board or agency as appropriate. 
C.  Minimum Submission/Information Requirements. Each site plan submission shall include the minimum items listed below. The information submitted shall document compliance with the standards of SZO Sec. 5.4: 
1)  Completed application for design and site plan review; 
2)  $250.00 filing fee ($50.00 for minor design and site plan review or when design and site plan review is requested simultaneously with a special permit application) in cash or check payable to the "City of Somerville"; 
3)  A written statement explaining how the project complies with each standard of SZO Sec. 5.4.6, referencing additional documents, plans, drawings, photos, evaluations etc., as necessary; 
4)  Documentation of property ownership, such as a deed; 
5)  Scaled (minimum 1" = 50') site plan with north arrow showing: 
a)  Existing and proposed property lines, road rights-of-way, easements (utility, access, etc.); 
b)  Footprint/roof area of all existing and proposed buildings within fifty (50) feet of the proposed development; 
c)  Location of existing and proposed paved areas within fifty (50) feet of the proposed development; 
Note: THE PLAN SHALL BE PREPARED BY A REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER, ARCHITECT, LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT, OR PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR, AND THE STAMP OF SUCH REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL SHALL APPEAR ON THE PLAN. THIS REQUIREMENT MAY BE WAIVED IN THE CASE OF A MINOR DESIGN AND SITE PLAN REVIEW OR IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 5.4.7.1 OF SZO. 
6)  Subdivisions, Lot Splits and Lot Mergers. In the case of a subdivision, lot split or lot merger, the submission shall include the above items plus the following: 
a.  Scaled (min. 1" = 30') boundary survey and subdivision plot, showing north arrow, date, and prepared by a Massachusetts-registered Professional Land Surveyor, upon which the seal and signature of such professional shall appear. The subdivision plot shall indicate: 
1.  The total calculated land area of the subdivided lands in total; 
2.  the calculated land area of each lot; 
3.  boundaries, angles, bearing and dimensions of all lots; 
4.  existing and proposed block and lot numbers; 
5.  notation of specific reference plats, if applicable; 
6.  description of field control points, monuments, or markers for locating lot corners. 
b.  Statement as to the proposed use of the new lots and the purpose for subdividing; 
c.  A plan showing location of nearest existing and proposed fire hydrant(s); 
d.  Proposed deed restrictions and covenants, if any, especially as related to future development on the subdivided lots complying with provisions of the SZO, particularly Section 5.4.6. 
D.  Requirement for Additional Information in Application. Although the above minimum information will often be sufficient, there may be a need for more detailed or additional information on any specific project. The actual final information requirements will vary for each individual design and site plan review, dependent on the size and scope of the proposed development. The Applicant should submit additional information indicated as pertinent by the Planning Director in discussion at the preliminary meeting. The Applicant may also submit information he/she feels will aid the Planning Board in reviewing compliance with the SZO Sec. 5.4.6. After the application has been officially filed, the planning Board and/or Planning Director may request additional information beyond that submitted by the Applicant, but only that which is reasonably related to demonstrating compliance with a specific standard or criteria of Section 5.4.6. Examples of materials, which may be pertinent to a given project and requested of the Applicant include: 
1)  Scaled boundary survey/plot plan certified with the seal of a Professional Land Surveyor (or in the case of application to the Planning Director for minor design and site plan review, a mortgage plot plan or similar scaled drawing) indicating total land area, boundaries, angles, bearings, and dimensions of site and its boundaries, north arrow; 
2)  Existing natural or vegetative features, and proposals for alterations thereto, including as appropriate: 
a.  Topographic information at not less than two (2) foot contour intervals, showing both existing grade and proposed changes to grade (if applicable); 
b.  General drainage patterns and plans, including drainage inlets/outfalls, and proposed erosion and sedimentation controls; 
c.  Soil survey; 
d.  Hydrogeologic evaluation and program storm water management (when large scale site work is required and site drainage altered); 
NOTE: GRADING AND DRAINAGE PLANS MAY BE REQUIRED TO BE PREPARED BY A MASSACHUSETTS-REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER OR LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT, WHOSE SEAL SHALL APPEAR ON SAID PLANS. 
3)  In the case of development including installation of new utilities or modification of existing utility systems, the submission shall also include information as to location of existing and proposed utilities and mechanical systems (except those fully enclosed within a building) and location of nearest and proposed fire hydrant(s). Subsurface water and sewer plans shall be prepared by a registered Professional Engineer, whose seal shall appear on said plans. 
4)  Architectural elevations for any new structure and any existing structure proposed to be modified, at a scale not less than 1/16" = 1', specifying materials, colors and finishes. Where new construction is proposed immediately adjacent to or attached to existing structure, the application should included information on the design context by showing a portion of the attached structure within the elevation drawing, providing a photographic montage of the existing buildings, or similar study. For larger projects, the Planning Board may request a photographic study of the neighborhood, up to a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the site perimeter, or a three-dimensional model of proposed buildings and the surrounding physical context; 
5)  Landscape plans, including schedule of materials and planting specifications. 
6)  Building shadow analysis. 
7)  Paving plans and specifications. 
8)  Signage plans and specifications. 
9)  Exterior lighting plans showing location and type of any exterior lighting fixtures, and location and type of any exterior lighting fixtures such as those within open or partially open garage structures, illuminated within open or partially open garage structures, illuminated signage and the like, but excluding normal interior lighting. 
10)  Traffic circulation and parking plans showing location, layout, and dimensions. 
11)  Traffic impact analysis (for projects over twenty-five thousand (25,000) gross sf of new construction) detailing existing and estimated peak hour traffic volumes and their effects on capacity and operating conditions of the nearest collector and arterial streets. 
Applicants may request to be reviewed based on the information they submit, regardless of any additional information requested by the Planning Board or the Planning Director. However, an incomplete application may be grounds for denial of the design and site plan review, per SZO Section 5.4.4. Applicants have a right to appeal any Planning Board decision regarding an incomplete application to the Board of Appeals. 
E.  Request for Simultaneous Review when Submitted with a Special Permit Petition. In accordance with SZO Section 5.4.4.C and with Section 6B below, whenever a design and site plan review application is made for a site or use also requiring some form of special permit, and the Planning Board is the SPGA, an Applicant may request that the Board review both the site plan application and special permit application simultaneously. An Applicant must request the simultaneous one-step review at the time of official filing of his/her application. 
(Amend. of  2-16-2017(1) )  
Section 5. - Staff/administration review of application. 
A.  Review by Planning Director and solicitation of Comments. After official filing of the site plan application by the Applicant, the City Clerk shall send the stamped copies to the Planning Director. The Planning Director shall review the design and site plan review application under all requirements of SZO Section 5.4. The Planning Director shall also communicate with the Director of Traffic and Parking, and the City Engineer, and ascertain their concerns, if any. The Planning Director may, in his/her discretion, contact other relevant agencies affected by the proposed development to solicit their input on concerns such as traffic and parking, fire safety and protection, landscaping, coordination of infrastructure improvements and the like. 
B.  Schedule of Public Hearing. The Planning Director shall schedule before the Planning Board a public hearing within forty within forty-five (45) days of the official filing date of the site plan application, and shall notify all parties in interest as defined in SZO Article 2 and as stipulated in Section 11 of the MGL Chapter 40A, and in accordance with the Boards normal hearing notification procedure (see chapter 5 of these Rules and Regulations). Such notice shall include a brief description of the proposed development, and be sent via U.S. mail not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the scheduled hearing. 
If the Applicant has submitted a petition for design and site plan review simultaneously with a petition for a required special permit, and has requested simultaneous review of both applications at a combined hearing, the public hearing will then be scheduled and advertised in accordance with the requirements for the special permit petition (SZO Sections 5.3.2 and 5.3.3). The public advertisement should clearly identify that the hearing will concern both a design and site plan review and a special permit petition. 
C.  Report from Planning Director. The Planning Director shall prepare a report to the Planning Board with his/her analysis and recommendations. This report should generally be forwarded to the Planning Board at least three (3) days prior to the scheduled review and public hearing. Planning Board members should try to visit the site of the proposed development prior to the hearing, so as to be familiar with its context. 
(Amend. of  2-16-2017(1) )  
Section 6. - Planning board review and action (Reference SZO SEC. 5.4.5). 
A.  Conduct of Public Hearing. The Planning Board shall conduct the public hearing on the design and site plan review petition under its normal rules and procedures for public hearings (see Chapter 5 of these Rules and Regulations), including establishment of the necessary quorum of members and restrictions on time allotted to individuals wishing to comment of the application. 
B.  Combined Hearing with Special Permit Petition. If an Applicant has requested simultaneous hearing and review of design and site plan review and special permit petitions (in those cases for which this is applicable), this request shall generally be honored for the purpose of administrative efficiency. This will eliminate the potential need for two (2) separate hearing dates, although the Planning Board shall take one separate action on the site plan application and another separate action on the special permit application. The Planning Board may also allow the Applicant to submit in his/her design and site plan review application only that information not otherwise submitted in the special permit application, in order to avoid redundancy. The Planning Board shall consider this one-step review only by written request of the Applicant, in which case the Applicant agrees to waive the normally specified time limits for design and site plan review and accepts the applicable time limits for review and sanction under the appropriate type of special permit application stipulated in Section 5.3 of the SZO. 
C.  Planning Board Action. In accordance with the SZO Section 5.4.6, the Board shall approve the site plan application, or approve such with conditions related to standards of Section 5.4 or the district within which the site is located, unless the site plan application is found to be deficient in one (1) of the three (3) specified items under Section 5.4. 
When an application is deemed generally acceptable, but is of a nature where specific approval of each applicable standard or criteria of SZO Section 5.4 cannot be reached (such as in subdivision, where all physical site development plans may not be finalized at the time of the plot recording), the Planning Board may attach a condition(s) requiring recordation of deed restrictions or covenants ensuring future compliance with specifically applicable standards of SZO Section 5.4. 
Design and site plan review is a process designed to insure public review and the benefit of public comment with respect to relevant architectural and site planning standards and guidelines, but not in any manner defined as a review of the appropriateness of a given proposed use. Any conditions attached to approval, or reasons for withholding approval shall be specifically related to the standards and guidelines of the SZO but exclude those designed for regulation and review of use. 
D.  Document of Decision. Within ten (10) business days of the Planning Board's action on the design and site plan review petition, the Planning Director shall issue a written record of such decision, including a detailing of the findings and analysis that were the basis for the decision. The written record shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk, and a copy transmitted to the Applicant and to any party in interest requesting a copy. 
Although not mandatory, Applicants are strongly encouraged to file a copy of the written decision in the Middlesex Registry of Deeds. This affords a secondary public record on the decision, for the protection of those having an interest in the property question. 
E.  Appeals of the Planning Board Decision. Appeals of the Planning Board decision on a design and site plan review petition may be made in accordance with MGL 40A, Section 17. 
F.  Enforcement. The Planning Director shall be responsible for ensuring that any conditions or requirements of the approval of a design and site plan review application are adhered to. The Planning Director shall work with the Superintendent of Inspectional Services as necessary in taking enforcement action against a violation of an approved design and site plan review application, under the enforcement provisions set forth in Article 3 of the SZO. 
(Amend. of  2-16-2017(1) )  
Chapter 7 - RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE 
 
Section 1. - Purpose of rules. 
The General Rules and Regulations of the Somerville Design Review Committee (referred to in this Chapter as the "DRC" or "Committee") are intended to be a reference source to interested citizens, to assure an orderly conduct of business matters by the DRC, to provide for the most efficient use of DRC and staff time, and to facilitate the decision-making processes of the DRC. 
Should any provisions contained in this document conflict with the provisions of Chapter 39, Sections 23A, 23B, and 23C of Massachusetts General Laws as amended (commonly referred to as the Open Meeting Law) or Chapter 40A as amended, those aforesaid chapters shall govern. 
(Adopted 5-15-2009)  
Section 2. - The design review committee and planning staff. 
Members volunteer their services, which includes attendance at meetings, site visits, and all work necessary for deliberating on cases and other Committee matters. The DRC is supported by the Director and Staff known as the Planning Division. The Planning Division maintains an office on the third floor of City Hall, 93 Highland Avenue, Somerville, MA 02143. The office is open Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday from 8:30 to 4:30, Thursday from 8:30 to 7:30, and Friday from 8:30 to 12:30, and can be reached at (617) 625-6600 x2500. 
(Adopted 5-15-2009)  
Section 3. - Officers. 
The DRC shall annually, as soon as practical after the first of each year, elect from among its own Committee a Chairperson. The Chairperson, or his/her designee, shall head all meetings and shall be responsible for ensuring they are run in an orderly and professional manner. Subject to these Rules, the Chair shall decide all points of order, unless overruled by a majority of the Committee in session at the time. He/she shall appoint such sub-committees as may be found necessary or desirable. 
(Adopted 5-15-2009)  
Section 4. - Meetings. 
A.  Scheduling and Posting Meetings. Regular meetings of the Design Review Committee are generally held on the fourth Thursday of the month or at the discretion of the Chairperson or Planning Director. Meetings are duly advertised by posting a notice on the City Bulletin Board on the first floor of City Hall at least (48) hours in advance of the meeting, and by filing a copy of said notice in the City Clerk's office. Additional meetings may be held as needed, provided that a quorum is met and proper notice of the meeting is posted. 
An agenda indicating the subjects to be discussed shall be drawn up by the Planning Staff and distributed to Committee Members prior to the meeting. The Committee may deviate from the agenda with the concurrence of a majority of the Committee Members in attendance. 
B.  Minimum Submission/Information Requirements. In addition to all application materials submitted to the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA), the DRC may request any additional materials related to the cohesive presentation of the project. The Applicant should submit additional information indicated as pertinent by the Planning Staff. The Applicant may also submit information he/she feels will aid the DRC in reviewing the project. Applicants may request to be reviewed based on the information they submit, regardless of any additional information requested. However, incomplete applications may be grounds for the DRC to be unable to make a recommendation on the application. 
Additional information may include: 
1.  Site Plan (including neighboring context, parking layout, landscape plan) 
2.  Photos of neighboring context 
3.  Perspective views of project within the neighboring context 
4.  Physical Model or Digital Model views 
5.  Floor Plans 
6.  Building Sections 
7.  Exterior Elevations (all) 
8.  Materials palette (including samples, images of other projects using similar materials) 
9.  Signage and Lighting Scheme 
The Applicant must provide documents digitally in PDF format and/or seven (7) hard copies to Planning Staff at least a week prior to the meeting to give the committee members an opportunity to review the project. 
C.  Quorum and Recommendation. In general, three (3) DRC members shall constitute a quorum. When the recommendations on matters within the DRC's review are not made by a majority opinion the discrepancy shall be recorded in the written recommendation. 
The Planning Staff shall prepare meeting minutes, which shall include members in attendance, key discussion points, and recommendations for each application reviewed. Minutes shall be approved or amended by DRC members attending that meeting. The Planning Staff shall report the DRC's recommendations to the SPGA and Applicant. The recommendations shall be in writing and be sent to SPGA Members in advance of the meeting whenever feasible; at a minimum, recommendations will be presented to SPGA Members at the meeting for which a given topic is scheduled for review. 
Minutes, including the recommendations, which have been endorsed by the DRC are public records and may be obtained by any interested party. 
D.  Additional Meetings. After the meetings required under this Ordinance or by the SPGA, the DRC shall only review the project again if requested by the Applicant. 
E.  Review Fees. Applicants shall pay a fee for the first requisite meeting with the DRC, as provided in the Schedule of Fees, Appendix 1A to Chapter 1 of these Rules and Regulations. There will be no charge for subsequent meetings. 
(Adopted 5-15-2009)  
Section 5. - Amendments and waivers. 
The Design Review Committee may, from time to time, amend its own Rules and Regulations (promulgated herein this Chapter) with a majority vote, and by filing a written copy of the amended Rules with the City Clerk. 
The DRC (assuming a quorum) may by a majority vote of the members present waive any of these Rules and Regulations except where said waiver would conflict with Massachusetts General Laws or the Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Adopted 5-15-2009) 
