BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 1
.
Amended as of May 20, 2019
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1 .............Town Meeting ............................................................................................................4
ARTICLE 2 .............Town Administration, General Government, Enforcement and
…………………….Non-Criminal Disposition ........................................................................................5
ARTICLE 3 .............Finance Committee ....................................................................................................9
ARTICLE 4 .............Board of Health ..........................................................................................................10
ARTICLE 5 .............Council on Aging .......................................................................................................10
ARTICLE 6 .............Gravel and Soil Removal ..........................................................................................10
ARTICLE 7 .............Highway and Police Regulations………………………………………..…….……13
ARTICLE 8 .............Littering Bylaw ..........................................................................................................17
ARTICLE 9 .............Regulating Cemetery Trust Funds .............................................................................18
ARTICLE 10 ...........Personnel Administration ..................................................................................19
ARTICLE 11 ...........Water Department Assessments ................................................................................19
ARTICLE 12 ...........Regulation of Water Craft ..........................................................................................19
ARTICLE 13 ...........Junk Dealers—Second Hand Articles ........................................................................20
ARTICLE 14 ...........Unused or Unregistered Motor Vehicles ...................................................................21
ARTICLE 15 ...........Historic District ..........................................................................................................22
ARTICLE 16………Preservation of Historically Significant Buildings …… …………………..…………..24
ARTICLE 17 ...........Animal Control ..........................................................................................................28
ARTICLE 18 ...........Miscellaneous Provisions...........................................................................................31
ARTICLE 19 ...........Abandoned, Non-completed, or Null and Void Permits ............................................32
ARTICLE 20 ...........Water Use Restriction ................................................................................................33
ARTICLE 21 ...........Licenses and Permits of Delinquent Taxpayers .........................................................35
ARTICLE 22 ...........Sewer Use Regulations ..............................................................................................37
ARTICLE 23 ...........Solid Waste and Recycling ........................................................................................51
ARTICLE 24 ...........Recreation Commission .............................................................................................52
ARTICLE 25 ...........Rapid Entry Systems for the Fire Department ...........................................................53
ARTICLE 26 ...........False Fire and Burglar Alarms ...................................................................................53
ARTICLE 27 ...........Brownfield Tax Abatement........................................................................................54
ARTICLE 28 ...........Toxic and Hazardous Materials Management ...........................................................56
ARTICLE 29 ...........Wetlands Protection ...................................................................................................60
ARTICLE 30……. Right to Farm Bylaw……………………....…………….……….....…….………...71
ARTICLE 31….….. Low Impact Development……………………………………………..…………...74
ARTICLE 32….......Pawnbrokers……………………………………………………………..………….81
ARTICLE 33……...Prohibited Materials Bylaw……………………………………………..…………..85
ARTICLE 34……...Funeral Buffer Zone Bylaw………………………………………………..………..86
ARTICLE 35……..Stretch Energy Code Bylaw….……………………………………………..…….….87
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 3
ARTICLE 36……...Fuel Storage System Regulation………………………………………………….....88
ARTICLE 37…….. Audit Committee……………………………….………………………….…………91
ARTICLE 38……. . Group Insurance Committee…..……………………………………………..……...92
ARTICLE 39………Revolving Funds………………………………………………………………….......93
ARTICLE 40……….Limitation of Recreational Marijuana Establishments………………………………..94
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 4
ARTICLE 1
TOWN MEETING
SECTION 1.1: NOTICE: SERVICE OF WARRANT
Every town meeting shall be notified by posting attested copies of the warrant calling the same at the Town Hall,
Library and in a public place in each precinct in Winchendon at least seven days before the Annual Town Meeting
and at least fourteen days before a Special Town Meeting, and by publication of the same in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town, or by delivery of said warrant by mail, postage prepaid, to each household in the Town
owned or occupied by a registered voter of the Town. Immediately upon the posting of the warrant, copies shall be
provided to citizens on request and the warrant shall be posted on any Town electronic bulletin board. (Approved
February 7, 1922)(Amended June 14, 1999)
SECTION 1.2: ANNUAL ELECTION AND TOWN MEETING DATES
The annual town election shall be held on the first Monday in May. The annual town meeting for appropriating such sums of
money as may be necessary for town purposes, and for transacting such other business as may legally be brought before it,
shall be held no earlier than the first Monday in May and no later than the second Monday in June at a date to be determined
by the Board of Selectmen
SECTION 1.3: RULES OF TOWN MEETINGS
1. All questions submitted for the consideration of the town shall be in writing when so required by the
Moderator.
2. Massachusetts General Laws specifically exempt the town meeting from the “Open Meeting Law”. To ensure proper
voting procedures, a person who is neither a registered voter nor a town official, shall be restricted to a clearly
defined section of the hall
3. The powers and duties of the presiding officer not especially provided for by law, or this Bylaw or by the
foregoing rules, shall be determined by the rules of practice contained in "Roberts Rules of Order," so far
as they are adapted to the conditions and powers of the town.
4. A motion to reconsider a vote already taken, may be made only for a bona fide reason, as determined by
the Moderator, such as information that was not known to the meeting at the time the vote was taken or the
effect of subsequent meeting action. Passage of a motion to reconsider will require a simple majority if the
action is moved within one hour of meeting time after the original vote and a two-thirds vote if moved
thereafter. No vote may be reconsidered more than once.
5. On matters requiring a two-thirds vote by statute a count need not be taken. (Amended May 11,1998)
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 5
SECTION 1.4: QUORUM (Amended 3/98)
The number of voters necessary to constitute a quorum at any town meeting shall be not less than seventy-five
(75) persons then registered as voters of the Town of Winchendon; provided, however, that a number less than
quorum may, from time to time, adjourn the meeting.
ARTICLE 2
TOWN ADMINISTRATION, GENERAL GOVERNMENT AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 2.1: FINANCIAL YEAR The financial year of the town shall begin with the first day of July in each
year and end on the thirtieth day of the following June.
SECTION 2.2: WRITTEN REPORTS All departments of the town shall annually make a written report to the
Selectmen and the Selectmen shall cause the same to be printed in the Annual Town Report.
SECTION 2.3: PUBLICATION OF VALUATION AND TAXES The Board of Assessors shall cause to be
published annually a list of the Valuation and Taxes of the Town which will be available for public viewing at the office of
the Board of Assessors.
SECTION 2.4: COMPENSATION Except as provided by Massachusetts General Law, members of all
appointed Boards or Committees shall serve without compensation.
SECTION 2.5: FEES All Town Officers shall pay into the Town Treasury all fees received by them by virtue of
their office.
SECTION 2.6: ACTIONS AT LAW The Board of Selectmen shall have full authority, as agents of the town, to
institute and prosecute suits in the name of the town, and appear for and defend suits brought against it.
SECTION 2.7: CONVEYANCING Whenever it shall be necessary to execute any deed conveying land or any
other instrument required to carry into effect any vote of the town, the same shall be executed by the Board of
Selectmen or a majority of them, in behalf of the town, unless the town shall otherwise vote in any special case.
SECTION 2.8 : CHIEF PROCUREMENT OFFICER Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 30B, Section 2,
of the Massachusetts General Laws, the Town Manager shall be designated and shall serve as the Chief
Procurement Officer for the Town, its agencies and departments. (Adopted June 14, 1999) The Chief
Procurement Officer is authorized to enter into contracts, leases, and other agreements for terms in excess of three
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 6
years. (Sept. 30, 2002) only if said contracts, leases or other agreements are ratified by a majority vote of the Board
of Selectmen.
SECTION 2.9: CAPITAL PLANNING COMMITTEE
(May 20, 2013)
A. Appointments. Consistent with the Winchendon Home Rule Charter, Section 2.3(d), the Committee shall be
composed of five registered voters of the Town - one to be appointed by the moderator and one to be appointed
by each of the following: Board of Selectmen, School Committee, Finance Committee and Planning Board. The
Committee shall choose a chairman. Appointments shall be made following the Annual Town Meeting, for the
period beginning July 1 through June 30 of each year. Vacancies shall be filled in the manner of the original
appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term; provided, however that if 30 days pass after notice of the
vacancy has been provided to the respective appointing authority, the committee may fill the position under
Section 7-8 of the Town Charter. Each appointing authority shall consider the qualifications of applicants for
appointment, and who will best be able to represent both Town employees and taxpayers. If possible, appointees
shall include registered voters who are familiar with and experienced with financial principles.
B. Duties and Responsibilities. The Committee shall consider the capital needs of the Town including both
long term and more immediate needs. It shall evaluate, coordinate and prioritize proposed capital improvements
and other outlays involving major assets and projects, including proposed gifts to the Town that would incur
future operating costs. It shall determine the method of funding for each capital need. It shall advise the Town
Manager and Town Meeting.
C. Characteristics of a Capital Project. A “capital project” is one that:
1. Will have a useful life of three or more years or will not recur within three years
2. Will cost at least $10,000, whether spread over one or more years; provided further that large projects shall
not be divided into smaller projects to avoid this threshold.
3. May include but not be limited to: the purchase of land; the erection of new buildings and alterations to
existing buildings; the construction of and major repairs to infrastructure such as highways, water mains and
stormwater systems; the purchase of vehicles, machinery and heavy equipment; or the purchase and
installation of technology and communications equipment.
D. Review of Capital Projects. All proposed Capital Projects shall be reviewed by the Committee, and requests
therefor may be submitted at any time. Such review is not necessarily dependent on the annual budget cycle, and
shall occur regardless of whether the project is included within the annual Town operating budget, will be funded
through a grant, or is a proposed gift that will later incur operating or maintenance costs. The Committee in
examining the need for capital improvements shall evaluate the need for the project, the urgency of the need, and
the affordability of the project. The Town Manager and the Finance Committee shall be invited to all meetings
where Capital Projects are reviewed.
E. Project Requests and Financial Impact Statements. Capital Project requests may be submitted by any Town
agency or as set forth in a petitioned warrant article, and shall, if submitted by a Town agency, be accompanied
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 7
by an estimated initial capital cost and a financial impact statement detailing increased operating costs reasonably
necessary for the project to accomplish its intended purpose. The Committee may request, but not require,
additional information or that the project proponent attend a meeting of the committee.
F. Recommendations. The Committee shall recommend to the Town Manager a proposed annual capital budget
and five year capital plan, prioritizing the capital budget requests it has reviewed, and proposing funding sources
therefor. Such recommendation shall, to the extent possible, be submitted well in advance of the deadline for
submission of a capital budget as required by Section 5-7 of the Town Charter. Notwithstanding the provisions
of this bylaw, however, failure of the Committee to review a proposed Capital Project or to make a
recommendation with respect to the same, shall not prohibit inclusion of the same in the capital budget prepared
by the Town Manager or action of the Town Meeting with respect thereto. The Committee shall report at Town
Meeting its recommendation on each capital project included in the warrant.
SECTION 2.10: NOTICE OF VACANCIES Notice of Vacancies— Whenever a vacancy occurs in any
Town agency, or in Town employment or when by reasons of a retirement or the expiration of a fixed term of
office a vacancy can be anticipated, the appointing authority shall forthwith cause public notice of the vacancy
or impending vacancy to be posted on the Town bulletin board for not less than ten days. Such notice shall
contain a description of the duties of the office or position and listing of the necessary or desirable qualifications
for appointment to fill it. No permanent appointment to fill an office or position shall be effective until at least
fourteen days shall have elapsed following the date the notice was first posted in order to permit reasonable
consideration of all applicants. This section shall not apply to positions covered under the civil service law and
rules or if in conflict with the terms of a collective bargaining agreement. This section shall not be construed so
as to prevent the appointment of a temporary officer when the public need or good so requires.
SECTION 2.11: BUDGET SUBMISSION The Town Manager shall submit his proposed annual operating
budget, not less than 45 days prior to the date of the Annual Town Meeting as provided in Articles 4 and 5 of the
Town Charter of the Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts, the initial submission of which shall represent a
balanced budget, whereby the total proposed expenditures do not exceed the total estimated revenues for the
corresponding fiscal year. (June 12, 2000)
SECTION 2.12: TELEVISING OF MEETINGS All meetings of the Board of Selectmen, Board of Health,
School Committee, Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, Finance Committee, and Conservation
Commission shall be broadcast live over the local cable television network, unless, by a vote of two-thirds of
those present and voting, because of emergency conditions or some substantial reason stated as part of the vote,
the body in question suspends the requirements hereof. The meetings shall be taped/recorded and made available
for a period of three months for the benefit of those who do not have Cable TV. Nothing contained in this article
shall be so construed as to conflict with the requirements of M.G.L. Chapter 39, s23 et seq. (June 12, 2000)
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 8
SECTION 2.13: COORDINATION OF TOWN GOVERNMENT In order to provide the opportunity for
the exchange of views and of information concerning the activities, plans and undertaking of the various Town
agencies whose powers, duties and responsibilities are interrelated, the Board of Selectmen shall meet not less
than quarterly with the School Committee, and not less than annually with the Finance Committee; the School
Committee shall meet not less than quarterly with the Board of Selectmen, not less than quarterly with the
Town’s representative to the Regional Vocational School district, and not less than annually with the Finance
Committee. In the event such meetings are not otherwise scheduled the Town Clerk shall call such meetings.
SECTION 2.14: NON-CRIMINAL DISPOSITION Any bylaw of the Town of Winchendon, or rule or
regulation of its officers, boards or departments, the violation of which is subject to a specific penalty, may at
the discretion of the Town official who is the appropriate enforcing person, be enforced in the method provided
in Section 21D of Chapter 40 of the Massachusetts General Laws. The non-criminal fine for each violation, if
not otherwise specified, shall be $25.00.
“Enforcing person” as used in this bylaw, shall mean: any Town of Winchendon police officer with respect to
any offense; as well as the Building Commissioner, the Conservation Agent, the Health Agent, the Sealer of
Weights and Measures, the Animal Control Officer and such other officials as the Board of Selectmen may
designate, each with respect to violation of bylaws and rules and regulations within their respective
jurisdictions. If more than one official has jurisdiction in a given case, any such official may be an enforcing
person with respect thereto.
SECTION 2.15: PROSECUTION UNDER THE BYLAWS Any citizen may, and the Selectmen, Town
Manager, constables and police officers shall prosecute every violation of the foregoing Bylaws, by complaint
before the District Court in the County of Worcester, or any other court having jurisdiction.
SECTION 2.16: LIMITATION OF ACTION No person shall be prosecuted or tried for any breach of the
provisions of any bylaws of this town, unless complaint shall be instituted and commenced within six months
from the time of committing such breach.
SECTION 2.17: PENALTIES Unless specifically provided for by special provision of any bylaw, any person,
firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any provision of the Town Bylaws, including the Zoning
Bylaws, shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $50 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1967)
SECTION 2.18: Any words used throughout these bylaws which impart the masculine gender shall be
interpreted to include the feminine gender. (Adopted May 20, 1991)
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 9
ARTICLE 3
FINANCE COMMITTEE
SECTION 3.1 There shall be a Finance Committee, appointed by the Moderator, consisting of seven voters
appointed for terms of three years each, which terms shall expire on June 30 and shall be so arranged that the
terms of as nearly an equal number of members as is possible shall expire each year. No person shall be eligible
to membership who shall have the care, custody or expenditure of town funds, or the care, custody or disposal of
town property, either as a town officer or member of any other committee, or an agent of such officer or
committee.
SECTION 3.2: It shall be the duty of the Committee to investigate the financial affairs of the town, including
receipts of and expenditures by the different departments, or any Town Officer; the methods in which the town
business is conducted; the general conduct of the town affairs; and all the articles in town warrants for town
meetings referred to it; and, in the discharge of its duties, shall have free access to all books of accounts, books of
record and all accounts, bills, and vouchers on which money has been or may be paid from the town treasury. All
articles that may hereafter be inserted in warrants for any town meetings, excepting articles for the choice of
officers, are hereby referred to the Finance Committee.
SECTION 3.3: The Committee shall hold at least one public hearing to consider the articles in the warrant for
each town meeting. The Selectmen shall, upon the closing of the warrant, notify the Finance Committee of its
intention and the date thereof by letter; and the citizens of the town by a posting on the town hall bulletin board of
the subject matter of each of the articles that may be included therein, even if such is not yet in final form. A copy
thereof shall be provided to any citizen on request. The Finance Committee upon receiving notice of the town
meeting and after consultation with the Town Manager shall give at least five days notice of the required hearing
by publication in a local newspaper. The required hearing shall be held no sooner than the fifth day following the
closing of the warrant and no later than the day preceding the town meeting. Failure to comply with the
requirements of this section shall not invalidate a special or annual town meeting called in accordance with the
provisions of Section 1.1 and G.L. c 39, s. 10.
SECTION 3.4: The Committee shall report its recommendations on the articles in the warrant by including them
in the mailed warrant for the town meeting or by a written document given to the voters at town meeting or
verbally at the beginning of the consideration of each article. It may also report to the town meeting on any
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 10
matters that it deems appropriate under an article for committee reports or a special article, if such is included in
the warrant.
ARTICLE 4
BOARD OF HEALTH
There shall be a Board of Health, chosen as stated in the charter, consisting of five members serving for terms of
three years each, which terms shall expire on June 30 and shall be so arranged that as nearly an equal number of
members as is possible shall expire each year.
The Board of Health shall have all the powers and duties conferred upon Boards of Health by General Laws and it
shall have such additional powers and duties as may be authorized by the Charter, by Bylaw, or by other town
meeting vote
ARTICLE 5
COUNCIL ON AGING
SECTION 5.1: There shall be a Council on Aging consisting of not less than seven (7) nor more than eleven
(11) members to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen. The members shall be appointed for terms of three
years to expire on June 30 and shall be so arranged that the terms of as nearly an equal number of members as is
possible shall expire each year. The members of the Council shall be chosen from interested and representative
groups in the Town.
SECTION 5.2: It shall be the duty of the Council to formulate and carry out programs designed to meet problems
of the aging in coordination with programs of the Massachusetts Commission on Aging established under
Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40, Section 8B.
ARTICLE 6
GRAVEL AND SOIL REMOVAL (Rev. 10/20/97)
SECTION 6.1: PURPOSE
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 11
The purpose of this section is to protect the Towns natural resources due to the uncontrolled removal or
redisposition of soils and earth materials. Unless otherwise provided for in this bylaw, this section shall not
apply to the removal of less than nineteen (19) cubic yards of material from a lot for non-commercial purposes
for maintenance or improvement of the lot or for excavation done in connection with the construction of a
building or structure for which a valid building permit has been issued. This bylaw shall not apply to the
removal of earth materials if required for constructing public ways or for constructing private ways and services
in accordance with a subdivision plan approved or endorsed by the Planning Board, or in connection with the
installation of a septic system approved by the Health Agent.
SECTION 6.2: GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Excavation, removal, stripping, or mining of any earth material or soil except as hereinafter
permitted on any parcel of land, public or private, in Winchendon is prohibited without a permit
from the Board of Selectmen.
B. All earth removal operations in existence in Winchendon on the effective date of this section
shall be subject to the requirements stated herein.
C. An annual fee of One hundred dollars ($100.00) or as determined by the Board of Selectmen
shall be required for an earth removal permit.
SECTION 6.3: APPLICATION FOR SOIL, ROCK AND GRAVEL REMOVAL
All applicants for a Soil, Rock and Gravel Removal Permit must, at a minimum, submit the following materials
to the Board of Selectmen:
A. A plan or plans to scale, (1" = 40') prepared and stamped by a Registered Engineer and a
Registered Land Surveyor, and subdivided into five acre lots showing the property lines
of the parcel of land under consideration along with all abutters to the property, existing
and final contours in two foot (2') elevation increments, existing and proposed final
drainage of the site, including all culverts, streams, ponds, swamps, and siltation basins,
and all wetlands pursuant to MGL Ch. 131, Sec. 40, means of entrance and egress from
the property, locus map, and any other pertinent data deemed necessary by the Board of
Selectmen.
B. A complete list of the names and addresses of current abutters of the property where such
removal is proposed.
C. An operation schedule showing the active area (not to exceed five (5) acres) where the
removal will begin and also how the total parcel will be developed in progressive five (5)
acre increments.
D. The full legal name and address of the owner of record, the operator of the removal
operation and of the applicant.
SECTION 6.4: CONDITIONS
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 12
A. Board of Selectmen may issue Soil, Rock and Gravel Removal Permits, and impose
conditions thereon, in any location in which such use is allowed under the zoning by-law.
If a special permit or variance from the Board of Appeals and/or Planning Board is
necessary for said use, said zoning relief must have been obtained and (1) the appeal
period has expired without the filing of an appeal or (2) any appeal filed has been
resolved so that the zoning relief is upheld.
B. All permits issued by the Board of Selectmen shall incorporate by reference any
conditions imposed in any grant of zoning relief applicable to the site. No permit from
the Board of Selectmen shall be deemed to override or supersede such zoning relief. The
grant of a permit issued by the Board of Selectmen shall be an additional requirement
which must be obtained prior to the commencement of the use or, for a use already in
progress, upon the effective date of this by-law (January 1, 1998, or upon approval of the
by-law by the Attorney General and publication as required by law, whichever is later).
C. Said permit shall allow the working of only five (5) acres at any one time. No removal of
material may take place within 300 feet of a street or way, nor within 100 feet of the high
water mark of any natural water course, nor within 100 feet of a lot line. Soil may be
disturbed within these established boundaries if it is considered part of the site restoration
work.
D. The Board of Selectmen shall issue the permit for one (1) year. The Board may make the
permit renewable for up to four (4) additional one (1) year terms; provided that any
renewal for a one year term will only be allowed if: (1) the permit holder has complied
with all terms and conditions of the Selectmen's permit and any special permit applicable
to the operation; (2) the permit holder has paid all license fees on time. In any case, the
Selectmen's permit may not extend past the expiration date of any applicable special
permit.
SECTION 6.5: STANDARDS FOR REMOVAL AND RESTORATION
If the operation for which a permit is sought is subject to a special permit, all conditions contained in said
special permit shall be part of the Selectmen's permit. The Board of Selectmen may impose additional
conditions as long as said conditions do not conflict with conditions of the special permit.
If the special permit contains no conditions, the Board of Selectmen shall impose conditions as to the
following:
A. Hours of operation, access limitations, safety precautions.
B. Slopes, grades allowed in active area.
C. Tree and stump removal, buffer zones, screening.
D. Road maintenance/repair/restoration
E. Site restoration
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 13
SECTION .6.6: SECURITY REQUIREMENTS
Upon approval of a permit, the applicant shall file with the Town Treasurer a bond or deposit of money in a form
approved by the Board of Selectmen and Town Counsel in the minimum amount of five thousand dollars
($5,000) per acre to be excavated, or other amount as deemed appropriate by the Board of Selectmen. After
completion of the total project, and at the applicant’s written request, the Board may grant a partial release of any
security posted by the applicant. One (1) year after such a partial release is granted and if in the opinion of the
Board of Appeals no damage or deterioration to the finished project has developed, the Board will issue a final
release of the security. If, during the year following the date of a partial release, slumping, gullying, erosion, or
any other unsatisfactory condition appears, the applicant shall be responsible for and shall make any necessary
repairs before final release of security is granted. If the applicant fails to make such repairs, the Board may
cause the work to be done using the bond or deposit. Any bonding agent shall be required to give the Board, by
Registered or Certified Mail, a sixty (60) day notice prior to any termination or cancellation of the bond.
SECTION 6.7: ENFORCEMENT
A. The permit shall be considered a non-transferable revocable permit to remove earth
materials. If it is found that incorrect information was submitted in the application, or that
conditions of the permit are being violated, or that the governing regulations are not being
followed, the permit shall be suspended until all provisions have been met and a plan to
remedy violations submitted to and approved by the Board of Selectmen. Failure of the
permit holder to comply within any time specified by the Board of Selectmen for correction
of violations shall cause the permit to be revoked.
B. Fines may be imposed for the violation of any of the terms and conditions of the permit.
Fines shall be $100 for the first offense and $200 for the second and any subsequent
offenses or the maximum allowed by law. The terms and conditions of the permit may be
enforced by the Board of Selectmen, Town Manager, or Building Commissioner.
ARTICLE 7
HIGHWAY AND POLICE REGULATIONS
SECTION 7.1: No building shall be removed over a public street without the written permission of the
Selectmen.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 14
SECTION 7.2: The owner of such building, or the person or persons removing the same, shall give bond in such
penal sum and with such sureties as the Selectmen shall determine, with conditions to reimburse the town for all
sums of money which it may be liable or compelled to pay in consequence of such use of the highway.
SECTION 7.3: No persons except the Selectmen or the town officers having charge of highways, in the lawful
performance of their duties, or of those acting under their orders, shall break or dig up ground in any street or
public way in the town, without first obtaining a written permit from the Selectmen; and all persons acting under
such permit shall put up and maintain suitable railing or fence around the part of the street so broken up, so long as
the same shall remain unsafe or inconvenient for travelers, and post such bond as the Selectmen may require to
secure the proper completion of such work keep one or more lights, reflective barrels, or other such devices placed
around the sections dug up so long as such street or way shall be or remain unsafe of inconvenient; and post such
bond as the Selectmen may require to secure the proper completion of such work. (Amended May 20, 1991)
SECTION 7.4: No person shall ride or drive a horse in any street or way in the town at a rate faster than eight
miles an hour.
SECTION 7.5 : No person shall use any Town sidewalk to propel, drive, wheel or haul any self-propelled or
motorized vehicles. This shall include, but is not limited to bicycles, tricycles, carts, roller skates, or skateboards
so as to impede pedestrian traffic. Carriages, strollers, motorized wheelchairs, or similar equipment used for the
transportation of infants, the elderly, or disabled persons are exempt. Livestock shall not be driven over, tethered,
or otherwise allowed to obstruct any town sidewalk. (Amended May 20, 1991)
SECTION 7.6 : No person shall hitch or fasten any horse to any ornamental tree standing or growing on or near
any sidewalk, or to the boxing or guard about said tree without the consent of the owner thereof.
SECTION 7.7 : No person shall, without a written license from the Board of Selectmen, place or cause to be
placed, or suffer to remain within the limits of a street or upon any sidewalk, any obstruction whatsoever. Any
person who is licensed to place a construction lean-to or similar temporary structure on or partly on a town
sidewalk so that the remaining sidewalk is less than five feet in width shall be responsible for prompt removal of
snow or any other material which obstructs the remaining sidewalk. The Board of Selectmen may temporarily
prohibit vehicle parking next to such a construction area. They may also require the licensee to install temporary
ramps or other structures so as to allow persons with disabilities to negotiate the area.
SECTION 7.8: Loud crying of wares or merchandise, or hallooing, hooting, or making loud and unseemly noises,
or distributing handbills or other papers, on public street or square of the town, to the annoyance of the citizens, is
prohibited.
SECTION 7.9: No persons shall behave in a rude, indecent, or disorderly manner, or use profane, indecent or
insulting language in any public place or on any sidewalk or street in the town, to the disturbance of any other
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 15
person there being or passing in a peaceful manner, or be, or remain upon any sidewalk, street or crossing, or
about doorways or places of business, to the annoyance or disturbance of any person.
SECTION 7.10: Three or more persons shall not continue to stand or remain in a group, near to each other, on
any sidewalk or street or crossing, or in any public place, in such a manner as to obstruct a free passage for foot
passengers, after having been requested to move on.
SECTION 7.11: No persons shall be or remain in any doorway or upon any stairs, door-step, portico, or other
projection, from any house or building, or upon any wall or fence on or near any street or public place after having
been requested by the owner or occupant of the premises or by any constable or police officer to remove
therefrom.
SECTION 7.12: No person shall make any figure, or write, paint, print or cut any word or words upon or deface
any public property or property of another.
SECTION 7.13: No persons shall extinguish any street light, or extinguish or remove any light placed to denote
any obstruction or a defect in any street or way, without proper authority.
Section 7.l4: Sledding on any of the public streets of the town is prohibited.
SECTION 7.15: REPAIR OF PRIVATE WAYS
Upon receipt of a petition signed by a majority of the abutters on a private way, or by ten such abutters, whichever
number shall be the lesser, the Town Manager, with the recommendation of the DPW Superintendent shall make a
determination whether temporary repairs are required by public necessity. If it is determined that such repairs are
necessary the Town shall make the same which shall be limited to the filling of holes in the subsurface of such
ways and repair to the surface materials thereof except that drainage facilities may be provided or improved where
public safety requires the same. These provisions shall not be applicable to any private way which shall not have
been open to public use for a period of at least six consecutive years. The Town shall not be liable for damage
caused by such repairs to any greater extent than if such work was done on a public way.
SECTION 7.16: REMOVAL OR TRIMMING OF TREES
Whenever the Town shall remove or trim trees and other vegetation located within the highway limits or on land
of an adjoining owner, the materials so removed shall become the property of said owner, or if the owner indicates
he does not want said materials, the department responsible for its cutting shall dispose of the same by public sale
or sealed bid after giving at least seven days notice of such sale by posting at the Town Hall, except that if the
value of the material shall be estimated to be less than fifty dollars, it may be sold, or otherwise disposed of,
without such notice and in such manner as the department may determine.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 16
SECTION 7.17: STREET NAMES AND NUMBERS Street numbers shall be attached to each dwelling,
business, industry and other building in the Town of Winchendon.
The number shall be made of permanent, weather-proof materials, in a color contrasting with the background,
shall be at least three (3) inches in height, and shall be clearly visible from the street or roadway upon which the
structure fronts.
Any structure that is not visible from the street or roadway shall have the assigned number posted on a suitable
support at the entrance to the driveway that services such structure.
The numbers posted shall be those assigned to each structure by the Planning Board . The Planning Board shall
advise the owners of the property of any changed number in writing within thirty days. If a building has not had
a number assigned to it, the Planning Board will do so within thirty days after the request. The board shall send
copies of any such notice to the town clerk, the assessors, the police department, the fire department and the
building commissioner in case of changes or new assignments of numbers to existing structures.
It shall be the responsibility of each property owner in the Town of Winchendon to obtain, display and maintain
the assigned street number.
This bylaw shall be enforced by the Police Department. Failure to comply with this bylaw shall subject
property owners to a fine of twenty five dollars ($25) for each offense. Each day shall constitute a separate
offense.
The names of all new or existing ways, whether public or private, shall be approved by the planning board. No
sign which appears to indicate a street name shall be placed or remain so as to mark any street, way, or
driveway with a name other than that approved by the planning board for that street or way.
If the planning board feels the name of any existing street or way, public or private, is so similar to that of
another way that the similarity may to lead to confusion particularly in the dispatch of emergency personnel, or
that the numbering of the properties on such a way is likely to cause confusion to persons seeking a particular
address, the board may propose to change the name or numbering of such street or way and hold a public
hearing thereon. Notice of The hearing shall be given by publication once in each of two successive weeks in a
local newspaper the first publication to be at least fourteen days before the hearing, by posting a copy on the
town hall bulletin board at least fourteen days before the hearing, and by mailing a notice thereof to each
household/business likely to be affected thereby as shown by the most recent street listing. If, after the hearing,
the board finds the public safety and convenience so require, it shall order the change, forthwith file a copy of
the order effecting the change in the office of the town clerk, and cause a copy thereof to be filed in the
Worcester registry of deeds. Copies of the order shall be provided to the assessors, the police department, the
fire department, the Department of Public Works, and the building commissioner. If a street name is changed,
the Department of Public Works shall, within thirty days, place street signs showing the new street or way at
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 17
each intersection with another street. If the street affected is not a public way, the cost of such signs may be
assessed upon the owner of the way.
SECTION 7.18; WINTER BAN Parking is prohibited on all public ways between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m., annually from December 1st through April 15th. In addition, any vehicle, other than one acting in an
emergency, parked, day or night, on any street in the Town, so as to interfere with the work of removing or
plowing snow, removing ice, or sanding the street may be removed or towed away under the authority,
discretion and direction of the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee. The registered owner of a motor vehicle
which is removed pursuant to this bylaw shall be fully responsible for all charges and expenses incurred for the
removal and storage of said motor vehicle. (May 21, 2012)
Section 7.19: SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL No person, other than an employee of the Town acting in
an official capacity, shall direct, discharge, dump, plow, blow, shovel, or deposit snow, ice, or water subject
to freezing onto, into, or across any sidewalk or public way, or cause, direct, sanction, or authorize any such
activity involving snow, ice, or water on a sidewalk or public way. Violation of this Bylaw shall be
punishable by a fine of $25 for the first offense, $50 for a second offense, and $100 for each subsequent
offense. “Enforcing persons” for purposes of this Bylaw shall be the Public Works Director and any police
officer of the Town of Winchendon. (May 21, 2012)
Section 7.20: DISCHARGE OF WATER ONTO TOWN WAYS OR TO THE SANITARY SEWAGE
SYSTEM No owner of a property or building, or his agent having care thereof, shall cause, pump or direct water,
in any form, from said property or the building itself, including the roof, onto or across any sidewalk or public
way in such a manner as to affect the public safety or create a public nuisance.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer
unless permitted to do so by the Public Works Director.
Violation of this Bylaw shall be punishable by a fine of $25 for the first offense, $50 for a second offense, and
$100 for each subsequent offense. “Enforcing persons” for purposes of this Bylaw shall be the Public Works
Director and any Police Officer of the Town of Winchendon. (May 21, 2012)
ARTICLE 8
LITTERING BY-LAW (May 20, 2013)
No person shall throw, discard, deposit, or abandon upon any public way or other property owned by the Town
or on the property of another any litter, except in a designated waste receptacle or as may otherwise be directed
by the Town or the property owner. For purposes of this bylaw, the term "litter" shall include but is not limited
to: paper wrappers; paper bags; paper towels or napkins; paper or plastic cups; cup lids; plastic bags; plastic or
glass bottles; beverage cans; cigarette butts; cigarette packs; gum packs; tissues; fruit skins and containers; and
any other items that would be considered trash. Enforcement: The provisions of this bylaw may be enforced by
the Agent of the Board of Health and any Police Officer of the Town of Winchendon, by any available means in
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 18
law or equity, including but not limited to enforcement by non-criminal disposition pursuant to MG.L. c. 40 §
21D. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. For the purposes of non-criminal
disposition, the following fine schedule shall apply:
First offense: $ 50.00
Second offense: $ 250.00
Third and each subsequent offense: $ 300.00
ARTICLE 9
REGULATING CEMETERY TRUST FUNDS
SECTION 9.1: The Town of Winchendon may take and hold any gift, grant, donation, or bequest of any money
or property upon trust, and apply the same, or the income thereof, for the improvement or embellishment of any
cemetery or burial place in said town, or for the preservation or renewal of any monument, fence or other erection,
or for the planting and cultivation of any trees, shrubs or plants, in or around any lot or for improving any
cemetery or burial place, or either of them in any manner and form consistent with the purposes for which said
gift, grant, donation, or bequest may have been made.
SECTION 9.2: Whenever any such gift, grant, donation or bequest shall be made to the Town by the owner of
any lot or lots in any burial ground or cemetery in the Town for the repair, preservation or embellishment of any
such lot or lots, or the erections thereon, the Town, acting through the Town Manager, shall give to such owner, or
his legal representatives, an agreement or obligation in such form as to bind the Town, to preserve and keep in
repair such lots forever, or for such term and in such manner as may be designated by the grantor, to the extent of
the income of such gift, grant, donation or bequest.
SECTION 9.3: Any sum or sums of money so received by the Town, shall be invested in any securities in
which the Town may invest under applicable law, as determined by the Town Collector/Treasurer, unless
otherwise provided for by the terms of such gift, grant, donation, or bequest and the income thereof may,
subject to town meeting appropriation, be expended in such manner as shall, in the opinion of the Town
Manager or his designee, best promote the purposes for which such gift, grant, donation, or bequest shall have
been made. Nothing herein contained shall be held to prevent the deposit of all such funds in a single account.
SECTION 9.4: The Town shall maintain a record of the names of each person making any such gift, grant,
donation or bequest, together with the date of the same, the number of the lot or lots owned by such person and the
identity of the fund or account in which the same shall be invested.
SECTION 9.5: The Town Treasurer shall at all times be the custodian of the funds, and the income thereof, and
shall keep proper records thereof and pay out such funds in accordance with the provisions of the law relating to town
expenditures
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 19
ARTICLE 10
PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
The Town Manager is responsible for all Town personnel and its administration consistent with MGL, Charter and
Town By laws.
*Editor’s Note: Personnel policies and procedures are adopted by the Board of Selectmen from time to time and
are on file with the Town Clerk.
ARTICLE 11
WATER DEPARTMENT ASSESSMENTS
Special assessments may be levied to meet the whole or part of the cost incurred of laying pipes in public and
private ways for the conveyance of distribution of water to the inhabitants of the Town of Winchendon. An owner
of land which receives benefit from the laying of water pipes in public or private ways upon which his land abuts
shall pay such proportionate part of the cost, not already assessed, of extending such water supply to his land as
may be determined by the Board of Selectmen. The amount to be charged against each parcel of land receiving
such benefit shall include the cost of pipes and other material and of the labor in laying them and other expenses
incidental thereto and shall be ascertained, assessed and certified by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of
Winchendon. Assessment for the cost or providing and laying water pipes in public and private ways shall be
made upon the several parcels of land receiving benefits from the laying of such pipes by a fixed uniform rate
based upon the estimated average cost of all the water pipes therein and the laying thereof according to the
frontage of such land on any way on which a water pipe is laid. Whenever the Town votes to lay water pipes in
public and private ways, and to make assessments for the construction of such improvement, the Board of
Selectmen shall forthwith cause to be recorded in the Worcester District Registry of Deeds a statement of the vote
adopted by the Town specifying the ways in which such water pipes are to be laid, and the estimated assessment
per foot of frontage of land abutting thereon. No assessment shall be levied in excess of the benefit to the land
assessed from the laying of the water pipes for which the assessment is levied or in excess of the estimate as
recorded in the Registry of Deeds. The Board of Selectmen may extend the time of payment of the assessment in
accordance with the provisions of General Laws, Chapter 80, and if the order for assessment is upon land not built
upon, shall extend the time of payment of the assessment and interest thereon at the rate of 4% per annum until
said land is built upon for a fixed time, and the assessment and interest shall be paid within three months after
such land is built upon or at the expiration of such fixed period.
ARTICLE 12
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 20
REGULATION OF WATER CRAFT
The Board of Selectmen may make rules and regulations for the operation of water craft upon the rivers and lakes
located in the town, to the end that such water craft shall not be operated in a manner which endangers the safety
of the public or is detrimental or injurious to the neighborhood or to the value of property therein, and provide
penalties for the violation of such rules and regulations.
ARTICLE 13
JUNK DEALERS: SECOND HAND ARTICLES
(May 21, 2007, Rev. May 23, 3011, Rev. May 21, 2012)
SECTION 13.1: The Board of Selectmen may license suitable persons to be collectors of, dealers in, or
keepers of shops for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metals or second hand articles, pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 140 of the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
SECTION 13.2: All such licenses may be revoked for cause after a hearing and shall expire on December 31st
of each year.
SECTION 13.3: Every keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metal or second hand articles,
excluding clothing, furniture, books, and magazines shall at the time of every transaction use a form prescribed
by the Town of Winchendon to record the purchase of any such article; a description thereof including the name,
age, and residence of the person from whom, and the day and hour when such purchase was made. A copy of all
transactions recorded on said form shall be kept by the shopkeeper in a book. All items purchased shall be
photographed, and itemized on said form with descriptions and markings along with serial and model numbers;
penny weight, troy ounce, and or karat if applicable; the size shape and type of any precious stones or metals; and
gross weight in pounds or tons in the case of scrap metal. Such books shall at all times be open to the inspection
of any police officer of the town, or of any person authorized by the Board of Selectmen to make such inspection.
Every shop keeper shall obtain a valid identification card and make a photocopy of same in the area designated
on prescribed form, to be attached to the sale either by name, number or receipt of the seller. (May 21, 2012)
SECTION 13.4: Every keeper of such shop shall put in a suitable and conspicuous place on his shop, a sign
having his name and occupation legibly inscribed thereon in letters at least two inches high. Such shop and all
articles of merchandise therein, and any place, vehicle or receptacle used for the collection or keeping of the
articles aforesaid may be examined at all times by any police officer of the town, or by any person authorized
by the Board of Selectmen to make such examination. Every such shop shall be closed except from 7:00 o'clock
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 21
a.m. to 9:00 o'clock p.m. of each day, and no keeper thereof and no junk collector shall purchase or sell any of
the articles aforesaid during such hours.
SECTION 13.5: No dealer in junk, old metals or second hand articles shall directly or indirectly purchase or
receive by way of barter or exchange such goods, or allow such goods to be deposited upon or within his
premises, shop or vehicle, by any minor, knowing or having reason to believe him to be such.
SECTION 13.6: No dealer in junk, old metals or second-hand articles shall sell any items within ten days of
purchase.
SECTION 13.7: No dealer in junk, old metals or second-hand articles shall carry on his business in any other
place than that designated for his license, unless a consent to his removal be granted by the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 13.8 Dealers shall forward (hand deliver or Email) an itemized list of all transactions on the form
prescribed by the Town of Winchendon, including all pertinent seller information to the Winchendon Police
Department on the first Monday following each transaction. In the event that the first Monday following said
transaction is a holiday, the shopkeeper shall submit a copy of said transactions on the next business day.
ARTICLE 14
UNUSED OR UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION 14.1: No unregistered motor vehicle, except those on the premises of a licensed dealer of motor
vehicles who is actively engaged in promoting its business, or any motor vehicle parts shall be parked, kept or
stored within 100 feet of a public way or within 50 feet of a property line, except within a garage, barn or other
completely enclosed structure so that said vehicle or part(s) are not visible from public ways or property lines.
SECTION 14.2
(a): Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the Town Manager may, after investigation by the Police
Department, and upon the payment of a fee to be determined by the Board of Selectmen , issue a permit for
the storage of one motor vehicle which does not comply with the above requirements, where at least one of
the following applies:
1. The vehicle is owned by a college student; upon verification of enrollment, a one year renewable
permit.
2. For racing cars; upon verification of the owner's membership in a racing association, a one-year
permit;
3. For antique cars, as defined by the Registry of Motor Vehicles, a one-year renewable permit;
4. For motor vehicles in the process of being restored, a one-year renewable permit;
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 22
5. For persons in active military service or in attendance at a military school or academy, a permit for
the duration of such service or attendance without the payment of any fee;
6. For a motor vehicle used as a source of spare parts for another motor vehicle belonging to the same
owner, for such period of time as the Town Manager may prescribe, but not to exceed one year and
to be non- renewable.
(b) In each case where a permit is granted under Section 14.2(a) the Town Manager shall set forth
appropriate conditions for the storage of said vehicles or parts, taking into consideration the nature of the
neighborhood, lot size, proximity of proposed storage location to nearby public ways and property lines,
availability of garages or other structures for storage, and appropriate screening devices such as fencing or
shrubbery.
(c): If the applicant is 65 years of age or over, any fee may be waived at the discretion of the Town
Manager.
(d): Nothing contained herein shall be applicable to
(1) a motor vehicle used exclusively for agriculture, or
(2) a motor vehicle used for construction purposes where said vehicles are temporarily parked or
stored on the property while said construction is being performed.
SECTION 14.3: Any violation of the provisions of this bylaw shall be subject to a fine of not more that $50.00
for each offense. Each day such violation is committed or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
ARTICLE 15
HISTORIC DISTRICT
Establishing a Historic District and an Historic District Commission under the provisions of Chapter 40C, General
Laws, as amended by Chapter 359 of the Acts of 1971.
SECTION 15.1: PREAMBLE The purpose of this bylaw is to promote the educational, cultural, economic, and
general welfare of the public in keeping with the provisions of the General Laws of the Commonwealth, Chapter
40C, as amended, through the preservation and protection of the distinctive outward appearance and
characteristics of buildings and places significant in the history of the town; through maintenance of the
appearances and settings of such buildings and places; and through the encouragement of design and construction
compatible therewith.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 23
SECTION 15.2: LOCATION OF DISTRICT There is hereby established an Historic District in that part of
Winchendon known as "Winchendon Centre", hereinafter called "Winchendon Centre Historic District", under the
provisions of General Laws, Chapter 40C, as amended, bounded and described as follows: 1. Commencing at an
iron pipe on the west side of High Street on the north boundary of land now owned by Omer J. Dionne; 2. Thence
southerly along a stone wall, crossing the road leading to the hospital and continuing to a point north of the First
Congregational Church; 3. Thence westerly along same stone wall to a corner and thence southerly to a corner;
and thence westerly along the wall to a corner; and thence southerly along same stone wall to a junction in the
wall SW of a house now owned by Marshall Smith; 4. Thence westerly along a stone wall to the NW corner of the
Day House lot; 5. Thence southerly along the west boundary of the Day House lot and continuing on the same line
across Hale Street to the end of a stone wall located on the east side of the Baldwinville Road and being the north
boundary wall on land owned now or formerly by Marshall Smith; 6. Thence S74 E, 189 feet along aforesaid
stone wall to a junction in the wall on land owned now or formerly of Ralph G. Diehl; 7. Thence easterly to the
junction of Teel Road and Cummings Road to an iron stake located on the north side of Teel Road and on land
owned now or formerly by Mary L. Diehl; 8. Thence northerly to the SE corner of the old town cemetery; 9.
Thence northerly along the stone wall east boundary of the old town cemetery to the NE corner of the same
cemetery; 10. Thence northerly to an iron stake on the east side of a barn owned by James J. Hunt, Jr., and located
on the former Hall farm; 11. Thence northwesterly to a bar way in a stone wall on the east side of Hall Road, and
north of James J. Hunt, Jr. house; 12. Thence southerly along the west side of Hall Road to a stone wall on the
north boundary of the Old Training Ground; 13. Thence westerly along the stone wall to a junction of the wall
along a stone wall on land of William D.Brown to a corner in the wall; 15. Thence westerly along the wall to a
point on the east side of High Street; 16. Thence southerly along the west side of High Street to a point of
beginning. The foregoing metes and bounds are shown on a map entitled "Winchendon Centre Historic District,
Established 1974" filed with the Town Clerk, and the Worcester County Registry of Deeds.
Said map is designated as the map required for filing in accordance with the fourth paragraph of Section 3 of said
Chapter 40C, as amended. The sources of said map are United States Geological Survey, Winchendon
Quadrangle, 1954, and on site survey of November,1972.
SECTION 15.3: POWERS, DUTIES AND AUTHORITY (May 20, 2013)
a. There is hereby established an Historic District Commission, hereinafter called "The Commission", under
the provisions of General Laws, Chapter 40C, as amended, It shall also have the powers and duties of an
historical commission as provided in M.G.L. Chapter 40, section 8D and Chapter 40C, Section 14. It shall
consist of five (5) members, and two (2) alternate members, appointed by the Board of Selectmen. Before
making any appointment, the Board of Selectmen shall in writing request the names of two (2) nominees
from the Winchendon Historic Society, Inc., two (2) nominees from the Chapter of the American Institute
of Architect covering Winchendon; and two (2) nominees from the Board of Realtors covering
Winchendon. One appointment shall be made from the two (2) nominees named by each such organization.
If any such organization shall fail to name two (2) nominees within thirty (30) days of such request, the
Board of Selectmen may make the appointment without nomination from such organization. The remaining
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 24
appointments may be made without nomination from any independent organization. At least one or more
members so appointed shall be a resident of, or owner of, property within the Historic District. The terms
of three (3) years will be so arranged that as equal a number as possible will expire each year. Their
successors shall be appointed in like manner for terms of three (3) years. The filling of vacancies in the
membership of the Commission, designation of alternate members to serve as required, and the election of
officers shall be in accordance with the provisions of General Laws, Chapter 40C, as amended.
b. The Commission shall have all the powers and perform all the duties conferred and imposed on Historic
District Commissions by the General Laws of the Commonwealth.
c.. In accordance with Section 16 of the General Laws, Chapter 40C, as amended, the Commission shall
have the powers and duties of an Historical Commission as provided by General Laws, Chapter 40, Section
8D.
d.. The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its business not inconsistent with
the provisions of General Laws, Chapter 40C, as amended, and may, subject to appropriation, employ
clerical and technical assistance of consultants and may accept money gifts and expend same for such
purposes.
e.. In case any section, paragraph, or part of this bylaw be for any reason declared invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of last resort, every other section, paragraph, or part shall continue in full
force and effect.
ARTICLE 16
PRESERVATION OF HISTORICALLY
SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS
SECTION 16.1: INTENT AND PURPOSE
This bylaw is enacted for the purpose of preserving and protecting significant buildings within the town which
constitute or reflect distinctive features of the architectural, cultural, economic, political or social history of the town
and to limit the detrimental effect of demolition on the character of the town. Through this bylaw, owners of
preferably preserved buildings are encouraged to seek out alternative options that will preserve, rehabilitate or
restore such buildings and residents of the town are alerted to impending demolitions of significant buildings. By
preserving and protecting significant buildings, streetscapes and neighborhoods, this bylaw promotes the public
welfare by making the town a more attractive and desirable place in which to live and work. To achieve these
purposes the Historical Commission is authorized to advise the Building Commissioner with respect to demolition
permit applications. The issuance of demolition permits is regulated as provided by this bylaw.
SECTION 16.2: DEFINITIONS
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 25
1. Applicant—Any person or entity who files an application for a demolition permit. If the applicant is not the
owner of the premises upon which the building is situated, the owner must indicate on or with the application
his/her assent to the filing of the application.
2. Application—An application for the demolition of a building.
3. Building—Any combination of materials forming a shelter for persons, animals or property.
4. Building Commissioner—The person occupying the office of Building Commissioner or otherwise
authorized to issue demolition permits.
5. The Winchendon Historical Commission or its designee.
6. Demolition—Any act of pulling down, destroying, removing, dismantling or razing a building or
commencing the work of total or substantial destruction with the intent of completing the same.
7. Demolition Permit—The building permit issued by the Building Inspector for a demolition of a building,
excluding a building permit issued solely for the demolition of the interior of a building.
8. Preferably Preserved—Any significant building which the Commission determines, following a public
hearing, that it is in the public interest to be preserved rather than demolished. A preferably preserved
building is subject to the twelve-month demolition delay period of this bylaw.
9. Significant Building—Any building within the town which is in whole or in part fifty years or more old and
which has been determined by the Commission or its designee to be significant based on any of the following
criteria:
1. The building is listed on, or is within an area listed, the National Register of Historic Places; or
2. The building has been found eligible for the National Register of Historic Places; or
3. The building is importantly associated with one or more historic persons or events, or with the broad
architectural, cultural, political, economic or social history of the Town or the Commonwealth; or
4. The building is historically or architecturally important (in terms of period, style, method of building
construction or association with a recognized architect or builder) either by itself or in the context of a
group of buildings.
SECTION 16.3: PROCEDURE No demolition permit for a building which is in whole, or in part, fifty years or
more old shall be issued without following the provisions of this bylaw. If a building is of unknown age, it shall be
assumed that the building is over 50 years old for the purposes of this bylaw.
An applicant proposing to demolish a building subject to this bylaw shall file with the Building Commissioner an
application containing the following information:
1. The address of the building to be demolished.
2. The owner’s name, address and telephone number.
3. A description of the building.
4. The reason for requesting a demolition permit.
5. A brief description of the proposed reuse, reconstruction, or replacement.
6. A photograph or photographs of the building.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 26
The Building Commissioner shall within seven days forward a copy of the application to the Commission. The
Commission shall within fifteen days after receipt of the application, make a written determination of whether the
building is significant.
Upon determination by the Commission that the building is not significant, the Commission shall so notify the
Building Commissioner and applicant in writing. The Building Commissioner may proceed to issue the demolition
permit.
Upon determination by the Commission that the building is significant, the Commission shall so notify the Building
Commissioner and the applicant in writing. No demolition permit may be issued at this time. If the Commission
does not notify the Building Commissioner within fifteen days of receipt of the application, the Building
Commissioner may proceed to issue the demolition permit.
If the Commission finds that the building is significant, it shall hold a public hearing within thirty days of the written
notification to the Building Commissioner. Public notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in town hall for a period of not less than seven days prior to the date of said hearing
and the applicant and the building inspector shall be notified in writing of the meeting time and place.
The Commission shall decide at a public hearing or within fourteen days after the public hearing whether the
building should be preferably preserved. If agreed to in writing by the applicant, the determination of the
Commission may be postponed.
If the Commission determines that the building is not preferably preserved, the Commission shall so notify the
Building Commissioner and applicant in writing. The Building Commissioner may then issue the demolition
permit.
If the Commission determines that the building is preferably preserved, the Commission shall notify the Building
Commissioner and applicant in writing. No demolition permit may then be issued for a period of twelve months
from the date of the determination unless otherwise agreed to by the Commission. If the Commission does not so
notify the Building Commissioner in writing within twenty-one days of the public hearing, the Building
Commissioner may issue the demolition permit.
If the Commission determines that the building is preferably preserved, the Commission shall notify the Building
Commissioner and applicant in writing. No demolition permit may then be issued for a period of twelve months
from the date of the determination unless otherwise agreed to by the Commission. If the Commission does not so
notify the Building Commissioner in writing within twenty-one days of the public hearing, the Building
Commissioner may issue the demolition permit
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 27
Upon a determination by the Commission that any building which is the subject of an application is a preferably
preserved building, no building permit for new construction or alterations on the premises shall be issued for a
period of twelve months from the date of the determination unless otherwise agreed to by the Commission.
No permit for demolition of a building determined to be a preferably preserved building shall be granted until all
plans for future use and development of the site have been filed with the Building Commissioner and have been
found to comply with all laws pertaining to the issuance of a building permit or if for a parking lot or vacant lot, a
site plan review shall be required, or if for a vacant lot use, until plans been filed with the Building Commissioner
showing the vacant lot us and detailing the plans to remove or fill any foundation or other subsurface structure,
including sanitary septic components, wells, and dry wells, and including proper regarding of the site. All approvals
necessary for the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy including without limitation any necessary
zoning variances or special permits, must be granted and all appeals from the granting of such approvals must be
concluded, prior to the issuance of a demolition permit under this section.
The Building Commissioner may issue a demolition permit or a building permit for a preferably preserved building
within the twelve months if the Commission notifies the Building Commissioner in writing that the Commission
finds that the intent and purpose of this bylaw is served even with the issuance of the demolition permit or the
building permit.
Following the twelve month delay period, the Building Commissioner may issue the demolition permit.
SECTION 16.4: ADMINISTRATION The Commission may adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary
to administer the terms of this bylaw. The Commission is authorized to adopt a schedule or reasonable fees to cover
the costs associated with the administration of this bylaw. The Commission may delegate authority to make initial
determinations of significance to one or more members of the Commission or to a municipal employee. The
Commission may pro-actively develop a list of significant buildings that will be subject to this bylaw. Buildings
proposed for the significant building list shall be added following a public hearing.
SECTION 16.5: EMERGENCY DEMOLITION If after an inspection, the Building Commissioner finds that a
building subject to this bylaw poses an immediate threat to public health or safety due to its deteriorated condition
and that there is no reasonable alternative to the immediate demolition of the building or structure, then the Building
Commissioner may issue an emergency demolition permit to the owner building and the basis for his decision which
shall be forwarded to the Commission.
SECTION 16.6: ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES The Commission and/or the Building Commissioner are
each specifically authorized to institute any and all actions and proceedings, in law or equity, as they may deem
necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements of this bylaw or to prevent a threatened
violation thereof. Any owner of a building subject to this bylaw that demolished the building without first obtaining
a demolition permit in accordance with the provisions of this bylaw shall be subject to a fine of not more than Three
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 28
Hundred Dollars. Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense until a faithful restoration of the
demolished building is completed or unless otherwise agreed to by the Commission. If a building subject to this
bylaw is demolished without first obtaining a demolition permit, no building permit shall be issued for a period of
two years from the date of the demolition on the subject parcel of land or any adjoining parcels of land under
common ownership and control unless otherwise agreed to by the Commission.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, whenever the Commission shall, on its own initiative, or on application of a
landowner, determine that earlier reconstruction, restoration or other remediation of any demolition in violation of
this By-law better serves the intent and purpose of this By-law, it may, prior to the expiration of said period of two
years, but no sooner than six months from the date of completion of any demolition in violation of this By-law,
authorize issuance of a building permit, upon such conditions as the Commission deems necessary or appropriate
to effectuate the purpose of this By-law, and may so notify the Building Commissioner
SECTION 16.7: HISTORIC DISTRICT ACT
Following a determination that the building is significant and preferably preserved, the Commission may
recommend to town meeting that the building be protected through the provisions of Massachusetts General Law,
Chapter 40C, the Historic District Act. The steps required under M.G.L. Chapter 40C shall be followed prior to the
establishment of a local historic district. Nothing in this bylaw shall be deemed to conflict with the provisions of
the Historic District act, Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40C. If any of the provisions of this bylaw do so
conflict, that act shall prevail.
SECTION 16.8: SEVERABILITY
In case any section, paragraph or part of this bylaw is for any reason declared invalid or unconstitutional by any
court, every other section, paragraph and part shall continue in full force and effect. (adopted May 18, 2009)
ARTICLE 17
ANIMAL CONTROL BYLAW
SECTION 17.1: PASTURING OF CATTLE OR OTHER ANIMALS ON STREETS OR WAYS
No person shall pasture any cattle, goat or other animal upon any street or public way in said town, either with or
without a keeper, except within the limits of such way adjoining his own premises, and field drivers are instructed
to enforce this bylaw.
SECTION 17.2: DOGS
A. DEFINITION OF TERMS
(1) "Dogs" shall mean all animals of the canine species, both male and female.
(2) "Owner" shall mean any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning,
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 29
keeping, or harboring a dog as herein defined.
(3) "Keeper" shall mean any person, corporation or society, other than the owner, harboring or
having in his possession any dog.
(4) "Run at large" shall mean free to wander on public or private ways at will, or on the
property of another.
B. LICENSING
(1) Beginning on January 1, 1994, all owners or keepers of dogs six months of age or older
shall license said dogs at the office of the town clerk.
(2) All owners or keepers of dogs shall produce proof of up-to-date rabies vaccination before
such a license can be issued.
(3) The Board of Health shall establish and may update from time to time fees for licensing of
dogs and of kennels, and may establish fines for late licensing.
(4) The yearly sums collected pursuant to the provisions of the previous section shall be
accounted for and paid to the Town Treasurer. (Rev. 6/95)
(5) Dog license fees shall be paid to the Town Clerk by April 1 of each calendar year. Any dog
license paid after the deadline shall pay a late licensing penalty of twenty (dollars) in addition
to the cost of the license.
(See Section I on Alternative Procedures under MGL 140, Section 137- 173E)
C. PERMITTING A DOG TO RUN AT LARGE
(1) No owner or keeper of a dog shall permit such dog, whether licensed or unlicensed, to run
at large within the Town of Winchendon, except that a dog may, for the purpose of sporting
events, (such as hunting, field trials or training purposes) or for agricultural assistance, or while
working as a canine guard of a mercantile, commercial, or industrial establishment, be exempt
from the restraining order during such period of time as the dog is actually engaged in the
event, sport, agricultural function, or guard work.
(2) Dogs may be taken from the owner's premises provided that such dogs are on a leash or
under the control of the owner or keeper.
D. IMPOUNDING It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer, duly appointed, to apprehend
any dog found unrestrained and running at large, and to impound such dog in a suitable place or to
order the owner or keeper thereof to restrain said dog.
E. NOTICE TO OWNER AND RELEASE if such dog so impounded has upon it the name and
address of the owner thereof, or if the name of said owner is otherwise know, then the Animal
Control Officer shall immediately notify the owner but if the owner is not known, then no notice shall
be necessary. The owner of any dog so impounded may reclaim such dog upon payment of the sum
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 30
of ten dollars ($10.00) for the first reclaiming, and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the second, and
subsequent reclaiming, or as determined by the Board of Health, provided, however, if the dog is not
licensed that before release to any person, license as required by the Town of Winchendon be
secured.
F. DISPOSITION OF FUNDS The sums collected pursuant to the provisions of this bylaw shall be
accounted for and paid to the Town Treasurer; however, under the provisions of the State Law, the
Animal Control Officer shall be entitled to all fees paid to him for the care of impounded dogs by the
owners thereof.
G. DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED DOGS Any dog which has been impounded and has not been
redeemed by the owner within ten (10) days shall be disposed of as provided by Section 151A,
Chapter 140 of the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and any amendments
thereto, provided that the description of the dog was published in a local paper at least three (3) days
before the scheduled date of destruction by the local dog officer. (Rev. 6/95)
H. ENFORCEMENT The Animal Control Officer or Officers duly appointed shall enforce the
provisions of this bylaw relating to dogs, and shall attend to all complaints or other matters pertaining
to dogs in the Town of Winchendon.
I. ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURES UNDER GENERAL LAWS,Ch.140 SEC. 136A- SEC.174E
Notwithstanding any provisions of the General Laws to the contrary, any Animal Control Officer
who takes cognizance of a violation of
(1) This Bylaw
(2) Failure to license dogs pursuant to General Laws, Chapter 140, 141 Section 137; failure to acquire
kennel license pursuant to General Laws, Chapter 140, Section 137A.-137C(3) Failure to vaccinate
against rabies pursuant to General Laws, Chapter 140, Section 145B.
May issue or mail a Notice of Complaint of Violation of Municipal Dog Control Law to the owner or
keeper of such dog or dogs, and if the owner or keeper of such dog or dogs in a minor, the parent or
guardian of such minor shall be liable for any violation of the bylaw.
J. PROCEDURE The procedure set forth above shall also include the provisions of paragraphs 2-4 of
General Laws, Chapter 140, Section 173 as amended.
K. PENALTY Any owner or keeper found in violation of any of the provisions of this bylaw shall be
subject to a fine of not more than Fifty dollars ($50.00) upon demand by the Animal Control Officer..
Further, if the owner or keeper of a dog be a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be held
liable for any violation of this bylaw.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 31
SECTION 17.3 REGULATIONS FOR THE REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF CANINE WASTE
(Pooper-Scooper Law) (May 2014)
SECTION 1 – AUTHORITY
1. These regulations are made pursuant to Chapter III of Massachusetts General Law MGL),
Section 31, to protect the public health of the residents of Winchendon.
2. Evidence demonstrates that canine waste can cause serious health problems.
SECTION 2 – REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF CANINE WASTE
A. Removal/Disposal
It shall be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls a dog to remove and dispose
of any feces left by his/her dog on any sidewalk, gutter, street, park or other public area, or on ay
private property neither owned nor occupied by said person. No person who owns, possesses or
controls such dog shall appear with such dog on any sidewalk, gutter, street, park or other public
area, or on any private property neither owned nor occupied by said person, without the means of
removal of any feces left b such dog. For the purpose of this section, the means of removal shall
by any tool, implement or other device carried for the purpose of picking up or containing such
feces in a manner that such feces shall be unexposed to said person in public. Disposal shall be
accomplished by transporting such feces to a suitable place.
B. Penalties
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this CHAPTER shall be subject to a fine of
FIFTY ($50.00) DOLLARS to be assessed for each and every violation. All fines shall be
payable to the Town of Winchendon through the Town Clerk’s office. The Chief of Police may,
as an alternative to initiating criminal proceedings, treat violations of this chapter in a noncriminal
manner pursuant to the provision of MGL CH 40, sec 21D.
C. Authorized Enforcement Personnel
The following persons shall be authorized enforcement: Police officer, Animal Control Officer
or Board of Health Agent, or act in relation thereto. (submitted by the Board of Health)
ARTICLE 18
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 32
SECTION 18.1 : SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS, ETC. No solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant,
transient vendor or purchaser of merchandise shall go in or upon any private residences or premises in the Town
of Winchendon, Massachusetts for the purpose of the sale or purchase of goods, wares, or merchandise, or for the
soliciting of orders for the sale of purchases of the same, or for the purpose of disposing of, peddling or hawking
the same, without first having been expressly authorized to do so in writing by the Board of Selectmen of the
Town. Everyone violating this bylaw shall be punished by a fine of $50.00 for each offense, which shall be
recovered by any means available in law or in equity, including non-criminal disposition in accordance with the
provisions of MGL Chapter 40, Section 21D. This bylaw may be enforced by any police officer of the Town of
Winchendon.
SECTION 18.2 : PUBLIC DRINKING No person shall drink any alcoholic beverage, as defined in Chapter
138, Section 1 of the General Laws, while on a public way, or while on any other public property, or in or on any
place to which members of the public have access as invites or licenses, or on private property without the consent
of the owner or other person duly authorized by the owner to be in control thereof. The foregoing prohibition shall
not apply to the consumption of alcoholic beverages in or on Town owned property pursuant to a special license
issued by the Town licensing authority pursuant to the General Laws. All alcoholic beverages being used in
violation of this bylaw shall be seized and safely held until adjudication of the charge against the person or
persons summoned before the Court, at which time they shall be returned to the person entitled to lawful
possession thereof. Any person who violates the provisions of this bylaw shall be punished by a fine of not more
than fifty dollars ($50.00).
SECTION 18.3 PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR USE OF MARIJUANA OR
TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL
A. No person, whether in or upon a vehicle, motor vehicle, conveyance, or on foot, shall burn, smoke,
ingest, or otherwise use or consume marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in G.L. c. 94C, § 1,
as amended) while in or upon any area owned by or under the control of the Town, including but not
limited to, any street, sidewalk, public way, footway, passageway, stairs, bridge, park, playground,
beach, recreation area, boat landing, public building, school, school grounds, cemetery, or parking lot; or
in or upon any place to which the public has a right of access as invitees or licensees.
B. Any marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol burned, smoked, ingested, or otherwise used or consumed in
violation of this bylaw shall be seized, held, and disposed of in accordance with G.L. c. 94C, § 47A.
C. Whoever is found in violation of this bylaw shall, when requested by an official authorized to enforce
this bylaw, state his true name and address to said official.
D. This bylaw may be enforced through any lawful means in law or in equity including, but not limited
to, enforcement by criminal indictment or complaint pursuant to G.L. c. 40, § 21, or by non-criminal
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 33
disposition pursuant to G.L. c. 40, § 21D, by the Board of Selectmen, the Town Manager, or their duly
authorized agents, or any police officer.
E. The fine for a violation of this bylaw shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each offense. A
penalty imposed under this bylaw shall be in addition to any civil penalty imposed under G.L. c. 94C, §
32L.
In case any section, paragraph or part of this bylaw be for any reason declared invalid or unconstitutional by any
court, every other section, paragraph and part shall continue in full force and effect.
ARTICLE 19
ABANDONED, NON-COMPLETED OR NULL AND VOID PERMITS (May 24, 2010)
Intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to
violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit
prevent the Building Commissioner from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or
violations of building code.
1. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced
within 6 months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or
abandoned for a period of 6 months after the time the work is commenced.
2. If work has commenced and the permit is revoked, becomes null and void, or expires because of lack
of progress or abandonment, a new permit covering the proposed construction shall be obtained before
proceeding with the work.
3. If a new permit is not obtained within 180 days from the date the initial permit became null and void,
the Building Commissioner is authorized to require that any work which has been commenced or
completed be removed from the building site by the holder of the original permit. Alternately, a new
permit may be issued upon application, providing the work in place and required to complete the
structure meets all applicable regulations in effect at the time the initial permit became null and void
and any regulations which may have become effective between the date of expiration and the date of
issuance of the new permit.
4. Work shall be considered to be in active progress when the permit has received an approved inspection
within 180 days. This provision shall not be applicable in case of civil commotion or strike or when
the building work is halted due directly to judicial injunction, order or similar process.
5. The fee for renewal, re-issuance and extension of a permit shall be set forth in the Building
Commissioner’s Permit Fee Schedule, as it may be amended from time to time.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 34
6. At the discretion of the Building Commissioner, such discretion to be neither capricious nor arbitrary
in its application, any person or entity may be denied a new project permit if at the time of application
for the new project permit that person or entity is the holder of three (3) or more permits that are either
abandoned, non-completed or otherwise null and void. Such denial of new project permit application
shall remain in effect until the person or entity seeking the new permit cures the defect(s) in the
previously issued permits.
ARTICLE 20
WATER USE RESTRICTION (Amended June 12, 2000)
SECTION 20.1: AUTHORITY This bylaw is adopted by the Town of Winchendon under its police powers
to protect public health and welfare and its powers under M.G.L. Chapter 40, Section 21. and implements the
Town’s authority to regulate water use pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 41, Section 69B. This bylaw also
implements the Town’s authority under M.G.L. Chapter 40, Section 41A, conditioned upon a declaration of
water supply emergency issued by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
SECTION 20. 2: PURPOSE The purpose of this bylaw is to protect, preserve and maintain the public health,
safety and welfare whenever there is in force a State of Water Supply Conservation or State of Water Supply
Emergency by providing for enforcement of any duly imposed restrictions, requirements, provisions or
conditions imposed by the Town or by the DEP.
SECTION 20.3: DEFINITIONS
“Person” shall mean any individual, corporation, trust, partnership or association, or other entity.
“State of Water Supply Emergency” shall mean a State of Water Supply Emergency declared by the
DEP under M.G.L. Chapter 21G, Sections 15-17.
“State of Water Supply Conservation” shall mean a State of Water Supply Conservation declared by the
Town pursuant to Section 4 of this bylaw.
“Water Users or Water Customers” shall mean all public and private users of the Town’s public water
system, irrespective of any person’s responsibility for billing purposes for water used at any particular
facility.
SECTION 20.4: DECLARATION OF A STATE OF WATER SUPPLY CONSERVATION
The Town, through its Board or Selectmen, may declare a State of Water Supply Conservation upon a
determination by a majority vote of the Board or Selectmen that a shortage of water exists and conservation
measures are appropriate to ensure an adequate supply of water to all water customers. Public notice of a State
of Water Supply Conservation shall be given under Section 6 of this bylaw before it may be enforced.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 35
SECTION 20.5: RESTRICTED WATER USES A declaration of a State of Water Supply Conservation
shall include one or more of the following restrictions, conditions or requirements limiting the use of water as
necessary to protect the water supply. The applicable restrictions, conditions or requirements shall be included
in the public notice required under Section 6.
1) Odd/Even Day Outdoor Watering: Outdoor watering by water users with odd numbered
addresses is restricted to odd numbered days. Outdoor watering by water users with even
numbered addresses is restricted to even numbered days.
2) Outdoor Watering Ban: Outdoor watering is prohibited.
3) Outdoor Water Hours: Outdoor watering is permitted only during daily periods of low
demand, to be specified in the declaration of a State of Water Supply Conservation and
public notice thereof.
4) Filling Swimming Pools: Filling of swimming pools is prohibited.
5) Automatic Sprinkler Use: The use of automatic sprinkler systems is prohibited.
SECTION 20.6: PUBLIC NOTIFICATION OF A STATE OF WATER SUPPLY CONSERVATION:
NOTIFICATION OF DEP -Notification of any provision, restriction, requirement or condition imposed by the
Town as a State of Water Supply Conservation shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within
the Town or by such other means reasonably calculated to reach and inform all users of water of the State of
Water Supply Conservation. Any restriction imposed under Section 5 shall not be effective until such
notification is provided. Notification of the State of Water Supply Conservation shall also be simultaneously
provided to the DEP.
SECTION 20.7: TERMINATION OF A STATE OF WATER SUPPLY CONSERVATION: NOTICE
A State of Water Supply Conservation may be terminated by a majority vote of the Board or Selectmen, upon a
determination that the water supply shortage no longer exists. Public notification of the termination of a State
of Water Supply Conservation shall be given in the same manner required by Section 6.
SECTION 20.8: STATE OF WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY: COMPLIANCE WITH DEP ORDERS
Upon notification to the public that a declaration of a State of Water Supply Emergency has been issued by the
DEP, no person shall violate any provision, restriction, requirement, condition of any order approved or issued
by the DEP intended to bring about an end to the State of Emergency.
SECTION 20.9: PENALTIES Any person violating this bylaw shall be liable to the Town in the amount of
fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first violation and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each subsequent violation
which shall inure to the Town for such uses as the Board or Selectmen may direct. Fines shall be recovered by
indictment, or a complaint before the District Court, or by non-criminal disposition in accordance with Section
21D of Chapter 40 of the General Laws. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 36
SECTION 20.10: SEVERABILITY The invalidity of any portion or provision of this bylaw shall not
invalidate any other portion or provision thereof.
ARTICLE 21
LICENSES AND PERMITS OF DELINQUENT TAXPAYERS (rev. of 5/98)
SECTION 21.1: Any board, officer, or department shall deny any application or revoke or suspend any local
license or permit, including renewals and transfers, for any person, corporation, or business enterprise who has
neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterment, or any other municipal charge, or with
respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject of such license or permit and which activity,
event, or matter is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate whose owner
has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other municipal charges.
SECTION 21.2: The Tax Collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all municipal taxes,
assessments, betterment and other municipal charges, hereinafter referred to as the Tax Collector, shall upon
request furnish to each department, board, commission or division, hereinafter referred to as the licensing
authority, that issues licenses or permits, including renewals and transfers, the identity of any person, corporation
or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the party, that has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees,
assessments, betterment or other municipal charges for not less than a twelve month period, and that such party
has not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending petition before the
appellate tax board.
SECTION 21.3: The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit, including renewals
and transfers of any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the Tax
Collector; or with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject of such license or permit and
which activity, event, or matter is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real
estate owned by any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the Tax
Collector; provided, however, that written notice is given to the party and the Tax Collector, as required by
applicable provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing to be held not earlier than fourteen days after said
notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any
party. The Tax Collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to such license
denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to such license denial,
revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purposes of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or
introduced in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license denial, revocation or
suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this section shall not be reissued or
renewed until the license authority receives a certificate issued by the Tax Collector that the party is in good
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 37
standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterment or other municipal charges, payable
to the municipality as the date of issuance of said certificate.
SECTION 21.4: Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement, thereby allowing the
licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating said limitations to the license or permit and the validity of said
license shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply with said
agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the
holder be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
SECTION 21.5: The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it finds there is not
direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his
immediate family, as defined in Section 1 of Chapter 268A in the business or activity conducted in or on said
property.
ARTICLE 22
SEWER USE REGULATIONS (amended 9/98)
The provisions of this bylaw shall not apply to any of the licenses and permits exempted by M.G.L. Chapter 40,
Section 57.
These regulations govern the use of public and private sewers and drains, private sewage disposal, the
installation and connection of building sewers, the discharge of waters and wastes into the public sewer system,
and the discharge of storm water and groundwater to the public storm drain; and provide penalties for violations
thereof;
SECTION 22.1: DEFINITIONS Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in these regulations shall be as follows:
1.1 "BOD" (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
1.2 "Board of Selectmen" has jurisdiction over, and is the governing authority for, the
wastewater collection and treatment system in the Town of Winchendon.
1.3 "Building Drain" shall mean that part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge of wastewater from inside the walls of the building and extends to
ten (10) feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 38
1.4 "Building Sewer" shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal, also called house or building connection.
l.5 "Easement" shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
1.6 "Floatable Oil" shall mean oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate
by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pre-treatment facility.
Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the
wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.
1.7 "Garbage" shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling
preparation, cooking, and serving of foods.
1.8 "Grease, Oil and Sand Interceptors" shall mean devises used to prevent grease, oil and
sand from entering the waste stream.
1.9 "Industrial Wastes" shall mean the wastewater from industrial processes, trade, or
business as distinct from domestic (sanitary) wastes.
1. 10 "May" is permissive (see "Shall", l. l20).
1. 11 "Natural Outlet" shall mean any outlet, including storm sewers into a watercourse, pond,
ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.
1.12 "Person" shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
partnership, group, or any political subdivision of the Commonwealth.
1.13 "pH" shall mean the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution. Neutral
water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen ion concentration of 10-7.
1.14 "Properly Shredded Garbage" shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be
carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no
particle greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
1.15 "Public Sewer" shall mean a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or
public entity.
1.16 "(Sanitary) Sewer" shall mean a conduit that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor
quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally.
1.17 "Septage" shall mean the wastes from holding tanks such as chemical toilets, campers, or
trailers, and wastes from septic tanks and cesspools.
1.18 "Sewage" is the used water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater", (see
1.27).
1.19 "Sewer" shall mean a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater.
1.20 "Shall" is mandatory (see "May", 1. 10).
1.21 "Slug" shall mean any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds five (5) times the average twenty-four
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 39
(24) hour concentration of normal operating flow for more than fifteen (15) minutes and
adversely affects the collection system and/or the performance of the wastewater
treatment works.
1.22 "Storm Drain" (sometimes termed "storm sewer") shall mean a conduit for conveying
stormwater, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source.
1.23 "Superintendent" shall mean the authorized deputy, agent, or representative of the Board
of Selectmen.
1.24 "Suspended Solids" shall mean total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of,
or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by
laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater" and referred to as nonfilterable residue.
1.25 "Town" shall mean the Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts or any duly authorized
officer, agent or representative of the Town of Winchendon.
1.26 "Unpolluted Water" is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect
or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would
not be benefited by discharge to the sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
1.27 "Wastewater" shall mean the used water of a community. From the standpoint of source,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with any groundwater,
surface water, and stormwater that are not admitted intentionally.
1.28 "Wastewater Facilities" shall mean the structures, equipment, and processes required to
collect, transport, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent.
1.29 "Wastewater Treatment Works" shall mean an arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with
"waste treatment facility" or "wastewater treatment facility" or "water pollution control
facility".
1.30 "Watercourse" shall mean a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
SECTION 22.2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED
2.1 It shall be unlawful to discharge directly to any natural outlet within the Town of
Winchendon, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town, any wastewater or other
polluted water, without the applicable state and federal discharge permits.
2.2 Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for property owners to construct or
repair any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for
the disposal of wastewater where a public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet of the
property line and where permission to enter such sewer can be obtained from the authority
having jurisdiction over it.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 40
2.3 The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the Town and abutting on any
street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located
a public sewer of the Town, are hereby required at their expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of these regulations within ninety (90) days after date of
receipt of official notice from the Board of Health of the Town of Winchendon acting
under the provisions of Title 5 of the "State Environmental Code for the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts, Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary
Sewage" or regulations relative thereto, provided that the public sewer is within one
hundred (100) feet of the property line. Said connections shall be made without
exception, unless for reasons as determined by the Town of Winchendon Board of
Health.
SECTION 22.3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
3.1 Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 2.3, the building
sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the
requirements of the Board of Health of the Town of Winchendon acting under the
provisions of Title 5 of the "State Environmental Code for the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage"
or regulations relative thereto, and/or the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP).
SECTION 22.4: BUILDING SEWERS AND INSTALLATION: PERMITS Regarding any sewer or
installation permit and land easements; No such permit shall be valid until all land easements have been
approved by the Board of Selectmen and properly recorded at the Worcester County Registry of Deeds.
4.1 No person(s) shall uncover (excavate), connect or cause to be connected to, or make any
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any building sewer, public sewer, or appurtenances
thereof except by written permit from the Superintendent of Public Works. Any person
proposing a new discharge into the public sewer or a substantial change in the volume or
character of pollutants that are being discharged into the public sewer shall notify the
Department of Public Works (DPW) at least forty-five (45) days prior to the proposed
change or connection. A permit must also be obtained for any repair work to existing
building sewers if said work is not performed by the DPW.
4.2 There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer installation permits: (a) for residential
and/or commercial service and (b) for service to establishments producing industrial
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 41
waste flow (see "Industrial Waste," Section 1. 9). In either case, the owner(s) or his agent
shall make a permit application in writing to the Superintendent. The permit application
shall be supplemented by plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent
in the judgment of the Board of Selectmen. A permit application fee, which shall ·
include the routine costs associated with the inspection of the building sewer installation
by the Superintendent or his representative, shall be paid to the Town at the time the
application is filed. Permit application fees shall be established from time to time by the
Board of Selectmen.
4.3 Permits are not transferable and are valid for ninety (90) days from the date of issue. If no
work commences within said ninety-day period a new permit must be obtained.
4.4 A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building except
where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is
available or can in any way be constructed to the rear building. In this case, the front
building sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one
building sewer. No such connection shall be made without a special permit from the
Superintendent. Any connection made without such a permit shall be discontinued and
any sewer use fees paid shall be forfeited. The Town does not and shall not assume any
obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single
connection aforementioned.
4.5 Under no circumstances may one building sewer be allowed to connect and serve more
than one house or block on streets where public sewers are laid, except by written
permission of the Superintendent.
4.6 Existing (old) building sewers shall not be used in connection with new building sewer
construction, except by written permission of the Superintendent.
4.7 The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods
to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench
shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable
rules and regulations of the Town. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification
thereof, the materials and procedures as set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society of Testing Materials (ASTM), the Water Pollution Control Federation
(WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 7 "Operation and Maintenance of Wastewater Collection
Systems," WPCF Manual of Practice No. FD-5, the American Society of Civil Engineers
(ASCE) Manuals and Reports in Engineering Practice No. 60 "Gravity Sanitary Sewer
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 42
Design and Construction", and WPCF Manual of Practice No. FD-4 "Design of
Wastewater and Stormwater Pumping Stations" shall apply.
4.8 The Superintendent has the right to require, at his discretion, any building, existing or
proposed, to construct, as a part of their building sewer, and at every building sewer
connection to the public sewer where said building has more than one connection, a
metering/sampling manhole. This manhole, located adjacent to the public sewer, with
frame and cover brought to grade, and just upon the owner's property, shall be
constructed for the purpose of allowing the Superintendent the ability to enter upon said
property to inspect the constituents in and quantity of flow being discharged to the public
sewer. This metering/sampling manhole shall conform to the requirements and
specifications of the sewer program and shall be a mandatory requirement of the sewer
installation permit, and shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the
Superintendent. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures as set forth in appropriate specifications of ASTM, the WPCF
Manual of Practice No. 7, the WPCF Manual of Practice No. FD-5, the ASCE Manuals
and Reports on Engineering Practice No. 60, and WPCF Manual of Practice No. FD-4
shall apply.
4.9 Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be installed to the building at an elevation
below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, the wastewater carried by such building drain
shall be pumped by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer or public
sewer. Shop drawings of proposed pumping equipment shall be submitted to the Board
of Selectmen for approval by the Superintendent.
4.10 No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, sump pumps,
areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or
building drain, which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to the public sewer. Any
persons found discharging said sources shall be subject to penalties as set forth in Article
8 of these Regulations.
4.10.1 The Superintendent or his representative reserves the right to inspect any property to c
onfirm that there are none of the aforementioned unauthorized connections to the public sewer.
4.11 Any person(s) found discharging non-contact cooling waters to the public sewer shall be
subject to penalties as set forth in Article 8 of these Regulations.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 43
4.12 The connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the sewer program and the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules
and regulations of the Town, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
ASTM, the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 7, the WPCF Manual of Practice No. FD-5, the ASCE
Manuals and Reports on Engineering Practice No. 60, and WPCF Manual of Practice No. FD-4.
All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Board of
Selectmen before installation. Non-approved material shall be required to be removed and
replaced at the expense of the applicant.
4.13 The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Board of Selectmen when the sewer
is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be
made under the supervision of the Superintendent or his representative, and no backfilling is
allowed until all appropriate inspections are made. Otherwise, the pipe shall be exposed for
inspection.
4.14 All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and
lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Any person, other than the DPW, who, during the
installation of a sewer connection, shall excavate or otherwise disturb the roadway and/or
sidewalk shall obtain the written permission of the Superintendent prior to the commencement of
work. A performance bond at least equal to the cost of restoring said roadway and/or sidewalk to
its prior condition shall be required before such permission is granted. Streets, sidewalks,
parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to its
original condition in a manner satisfactory to the Town.
The DPW reserves the right to shut off the public sewer for the purpose of making alterations or repairs.
SECTION 22.5: USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged
any unpolluted waters such as storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any public sanitary sewer. In general,
only sanitary sewage shall be discharged to the common sewer.
No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any
public sewers:
5.2.1 Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, whether
singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process,
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 44
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the wastewater treatment facility.
5.2.3 Any water or waste having a pH lower than 6.0, or higher than 9.5, or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the
wastewater facilities.
5.2.4 Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such
as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings,
paper dishes, cups, milk containers, either whole or ground by garbage grinders or other similar
products.
5.2.5 Any septage (see Section 1.17).
5.2.6 Sludges or deposited solids resulting from an industrial or pretreatment process.
5.3 No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances,
materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the Superintendent that such
wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute
a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent will
give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatablility of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
5.3.1 Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C).
5.3.2 Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of
one hundred (100) mg/1 or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32°F and 1 50°F (0 and 65°C).
5.3.3 Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage
grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 45
5.3.4 Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating
solutions whether neutralized or not.
5.3.5 Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, antimony, arsenic, barium,
beryllium, boron, cadmium, lead, manganese, mercury, nickel, selenium, silver, tin, and similar
objectionable or toxic metal substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement,
unless treated to reduce their concentrations to the minimum levels attainable by chemical
precipitation process or other equally effective methods.
5.3.6 Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such
concentrations exceeding limits which may, after treatment of the composite sewage, fail to meet
the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies with jurisdiction for such
discharge to the receiving waters.
5.3.7 Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the Board of Selectmen in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
5.3.8 Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
5.3.9 Materials which exert or cause:
5.3.9.10 Unusual concentration of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers
earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate).
Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to
constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.
5.3.9.4 Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" (see Section 1.21).
5.3.10 Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the
sewage treatment process employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the
wastewater treatment works effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
5.3.11 The following are the wastewater characteristic thresholds that may not be exceeded:
BOD: 250 mg/l
TSS: 250 mg/l
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 46
5.4 If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers,
which contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 5.3, or which,
in the judgment of the Superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater
facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
5.4.1 Reject the wastes,
5.4.2 Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers,
5.4.3 Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or
5.4.4 Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing
taxes or sewer user charges under the provisions of Section 5.9. If the Superintendent permits
the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Board of Selectmen and subject to
the requirements of all applicable local, state and federal codes, regulations and laws.
5.5 Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Superintendent
they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable oil in excessive
amounts, as specified in Section 5.3.2, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful
ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Board of
Selectmen and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal
and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the
dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the Board of Selectmen. Any
removal and handling of the collected materials not performed by owner(s)' personnel must be
performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms.
5.6 Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required any waters or wastes,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner(s) at
his expense.
5.7 When required by the Board of Selectmen, the owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control structure together with such
necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such control structure, when required, shall be
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 47
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Board of Selectmen. The structure shall be
installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.
5.8 All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in these regulations shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of
"Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American
Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control structure provided, or upon
suitable samples taken at said control structure. In the event that no special structure has been
required, the control structure shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out
by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and
to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a property is
appropriate or whether a grab sample or grab samples should be taken. Normally, but not always,
BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls,
whereas pH is determined from periodic grab samples).
5.8.1 All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such monitoring of their discharges
as the Superintendent and/or other duly authorized employees of the Town may reasonably
require, including installation, use, and maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping records
and reporting the results of such monitoring to the Superintendent. Such records shall be made
available, upon request by the Superintendent, to other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharges to the receiving waters.
5.9 No statement contained in this Article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the Town and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of
unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Town for treatment subject to payment,
therefore, by the industrial concern.
SECTION 22.6: USE OF THE PUBLIC STORM DRAIN: PERMITS
6.1 No person(s) shall uncover (excavate), connect or cause to be connected to, or make any opening
into, use, alter, or disturb any building storm drain, public storm drain, or appurtenances thereof
except by written permit from the Superintendent of Public Works. Any person proposing a new
discharge into the public storm drain shall notify the Department of Public Works (DPW) at least
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 48
forty-five (45) days prior to the proposed change or connection. A permit must also be obtained
for any repair work to existing building drains if said work is not performed by the DPW.
6.2 Only the connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, sump pumps, areaway drains, or
other sources of surface runoff or groundwater shall be allowed to be made to the public storm
drain, upon approval by the Superintendent.
6.3 No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any polluted waters such as sewage,
septage, industrial process waters, or garbage. In general, only surface runoff or ground water
shall be discharged to the public storm drain.
6.4 Any storm water discharged to the public storm drain shall conform to the standards set forth in
the DEP administered regulations: 314 CMR 9.00 (401 Water Quality Certification), 314 CMR
3.00 (Surface Water Discharge Permit Program), 314 CMR 4.00 (Surface Water Quality
Standards), 314 CMR 5.00 (Groundwater Discharge Permit Program), and 314 CMR 6.00
(Groundwater Quality Standards).
6.5 The connection of the building storm drain to the public storm drain shall conform to the
requirements of the sewer program and the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules
and regulations of the Town.
6.6 The applicant for the building drain permit shall notify the Board of Selectmen when the drain is
ready for inspection and connection to the public storm drain. No connection shall be put to use
6.7 and no back-filling is allowed until all appropriate inspections are made by the Superintendent or
his representative, and by building, plumbing, and electrical inspectors.
SECTION 22.7: PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE
7.1 No person(s) shall maliciously willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface,
or tamper with the structures, mains, or other appurtenances or equipment which is a part of the
sewerage system or wastewater facilities. Any person(s) violating this provision shall be subject
to all civil or criminal penalties as provided by Massachusetts General Laws or these regulations.
SECTION 22.8: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS
8.1 The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees or agents of the Town bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter, at reasonable times, all private
properties connected with public sewers for the purposes of inspection, observation,
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 49
measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the wastewater facilities in
accordance with the provisions of these regulations.
8.2 The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees or agents are authorized to obtain
information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source
of discharge to the wastewater facilities. The industry may withhold information considered
confidential. However, the industry must establish that disclosure of the information in question
to the public might result in an advantage to competitors.
8.3 While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in Section 7. 1, the
Superintendent or duly authorized employees or agents of the Town shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the companies.
8.4 The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees or agents of the Town bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the
Town holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in
full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved.
SECTION 22.9: PENALTIES
9.1 Whenever on the basis of information available to it, the Town finds any person to be violating
any provision of these regulations, the Town may take any or all of the following actions:
9.1.1 Issue an order to cease and desist any such violation;
9.1.2 Issue an implementation schedule ordering specific actions to be taken and time schedule;
9.1.3 Any person violating any of the foregoing regulations shall be subject to a fine not exceeding
$50.00 for each violation. Each day a violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offence.
9.1.4 Bring a civil or criminal action as provided by law;
9.1.5 Take any action available to it under federal, state, or local laws or regulations.
9.2 Any person violating the provisions of these regulations shall become liable to the Town for any
expense, loss, or damage incurred by the Town by reasons of such violation, including but not
limited to any attorney's fees incurred in the enforcement or defense of actions under or relative
to this bylaw and fines, charges, or assessments made or imposed on the Town by federal, state,
or local agency.
SECTION 22.10: SEWER CHARGES AND PAYMENT
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 50
10.1 Sewer use charges shall be determined by a vote of the Board of Selectmen. Bills shall be
rendered semi-annually in January and July, concurrent with the semi-annual water bill. Failure
to receive a bill shall not excuse non-payment of same.
10.2 All bills issued by the Treasurer/Collector shall be due and payable on the thirtieth day after
mailing. Amounts which remain unpaid after the thirtieth day shall accrue interest at a rate to be
determined based on the vote of the Board of Selectmen. There shall be added charge of $5.00
for water and sewer on each bill for which a demand notice is sent. Owners of property shall be
responsible for sewer use charges incurred by their tenants, agents, or licensees.
10.3 The Treasurer/Collector shall be notified upon conveyance of property which is connected to the
public sewer system. Such notification shall include the names of the Grantor, the Grantee, and
the party currently billed if different than the Grantor. The meter shall be read on the date of
conveyance, or as close to same as is practical and/or convenient, and a bill shall be rendered at
that time to the Grantor. The Grantee shall be liable for usage from that special reading.
10.4 The Board of Selectmen, acting through the Town Manager, shall have full authority to take any
action available under local by-law or state statute to collect rates and charges and to enforce
these regulations.
10.5 The Board of Selectmen reserves the right to revise the charges for use of the public sewers.
Upon approval of this bylaw the Board of Selectmen shall forthwith determine sewer use
charges. These charges and regulations shall be effective January 1, 1999. All previous charges
will be thereby rescinded.
SECTION 22.11: ABATEMENT PROCESS
11.1 Before any abatement may be considered, the bill shall be paid in full. An abatement request,
with supporting documentation, shall be submitted to the Town Manager's office by the affected
owner on or before the thirtieth day after the date on which the bill was sent. The Town
Manager may refer the matter to the Superintendent for an investigation. The Superintendent
shall report to the Town Manager within ten days. The Town Manager will make a
recommendation to the Board of Selectmen within ten days, who shall act upon such abatement.
A copy of the Board of Selectmen decision will be sent to the owner and to the
Treasurer/Collector's office.
SECTION 22.12: VALIDITY The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provisions of these
regulations shall not affect the validity of any other part of these regulations, which can be given effect without
such invalid part or parts.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 51
SECTION 22.13: APPEALS
13.1 The Board of Selectmen shall receive appeals for arbitration of differences between the
Superintendent and sewer users on matters concerning interpretation and execution of the
provisions of this bylaw by the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 22.14: ASSESSMENTS The Board of Selectmen shall determine the method of assessment of the
cost of public sewers to sewer users.
SECTION 22.15: PERMIT APPLICATIONS
15.1 Applications for residential or commercial building sewer installation permits and applications
for service to establishments producing industrial waste flow (See "Industrial Waste" Section
1.9) shall be made in writing on forms approved by the Board of Selectmen.
ARTICLE 23
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
SECTION 23. l: GENERAL In order to ensure that solid waste materials are disposed of in an environmentally
responsible manner in the Town, and that such disposal is done in compliance with state-mandated waste bans,
no person or entity shall dispose of any recyclable materials, as defined under section 2 of this article, in any
landfill located within the Town of Winchendon or any waste disposal facility outside of the Town, if access to
such disposal is provided by the Town. This bylaw will serve to bring the Town of Winchendon into
compliance with state waste disposal policies.
SECTION 23.2: RECYCLABLE MATERIALS The Town Manager shall promulgate regulations, which he
may revise from time to time, designating which items shall be separated for recycling and how such items shall
be handled at the landfill, transfer station or left for pickup by the Town or a hauler contracted by the Town.
SECTION 23.3: RECYCLING OF DESIGNATED MATERIALS Recyclable materials shall be separated
from other solid waste materials prior to being deposited at the landfill, transfer station, or put out for pickup by
the Town or a hauler contracted by the Town. Persons using private solid waste haulers shall conform to the
separation requirements of the hauler.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 52
If it is determined by the Landfill Manager or his designee that any container contains both solid waste and
recyclable materials, as defined by the regulations, it shall not be accepted for disposal at the landfill or transfer
station until the recyclable materials have been removed therefrom by the person attempting to dispose of
same.
The landfill Manager or his designee shall inspect any and all solid waste presented for disposal.
SECTION 23.4: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES No person or entity shall place solid waste in the
Winchendon landfill, dispose of at the transfer station, or put out for pickup by the Town or a hauler contracted
by the Town unless the recyclable materials as designated pursuant to Section 2 of this bylaw have been
separated from other solid waste and are deposited as the regulations require.
No person or entity who collects, transports, disposes or otherwise manages solid waste shall mix, co-mingle, or
otherwise contaminate recyclable materials with solid waste or other contaminants.
The Town Manager or his agent may suspend a violator’s solid waste disposal privileges at the Winchendon
landfill or transfer station in response to repeated violations of this bylaw.
Violators may also be fined $25 per offense, which fine may be recovered under the provisions of section 21D
of Chapter 40 of the General Laws.
ARTICLE 24
RECREATION COMMISSION (5.21.18)
1. (A) There shall be a Recreation Commission [the Commission] consisting of seven (7)
members appointed by the Board of Selectmen. One (1) member shall be a student in
good standing from the Murdock Middle School, and one (1) member shall be a student
in good standing from the Murdock High School.
(B) The terms shall be for three years and so arranged that the term of as nearly an equal
number as is possible shall expire each year.
(C) Upon the completion of these original terms, each member shall serve for three years.
(D) Student members shall be appointed annually.
2 . The Commission acts in an advisory capacity in matters pertaining to public recreation, makes
annual budget recommendations and assists in planning a recreation program to stimulate public
interest.
3 . The stated primary function of the Commission is to expand and enhance the recreation
opportunities for the residents of Winchendon.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 53
ARTICLE 25
Rapid Entry Systems for the Fire Department (June, 2001)
PURPOSE: To permit rapid entry into apartments, businesses and schools connected to the municipal fire
alarm system when said system has been activated.
SECTION 25.1: Any building other than a residential building of fewer than six (6) units, which has a fire
alarm system or other fire protection system, shall provide a secure key box installed in a location accessible to
the fire department in the event of an emergency. This key box shall contain the keys to fire alarm control
panels and elevators and any other keys necessary for fire protection.
SECTION 25.2: The key box shall be a type approved by the Fire Chief or his designee and shall be locate and
installed as directed by the Fire Chief or his designee.
SECTION 25.3: All existing commercial buildings, not normally occupied twenty-four hours a day, shall be
required to comply with this bylaw within twelve (12) months of the effective date thereof.
SECTION 25.4: All newly constructed buildings, regardless of use or occupancy, except residential dwellings
under six (6) units, shall install a key box system.
ARTICLE 26
FALSE FIRE AND BURGLAR ALARMS
(May 2003)
SECTION 26.1: GENERAL: Any residence or place of business which has a fire or burglar alarm system
connected directly to the Fire or Police Department (the “Department”) or connected indirectly
to said Department through a private alarm company (each of which will be hereinafter referred
to as a “monitored system”), will be charged a fine for all responses by the Department to such
buildings where the response is caused by the activation of the monitored system, with the
following exceptions:
1. When the monitored system was activated by an actual fire or burglary:
2. When the monitored system was activated by smoke from a source such as burnt food or an
overheated motor or overheated electrical appliance or other equipment: or
3. When someone, with reasonable cause, activates a manual pull station. The fee may be
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 54
assessed against the owner or tenant of the building.
SECTION 26.2: ENFORCEMENT, NON-CRIMINAL DISPOSITION: The Fire or Police Chief shall
notify the owner or tenant of the residence or place of business by certified mail or by service in
hand of any violation and the owner or tenant shall submit payment within fifteen (15) days of
said notice to the Town Treasurer for deposit in the general fund. Fines for false alarm services
shall be as follows:
Offense Fine
First three responses Warning
Fourth response $ 50.00
Fifth response $ 75.00
Sixth response $100.00
Seventh response $150.00
Eighth and subsequent responses $200.00
This bylaw may, in the discretion of the enforcing person, be enforced by non-criminal disposition as provided
in G.L. c 40, Sec. 21D, or by the method provided in Article 2.14 of these bylaws, “ Prosecution under the
Bylaws”. The non-criminal fine for each such violation shall be as set forth above, and each day on which any
violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense. “Enforcing person,” as used in this bylaw, shall mean
any officer of the Town of Winchendon Police Department, and the Fire Chief and his designees.
SECTION 26.3: ORDER TO DISCONNECT OR DISCONTINUE USE OF MONITORED SYSTEM:
The owner or tenant of a residence or place of business which has a monitored system which occasion six (6) or
more false alarms within the previous twelve (12) months or fails to pay the fine described in Section 2
after notice of the same may be ordered to disconnect and otherwise discontinue the use of the monitored
system by the Fire or Police Chief. Such order shall be given to the owner or tenant by certified mail or by
service in hand.
SECTION 26.4: SEVERABILITY: Invalidity of any individual section of this bylaw shall not affect the
validity of the bylaw as a whole.
ARTICLE 27
BROWNFIELD TAX ABATEMENT (May 13, 2002)
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 55
Brownfield Tax Abatement Agreements
SECTION 27.1: The purpose of this by-law is to encourage the clean-up and redevelopment of contaminated
industrial or commercial sites or portions of sites by providing a method by which the Town of Winchendon
may enter into tax abatement agreements pursuant to MGL Chapter 59 Section 59A and this by-law.
SECTION 27.2: Property which may be the subject of a tax abatement agreement pursuant to this by-law
must:
(a) be a site or portion of a site from or at which there has been a release of oil or hazardous
material;and
(b) be owned by an eligible person, as that term is defined in MGL Chapter 21E section2; and
(c) be zoned for commercial or industrial use.
SECTION 27.3: The Town Manager, or the Director of Planning and Development with the Town Manager’s
approval, are authorized to negotiate agreements providing for the abatement of real estate taxes with owners of
eligible properties.
SECTION 27.4: The agreement must specify all details regarding payment of any outstanding taxes, interest
or
penalties including the amount owed, the rate of interest to accrue if any, the amount of monthly payments, the
payment schedule, late penalties and all other terms and conditions agreed to by the town and the property
owner As part of the agreement the property owner must provide a detailed statement and supporting evidence
that demonstrates there is adequate financing available to accomplish clean-up of the contamination or
hazardous materials, and that the reduction in outstanding taxes, interest or penalties is reasonably necessary to
complete the clean-up.
The agreement may allow for reductions in outstanding real-estate taxes, interest and penalties, or full or partial
payments therefore, and such other terms and conditions as the town deems reasonable and necessary to ensure
the timely clean-up and redevelopment of the parcel or portion thereof.
SECTION 27.5: The Board of Selectmen may approve, by majority vote, a tax abatement agreement where the
total value of the abated taxes, penalties and interest is less than $100,000. If the total value of the tax abatement
is $100,000 or more, then town meeting must approve the agreement by majority vote.
SECTION 27.6: The tax abatement agreement must be signed by the chairman of the Board of Selectmen and
the property owner, and their signatures notarized, and the agreement attested to by the Town Clerk. Copies
must be provided to the Massachusetts Commissioner of Revenue, the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection, the US Environmental Protection Agency, the property owner, the Board of
Selectmen, the Town Manager, Town Clerk, Town Assessor, Town Collector, and Planning Board.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 56
ARTICLE 28
TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS MANAGEMENT
(May 24, 2004)
SECTION 28.1: FINDINGS The Town of Winchendon finds that:
i. The groundwater underlying this town is currently a significant source of its existing and
future water supply, including drinking water.
ii. The groundwater aquifer is integrally connected with, and flows into the surface waters,
lakes, streams and ponds, which constitute significant recreational and economic
resources of the town, used for bathing and other water-related recreation.
iii. Accidental spills and discharges of petroleum products and other toxic and hazardous
materials have repeatedly threatened the quality of such groundwater supplies and related
water sources in other Massachusetts towns, posing potential public health and safety
hazards and threatening economic losses to the affected communities.
iv. Unless preventive measures are adopted to prohibit and protect against the discharge of
toxic and hazardous materials and to ensure their safe and proper storage within the town,
further spills and discharges of such materials will predictably occur with greater
frequency and degree of hazard by reason of increasing construction, commercial and
industrial development, population and vehicular traffic in the Town of Winchendon.
SECTION 28.2: STATUTORY AUTHORITY
The Town of Winchendon adopts the following in accordance with MGL C. 111. S. 31 as amended to Title V of
the Environmental Code.
SECTION 28.3: DEFINITIONS As used in this bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISCHARGE - The accidental or intentional spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or
dumping of toxic and/or hazardous material(s) upon or into any land or waters of the Town of Winchendon.
“Discharge” includes, without limitation, leakage of such materials from failed or discarded containers or
storage systems and disposal of such materials into any on-site sewage disposal system, dry well, catch basin or
unapproved landfill.
The term “discharge”, as used and applied in this bylaw, does not include the following:
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 57
1. Proper disposal of any material in a sanitary or industrial landfill that has received and
maintained all necessary legal approvals for that purpose.
2. Application of fertilizers and pesticides in accordance with label recommendations and
with regulations of the Massachusetts Pesticide Control Board.
3. Application of road salts in conformance with the Snow and Ice Control Program of the
Massachusetts Department of Public Works.
4. Disposal of sanitary sewage to subsurface sewage disposal systems as defined and
permitted by Title V of the Massachusetts Environmental Code.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL(S) - Any substance of such physical, chemical, biological, or
infectious characteristics as to pose a significant actual or potential hazard to water supplies or other hazard to
human health and safety if such substance or mixture were discharged to land or waters of the town. “Toxic or
hazardous material(s)” include, but are not limited to organic chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals,
radioactive or infectious wastes, acids and alkalis, and includes products such as pesticides, herbicides, solvents
and thinners. By-products and wastes generated by the following activities, without limitation, are presumed to
be toxic or hazardous, unless and to the extent that anyone engaging in such activity can demonstrate the
contrary to the satisfaction of the Town of Winchendon or its authorized agent(s):
1. Airplane, boat and motor vehicle service and repair.
2. Chemical and bacteriological laboratory operation.
3. Cabinetmaking.
4. Dry cleaning.
5. Electronic circuit assembly.
6. Metal plating, finishing and polishing.
7. Motor and machinery service and assembly.
8. Painting, wood preserving and furniture stripping.
9. Pesticide and herbicide applications.
10. Photographic processing.
11. Printing.
12. Resin manufacturing.
SECTION 28.4: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
A. The discharge of toxic or hazardous material(s) upon ground or into any surface or ground waters within
the Town of Winchendon is prohibited.
B. Outdoor storage of toxic or hazardous material is prohibited, except when storage is in product-tight
container(s) which are protected from the elements, maintained on the premises and be reconciled with
purchase, use accidental damage, vandalism and which are stored in accordance with all applicable
requirements of Section 5 of this bylaw.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 58
SECTION 28.5: STORAGE
A. Registration
(1) Except as exempted below, every owner and every operator other than an owner of a site
at which toxic and hazardous material(s) are stored in quantities totaling at any time,
more than fifty (50) gallons liquid volume or twenty-five (25) pounds dry weight shall
register with the Winchendon Health Department and Fire Department the types of
materials stored, quantities, location and method of storage. The Winchendon Health
Department or Fire Department may require submittal of a Material Safety Data Sheet for
each toxic and hazardous material(s) and an inventory of such materials be, sales and
disposal records on a monthly basis in order to detect any product loss. Registration
required by this bylaw shall be submitted within sixty (60) days of enactment of this
bylaw and annually thereafter. Maintenance and reconciliation of inventories shall begin
within the same sixty-day period.
(2) Registration and inventory requirements shall not apply to the following:
a) Fuel oil stored in conformance with Massachusetts Fire Preventive Regulations
and regulations of the Winchendon Health Department for the purpose of heating
buildings located on the site; or
b) The storage of toxic and hazardous materials at a single- or two-family dwelling,
except when such materials are stored for use associated with a professional or
home occupation use.
B. Wastes containing toxic or hazardous material(s) shall be held on the premises in product-tight
containers and shall be removed and disposed of in accordance with the Massachusetts Hazardous Waste
Management Act, Ch. 704, Acts of 1979.
C. The Winchendon Health Department or Fire Department may require that containers of toxic or
hazardous materials be stored on an impervious, chemical-resistant surface compatible with the material
being stored and that provisions be made to provide secondary containment equal to 110% of the
volume of the largest container or 10% of the total volume of containers, whichever is greater, to protect
against contamination in the event of accidental spillage or leakage.
SECTION 28.6: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS AND LEAKS Every owner or operator or other person
having knowledge of a spill, leak or other loss of toxic or hazardous materials in excess of five (5) gallons shall
notify the Winchendon Health Department or Fire Department immediately upon discovery and in every case
within two (2) hours.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 59
SECTION 28.7: ENFORCEMENT
A. The Winchendon Health Department or Fire Department, acting as duly authorized agents of the
Town, shall enforce the provisions of this bylaw and according to law, may enter upon any premises at
any reasonable time to inspect for compliance.
B. Upon request of the Winchendon Health Department or Fire Department, the owner or operator of
any premises at which toxic or hazardous materials are used or stored shall furnish all information
required to monitor compliance with this bylaw, including a complete list of all chemicals, pesticides,
fuels and other toxic or hazardous materials used or stored on the premises, a description of measures
taken to protect storage containers from vandalism, corrosion and spillage and the means of disposal of
all toxic or hazardous wastes produced on this site. The Winchendon Health Department may require
samples.
C. All records pertaining to storage, removal and disposal of toxic or hazardous wastes shall be retained
for no less than three (3) years and shall be made available for review by the Winchendon Health
Department or Fire Department upon request.
D. The Building Commissioner of the Town of Winchendon shall condition issuance of construction
and occupancy permits upon conformity with the requirements of this bylaw respecting any toxic or
hazardous materials to be used in the course of such construction or occupancy.
SECTION 28.8: NOTICE OF VIOLATION Written notice of any violation of this bylaw shall be given by
the Winchendon Health Department or Fire Department, specifying the nature of the violation; any corrective
measures that must be undertaken, including containment and cleanup of discharged materials; any preventive
measures required for avoiding future violations; and a time for compliance. Requirements specified in such a
notice shall be reasonable in relation to the public health hazard involved and the difficulty of compliance. The
cost of containment and cleanup shall be borne by the owner and/or operator of the premises.
SECTION 28.9: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES Any owner or operator who violates any provision of
this bylaw shall be subject to a fine of not more than twenty-five ($25.00). Each day or portion thereof during
which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense; if more than one (1), each condition shall
constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 28.10: SEVERABILITY Each provision of this bylaw shall be construed as separate, to the end
that, if any part of it shall be held invalid for any reason, the remainder shall continue in full force and effect.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 60
ARTICLE 29
WETLANDS PROTECTION BYLAW
(May 2007)
SECTION 29.1: PURPOSE The Purpose of this bylaw is to maintain the quality of surface water, the quality
and level of the groundwater table and water recharge areas for existing or potential water supplies; to protect
the public health and safety; to protect persons and property against the hazards of flood water inundations; to
protect the community against the costs which may be incurred when unsuitable development occurs in wetland
resources areas; and to provide for the reasonable protection and conservation of certain irreplaceable natural
features, resources and amenities for the benefit and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the town of
Winchendon.
Accordingly, this bylaw protects the wetlands, related water resources, and certain adjoining land areas in the
Town by providing for prior review and control of activities deemed to have a significant or cumulative adverse
effect upon wetland values. Collectively, the wetlands values protected by this bylaw, include but are not
limited to the following: protection of public and private water supply, protection of groundwater supply, flood
control, erosion and sedimentation control, storm damage prevention, avoidance of water and soil pollution,
protection of wildlife habitat, rare species habitat including rare plant species, protection of agriculture and
aquaculture and recreation values, deemed important to the community.
This bylaw is intended to utilize the Home Rule authority of the town of Winchendon to protect the resource
areas and associated values currently being regulated under the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act
(Massachusetts General Law Ch. 131, Sec.40; the Act) to a greater degree, to protect additional resource areas
beyond the Act recognized by the Town as significant, to protect all resource areas for their additional values
beyond those recognized in the Act, and to impose in local regulations and permits additional standards and
procedures stricter than those of the Act and regulations thereunder (310 CMR 10.00), subject however, to the
rights and benefits accorded to agricultural uses and structures of all kinds under the laws of the Commonwealth
and other relevant bylaws of the Town of Winchendon, and regulations thereunder (310 CMR 10.00).
SECTION 29.2: JURISDICTION Except as permitted by the Conservation Commission or as provided in
this bylaw, no person shall commence to remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade, pollute or discharge into, or
otherwise alter the following resource areas protected by this chapter, (collectively, ‘wetland resource areas’)
any wetland, including but not limited to, any freshwater wetland, marshes, flats, wet meadow, bogs, swamps,
vernal pools, springs, banks, reservoirs, lakes, ponds of any size, and lands under water bodies; intermittent
streams, creeks, brooks; lands adjoining these resource areas out to a distance of one-hundred feet(100), known
as the buffer zone; perennial rivers, streams, brooks and creeks; land adjoining these resource areas out to a
distance of two hundred feet (200), known as the riverfront area; lands subject to flooding or inundation by
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 61
groundwater or surface water; and lands subject to storm flowage, or flooding (collectively the “resource areas
protected by this bylaw”). Said resource areas shall be protected whether or not they border surface waters.
The jurisdiction of this bylaw shall not extend to uses and structures of agriculture that are under the rights and
privileges of laws and regulations of the Commonwealth governing agriculture, including work performed for
normal maintenance or improvement of land in agricultural or aquaculture uses as defined by the Wetland
Protection Act regulations, found at 310 CMR 10.04
SECTION 29.3: EXEMPTIONS AND EXCEPTIONS The application and permit required by this bylaw
shall not be required for maintaining, repairing, or replacing, but not substantially changing or enlarging, an
existing and lawfully located structure or facility used in the service of the public to provide electric, gas, water,
telephone, telegraph or other telecommunication services, provided that written notice has been given to the
Commission prior to commencement of work, and provided that the work conforms to performance standards
and design specifications in regulations adopted by the Commission (8 interests of the “Act”, cover sheet)
The application and permit by this bylaw shall not be required for emergency projects necessary for the
protection of the health and safety of the public, provided that the work is to be performed by or has been
ordered to be performed by an agency of the Commonwealth or a political subdivision thereof; provided that
advance notice, oral or written, has been given to the Commission prior to commencement of work or within 24
hours after commencement; provided that the Commission or its agent certifies the work as an emergency
project; provided that the work is performed only for the time and place certified by the Commission for the
limited purposes necessary to abate the emergency; and provided that within 21 days of commencement of an
emergency project a permit application shall be filed with the Commission for review as provided by this
bylaw. Upon failure to meet these and other requirements of the Commission, the Commission may after notice
and public hearing, revoke or modify an emergency project approval and order restoration and mitigation
measures.
A ‘Request for Determination of Applicability’ may be requested, but no Notice of Intent need be filed for the
replacement, repair, or installation of a residential septic system that meets the requirements of Title 5 of the
State Environmental Code (310 CMR 15.00), and has received a permit from the Winchendon Board of Health,
and that meets the setback requirements of this Bylaw.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Bylaw, the Commission may issue an ‘Order of Conditions’ for
limited projects listed under Section 10.53(3) of the Wetland Protection regulations promulgated under the
Massachusetts Wetland Protection Act (310 CMR 10.53 (3)).
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the alteration of any residential, business or
institutional building or customary appurtenance thereto, such as lawns, gardens, landscaped or other developed
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 62
areas, where such structure or appurtenance existed prior to the effective date of this bylaw, shall not be subject
to this bylaw, but shall be regulated exclusively by the provisions of MGL c.131,s40.
Strict compliance with this Bylaw may be waived when, in the judgment of the Conservation Commission, such
action is in the public interest and is consistent with the intent and purpose of the Bylaw. Any request for a
waiver must be submitted to the Commission in writing. The waiver shall be presented at the time of filing
along with a written justification stating why a waiver is desired or needed; is in the public benefit, and is
consistent with the intent and purpose of the Bylaw. In no cases will a decision under this bylaw be less
stringent than the Wetland Protection Act’s requirement.
Other than stated in the section, the exemptions provided in the Wetlands Protection Act (G.L. Ch. 131 S.40)
and Regulations (310 CMR 10.00) shall not apply under this bylaw.
SECTION 29.4: APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS AND REQUESTS FOR DETERMINATION
Written application shall be filed with the Commission to perform activities affecting resource areas protected
by this bylaw. The permit application shall include such information and plans as are deemed necessary by the
Commission to describe proposed activities and their effects on the resource areas protected by this Bylaw. No
activities shall commence without receiving and complying with a permit issued pursuant to this bylaw.
The Commission may waive the filing fee, consultant fee, and costs and expenses for a permit application or
RDA filed by a government agency.
a. Written application shall be filed with the Commission to perform activities affecting resource areas
and buffer zones protected by this bylaw. The permit application shall include such information and
plans as are deemed necessary by the Commission as specified in the bylaw. No activities shall
commence without receiving and complying with a permit issued pursuant to this bylaw.
b. The Commission may, where it deems it appropriate, accept as the permit application and plans
under this bylaw the ‘Notice of Intent’ and plans required to be filed under the Wetlands Protection
Act, MGL c.131 S40, and regulations, hereunder, at 310 CMR 10.00, et seq.
c. Any person may request the Conservation Commission to make a determination as to whether or not
a proposed project in the wetland or “buffer zone” is significant to the interests protected by the
Bylaw. The Commission or its agents, may for the purpose of carrying out its duties under this
Bylaw, request such plans or information as may be necessary for its evaluation, may enter upon the
subject land, and may make or require to be made such examination or survey as it deems necessary.
d. At the time of the permit application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee according to the schedule in
the Town of Winchendon and Wetland Protection Act regulations. This fee is non-refundable.
e. Any additional outside expert engineering or consultant services will be at the expense of the
applicant. The entire fee must be received before the initiation of consulting services. Failure by
applicant to pay consultant fee within 10 business days shall be cause for the Commission to declare
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 63
the application administratively incomplete and deny the permit without prejudice, except in the case
of an appeal. The Commission shall inform the applicant and Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) of such a decision in writing.
f. All plans shall also show the location of the wetland boundaries and shall be at a scale of 1” = 40’ or
any such scale that adequately depicts the area.
g. All properties shall be staked for any proposed buildings and wetland delineations.
h. The Commission may extend an ‘Order of Conditions’ once for a period of up to three (3) years.
Written requests for an Extension Permit shall be made not less than thirty calendar days prior to the
expiration of said ‘Order of Conditions’.
i. The Commission may deny an ‘Extension Permit’ under any of the following circumstances:
Where no activity has begun on the project, except where such failure is due to unavoidable
delay such as appeals in obtaining other necessary permits.
Where new information not available at the time of the original permit filing has become
available and indicates that the ‘Order of Conditions’, is insufficient to protect the areas subject
to protection.
Where activity is causing damage to areas subject to protection.
Where there has been activity in violation of the ‘Order of Conditions’.
Where an extension permit has been previously granted for the “Order of Conditions.
j. Site checks will be based on accessibility due to snow depth and ice.
The Commission in an appropriate case may accept as the permit application and plans under this bylaw any
application and plans filed under the Wetlands Protection Act (MGL ch.131 Sec. 40) and Regulations (310
CMR 10.00), but the Commission is not obligated to do so.
Any person desiring to know whether or not a proposed activity or an area is subject to this bylaw may in
writing request a determination from the Commission. Such a ‘Request for Determination of Applicability’
(RDA) or Abbreviated Notice of Resource Area Delineation (ANRAD) filed under the Act shall include
information and plans as are deemed necessary by the Commission.
Any person may request the Conservation Commission to verify the precise boundaries of a resource area,
including the buffer zone. A ‘Request for Resource Area Delineation’, using the form designated by the
Commission, shall be sent by certified mail, or hand delivered to the Commission and standardized procedures
will be followed under M.G.L. ch.131, s. 40. If the Commission determines that additional data or information
is necessary, the hearing may be continued to a specific date and time announced at the hearing, agreeable to
both the Applicant and the Commission. The ‘Order of Resource Area Delineation’ shall be issued within 21
days after the public hearing and may be identical to any such delineation issued under the provisions of the
Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. Ch 131, s.40).
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 64
Any person submitting an application for a permit to build, that has the potential to acquire future permits for
lots in the same boundary ownership, shall include in those plans, all boundaries of ownership for potential
future building lots. This action may help prevent potential future non-conforming lots (hardships) involving the
protection of wetland resource areas.
SECTION 29.5: NOTICE AND HEARINGS Prior to issuing any permits or ‘Order of Conditions’ (Section
12.8.2 Determinations) the Conservation Commission shall hold a public hearing on any permit application,
RDA or ANRAD with written notice given at the expense of the applicant. Notice of time and place of such
hearing shall be posted not less than five (5) business days prior to the public hearing, by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in the town and by mailing a notice to the Applicant, the Board of Health and
the Planning Board. Such hearing may be held at the same time and place as any public hearing required to be
held under M.G.L. Ch 131, s.40.The Commission shall commence the public hearing within 21 days from
receipt of a completed permit application, RDA or ANRAD unless an extension is authorized in writing by the
applicant. The Commission shall have authority to continue the hearing to a specific date announced at the
hearing, for reasons stated at the hearing, which may include the need for additional information from the
applicant or others as deemed necessary by the Commission in its discretion.
SECTION 29.6: BURDENS OF PROOF The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the credible evidence that the work proposed in the permit application will not have an
unacceptable significant or cumulative effect upon the resource area values protected by this bylaw. Failure to
provide adequate evidence to the Commission supporting this burden shall be sufficient cause for the
Commission to deny a permit or to grant a permit with conditions.
SECTION 29.7: PERMITS AND CONDITIONS The Conservation Commission may impose such
conditions on any proposed removing, dredging, filling or altering as it deems necessary to protect and preserve
the interests covered by this bylaw. In preparing the ‘Order of Conditions’, the Commission shall take into
account the cumulative adverse effects of loss, degradation, isolation and replication of protected resource areas
throughout the municipality, resulting from past activities, permitted and exempt, and foreseeable future
activities. Such ‘Order of Conditions’ shall be in writing and may be subject to the same constraints and be
identical to any such order issued by the Conservation Commission under the provisions of MGL. Ch131, s.40,
or successor statutes, and shall be issued within 21 days after the public hearing. Such ‘Order of Conditions’
will expire three years from the date of issuance, unless renewed prior to expiration. No proposed work
governed by an ‘Order of Conditions’ shall be undertaken until all permits, approvals, and variances required by
local Bylaws have been obtained and all applicable appeal periods have expired. The final ‘Order of
Conditions’ issued under this bylaw shall be recorded with the Registry of Deeds for the district in which the
land is located. However, if said ‘Order’ is identical to the final ‘Order of Conditions’ issued under the
provisions of M.G.L. 131, s40, only one ‘Order of Conditions’ need be recorded. If a wetland replication is
required, the applicant will adhere to replication procedures established by the Commission or as set down in
the Commission’s rules and Regulations.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 65
If the Conservation Commission, after a public hearing, determines that the activities which are subject to the
permit application, or the land and water uses which will result therefrom, are likely to have a significant
individual or cumulative effect on the resource area values protected by this bylaw, the Commission, within 21
days of the close of the hearing, shall issue or deny a permit for the activities requested. The Commission shall
take into account the extent to which the applicant has avoided, minimized and mitigated any such effect. The
Commission also shall take into account any loss, degradation, isolation, and replacement or replication of such
protected resource areas elsewhere in the community and the watershed, resulting in past activities, whether
permitted, unpermitted or exempt, and foreseeable future activities. The Commission may waive specifically
identified and requested procedures, design specifications, performance standards, or other requirements set
forth in its regulations, provided that: the Commission finds in writing after said public hearing that there are no
reasonable conditions or alternatives that would allow the proposed activity to proceed in compliance with said
regulations; that avoidance, minimization and mitigation have been employed to the maximum extent feasible;
A waiver may then be necessary to accommodate an overriding public interest or to avoid a decision that so
restricts the use of the property as to constitute an unconstitutional taking without compensation.
In reviewing activities within a buffer zone, the Commission shall presume the buffer zone is important to the
protection of other resource areas because work performed in close proximity have a high likelihood of adverse
impact, either immediately, as a consequence of construction, or over time, as a consequence of daily operation
or existence of the activities. These adverse impacts from construction and use can include, without limitation,
erosion, siltation, loss of groundwater recharge, poor water quality, and loss of wildlife habitat. The
Commission may establish, in its regulations, design specifications, performance standards, and other measures
and safeguards, including setbacks, no-disturb areas, no-build areas, and other work limits for protection of such
lands, including without limitation strips of continuous, undisturbed vegetative cover, unless the applicant
shows the Commission that part or in total area may be disturbed without harm to the values protected by this
bylaw.
In accordance to the riverfront area, the Commission will presume that this area is important to all the resource
area values, unless demonstrated otherwise, and no permit will be issued unless the applicant, having met all
applicable requirements of this bylaw, has proven by a preponderance of the evidence that (1) there is no
practicable alternative to the proposed activities with less adverse effects, and that (2) such activities, including
proposed mitigation measures, will have no significant adverse impact on the areas and values protected by this
bylaw. The Commission shall regard the overall project and alternatives in which are practicable and reasonable
and capable of being done after taking into consideration the proposed property use, overall project purpose
(e.g., residential, institutional, commercial, or industrial) logistics, existing technology, costs for the alternatives
and overall project costs.
To prevent a loss of resource areas, and minimize alteration; the Commission shall require applicants to avoid
alteration wherever feasible; to minimize alteration, and where alteration is unavoidable the Commission will
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 66
authorize or require replication of wetlands. These replication areas must have professional design, specific
plans and proper safeguards. There must be professional monitoring and reporting to ensure its success.
The Commission may require a wildlife habitat study of a proposed project area at the expense of the applicant,
regardless of the location of the resource area. The decision shall be based on vital information of actual or
possible presence of rare plant or animal species in the area. The work shall be done by someone who meets the
qualifications listed in the wildlife habitat section of the Wetlands Protection Act regulations (310 CMR 10.60)
The Commission will accept all areas meeting the definition of “vernal pools’ (see Section 20, Definitions)
under this bylaw, to include adjacent areas subject to essential habitat functions. This presumption may be
overcome by credible evidence that the basin or depression does not provide essential habitat functions.
Amendments to permits, DOAs (Determination of Applicability), or ORADs (Order of Resource Area
Delineation) shall be handled in the manner set out in the Wetlands Protection Act regulations and policies
thereunder.
SECTION 29.8: INSPECTIONS All projects for which an ‘Order of Conditions’ has been issued under this
Bylaw are subject to inspections by the members of the Conservation or its duly appointed agent. No
construction within the conditioned area will commence without the following items being completed:
(a) The ten day appeal period
(b) The DEP filing number issued for this project must be posted at the site.
(c) All mitigation controls must be in place as to plans.
(d) The ‘Order of conditions’ must be recorded with the Registry of Deeds and a copy forwarded to
this commission.
(e) A copy of the ‘Order of Conditions’ must be on site.
SECTION 29.9: SETBACKS FOR ACTIVITIES The following are the minimum distances (setbacks) from
the edge of wetlands or vernal pools (see Section 20, Definitions). No activity shall be allowed within these
setbacks except as provided below. These setbacks are the minimum and may be extended further if deemed
necessary for the protections of the interests of the Bylaw by the Commission.
Example: seasonal high water line, topography, industrial verses residential.
The setbacks shall be as follows:
(a) 0-foot setback for wetland-dependent structures (drain outfalls, weirs, etc.), fences, and structures
necessary for upland access where reasonable alternative access is unavailable.
(b) 50-foot setback of undisturbed natural vegetation.
(c) 75-foot setback of no build/structure zone.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 67
When in the opinion of the Commission, compliance with these setbacks will result in greater harm to the
interests of this bylaw, or that no harm would be done to the interests of this bylaw, by the proposed action,
(e.g., non-motorized boat shed, mooring) the Commission would then waiver by degree these setbacks. The
Conservation Commission is permitted to grant such waivers.
Pre-existing activities or structures not meeting the setbacks set forth prior to this law need not be discontinued
or removed (but are deemed to be nonconforming). No new activity shall be commenced and no new structure
shall be located closer to the edge of wetlands or vernal pools than this Bylaw allows unless such activity or
structure will not affect the interests protected by the bylaw no more adversely than the existing activity or
structure.
SECTION 29.10: EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL Where activities are proposed within
the buffer zone, erosion and sedimentation barriers and other erosion controls as necessary shall be installed
between the area of activity and the wetlands or vernal pool to prevent sediment into said areas. Similarly, the
same erosion controls shall be installed when activities outside the buffer zone create a significant potential for
transport of sediment into wetlands or vernal pools.
SECTION 29.11: STORAGE OF FILL OR MATERIALS If any fill is to be stored on site, it shall be
stored outside of the buffer zone and/or it shall be surrounded by staked hay bales to prevent erosion and
sedimentation. No storage, disposal or burial of construction debris (Example: scrap lumber, metals, concrete,
asphalt, piping, logs, stumps, etc.) shall be allowed within the buffer zone without the express permission of the
Commission in an ‘Order of Conditions’.
SECTION 29.12: WETLANDS REPLACEMENT Wetlands or Vernal Pools that are altered shall in all
instances be replaced by replacement wetlands of similar character. Replicated wetlands shall include, at
minimum, equal area as the altered wetlands or vernal pool in a hydrologically connected location to the
unaltered remainder of the wetlands or vernal pool. All replicated areas shall be completed before any other
construction is allowed unless specifically addressed in the ‘Order of Conditions’.
SECTION 29.12A: Requirements for Wetland Replacement
Projects involving the filling and/or permanent alteration of wetlands or vernal pools shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) The proposed replacement area design must be submitted to the Commission for approval as part of
the ‘Notice of Intent’.
(b) The replacement area must be shown to duplicate sufficiently the functions of the wetland proposed
to be altered.
(c) The replacement area shall be constructed, to the extent possible, immediately after alteration of the
existing wetland and during the same growing season.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 68
(d) If after three growing seasons, the Commission determines that the replacement area has not
satisfactorily developed into a wetland or vernal pool, the applicant or owner may be required to
submit new plans to successfully replicate the original altered wetland. No ‘Certificate of
Compliance’ shall be issued until the Commission has determined that a satisfactory replacement
area has been completed. (see section 21, definitions)
SECTION 29.13: DENIAL The Conservation Commission is empowered to deny a permit for failure to meet
the requirements of this bylaw; for failure to submit necessary information and plans requested by the
Commission; for failure to meet the design specifications, performance standards, and other requirements in
regulations of the Commission; for failure to avoid or prevent unacceptable significant or cumulatively adverse
effects upon the wetland values protected by this bylaw; or where the commission deems that no conditions are
adequate to protect those values. Due consideration shall be given to any demonstrated hardship on the
applicant by reason of denial, as presented at the public hearing.
SECTION 29.14: PRIOR VIOLATION Any person who purchases, inherits or otherwise acquires real
estate upon which work has been done in violation of any order pursuant to this Bylaw, shall forthwith comply
with any such order, or restore such real estate to its condition prior to any such violation; provided however
that no such action, civil or criminal shall be brought against such person unless commenced within three (3)
years following the date of acquisition of the real estate by such person.
SECTION 29.15: BOND The Conservation Commission may require the posting of a bond with surety,
running to the Town of Winchendon, sufficient as to form and surety in the opinion of the town counsel, to
secure the faithful and satisfactory performance of work required by any final ‘Order of Conditions’, in such
sum and upon such conditions as the Commission may require. Other evidence of financial responsibility which
is satisfactory to the Commission may be accepted in lieu of a bond. Notwithstanding the above, the amount of
such bond shall not exceed either the estimated cost of the work required by the final ‘Order of conditions’, or
the estimated cost of the work required for the restoration of affected lands and properties if the work is not
performed as required, whichever is greater.
SECTION 29.16: RULES AND REGULATIONS After due notice and public hearing, the Conservation
Commission may promulgate procedural rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this bylaw, effective
when voted and filed with the town clerk. However, failure to promulgate such rules and regulations or a legal
declaration of their invalidity by a court of law shall not act to suspend or invalidate the effect of this bylaw.
SECTION 29.17: ENFORCEMENT The following provides a list of specific violations definable by this
Bylaw:
? Alteration of a wetland or Vernal Pool without an ‘Order of Conditions’ issued pursuant to this bylaw.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 69
? Work within the buffer zone without prior submittal of ‘Request for Determination of Applicability’ or
‘Notice of Intent’.
? Failure to provide sedimentation controls required by an ‘Order of Conditions’.
? Disposal of construction debris within the buffer zone.
? Failure to construct storm water or drainage structure according to plans.
? Storage of fill within a buffer zone (except as allowed by he ‘Orders of Conditions’)
A fine for the specific violations listed above is $300.00.
Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw or of any condition of a permit issued pursuant to it may
be subject to a fine of not more than $300.00. Each day during which a violation continues may constitute a
separate violation.
The Commission, its agent or officers, have the authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of
performing their duties under this bylaw, subject to the constitutions and laws of the United States and the
Commonwealth.
The Commission shall have the right to enforce this bylaw, its regulations and permits issued by letters, phone
calls, electronic communication and/or other informal methods. As an alternative to criminal prosecution in a
specific case, the Commission may issue citations with specific penalties pursuant to the non-criminal
disposition procedure set forth in G.L. Ch. 40 S.21D.
Municipal boards and officers, including any police officer or other officer having police powers, shall have the
authority to assist the Commission in enforcement under civil law.
SECTION 29:18: APPEALS A decision of the Commission may be reviewed by the Superior Court in an
action filed within 60 days thereof, in accordance with Massachusetts General Law 249, Section 4.
SECTION 29.19: SEVERABILITY The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall not
invalidate any other section or provision thereof.
SECTION 29:20: DEFINITIONS The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
implementation of this bylaw:
The term ‘alter’ shall include, without limitation, the following activities when undertaken to, upon, within or
affecting resource areas protected by this bylaw:
A. Removal, excavation, or dredging of soil, sand, gravel, or aggregate materials of any kind.
B. The change of pre-existing drainage characteristics, flushing characteristics, salinity distribution,
sedimentation patterns, flow patterns, or flood retention characteristics.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 70
C. Drainage or other disturbance of water level or water table.
D. Dumping, discharging or filling with any material which may degrade water quality.
E. Placing of fill or removal of material, which would alter elevation.
F. Driving of piles, erection or repair of buildings, or structures of any kind.
G. Placing of obstructions or objects in water.
H. Destruction of plant life including cutting of trees.
I. Changing temperature, biochemical oxygen demand or other physical, biology, or chemical
characteristics of any waters.
J. Any activities, changes, or work which may cause or tend to contribute to pollution of any body of
water or groundwater.
K. Incremental activities, which have, or may have, a cumulative adverse impact on the resource areas
protected by this bylaw.
The term ‘Abbreviated Notice of Resource Area Delineation’ (ANORAD) is the application used for
requesting the review of wetland boundary lines.
The term ‘bank’ shall include the land area which normally abuts and confines a water body; the lower
boundary being the mean annual low flow level, and the upper boundary being the first observable break in the
slope or the mean annual flood level, whichever is higher.
The term ’Certificate of Compliance’ means a written determination by the issuing authority that work or a
portion thereof has been completed in accordance with an order.
The term ‘Determination of Applicability’ is the response to a ‘RDA’. A negative response means the project
in a buffer zone may move forward without adverse effects in a resource area. A positive response means that
the applicant must file a ‘Notice of Intent’.
The term ‘Notice of Intent’ is an application that is used when work is in a resource area or buffer zone. The
abutters are notified of a project and posted 5 business days prior to a hearing.
The term ‘Order of Conditions,’ is a document issued by a Conservation Commission containing conditions
which regulate or prohibit an activity in a resource area.
The term ‘Orders of Resource Area Delineation’ (ORAD) is the document used to answer the ‘Abbreviated
Notice of Resource Area Delineation’.
The term ‘person’ shall include any individual, group of individuals, association, partnership, corporation,
company business organization, trust, estate, the Commonwealth, or political subdivision thereof, to the extent
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 71
subject to town bylaws, administrative agency, public or quasi-public corporation or body, this municipality,
and any other legal entity, its legal representatives, agents or assigns.
The term ‘rare species’ shall include, without limitation, all vertebrate and invertebrate animals and plant
species listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern by the Mass. Division of Fisheries and Wildlife,
regardless of whether the site in which they occur has been previously identified by the Division.
The term ‘Request for Determination of Applicability (RDA), is an application used in the wetlands
regulations that would determine an impact to wetlands, whether laws apply to a particular area and project.
The term ‘vernal pool’ shall include, in addition to scientific definitions found in the regulations under the
Wetland Protection Act, any confined basin, or depression not occurring in existing lawns, gardens, or
driveways which, at least in most years, holds water for a minimum of two continuous months during the spring
and/or summer, contains at least 200 cubic feet of water most years and which is free of adult fish populations,
and provides a habitat for breeding and rearing of vernal pool species, as well as the area within 100 feet of the
mean annual high-water line of such a depression, regardless of whether the site has been certified by the
Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife. The definitions and procedures in this bylaw shall be set forth
as in the Wetlands Protection Act (MGL Ch. 131 S. 40) and regulations (310 CMR 10.00)
Except as otherwise provided in this bylaw or in regulations of the Commission, the definitions of terms in this
bylaw shall be as set forth in the Wetlands Protection Act (MGL Ch. 131 Sec. 40) and Regulations (310 CMR
l0.00)
ARTICLE 30
RIGHT TO FARM BY-LAW (11/ 8/ 2007)
SECTION 30.1: LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE AND INTENT The purpose and intent of this By-law is to
state with emphasis the Right to Farm accorded to all citizens of the Commonwealth under Article 97, of the
Constitution and all state statutes and regulations there under including but not limited to Massachusetts
General Laws Chapter 40A, Section 3, Paragraph 1; Chapter 90, Section 9, Chapter 111, Section 125A and
Chapter 128 Section 1A. We as citizens of Winchendon restate and republish these rights pursuant to the
Town’s authority conferred by Article 89 of the Articles of Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution,
(“Home Rule Amendment”).
This general By-law encourages the pursuit of agriculture, promotes agriculture-based economic opportunities
and protects farmlands within Winchendon by allowing agricultural uses and related activities to function with
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 72
minimal conflict with abutters and local agencies. This By-law shall apply to all jurisdictional areas within the
Town of Winchendon.
SECTION 30.2: DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this by-law, any definition of farming and agriculture
shall refer to MGL Chapter 128: Section 1A. which states: “Farming” or “agriculture” shall include farming in
all of its branches and the cultivation and tillage of the soil, dairying, the production, cultivation, growing and
harvesting of any agricultural, aquacultural, floricultural or horticultural commodities, the growing and
harvesting of forest products upon forest land, the raising of livestock including horses, the keeping of horses as
a commercial enterprise, the keeping and raising of poultry, swine, cattle and other domesticated animals used
for food purposes, bees, fur-bearing animals, and any forestry or lumbering operations, performed by a farmer,
who is hereby defined as one engaged in agriculture or farming as herein defined, or on a farm as an incident to
or in conjunction with such farming operations, including preparations for market, delivery to storage or to
market or to carriers for transportation to market.
The word “farm” shall include any parcel or contiguous parcels of land, or water bodies used for the primary
purpose of commercial agriculture, or accessory thereto.
The words “farming or agriculture” or their derivatives shall include, but not be limited to the following:
• farming in all its branches and the cultivation and tillage of the soil;
• the cultivation and harvesting of orchard produce such apples, peaches and pears;
• dairying;
• production, cultivation, growing and harvesting of any agricultural, aqua cultural, floricultural,
viticulture or horticultural commodities;
• growing and sustainably harvesting of forest products upon forest land;
• raising of livestock including horses;
• keeping of horses as a commercial enterprise; and
• keeping and raising poultry, swine, cattle, sheep, ratites (such as emus, ostriches and rheas) and camelids
(such as llamas, alpacas and camels), and other domesticated animals for food and other agricultural
purposes, including bees and fur bearing animals.
“Farming” shall encompass activities including but not limited to, the following:
• operation and transportation of slow moving farm equipment over roads within the town;
• control of pests, including but not limited to, insects, weeds, predators and disease organism of plants
and animals;
• application of manure, fertilizers and pesticides;
• conducting agriculture-related educational and farm based recreational activities, including agri-tourism,
provided that the activities are related to marketing the agricultural output or services of the farm.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 73
• Processing and packaging of the agricultural output of the farm and the operation of a farmer’s market
or farm stand including signage thereto;
• maintenance, repair or storage of seasonal equipment or apparatus owned or leased by the farm owner or
manager and used expressly for the purpose of propagation, processing, management or sale of the
agricultural products;
• on-farm relocation of earth and the clearing of ground for farming operations;
• 0n farm revitalizing drainage or irrigation ditches, picking stone, erecting repairing and maintaining
fences, and clearing, rejuvenation and maintaining pastures; and
• herding of livestock from area to area, including along roads.
SECTION 30.3: RIGHT TO FARM DECLARATION The right to farm is hereby recognized to exist
within the Town of Winchendon. The above-described agricultural activities may occur on holidays, weekdays
and weekends by night or day and shall include the attendant incidental noise, odors, dust and fumes associated
with normally accepted agricultural practices. It is hereby determined that whatever impact may be caused to
others through the normal practice of agriculture is more than offset by the benefits of farming to the
neighborhood, community, and society in general. The benefits and protections of this By-law/Ordinance are
intended to apply exclusively to those commercial agricultural and farming operations and activities conducted
in accordance with generally accepted agricultural practices. Moreover, nothing in this Right-to-Farm By-
Law/Ordinance shall be deemed as acquiring any interest or land, or as imposing any land use regulation, which
is properly the subject of state statute, regulation or local zoning law.
SECTION 30.4: DISCLOSURE NOTIFICATIONS Not later than 21 days after the purchase and sale
contract is entered into, or prior to the sale or exchange of real property if no purchase or sale agreement exists,
for the purchase or exchange of real property, or prior to the acquisition of a leasehold interest or other
possessory interest in real property, located in the Town of Winchendon, the landowner shall present the buyer
or occupant with a disclosure notification which states the following:
“It is the policy of this community to conserve, protect and encourage the maintenance and improvement of
agricultural land for the protection of food, and other agricultural products, and also for its ecological value.
This disclosure notification is to inform buyers or occupants that the property they are about to acquire or
occupy lays within a town where farming activities occur. Such farming activities may include, but are not
limited to, activities that cause noise, dust and odors. Buyers or occupants are also informed that the location of
property within the Town may be impacted by commercial agricultural operations.
A copy of this disclosure notification shall be given on a form prepared by the Town and shall be signed by the
landowner prior to the sale, purchase, exchange or occupancy of such real property. A copy of the disclosure
notification must be filed with the town manager or his/her designee prior to the sale, purchase or occupancy of
such real property. In addition to the above, a copy of this disclosure notification shall be provided by the Town
to land owners each fiscal year by mail.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 74
A violation of Section 4 shall be subject to a fine of $300 and shall be enforced by the Town Manager. The
Town is authorized to enforce Section 4 under the non-criminal disposition provision of G.L. c. 40, Paragraph
21D.
SECTION 30.5: RESOLUTIONS OF DISPUTES Any person who seeks to complain about the operation of
a farm may, notwithstanding pursuing any other available remedy, file a grievance with the Town Manager and
the issue will be referred to the proper board, depending upon the nature of the grievance. The filing of the
grievance does not suspend the time within which to pursue any other available remedies that the aggrieved
may have. The Town Manager may forward a copy of the grievance to the Agricultural Commission or its
agent, which shall review and facilitate the resolution of the grievance, and report its recommendations to the
referring Town authority within an agreed upon time frame.
The Board of Health, except in cases of imminent danger or public health risk, may forward a copy of the
grievance to the Agricultural Commission or its agent, which shall review and facilitate the resolution of the
grievance, and report its recommendations to Board of Health within an agreed upon time frame.
SECTION 30.6: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE If any part of this By-Law is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this By-Law/Ordinance. The Town of
Winchendon hereby declares the provisions of this By-Law/Ordinance to be severable.
ARTICLE 31
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) (5/18/2009)
INTRODUCTION Land uses in Town affect our streams, lakes and water supplies. Careful planning of new
development and redevelopment will protect the quality and health of these important water resources.
Therefore, the Town of Winchendon enacts this Low Impact Development bylaw to provide guidance that will
prevent harmful impacts from land development activities.
1.0 PURPOSES AND AUTHORITY
1.1 Purposes
The purpose of this Bylaw is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and
general welfare by establishing requirements and procedures to manage stormwater runoff, promote
groundwater recharge and to prevent water pollution from new development and redevelopment. This Bylaw
seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives:
1. Establish regulations for land development activities that preserve the health of water resources;
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 75
2. In new development, require that the amount of stormwater runoff is equal to or less than predevelopment
conditions and that the quality of stormwater runoff is equal to or better than predevelopment
conditions in order to reduce flooding, stream erosion, pollution, property damage and
harm to terrestrial and aquatic life;
3. Establish LID management standards and design criteria to control the quantity and quality of
stormwater runoff;
4. Implement “low impact development practices,” such as reducing impervious cover and preserving
greenspace and other natural areas to reduce stormwater runoff and maintain hydrologic function;
5. Establish maintenance provisions to ensure that stormwater treatment practices will continue to function
as designed and pose no threat to public safety;
6. Establish procedures for the Town’s review of low impact development plans and for the Town’s
inspection of approved stormwater treatment practices.
1.2 Nothing in this Bylaw is intended to replace the requirements of either, the Town of Winchendon Zoning
Bylaw, Wetlands Protection Bylaw, Wetland Conservancy District, Flood Plain Conservancy Districts,
Groundwater Protection Overlay District or any other Bylaw that has been or may be adopted by the Town of
Winchendon. Any activity subject to the provisions of these Bylaws must comply with the specifications of
each.
1.3 Authority
This Bylaw is adopted under authority granted by the Home Rule Amendment of the Massachusetts
Constitution, and pursuant to the regulations of the federal Clean Water Act, and as authorized by the residents
of the Town of Winchendon at Town Meeting, dated May 18, 2009.
2.0 DEFINITIONS
These definitions shall apply in the interpretation and implementation of the Bylaw. Terms not defined in this
section shall be understood according to their customary and usual meaning. Additional definitions may be
adopted by separate regulation.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate or secondary building situated on the same lot or parcel with
a principal building, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building or land
use.
ALTER: Any activity, which will measurably change the ability of a ground surface area to absorb
water or will change existing surface drainage patterns. Alter may be similarly represented as
“alteration of drainage characteristics,” and “conducting land disturbance activities.” A land
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 76
altering activity includes the cutting of trees of greater than 6 inch caliper Diameter Breast Height
(DBH).
APPLICANT: A property owner, agent of a property owner, person or persons, including a
corporation, trust or other legal entity, who applies for issuance of a LID Permit in accordance with
this bylaw.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP): Structural, non-structural and managerial techniques that
are recognized to be the most effective and practical means to prevent and/or reduce increases in
stormwater volumes and flows, reduce point source and nonpoint source pollution, and promote
stormwater quality and protection of the environment. “Structural” BMPs are devices that are
engineered and constructed to provide temporary storage and treatment of stormwater runoff.
“Nonstructural” BMPs use natural measures to reduce pollution levels, do not require extensive
construction efforts, and/or promote pollutant reduction by eliminating the pollutant source.
BETTER SITE DESIGN: Site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site’s impact on the
watershed through the use of nonstructural LID Management practices. Better site design includes
conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover, and using
natural features for LID Management.
BUILDING ENCLOSURE: The building assemblies comprising the outer structure of a building that
enclose living and storage spaces including walls, windows, doors, roof, floors and foundation;
also, building envelope, building shell.
DEVELOPMENT: The modification of land to accommodate a new use or expansion of use, usually
involving construction.
DISTURBANCE OF LAND: Any action that causes a change in the position, location, or arrangement
of soil, sand, rock, gravel or similar earth material. A land altering activity includes the cutting of
trees of greater than 6 inch caliper Diameter Breast Height (DBH).
FOREST CUTTING PLAN: A plan for the cutting of trees on forest land, which is prepared and
submitted in accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 132 Sections 40 - 46A. The forest cutting plan
requires approval by a Service Forester of the Massachusetts Department of Conservation and
Recreation, as provided under 304 CMR 11.04.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any material or structure on or above the ground that prevents water from
infiltrating through the underlying soil. Impervious surface is defined to include, without
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 77
limitation: paved parking lots, sidewalks, roof tops, driveways, patios, paved recreation areas and
paved, gravel and compacted dirt surfaced roads.
LANDSCAPING: Landscaping includes a range of maintenance and construction activities aimed
at shaping, defining, and enhancing out-door spaces and environments inhabited by people. It is
practiced as both a science and an art. Landscaping involves working with functional site
conditions of water, soil, seasonality, wind, and light conditions, requires a thorough knowledge of
plant materials, and strives to shape our living environments to achieve aesthetic effects.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT: Low Impact Development (LID) is an approach to land
development that uses land planning and design practices and technologies to simultaneously
conserve and protect natural resource systems and reduce infrastructure costs. LID seeks to design
the built environment to remain a functioning part of an ecosystem rather than exist apart from it.
LID tools are used to plan and engineer urban and rural sites to maintain or restore the hydrologic
and ecological functions of their watersheds.
LID AUTHORITY: The Town of Winchendon Planning Board is duly authorized to administer,
implement, and enforce these LID Bylaws. The LID Authority is responsible for coordinating the
review, approval and permit process as defined in this Bylaw. Other Boards and/or departments
participate in the review process as defined in Section 4 of these LID Bylaws.
LID DESIGN CRITERIA: Best management practices and specifications for the use of LID. Projects
that comply with prescribed requirements may be allowed reductions in stormwater management
requirements when techniques are used to reduce stormwater runoff at the site.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT PERMIT (LIDP): A permit issued by the LID Authority for projects
in the categories and meeting the standards defined in this Bylaw, after review of an application,
plans, calculations, and other supporting documents. Projects in these categories that meet these
generic standards and are properly implemented are assumed to meet the requirements and intent of
this Bylaw which is designed to protect the environment of the Town of Winchendon from the
deleterious affects of uncontrolled and untreated stormwater runoff.
MASSACHUSETTS STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS AND HANDBOOK: The
policy issued by the Department of Environmental Protection, and as amended, that coordinates the
requirements prescribed by state regulations promulgated under the authority of the Massachusetts
Wetlands Protection Act G.L. c. 131 § 40 and Massachusetts Clean Waters Act G.L. c. 21, §. 23-
56. The policy addresses stormwater impacts through implementation of performance standards to
reduce or prevent pollutants from reaching water bodies and control the quantity of runoff from a
site.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 78
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION: Pollution from many diffuse sources caused by rainfall or
snowmelt moving over and through the ground. As the runoff moves, it picks up and carries away
natural and human-made pollutants, finally depositing them into water resource areas.
PERSON: Any individual, group of individuals, association, partnership, corporation, company,
business organization, trust, estate, the Commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the extent
subject to Town Bylaws, administrative agency, public or quasi-public corporation or body, the
Town of Winchendon, and any other legal entity, its legal representatives, agents, or assigns.
POST-DEVELOPMENT: The conditions that reasonably may be expected or anticipated to exist after
completion of the land development activity on a specific site or tract of land. Post-development
refers to the phase of a new development or redevelopment project after completion, and does not
refer to the construction phase of a project.
PRE-DEVELOPMENT: The conditions that exist at the time that plans for the land development of a
tract of land are submitted to the LID Authority. Where phased development or plan approval
occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the
first plan submission shall establish pre-development conditions. For the purpose of meeting the
sizing criteria of structural stormwater management devices as required in the LID Regulations
[Section 7.2.9.2], the standard for characterizing pre-development land use for on-site areas shall be
woods.
RECHARGE: The replenishment of underground water reserves.
REDEVELOPMENT: Any construction, alteration, transportation, improvement exceeding land
disturbance of 20,000 square feet, where the existing land use is commercial, industrial,
institutional, or multi-family residential.
3.0 SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY
3.1.1 This Bylaw shall be applicable to all new development and redevelopment including, but not limited to,
site plan applications, subdivision applications and applications for earth removal permits. The bylaw shall
apply to any activities that will result in an increased amount of stormwater runoff or pollutants from a parcel of
land, or that will alter the drainage characteristics of a parcel of land, unless exempt under Section 3.2 of this
Bylaw. A LID Permit shall be required for all new development and redevelopment under the jurisdiction of
this bylaw. The LID permit process shall be coordinated with existing permitting, where applicable.
3.1.2 An alteration, redevelopment, or conversion of land use or activities to those with higher potential
pollutant loadings such as: auto salvage yards, auto fueling facilities, fleet storage yards, commercial parking
lots, road salt storage areas, commercial nurseries and landscaping, outdoor storage and loading areas of
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 79
hazardous substances, or marinas, shall require a LID Permit.
3.1.3 Redevelopment projects are presumed to meet the specified LID requirements described in this Bylaw if
the total impervious cover is reduced by at least 40% from existing conditions. Where site conditions prevent
the reduction in impervious cover, LID practices shall be implemented to provide stormwater controls for at
least 40%of the site’s original impervious area. When a combination of impervious area reduction and LID
practice implementation is used for redevelopment projects, the combination of impervious area reduction and
the area controlled by a LID practice shall equal or exceed 40%.
3.2 Exemptions
No person shall alter land within the Town of Winchendon without having obtained a LID Permit for the
property with the following exceptions:
3.2.1 Any activity that will disturb or alter an area less than 20,000 square feet unless site plan,
subdivision or review for an earth removal permit are required. An applicant claiming exemption under
this 20,000 square foot rule shall be required to document that the extent of land disturbance or
alteration is less than 20,000 square feet. The area required for construction of a one- or two-family
residential dwelling septic system shall be exempt.
3.2.2 Normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural use as defined by the Wetlands
Protection Act Bylaw 310 CMR 10.04 and MGL Chapter 40A Section 3.
3.2.3 Conversion of land to agricultural use for crops and/or pasture, provided that such conversion is
supported by the Winchendon Agricultural Commission and the project employs best management
practices for LID;
3.2.4 Timber harvesting conducted under the terms of an approved Forest Cutting Plan as defined by the
Forest Cutting Practices Act regulation 304 CMR 11.00 and MGL Chapter 132 Sections 40 through 46;
3.2.5 Maintenance of existing landscaping, gardens or lawn areas associated with a residential
dwelling;
3.2.6 Construction, repair or replacement of a one- or two-family residential dwelling septic system.
3.2.7 Repair or replacement of an existing roof of a residential dwelling;
3.2.8 The construction of any fence that will not alter existing terrain or drainage patterns;
3.2.9 Construction of utilities serving a one- or two-family residential dwelling (gas, water, electric,
telephone, etc.), other than drainage, which will not alter terrain, ground cover, or drainage patterns;
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 80
3.2.10 Emergency repairs to any Stormwater Management device or practice that poses a threat to public
health or safety, or as deemed necessary by the LID Authority;
3.2.11 Stormwater discharges resulting from the activities subject to this Bylaw that are wholly subject
to jurisdiction under the Wetlands Protection Act and/or the Town of Winchendon Wetlands Protection
Bylaw, and that demonstrate compliance with the Massachusetts Stormwater Management Standards as
reflected in an Order of Conditions issued by the Conservation Commission;
3.2.12 Any work or projects for which all necessary approvals and permits have been issued before the
effective date of this Bylaw.
3.3 Due to the many benefits of low impact development, persons exempt from this bylaw are encouraged to
use stormwater control and site planning methods described in the Town of Winchendon Best Development
Practices Guidebook.
4.0 ADMINISTRATION
4.1 The Planning Board is hereby designated as the LID Authority. The LID Authority shall administer,
implement and shall enforce this Bylaw. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the LID Authority may be
delegated in writing by the LID Authority to its employees or agents.
4.2 LID Regulations The LID Authority shall adopt, implement and may periodically amend, rules and
regulations relating to the terms, conditions, definitions, enforcement, fees (including application, inspection,
and/or consultant fees), procedures and administration of this LID Bylaw by majority vote of the LID Authority,
after conducting a public hearing to receive comments on any proposed revisions. Such hearing dates shall be
advertised in a newspaper of general local circulation, at least fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing date. After
public notice and public hearing, the LID Authority may issue rules and regulations to fulfill the purposes of
this Bylaw. Failure by the LID Authority to issue such rules and regulations or a legal declaration of their
invalidity by a court shall not suspend or invalidate the effect of this Bylaw.
4.3 The LID Authority may, with the concurrence of the Applicant, designate another Town Board, including,
but not limited to, the Conservation Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals and Board of Health, as its
authorized agent for the purposes of reviewing LID submittals and approving LID Permits for any project
within that particular Board’s jurisdiction.
4.4 Stormwater Management Standards and Handbook The LID Authority will use the policy, criteria and
information, including specifications and standards, of the latest edition of the Massachusetts Stormwater
Management Standards and Handbook to execute the provisions of this Bylaw. The Handbook includes a list of
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 81
acceptable stormwater treatment practices, including specific design criteria for each. The Standards and
Handbook may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in engineering, science,
monitoring, and local maintenance experience. Unless specifically revised in the LID Regulations, stormwater
management practices that are designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with these design and sizing
criteria will be presumed to be protective of Massachusetts water quality standards.
4.5 Actions by the LID Authority The LID Authority may take any of the following actions as a result of an
application for a LID Permit: Approval, Approval with Conditions or Disapproval.
4.6 Appeals of Action by the LID Authority The decisions or orders of the LID Authority shall be final. Further
relief shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction.
4.7 LID Design Criteria The LID Authority shall adopt LID Design Criteria through the Regulations authorized
by this LID Bylaw. Applicants are required to use these Design Criteria to assess the effectiveness of the use of
LID better site design practices to decrease stormwater runoff at the site. Projects that comply with LID Design
Criteria may be allowed reductions in stormwater management requirements specified in the Performance
Standards section of the Regulations. Failure by the LID Authority to issue LID Design Criteria through its
Regulations or a legal declaration of their invalidity by a court shall not act to suspend or invalidate the effect of
this Bylaw.
5.0 PROCEDURES Permit Procedures and Requirements shall be defined and included as part of any rules
and regulations issued as permitted under Section 4 of this Bylaw.
6.0 ENFORCEMENT
6.1 The LID Authority or an authorized agent of the LID Authority shall enforce this Bylaw, regulations,
orders, violation notices, and enforcement orders, and may pursue all civil and criminal remedies for such
violations. The LID Authority or an authorized agent of the LID Authority may issue a written order to enforce
the provisions of this Bylaw or the Regulations thereunder.
6.2 Criminal Penalty Any person, who violates any provision of this Bylaw or regulation, order or permit issued
thereunder, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300. Each day or part thereof that such violation
occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
6.3 Non-Criminal Disposition As an alternative to criminal prosecution or civil action, the Town of
Winchendon may elect to utilize the non-criminal disposition procedures set forth in G.L. Chapter 40, Section
21D, in which case the LID Authority or its agent shall be the enforcing party. The penalty for the 1st violation
shall be $100. The penalty for the 2nd violation shall be $200. The penalty for the 3rd and subsequent violations
shall be $300. Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 82
7.0 SEVERABILITY
The invalidity of any section, provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this Bylaw shall not invalidate any
section, provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause thereof, nor shall it invalidate any permit or determination that
previously has been issued.
ARTICLE 32
PAWNBROKERS
(Aug. 30, 2010)
32.1 Licensing authority and requirements.
A. The Board of Selectmen may license suitable persons to be pawnbrokers, pursuant to law. Such
licenses shall not be valid to protect the holders thereof in a building or place other than that designated
in the license, unless consent to removal is granted by the Board of Selectmen. Applications for new
licenses under this rule may be filed at any time with the Board of Selectmen. Applications for the reissue
of licenses already existing should be filed at least 30 days before the expiration of such licenses. All
licenses issued hereunder shall expire annually on the last day of December. Persons whose licenses have
expired and have not been reissued will be liable to prosecution if carrying on the business for which the
license is required. Every person so licensed shall at the time of receiving such license, file a bond as
provided by state law.
B. Persons who engage in or carry on the business of lending money on mortgages, deposits or pledges
of wearing apparel, jewelry, ornaments, household goods or other personal property, or of purchasing such
property on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price, when the property so mortgaged,
pledged or purchased is deposited with the lender, must be licensed as pawnbrokers. This provision,
however, does not apply to loans made on stock, bonds, notes or other written or printed evidence of
ownership of property or of indebtedness to the holder or owner of such securities. (MGL c. 140, § 70 -
85)
32.2 INTEREST RATES
A. Licensed pawnbrokers may charge the following rates of interest:
(1) For loans up to and including $30: 2% per month (and each fraction thereof at the same rate).
(2) For loans over $30: 2% per month (and each fraction thereof at the same rate).
B. No such pawnbrokers shall charge or receive any greater rate of interest, and interest shall be
determined on the precise sum advanced by the lender.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 83
C. No pawnbroker shall make or receive any extra charge or fee for storage, care or safekeeping of any
goods, articles or things pawned with him. (MGL c. 140, § 78)
32.3. Police may enter and inspect premises and records.
Any officer of the Police Department may, at any time, enter upon any premises used by a licensed pawnbroker
for the purposes of his business, ascertain how he conducts his business and examine all articles taken in pawn or
kept or stored in or upon said premises, and all books and inventories shall be exhibited to any above named
whenever a demand shall be made for such exhibition. (MGL c. 140, § 73)(Penalty for refusal. MGL c. 140, §
74)
32.4. Numbering of pawned articles.
Every licensed pawnbroker shall, at the time of making any loan, attach a number to the article taken in pawn,
and shall make entry of such number in the book provided for by Section 32.5 (A).
32.5. Maintenance of records; contents; photo identification.
A. Every licensed pawnbroker shall keep a book of a style and size in which shall be legibly written
in ink, in the English language, at the time of making each loan, an account and description
including all distinguishing marks and numbers, penny weight, troy ounce, and or karat of the
goods (if applicable), articles or things pledged or pawned, the amount of money loaned thereon,
the day and hour when it was pawned, the rate of interest to be paid on such loan, the number of
such article as same, and shall attach a photo of said articles. No entry made in said book shall be
erased, obliterated or defaced. All transaction entries in said book shall be recorded on a form
prescribed by the Town of Winchendon.
B. Every pawnbroker shall photograph any person pawning or pledging articles and keep such
photographs with said books as part of his records. (MGL c. 140, § 79)
C. For all loans, every pawnbroker shall also require positive identification and record the type of
identification presented and record the date of birth from any person pawning or pledging any
article. Positive identification shall mean any picture identification card issued by a
governmental agency. Said identification shall be photocopied onto the form prescribed by the
Town of Winchendon. (May 21, 2012)
32.6. Pledge cards; contents; retention.
Each pledger shall be required by the pawnbroker to sign his name, age and address on a card (the prescribed
form). In the event that the pledger is unable to write, the pawnbroker shall fill in the name, age and address on
such card, together with a notation stating that the pledger was unable to do so. Such card (prescribed form)
shall be retained seven years in an alphabetical index file to be kept on the premises by the licensed
pawnbrokers.(May 21, 2012)
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 84
32.7. Copy of required record to pledger. Every pawnbroker shall, at the time of making such loan, deliver to
the person who pawns or pledges any goods, articles or things, a copy of the prescribed form signed by him,
containing the substance of the entry required to be made in his book by the provisions of Section 32.5 (A); and
no charge shall be made or required by any pawnbroker for any such copy of prescribed form. (MGL c. 140, §
80) (May 21, 2012)
32.8. Daily report to police. Every licensed pawnbroker shall deliver to the Winchendon Police Chief, every
day before the hour of 10:00 a.m., a legible and correct photocopy or electronic report of all transactions
recorded on said form prescribed by the Town of Winchendon containing an accurate description, including all
distinguishable marks along with serial, and model numbers, including penny weight, troy ounce, and or karat
if applicable, of all articles taken in pawn during the preceding business day, the respective numbers of such
articles as provided by Section 32.4, the amount loaned thereon, and the time when such articles were pawned.
If during the preceding day no articles have been taken in pawn by such pawnbroker, he shall make out and
deliver to the Police Chief before the hour of 10:00 a.m., a report of such fact. (May 21, 2012)
32.9. Posting requirements.
A. Every licensed pawnbroker shall post in a conspicuous place in his shop or office a copy of the
statutes, ordinances and police regulations relating to pawnbrokers, to be furnished by the Police Chief,
and shall put in some suitable and conspicuous place in his shop a sign having his name and occupation
legibly inscribed thereon in large letters.
B. No pawnbroker shall place or maintain any signs or devices upon or in connection with his licensed
premises indicating or tending to indicate that any form of business is conducted therein which he is
not legally authorized to pursue.
32.10. Hours of operation.
No pawnbroker shall have his shop open for the transaction of business, except between 8:00 in the morning and
9:00 in the evening of any weekday except Saturday, on which day such shop may be kept open from 8:00 in the
morning until 10:00 in the evening.
32.11. Disposition of pledged articles.
A. Articles deposited in pawn with a licensed pawnbroker shall, unless redeemed, be retained by him on
the premises occupied by him for his business for at least four months after the date of deposit.
B. After the expiration of the applicable period of time, he may sell the article by public auction, apply
the proceeds thereof in satisfaction of the debt or demand and the expense of the notice and sale, and pay
any surplus to the person entitled thereto on demand.
C. No such sale of any article which is not of a perishable nature shall be made unless not less than 10
days prior to the sale a written notice of the intended sale shall have been sent by registered mail to the
person entitled to the payment of any surplus as aforesaid, addressed to his residence, as appearing in the
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 85
records of such pawnbroker. Proof of registered mail shall be kept on file for one year after the date of
sale.
D. No article taken in pawn by such pawnbroker shall be disposed of otherwise than as above provided,
any agreement or contract between the parties thereto to the contrary notwithstanding.
E. Articles of personal apparel shall not be deemed to be of a perishable nature within the meaning of this
section. (MGL c. 140, § 71)
32.12. Prohibitions.
A. No pawnbroker shall make a loan, directly or indirectly, to a minor, knowing or having reason to
believe him to be such.
B. No pawnbroker shall loan money secured by deposit or pledge of a firearm, rifle, shotgun or machine
gun. (MGL c. 140, § 13JB)
32.13. Complaints; disciplinary action; hearing.
A. Complaints concerning licensed pawnbrokers shall be filed with the Board of Selectmen and
investigated by the Winchendon Police Chief. An investigation shall be made in all such instances.
In the event the Board of Selectmen determines that disciplinary action against a licensed pawnbroker
may be appropriate, the Board shall cause to be served upon the licensed pawnbroker notice as to the
time, date and place of hearing of the charge with a statement of the reasons for the proposed
disciplinary action. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the procedure established by the
Board.
The Board of Selectmen may, however, suspend or revoke a pawnbroker’s license without hearing if the
public health and safety so require. In such circumstances, the Board must forthwith give notice of the
suspension or revocation and serve the pawnbroker by certified mail or in hand with notice of the
opportunity for a hearing.
32.14. Suspension or revocation of license. The Board of Selectmen may suspend or revoke licenses provided
for by this bylaw for any cause which the Board of Selectmen deems sufficient. Offenses which may result in
the suspension or revocation of a pawnbroker’s license include but are not limited to the following:
A. A violation of any section of this bylaw;
B. A violation of any provision of the statutes regulating pawnbrokers;
C. A violation of any provisions of any other statue or applicable law.
Article 33
PROHIBITED MATERIALS BYLAW
(May 23, 2011)
1. No person, tenant or entity, corporate or otherwise, as owner(s) or one(s) in control of premises, shall keep
in the open in any area of the Town of Winchendon, any prohibited material, as the term is hereinafter
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 86
defined, for more than fourteen (14) consecutive calendar days without being licensed to do so under this
chapter.
a. “Prohibited material” shall be defined as, including but not limited to, abandoned, discarded, or unused
furniture, stoves, toilets, cabinets, scrap metal, lumber, concrete, asphalt, tin cans, rope rugs, batteries,
paper, trash, rubber debris, waste, and other old scrap ferrous or non-ferrous material, which is not being
used for its intended purpose.
2. A license to keep any prohibited material shall be requested by filing any application in writing for such
a license with the Board of Selectmen no later than fifteen (15) days after a citation has been issued. The
Selectmen shall hold a public hearing upon such a request within thirty (30) days of receipt of said
application, notice of which shall be published in a newspaper issued in Winchendon or a paper of general
circulation in Winchendon, at least three (3) days prior to the hearing. The applicant shall pay the cost of
the publishing.
3. The Selectmen may grant a license for up to one (1) year upon such condition(s) as the Selectmen deem
proper to keep such prohibited material in the open after a hearing has been held and the Selectmen
determine that the keeping of the same will not depreciate property value in the area, will not create a
hazard to the public safety, or will not become a public nuisance. Renewals of said license shall be granted
only after the procedure set forth is followed.
4. The application shall at his own expense, give notice of said hearing by mailing a notice of same prepared
by the Board of Selectmen to all parties of interest, meaning abutters, owners of land directly opposite on
any public or private street or way and abutters to the abutters within three hundred (300) feet of the
property line, all as they may appear on the most recent applicable tax list as certified by the Board of
Assessors. The Applicant shall submit an affidavit as to said notice. Renewals of said licenses shall be
granted only after the procedures set forth is followed.
5. Notwithstanding the aforesaid sections, no prohibited material shall be deemed to be “in the open” as the
phrase is used in Section 1, if it is totally screened from view of any public road or way, or any way which
the public has a right of access.
6. Conditions existing on the date of acceptance of this chapter which meet the definition of prohibited
material must be brought into compliance within thirty (30) days after said acceptance of this chapter.
Which meets the definition of prohibited material, must be brought into compliance within thirty (30) days
after said acceptance.
7. The Building Commissioner and Health Agent shall be charged with the interpretation and enforcement
of this Bylaw, and it may also be enforced by the Winchendon Police Department. Enforcement of this
chapter may be by criminal complaint, indictment, non-criminal disposition or appropriate civil
enforcement action. Selection of one method shall not preclude the selection of any method or remedy.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 87
8. Any person or entity who is found in violation of this chapter shall be liable for a fine of twenty-five
(25.00) dollars a day for the first five days and fifty ($50.00) dollars a day every day thereafter. The days
shall be counted commencing fifteen (15) days after the notice of violation is given.
9. Any clause, section or part of this chapter determined to be invalid by any judiciary for any reason, shall
be severable from any other clause, section, or part, without affecting the validity of that which remains.
10. Construction sites complying with the requirements of 780 CMR and MGL chapter 40, Section 54, are
exempt from the aforementioned, provided that all related construction debris is maintained in a controlled
fashion as determined by the Building Official.
ARTICLE 34
FUNERAL BUFFER ZONE BYLAW
(May 23, 20ll)
Section 1. Definitions
"Funeral" means a funeral, burial, ceremony, memorial service or procession held in connection with the burial
or cremation of the dead.
Section 2. Prohibitions No person may knowingly obstruct, hinder, impede, or block another person's entry
to or exit from a funeral.
No person may picket a funeral or engage in activities that are disruptive of a funeral, including making loud
and raucous noise which cause unreasonable distress to the persons attending or participating in the funeral,
directing abusive epithets or making any threatening gesture which the person knows or reasonably should
know is likely to provoke a violent reaction by another, within 500 feet of the property line of the residence,
cemetery, funeral home, church, synagogue or other establishment where the service is conducted or within 500
feet of a funeral or burial. The prohibition contained in this section shall be applicable to activities occurring
within one hour before a funeral, during a funeral, and within one hour after a funeral.
Section 3. Enforcement This bylaw may be enforced by the any Police Officer of the Town of Winchendon,
by any available means in law or equity, including but not limited to enforcement by noncriminal disposition
pursuant to G.L. c. 40, §21D. When enforced pursuant to G.L. c.40, §21, the penalty shall be $300.00. Each
day a violation exists shall constitute separate violation.
When enforced through noncriminal disposition, the penalties shall be as follows:
First violation: $100.00
Second violation: $200.00
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 88
Third and subsequent violations: $300.00
ARTICLE 35
STRETCH ENERGY CODE (5/20/2013)
Section 1 - Adoption The Town of Winchendon has adopted the provisions of 780 CMR 115.AA (i.e.,
Appendix 115.AA of the State Building Code or the “Stretch Energy Code”), as may be amended from
time to time, in place of the provisions set forth under 780 CMR 13.00, 34.00, 61.00 and 93.00.
Section 2 - Purpose The purpose of the Stretch Energy Code shall be to provide the Town with a more
energy efficient alternative to the base energy code otherwise set forth under the State Building Code.
ARTICLE 36
FUEL STORAGE SYSTEM REGULATION (5/12/2014)
Whereas, leaking fuel storage systems pose an immediate and serious threat to ground water, public and
private wells, and,
Whereas, the Town of Winchendon does not have records to locate all such systems installed within the Town,
Therefore, under Chapter 111, Section 31, of the Massachusetts General Laws, the Town of Winchendon hereby
adopts the following bylaw to protect the ground and surface waters from contamination with liquid toxic or
hazardous materials.
DEFINITION: “Toxic or hazardous materials” shall be defined as all liquid hydrocarbon products including,
but not limited to, gasoline, fuel and diesel oil, and any other toxic or corrosive chemicals, radioactive
materials or other substance controlled as being toxic or hazardous by the Division of Hazardous Waste of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, under the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 21C, Section
1, et. Seq.
The following regulations apply to all toxic or hazardous materials storage:
Section 1., Installation of Fuel Storage Tanks
1-1. Following the effective date of this regulation, the installation of all underground fuel, gasoline, or
o t her chemical storage tanks shall conform with the following criteria: In that the United States
Environmental Protection Agency designated the Town of Winchendon as overlying a sole source aquifer,
secondary containment of tank and piping and an approved in-tank and interstitial space monitoring system
shall be required for new or replacement tanks.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 89
1-2. Following the effective date of this regulation, all tanks installed above ground outside shall be of
material approved for outside use. All tanks shall be properly installed as per Massachusetts Fire Regulations
and manufacturer’s specifications, under the direction of the head of the Fire Department. Tanks shall be
approved design and protected from internal and external corrosion. The following tank construction systems
are considered to provide adequate corrosion protection: all fiberglass construction; steel with bonded fiberglass
or enamel coating and internal lining; and the Steel Tank Institute 3-Way Protection System. Any other system
must be shown to provide equivalent protection.
1-3. All tank installations within four feet of maximum high water table or within one hundred feet of a
surface water body or wetland shall be of fiberglass construction. The Fire Chief and the Board of Health Shall
determine if additional protective measures are necessary.
1-4. Underground storage tanks shall not be installed within Water Resource Districts or Zones of
Contributions of Public Water Supply Wells or within 150 feet of a private well.
Section 2., Tank Registration
The following regulations shall apply to A) all underground tanks containing toxic or hazardous materials as
defined above which are not currently regulated under 527 CMR 9.26 – Tanks and Containers, to B) all tanks
containing fuel oil, whose contents are used exclusively for consumption on the premises, and to C) farm and
residential tanks of 1,100 gallon capacity or less, used for storing motor fuel for non-commercial purposes.
2-1. Owners shall file with the Board of Health, within 30 days of the date of publishing of this regulation, the
size and type, age and location of each tank, and the type of fuel or chemical stored in them. Evidence of date
of purchase and installation, including Fire Department permit, if any, shall be included along with a sketch map
showing the location of such tanks on the property. Upon registering the tank with the Board of Health, the
tank owner will receive a permanent metal or plastic tag, embossed with a registration number unique to that
tank. This registration tag must be affixed to the fill pipe or in such a location as to be visible to any distributor
when filling the tank and to any inspector authorized by the Town.
2-2. Within 30 days of the date of the publishing of this regulation, every petroleum and other chemical
distributor, when filling an underground storage tank, shall note on the invoice or bill for the product delivered,
the registration number appearing on the tag affixed to the tank which was filled. Every petroleum and other
chemical distributor shall notify the Board of Health of the existence and location of any unregistered or
untagged tank which they are requested to fill. Such notification must be completed within two (2) working
days of the time the distributor discovers that the tank registration tag is not present.
2-3. Prior to the sale of a property containing an underground storage tank, the Fire Department must receive
from the current owner a change of ownership form for the registration of the underground storage tank. Such
form can be obtained from the Fire Department.
Section 3., Report of Leaks or Spills
3-1. Any person who is aware of a spill, loss of product, or unaccounted for increase in consumption which
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 90
may indicate a leak shall report such spill, loss or increase immediately to the head of the Fire Department and
to the Board of Health.
3-2. All leaking tanks must be emptied within 12 hours of leak detection, and removed in a time period to be
determined by the Fire Chief and the Board of Health.
3-3. All tanks shall be removed or secured as per Fire Department specifications at the owner’s expense within
six months following discontinuation of use.
Section 4., Tank Removal
4-1. All fuel, gasoline or other chemical tanks not regulated under 527 CMR 9.00 (farm or residential tanks of
1,100 gallons or less and underground tanks storing fuel for consumptive use at the property) in service on the
effective date of this regulation, shall be removed twenty-one (21) years after the date of installation. If the date
of installation is unknown, the tank shall be assumed to be twenty (20) years old. All underground storage tanks
currently subject to the removal regulation (21 years or older) must be removed within two (2) years of the date
the publishing of this regulation.
4-2. Prior to the removal of an underground storage tank governed by this regulation, the owner of shall first
obtain permit from the head of the Fire Department, pursuant to M.G.L., 148.
4-3. Any person granted a permit by the Marshall or the head of a local Fire Department to remove a tank
under the provisions of M.G.L., C. 148 or 527 CMR 9.00, shall within 72 hours provide the permit granting
authority with a receipt for delivery of said tank to the site designated on the permit.
4-4. Before any person is granted a permit by the Marshall or the head of a local Fire Department to remove a
tank under the provisions of M.G.L., C. 148 or 527 CMR 9.00, and said tank is not being transported to an
approved tank yard, the person requesting the permit shall provide the permit-granting authority with written
approval from the owner/manager of the disposal site. (Reference: 502 CMR 3.00 for tank removal and disposal
procedure).
Section 5.0., Costs
5-1. In every case, the owner shall assume responsibility for costs incurred necessary to comply with this
regulation.
Section 6.0., Variances
6-1. Variances from this regulation may be granted by the Board of Health after a hearing at which the applicant
establishes the following: (1) the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice: and (2) installation or use
of an underground storage tank will not adversely affect public or private water resources. In granting a
variance, the Board will take into consideration the direction of the groundwater flow, soil conditions, depth
to groundwater, size, shape and slope of the lot, and existing and known future water supplies.
Section 7.0., Severability
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 91
7-1. Provisions of this regulation are severable and if any provision hereof shall be held invalid under any
circumstances, such invalidity shall not affect any other provisions or circumstances.
* A failure to comply with any element of this regulation will result in the levy of a fine of $50.00.
Each 24-hour period of non-compliance shall constitute a separate offense. (submitted by the Town Manager)
ARTICLE 37
TOWN OF WINCHENDON AUDIT COMMITTEE
(ATM May 18, 2015)
1. There shall be a five (5) member Audit Committee in the Town of Winchendon comprised of one (1)
member of the Board of Selectmen (appointed by the Board of Selectmen), one (1) member of the Finance
Committee (appointed by the Finance Committee), one (1) member of the School Committee (appointed
by the School Committee) and two (2) registered voters in the town who have finance experience,
preferably municipal (appointed by a majority vote of the three Board and Committee member
appointees).
2. Administrative support staff to the Audit Committee shall be provided by the Town Manager, the Town
Accountant, the Superintendent of Schools and the School Business Manager.
3. The Audit Committee shall solicit, interview and recommend to the Board of Selectmen the firm of
independent auditors that is to audit and report on the financial statements issued by the Town. The Audit
Committee shall review the audit plan with the independent auditors and upon completion of the audit,
meet with the independent auditors to discuss the results of the audit and the annual financial reports.
4. The Audit Committee shall transmit a copy of the completed annual audited financials and management
letter report to the Board of Selectmen, the Finance Committee and the School Committee, and with the
assistance from the auditing firm, shall present the results of the annual audited financials and management
letter report to a jointly held public meeting of the Board of Selectmen, the School Committee and the
Finance Committee.
Funding for the annual independent audit shall be budgeted in the Finance Committee annual budget.
ARTICLE 38
TOWN OF WINCHENDON GROUP INSURANCE AND BENEFIT COMMITTEE
(ATM May 18, 2015)
1. There shall be a Group Insurance and Benefit Committee in the Town of Winchendon comprised of one
(1) member of the Board of Selectmen (appointed by the Board of Selectmen), one (1) member of the
Finance Committee (appointed by the Finance Committee), one (1) member of the School Committee
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 92
(appointed by the School Committee) and two (2) registered voters in the town who have group insurance
and benefit experience, preferably municipal (appointed by a majority vote of the three Board and
Committee member appointees).
2. Administrative support staff to the Group Insurance and Benefit Committee shall be provided by the Town
Manager, the Town Accountant, the Town Treasurer-Collector, the Superintendent of Schools and the
School Business Manager.
3. The Group Insurance and Benefit Committee shall annually, on or before December 31st, review the
Town’s group insurance and benefit plan offerings and shall make written recommendations to the Town
Manager relative to the following:
o Group Health Insurance Programs
o Group Dental Insurance Programs
o Group Life Insurance Programs
o Optional Life Insurance Programs
o Optional Disability Insurance Programs
o Deferred Compensation Programs; and
o OBRA Defined Contribution Plan for part-time, temporary and seasonal employees who are not
eligible to join the retirement plans
4. One member of the Group Insurance and Benefit Committee, selected by the Committee, shall serve as a
non-voting member on and liaison to the Town’s Insurance Advisory Committee (IAC).
Article 39
Revolving Funds
A. There are hereby established in the Town of Winchendon pursuant to the provisions of G.L. c.44,
§53E½, the following Revolving Funds, from which the specified department head, board, committee,
or officer may incur liabilities against and spend monies from without appropriation in accordance with
the limitations set forth in this by-law.
B. Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are paid from the fund shall also be paid
from the fund.
C. No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of the fund.
D. The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount authorized by Annual Town
Meeting or any increase therein as may later be authorized by the Board of Selectmen and Finance
Committee in accordance with G.L. c.44, §53E½.
E. Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this by-law shall be credited to the
General Fund.
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 93
F. Authorized Revolving Funds
REVOLVING
FUND
AUTHORITY
TO SPEND
FUND
REVENUE
SOURCES
USE OF FUNDS
1
Agricultural
Commission
Fees
Agricultural
Commission
Agricultural
programming fees
Costs in connection with
its official responsibilities
under local by-laws,
including but not limited
to part-time staff support,
postage, posting and
publishing, and
consultants
2
Planning and
Development
Plotter Fees
Planning
Director
Fees for large-format
copier and plotter
Any lawful purpose
related to large-format
copier and plotter
3.
Library Copy
Fees
Beal’s
Memorial
Library Director
or Library
Trustees
Fees for use of
Library copiers,
printers and fax
machines
Maintenance and supply
costs for copiers, printers
and fax machines
4. Library Materials
Beal’s
Memorial
Library Director
or Library
Trustees
Fees for overdue, lost
and/or damaged
Library materials
Repair or replacement of
Library materials
5.
Community
Development
Block Grant
Program Income
Town Manager
Housing Rehab Loan
Repayments
Professional Services
G. Procedures and Reports. Except as provided in General Laws Chapter 44, §53E½ and this by-law, all
applicable state and local laws and regulations that govern the receipt, custody, expenditure and payment
of town funds shall apply to the use of revolving funds established and authorized by this by-law.
And, further, to establish the following fiscal year spending limit for such funds:
1. Agricultural Commission Fees - $20,000
2. Planning and Development Plotter Fees - $20,000
3. Library Copy Fees - $8,000
BYLAWS OF THE TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Page 94
4. Library Materials - $8,000
ARTICLE 40
Limitation on Number of Recreational Marijuana Retail
Establishments
Preamble (5.21.18)
M.G.L. c.94G does not require a vote of the voters to approve any limitation on the
number of recreational marijuana establishments that is at or above the number of medical
marijuana treatment centers registered to operate in the municipality or equal to or greater
than 20% of the licenses issued for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages not to be drunk
on the premises. Currently, there are seven (7) licenses issued for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages not to be drunk on the premises in Winchendon.
Limitation
No more than three (3) recreational marijuana retail establishments shall be permitted to
be located in the Town of Winchendon. Licensing Authority shall be the Board of
Selectmen.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
1
Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20 ,2019
Axiopower.ca 123rf.com
Winchendon, Massachusetts
Zoning Bylaw
Department of Planning and Development
Town Hall, 109 Front Street
Winchendon, MA 01475
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
2
DISCLAIMER
This publication of the Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw includes amendments as they are adopted, and are so noted.
However, it is not practically possible to keep any compilation of law perfectly current; therefore, you are advised to
independently confirm the status of any particular article or section of this bylaw.
No misprint or omission in this publication shall affect the validity of any bylaw, rule or regulation duly enacted by the
Town or any Town board, department or officer.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article 1: Introduction .............................................................................................. 6
1.1 Purpose and Spirit of the Bylaw ......................................................................................6
1.2 Authority ..........................................................................................................................6
1.3 Title ..................................................................................................................................7
1.4 Basic Scope and Application ...........................................................................................7
1.5 Communication ................................................................................................................7
Article 2: Definitions ................................................................................................. 8
Article 3: Establishment of Zoning Districts .......................................................... 19
3.1 Division into Districts ......................................................................................................19
3.2 Location of Districts; Zoning Map ..................................................................................20
3.3 Lots Split in Separate Districts ........................................................................................20
3.4 Location of Superimposed District; Map References ......................................................21
3.5 Historic District ................................................................................................................21
Article 4: Special Zoning Districts .......................................................................... 22
4.1 Ice Racing District ...........................................................................................................22
4.2 Mill Conversion Overlay District (MCOD) .....................................................................23
4.3 Wetlands Conservancy District ........................................................................................30
4.4 Flood Plain Conservancy Districts...................................................................................31
4.5 Groundwater Protection Overlay District ........................................................................32
4.6 Golf/Residential Overlay District (GROD) .....................................................................35
4.7 Planned Development District .........................................................................................43
4.8 Gateway Overlay District ................................................................................................45
4.9 Route 140 Corridor Overlay District…………………………………………………...49
Article 5: Use Regulations ........................................................................................ 51
5.1 Basic Requirements .........................................................................................................50
5.2 Schedule of Use Regulations ...........................................................................................51
Article 6: Non-Conforming and Special Buildings and Uses ................................ 60
6.1 Applicability ....................................................................................................................61
6.2 Non-Conforming Uses .....................................................................................................61
6.3 Accessory Uses and Dwellings ........................................................................................63
6.4 Parking of Heavy Vehicles ..............................................................................................64
6.5 Home Based Business ......................................................................................................64
6.6 Swimming Pools .............................................................................................................65
6.7 Mobile Home Parks and Courts .......................................................................................65
6.8 Wireless Communications Facilities ................................................................................65
6.9 Adult Entertainment .........................................................................................................68
6.10 Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)……...………………...………………....70
6.11 Solar Energy Collection Systems ..................................................................................76
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
4
6.12 Medical/Adult Use Marijuana Facilities and the Medical/Adult Use Marijuana Retail
Overlay District………………………………………………………………………..78
Article 7: Site Considerations-Dimensional and Density Regulations ................. 84
7.1 Purpose .............................................................................................................................84
7.2 Basic Requirements .........................................................................................................85
7.3 Reduced Frontage Lots ....................................................................................................86
7.4 Access to Lot...………………………………………………………………….………88
Article 8: Traffic, Parking and Circulation Regulations ...................................... 89
8.1 General Requirements ......................................................................................................89
8.2 Parking Location ..............................................................................................................89
8.3 Number of Parking Spaces Required ...............................................................................90
8.4 Size and Number of Spaces .............................................................................................90
8.5 Design Requirements .......................................................................................................91
8.6 Loading and Unloading Requirements ............................................................................91
8.7 Stacking Regulations for Drive-Up and Drive-Through Lines........................................91
8.8 Driveway Standards .........................................................................................................92
8.9 Traffic Generation ............................................................................................................93
8.10 Other Means of Access ..................................................................................................93
Article 9: Signs .......................................................................................................... 94
9.1 Purpose .............................................................................................................................94
9.2 General Provisions ...........................................................................................................94
9.3 Temporary Signs ..............................................................................................................95
9.4 Signs Permitted in all Zones ............................................................................................95
9.5 Signs Prohibited in all Zones ...........................................................................................96
9.6 Specifications Applying to all Signs ................................................................................96
9.7 Landscape Requirements .................................................................................................97
9.8 Off Premise Directional Signs .........................................................................................97
9.9 Signs in Residential Zones ...............................................................................................98
9.10 Signs Allowed in the C-2 & PD Districts ......................................................................98
9.11 Signs Allowed in C-1 & I Districts ................................................................................99
9.12 Nonconforming Signs………………………………………………………………….99
Article 10: Soil, Vegetation, Rock and Gravel Removal ………………………100
10.1 Purpose ............................................................................................................................100
10.2 General Removal Provisions...........................................................................................100
10.3 Application for Soil, Vegetation, Rock and Gravel Removal ........................................100
10.4 Plan Distribution .............................................................................................................101
10.5 Permit for Soil, Vegetation, Rock and Gravel Removal .................................................101
10.6 Removal Incidental to Development, Construction or Improvement. ............................102
10.7 Operation Standards for Removal and Restoration ........................................................102
10.8 Restoration Standards .....................................................................................................102
10.9 Security Requirements ....................................................................................................102
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
5
Article 11: Residential Development…………………………………………....105
11.1 Purpose……………………………………………………………………………….105
11.2 Applicability………………………………………………………………………….105
11.3 Exceptions……………………………………………………………………………105
11.4 Open Space Requirements……………………………………………………………106
11.5 Use of the Dedicated Open Space……………………………………………………106
11.6 Restrictions on the Use of Dedicated Open Space…………………………………...107
11.7 Specific Uses Allowed in the Dedicated Open Space…………………………...…...107
11.8 Improvements that may be allowed by Special Permit……………………………….107
11.9 Legal Protection Requirements……………………………………………………….108
11.10 Maximum Number of Dwelling Units………………………………………………108
11.11 Development Procedures……………………………………………………………109
11.12 Design Standards……………………………………………………………………110
11.13 Approval of the Plan………………………………………………………………...111
Article 12: Site Plan Review....................................................................................113
12.1 Purpose ...........................................................................................................................113
12.2 Projects Requiring Site Plan Review .............................................................................113
12.3 Exemptions from Site Plan Review ...............................................................................113
12.4 Required Submittals .......................................................................................................114
12.5 Procedure .......................................................................................................................114
12.6 Site Plan Evaluation .......................................................................................................114
12.7 Planning Board Regulations ..........................................................................................117
12.8 Enforcement ...................................................................................................................117
12.9 Violations .......................................................................................................................117
Article 13: Administration, Enforcement and Amendment............................... 119
13.1 Effective Date ................................................................................................................119
13.2 Severability of Bylaw ....................................................................................................119
13.3 Bylaw Interpretation ......................................................................................................119
13.4 Enforcement ...................................................................................................................119
13.5 Building Permits ............................................................................................................119
13.6 Board of Appeals ...........................................................................................................119
13.7 Scheduled Development ................................................................................................120
13.8 Penalties .........................................................................................................................121
13.9 Amendment ....................................................................................................................121
13.10 Planning Board Associate Member .............................................................................121
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
6
ARTICLE 1. INTRODUCTION (amended 5/19/08)
1.1 PURPOSE AND SPIRIT OF THE BYLAW
In the early years of the United States, the perception of the vast spaces of the country allowed landowners in their log
cabins remote from civilization to do pretty much as they pleased with their properties, and zoning was not of much
interest. However, the desire to have access to the goods, services and functions of civilization (e.g. like water, sewage,
healthcare and so forth) overcame the desire for unfettered freedom. As long as individual pursuit of goods, services and
functions did not impact their neighbors any more than their neighbors’ pursuit, all was relatively copasetic. People
cooperated with their neighbors before building or planting for the sake of community.
Unfortunately over time, People began to abuse the cooperative spirit for individual gain. Polluting factories were
constructed in the middle of dense urban residential area. Zoning was first enacted to counteract the health implications
of these incompatible land-uses in 19th century England. Zoning has thus been inclined to regulate land-uses rather than
the direct cause of the pollution or impact.
In more recent times, the sophistication of technology has enabled zoning to directly manage the actual impacts and
performance of a given landowner or user upon his/her neighbors, recognizing this as more directly what is objectionable
to the neighborhood. One could imagine, for instance, a beautiful clock factory building that would not pollute or
adversely affect its neighbors and might in fact employ much of the neighborhood within walking distance increasing
both land appeal and value, but zoning by land-use alone would probably disallow this type of admittedly-rare
arrangement.
MISSION:
This bylaw is thus enacted to encourage the most appropriate use and performance of land throughout the Town, to
eliminate or mitigate the adverse impacts of this use, to conserve the value of land and buildings, to preserve and protect
lakes, streams, wetlands, aquifers, watersheds and other environmental resources of the Town, to provide careful
recognition of variable soil conditions throughout the Town, to prevent overcrowding of land, to preserve the historical
character of the Town and to preserve and increase amenities so that all citizens shall have access to the fruits of living in
Winchendon and to a quality of life that they choose without preventing their neighbors from doing the same.
1.1.1 It is the intention of this bylaw to encourage practices which will make Winchendon a sustainable
community. These include practices that will contribute to the reduction of global warming, discourage the generation of
greenhouse gases and encourage their absorption, discourage unnecessary energy use, and encourage the use of
renewable energy sources.
This bylaw is enacted with reasonable consideration for the Town’s unique physical characteristics and its unique
suitability for particular uses with a view toward providing direction to the land development policies and proposals of
the Planning Board, including making the Town of Winchendon a more viable and more pleasant community in which to
live, work and play, consistent with the objectives laid forth in the master plan for the Town of Winchendon, including
its rural character and easy access to modern amenities.
1.2 AUTHORITY
This bylaw is enacted under rights of local self-government granted by the Massachusetts Constitution and by the
authority granted under Chapter 40A of the General Laws of Massachusetts and any amendment thereto.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
7
1.3 TITLE
This bylaw shall be known and may be cited by the title: “Winchendon , Massachusetts Zoning Bylaw.”
1.4 BASIC SCOPE AND APPLICATION
All buildings and structures thereafter constructed, reconstructed, altered, enlarged or moved, and all uses of land,
premises, buildings and structures within the Town of Winchendon shall be in conformance with the provisions of this
bylaw. Effective date should be noted for general purposes and specific deviations accepted as noted.
1.5 COMMUNICATION
The structure of the bylaw is as follows: Article 1 serves as the introduction to the bylaw. Article 2 contains the
definitions of terms used in the bylaw. Articles 3 and 4 concern zoning districts and special zoning districts,
respectively. Article 5 deals with principal land uses. Article 6 takes up accessory, non-conforming and other special
buildings and uses. Articles 7-10 deal with site considerations. Article 7 deals with dimensional and
density requirements for lot layouts. Article 8 treats parking and traffic considerations. Article 9 discusses signage.
Article 10 deals with the removal and handling of natural materials on a given site. Article 11 provides a flexible means
for residential development while also preserving open space in conformity with the objectives of the Master Plan.
Article 12 deals with on-site considerations through requirements for site plan approval. Finally, Article 13 deals with
the remaining legal and administrative issues.
The Planning Board is authorized, after a public hearing as provided in section 11 of chapter 40A of the Massachusetts
General Laws, to adopt by simple majority vote, appendices that may be included after this bylaw. These will not be
legally binding but will serve as clarifications and guidelines for those interpreting the bylaws. The appendices may
originate from material that changes over time, such as the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) tables.
Developers should make sure to use the most up to date version of the sources referenced.
The Department of Planning and Development shall keep up-to-date copies of this zoning bylaw available to and
accessible by all the citizens. Copies shall be available for sale. Every attempt, within reason and within reasonable cost,
shall be made so that such copies are identical to the definitive reference in the town clerk's office at the Town Hall.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
8
ARTICLE 2 DEFINITIONS
This section is intended to provide definitions of terms used in the bylaw that might require clarification or
might have unusual or restrictive usage or meaning specific to urban planning, zoning or this bylaw in
particular.
ACCESS: An unobstructed means of vehicular entry to or exit from a lot.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate or secondary building situated on the same lot or parcel with a
principal building, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building or land use. (SEE
FIGURE A.6.3)
ACCESSORY APARTMENT: A dwelling unit constructed within an existing house. It is a unit
containing a bathroom (a minimum of a toilet, wash basin, and shower), kitchen and living/bedroom
space. An accessory apartment must be subordinate to the principal household and must have an
entrance-exit way independent of the principal household.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: A separate, complete housekeeping unit with a separate entrance,
kitchen, sleeping area, and bathroom (a minimum of a toilet, wash basin, and shower) which is an
attached or detached extension to an existing single-family structure.
ACCESSORY USE: A use subordinate to and customarily incidental to the principal use.
ADDITION: Any construction which increases the size of a structure or building in terms of site coverage,
height, length, width or gross floor area.
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT: Establishment which features entertainment or materials of or relating to “sexual
conduct”, “nudity” or other “matter”, as these terms are defined in Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 272,
Section 31.Includes Adult Live Entertainment, Motion Picture Theater, Retail and other Adult uses.
OBSCENE ENTERTAINMENT: All entertainment which may be considered “obscene” as this term
is defined by Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 272, Section 31.
ANIMAL FEED LOT: A plot of land of which ten (10) or more livestock per acre are kept for the purposes of
feeding.
ANTENNA/WIRELESS DEVICE: See WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
APARTMENT: See DWELLING
APPLICANT: A person or persons, including a corporation, trust, or other legal entity, who applies for
issuance of a permit in accordance with this bylaw.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: A special combination of housing, supportive services, personalized
assistance, and health care designed to respond to the individual needs of those who need help with activities of
daily living. Such a facility may include a central or private kitchen, dining, recreational, and other facilities,
with separate bedrooms or living quarters, where the emphasis of the facility remains residential.
AUCTION – See GALLERY
AUTO BODY SHOP: A facility, which provides collision repair services, including body frame straightening,
replacement of damaged parts, and painting.
AQUIFER: A geological formation, group of formations or part of a formation which contains sufficient
saturated permeable material to yield significant quantities of potable groundwater to public or private wells.
BED AND BREAKFAST: See COUNTRY INN
BEDROOM: A separate room intended for, or customarily used for, sleeping.
BIG BOX RETAIL: A retail facility, usually a chain store, with a floor area greater than 15,000 sq. ft. The
facility is normally a single story box-shaped building with a large parking lot.
BOARD, PLANNING BOARD: The Planning Board of the Town of Winchendon.
BOARDING HOUSE: Any dwelling in which more than three persons not members of the family reside on the
premises, either individually or as families, are housed or lodged for hire with or without meals. See dwelling.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
9
BUFFER ZONE: A strip of land, identified in the zoning bylaw, established to protect one type of land use
from another. An example is a dense, wide screen of vegetation around a commercial or industrial area to
insulate the commercial or industrial area from an adjacent but incompatible residential area.
BUILDING: Any structure erected for the support, shelter or use of animals, goods, persons or property.
BUILDING COVERAGE: A percentage figure referring to that portion of a lot covered only with principal
and accessory buildings.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: Building Official empowered to enforce Massachusetts State Building Code and
also construed to be the Building Commissioner for Winchendon.
BURDEN: The undue externalization of costs from where they are incurred, the raising of costs to the Town or
other entities without paying for those costs over time to cover the full and incidental costs incurred, including
imputed value loss based on undesirable or inappropriate development and extra maintenance or security costs
associated with development.
BUSINESS CENTER: The following three locations are deemed to be business centers: Corner of Central
Street and Grove Street; Corner of Main Street and Alger Street; Corner of Glenallan Street and Maple Street.
CAMPGROUND: An area or place operated commercially and used for a camp, camping or for a camp
meeting.
CARRIER: See WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
CO-LOCATION: See WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
CONSTRAINTS: Limitations
CONDOMINIUM: A multiple dwelling or development containing individually owned dwelling units and
jointly owned and shared areas and facilities maintained by a homeowners’ association. The homeowners’
association is subject to the provisions of applicable state and local laws.
CONFORMING USE: The use of buildings, structures or land which fully meets the use, density and
dimensional requirements of the zoning district wherein located.
CONTIGUOUS: Contiguous means connected. In the case of required open space the connection shall be not
less than 100 feet wide. Open space will be considered connected if it is separated by a roadway or accessory
amenity.
CONTRACTOR' S YARD - A facility used for the provision of general contracting services associated
with business which may include office and workshop areas and areas for the storage of equipment,
including but not limited to motorized vehicles, machinery, and/or materials used in association with the
contractor’s business.
CONVENIENCE STORE: Any retail establishment offering for sale a limited line of groceries and household
items intended for the convenience of the neighborhood.
CONVERSION: Changing the original purpose of a building to a different use.
COUNTRY INN: Premises with individual sleeping or dwelling units, with a common kitchen and dining area
for all guests.
COVENANT: A private legal agreement on the use of land, contained in the deed to the property or otherwise
formally recorded (cf. constraints and restrictions)
DEDICATION: The transfer of property interests from private to public ownership for a public purpose. The
transfer may be of fee-simple interest or of an other-than-fee interest, including an easement.
DENSITY, GROSS: The quotient of the total number of dwelling units divided by the area of a site.
DISPOSAL: The deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, incineration or placing of any hazardous
material into or on any land or water so that such hazardous material or any constituent thereof may enter the
environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwater.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
10
DRAINAGE: The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading or other means.
Drainage includes the control of runoff to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after development
and includes the means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof which is designated or used for residential purposes.
APARTMENT: A dwelling unit in a building.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY ATTACHED: Three (3) or more adjoining dwelling units. (SEE FIGURE
A.3.1.1)
DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY APARTMENTS: A building with three or more apartments. See
APARTMENT. (SEE FIGURE A.3.1.1)
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED: A dwelling designed for and occupied by not more than one
(l) family and having no roof, wall or floor in common with any other dwelling unit. (SEE FIGURE A.3.1.1)
DWELLING UNIT: A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one family including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
EFFICIENCY UNIT: A single dwelling unit providing living quarters for not more than two persons.
EASEMENT: Authorization by a property owner for use by another for a specified purpose of any designated
part of his/her property.
EROSION: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice and/or gravity.
EXTENSIVE USE: Large scale, expansive, outdoor use of land associated with agriculture, conservation or
recreation.
EXTERIOR STORAGE: Outdoor storage of fuel, raw materials, products and equipment. In the case of
lumberyards, exterior storage includes all impervious materials stored outdoors. In the case of truck terminals,
exterior storage includes all trucks, truck beds and truck trailers stored outdoors.
FAMILY: Any number of persons living together under one head as a single housekeeping unit and including
not more than three (3) persons not related by blood, adoption, marriage or other legal bonding (e.g. foster care)
to the family head.
FABRICATION - Manufacturing Process in which an item is made (fabricated) from raw or semi-finished
materials instead of being assembled from ready-made component parts. Product may be part of or a
finished item.
FILLING: The depositing on land, whether submerged or not, of sand, gravel, earth or other materials of any
composition whatsoever.
FLOODPLAIN: Floodplains may be either riverine or inland depressional areas. Riverine floodplains are those
areas contiguous with a lake, pond, stream, river or river bed whose elevation is greater than the normal water
pool elevation but equal to or lower than the projected 100-year flood elevation. Inland depressional floodplains
are floodplains not associated with a stream system but which are low points to which surrounding lands drain.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross floor area for each of a building’s stories measured from the exterior
limits of the faces of the structure, but not including unfinished basements and attics.
GALLERY (AUCTION): Site open to the public for use, display and/or sales of art, furniture, and other
goods, sold or auctioned.
GARAGE, COMMERCIAL: A deck or building (or part thereof) used or intended to be used for the parking
and storage of any number of motor vehicles for a fee.
GAS STATION: A facility limited to retail sales to the public of gasoline, motor oil, lubricants, motor fuels,
travel aides, and minor automobile accessories. In addition, such a facility may provide vehicle servicing,
minor repairs, and maintenance, but not reconditioning of motor vehicles, collision services such as body, frame
or fender straightening and repair, or painting of automobiles (cf. convenience store).
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A building (or part thereof) used or intended to be used for the parking and storage of
not more than four (4) motor vehicles.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
11
GO-CART: A four-wheeled, SINGLE OCCUPANT vehicle, which is not more than 74 inches long, with tires
not larger than 12 inches in external diameter, and powered by an internal combustion engine not greater than
300 cubic centimeters (“300 cc”) displacement. So called all-terrain vehicles are excluded from this definition.
GO-CART / OFF-ROAD MOTORCYCLE RACETRACK: A facility for competition and use of go-carts and
off-road motorcycles.
GROUNDWATER: All the free flowing water beneath the surface of the ground.
GVW - The gross vehicle weight rating established by a manufacturer when applied to a motor vehicle,
trailer, semi-trailer or semi-trailer unit, including the gross combination weight rating, if any, when
applied to a semi-trailer unit or to a tractor-trailer combination.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or combination of substances that because of quantity,
concentration or physical chemical or infectious characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard
to water supplies or to human health if disposed of into or on any land or water in this Town. Any substance
deemed a “hazardous waste” in Mass. General Laws Chapter 21C shall also be deemed a hazardous material for
the purposes of this bylaw.
HEIGHT OF STRUCTURE: The vertical distance measured from the mean ground elevation to the highest
point of the structure.
HOME BASED BUSINESS: A business, profession, occupation or trade conducted for gain or support and
located entirely within a residential building, or a structural accessory thereto, which use is accessory, incidental
and secondary to the use of the building for dwelling purposes and does not change the essential residential
character or appearance of such a building.
HOTEL: Premises used as individual sleeping or dwelling units without kitchens, with primary access to each
unit through enclosed corridors.
HYDROPOWER - Power derived from the force of energy of moving water
ILLUMINATION, EXTERNAL: a projecting spotlight onto the sign, rather than illuminated from within.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any hard surfaced, man-made area that does not readily absorb or retain water.
This includes but is not limited to building roofs, parking and driveway areas, graveled areas, sidewalks, and
paved recreation areas.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE, ON LOT: The total amount of impervious surface, which is present on a lot.
INFILL: Development within an existing urban fabric or within similar existing development
INTENSITY: The density or degree to which access to services and functions is available in a given location,
e.g. Main Street has a relatively high intensity and a large rural farm has a low intensity.
INTENSIVE USE: A use consisting of or requiring high access to resources such as delivery trucks, traffic,
people and so forth, probably producing significantly more noise, light, traffic and other impacts than
residential.
INTERIOR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY: See WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
JUNK: Any article or material or collection thereof, which is worn out, cast off or discarded and which is ready
for destruction or has been collected or stored for salvage or recycling. Any article or material which unaltered
or unchanged, or with only minimal reconditioning can be used for its original purpose as readily as when new
shall not be considered junk.
JUNK YARD: The use of any area of any lot, whether inside or outside a building, for the storage, keeping or
abandonment of junk or scrap or discarded materials or the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of
automobile(s) or other vehicle(s) or machinery or parts thereof.
KENNEL STRUCTURE: A structure which consists of a building, other than a dwelling, and/or one or more
fenced enclosures where pets (dogs, cats, etc.) are kept. A “kennel” as used in the general bylaws or in Chapter
140 of the Massachusetts General Laws is not regulated by the zoning bylaw and is not the same as a “kennel
structure” as used in the zoning bylaw.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
12
KENNEL STRUCTURE, COMMERCIAL: A structure where pets (dogs, cats, etc.) owned by a
nonresident are temporarily boarded for hire.
KENNEL STRUCTURE, HOBBY : A kennel structure which is accessory to a dwelling where pets
are kept for the personal enjoyment of the occupants of the residence and commercial gain is not the
primary objective.
KENNEL STRUCTURE, NON-PROFIT: A kennel structure where animals (dogs, cats, etc.) are
boarded by a non-profit [501c3] animal rescue league or similar organization.
LAND TRANSPORTATION PASSENGER TERMINAL FACILITY: A facility at which passengers may
board or alight from vehicles such as taxis, busses or limousines. Such facility may provide accessory services
including waiting rooms, ticket sales, baggage handling, handling small amounts of goods carried on vehicles
which primarily carry passengers, parking, and other amenities.
LEACHING WASTES: Waste materials, including solid wastes, sewage sludge and agricultural wastes that are
capable of releasing water-borne contaminants to the surrounding environment.
LICENSE GRANTED UNDER MA GENERAL LAW CHAPTER 140 SEC 59 & 59A -
Class 1 – Refer to MGL Chapter 140 Section 58
Class 2 –Refer to MGL Chapter 140 Section 58
Class 3 - Refer to MGL Chapter 140 Section 58
LOT: A continuous parcel of land undivided by any street or private road. (SEE FIGURE A.7.2.1)
LOT AREA: The area contained within the boundary lines of a lot. (SEE FIGURE A.7.2.1)
LOT FRONTAGE: Lot width measured at the street lot line and providing access to the lot. When a lot has
more than one street lot line, the full lot width shall be required from at least one such street line. (SEE FIGURE
A.7.2.1)
LOT LINE: A line bounding a lot, which divides one lot from another or from a street or any other public or
private space. (SEE FIGURE A.7.2.3)
LOT LINE, REAR: That lot line which is most nearly parallel to and most distant from the front lot line of
the lot; in case of an irregular, triangular or gore-shaped lot, a line twenty (20) feet in length, entirely within
the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from, the front line shall be considered to be the rear
lot line. (SEE FIGURE A.7.2.3)
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. (SEE FIGURE A.7.2.3)
MAJOR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY: See WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
MANUFACTURING, GENERAL:
1) The mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the
assembling of component parts, the creation of products, and the blending of materials including but
not limited to oils, plastics, resins, etc.
2.) Fabrication of raw materials or assembly of parts or materials fabricated offsite.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT:
1) The manufacturing, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts,
including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products, and incidental
storage, sales and distribution of such products, provided all manufacturing activities are contained
entirely within a building and noise, odor, smoke, heat, glare and vibration resulting from the
manufacturing activity are confined entirely within the building.
2.) The processing or fabrication of materials or products where no process involved will produce noise,
vibration, air pollution, fire hazard, or noxious emission which will disturb or endanger neighboring
properties.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
13
MILL CONVERSION PROJECT (MCP): The conversion of an existing mill or portion thereof, to a mixture of
residential and nonresidential uses as provided under section 4.2.
MINIATURE GOLF COURSE: A novelty version of golf played with a putter and a golf ball on a miniature
course, typically with artificial playing surfaces, and including obstacles such as bridges and tunnels.
MINING OF LAND: The removal or relocation of geological materials such as topsoil, sand and gravel,
metallic ores and bedrock.
MIXED USE ZONING: Zoning which permits a combination of usually separated uses within a single
development.
MOBILE HOME: A structure designed as a dwelling unit for living purposes, capable of being moved on its
own wheels by a towing vehicle fixed to a temporary site on wheels, or fixed without wheels to a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Premises, which have been planned and improved for the placement of two or more
mobile homes for non-transient use.
MOTEL: Premises used as individual sleeping or dwelling units without kitchens, with primary access from
each unit directly outdoors. The building or group of buildings may be either detached or in connected units.
The term “motel” includes buildings designated as tourist courts, motor lodges, cabins and by similar
appellations.
MOTOR VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT SALES - Salesroom and related facilities, including but not limited to
open-air display, for the sale or lease of automobiles, motorcycles, recreational vehicles and similar vehicles,
boats, or light industrial or farm equipment.
MOTOR VEHICLE: All vehicles constructed and designed for propulsion by power other than muscular
power including such vehicles when pulled or towed by another motor vehicle, except railroad and railway
cars, vehicles operated by the system known as trolley motor or trackless trolley and shall not include
motorized bicycles.
MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLING/STRUCTURE: A building containing 3 or more adjoining Dwellings
Units.
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES: Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department, or board duly authorized to
furnish, and furnishing under state or municipal regulations to the public, electricity, gas, steam,
communication, telegraph, transportation or water, or the services provided by such entities.
MUSEUM: An institution devoted to the procurement, care and display of objects of lasting historical interest
or value. In the normal course of its operations, a museum can be expected to host openings, small receptions,
collations and similar events with or without charging a fee.
NONCONFORMITIES: Existing uses, structures, and/or lots that were legally established prior to the
existence or change(s) in the zoning bylaw but which do not comply with currently existing zoning bylaw
standards.
NUISANCE: Any adverse uses, infringements or impacts of land use or performance. (APPENDIX F)
NURSERY: An enterprise which conducts the retail and wholesale sale of plants grown on the site, as well as
accessory items (but not power equipment such as gas or electric lawnmowers and farm implements) directly
related to their care and maintenance. The accessory items normally sold are clay pots, potting soil, fertilizers,
insecticides, hanging baskets, rakes and shovels, and similar items.
OBSCENE ENTERTAINMENT: see adult establishment.
OFFICE BUILDING: A building used primarily for offices that may include ancillary services for office
OPEN-AIR SALVAGE YARD - Open-air storage of materials, merchandise, products or equipment needed
in connection with an individual or entity engaged in the business of acquiring or owning salvage automobiles
for resale in their entirety or as spare parts.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
14
OFFICE BUILDING, MEDICAL: A building used primarily by physicians, dentists, and similar personnel for
the treatment and examination of patients solely on an outpatient basis, provided that no overnight patients are
kept on the premises.
OFF-ROAD MOTORCYCLE: A two-wheeled vehicle for a single occupant, which has a wheelbase not greater
than 54 inches, powered by an internal combustion engine not greater than 500 cubic centimeters (“500 cc”)
displacement, and not licensed or registered for use on public roads.
ORCHARD: A cultivated area of fruit trees.
OWNER: The person or persons, including a corporation, trust or other legal entity, which has fee simple
ownership as evidenced by the most current record instrument at the Worcester District Registry of Deeds or
Land Court.
PARTIES IN INTEREST: The petitioner, abutters, owners of land directly opposite on any public or
private street or way, and abutters to tl1e abutters within three hundred feet of the property line of the
petitioner as they appear on the most recent applicable tax list, notwithstanding that the land of any
such owner is located in another city or town, the town planning board and the planning board of
every abutting city or town
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A form of development usually characterized by a unified site design for a
number of housing units, clustering buildings and providing common open space, density increases and a mix of
building types and land uses.
PRE-DEVELOPMENT LAND USE: The state of a property prior to the current development, or a state that
land if not damaged would return to without human impact after a large number of years.
PREMISES: A lot together with all buildings, structures and uses thereon.
PRIVATE CLUB: A building in which members of a community or association may gather for social,
educational, or cultural activities.
RECHARGE AREA: Any area of porous, permeable geological deposits, especially, but not exclusively,
deposits of stratified sand and gravel, through which water from any source drains into an aquifer and includes
any wetland or body of surface water surrounded by or adjacent to such area together with the watershed of any
wetland or body of surface water adjacent to such area.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A portable vehicular structure designed for travel
recreational camping or vacation purposes, either having its own motor power or mounted onto
or drawn by another vehicle. Including but not limited to travel and camping trailer, truck
campers and motor homes.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE --- MARINE: A vessel propelled by oars, sails, or an engine designed to float
or plane, to work or travel on water, including but not limited to boat, jet ski, personal watercraft, kayak,
and canoe.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE --- OFF ROAD (ORV). A vehicle designed or modified for use for recreation
or pleasure off a public way including but not limited to, All Terrain Vehicle (ATV), Snowmobile, Dirk
Bike, Off Road Motorcycle, Golf Cart, and All Terrain Utility Vehicle (i.e. , Gator).
RESEARCH LABORATORY: A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific
research, investigation, testing, or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products
except those that are incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD: A restaurant whose primary business is the sale of food for consumption on or
off the premises, which is:
(A) Primarily intended for immediate consumption rather than for use as an ingredient or component of
meals;
(B) Available upon a short waiting time; and
(C) Packaged or presented in such a manner that it can be readily eaten outside the premises where it is
sold.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
15
RESTAURANT, STANDARD: An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and/or beverages
to customers in a ready-to-consume state, and whose principal method of operation includes one or both of the
following characteristics: (1) customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are served their foods and
beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which food and beverages are consumed; (2)
a cafeteria-type operation in which food and beverages are consumed within the building, but are served at a
buffet-type area and taken by the customer to a table for consumption.
RESTRICTIONS: Prohibitions
RURAL CHARACTER: The ability of a place to offer easy access to open space, pristine or agrarian
landscapes.
SALVAGE YARD: A facility where second hand motor vehicles are remodeled, taken apart or rebuilt,
such as to require a license under section 59A of Chapter 140 of the M.G.L.; this includes a junkyard (see
above) and also includes an automobile graveyard as defined in section 1 of chapter 140B of the M.G.L.
SERVICES: An offering or provision that is above normal minimum expectations, e.g. snow removal, water,
sewer, etc.
SIGN: A placard, banner or other article used to advertise or inform those who can read the information
thereon. See Article 9. (SEE FIGURE A.9.1)
AREA OF: The entire display area of a sign. In cases of signs with faces 180 degrees to each other,
only one side shall be counted.
GROUND/POLE: A sign permanently affixed apart from, not attached to a building. A ground sign is
mounted directly on the ground. A pole is a ground sign raised in the air by means of a pole. This
bylaw regulates both types as the same category of signs.
.
PROJECTING: A sign attached perpendicularly to the façade of a building.
TEMPORARY: Any sign not permanently affixed.
WALL: A sign attached directly against and parallel to a building façade.
. SIGN, BLINKING --- To light intermittently.
SIGN, FLASHING - Rhythmic light and darkness at predetermined intervals.
SIGN, INTERMITTENT LIGHTED - Light alternately ceasing and beginning again sequentially or alternately
at predetermined intervals
SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEM A system using photo voltaic, thermal, or other means of
collecting solar energy and converting it to electricity or other forms of useful energy. Such a system will
include collectors, energy transmission lines, and appurtenant devices such as transformers, inverters, pumps,
storage facilities and similar devices. Necessary appurtenant structures are also included.
GROUND MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEM A system that is structurally mounted
on the ground and is not roof-mounted,
SOLID WASTE: Useless, unwanted or discarded solid materials with insufficient liquid content to be free
flowing.
STABLE: A building or land where horses or ponies are kept.
STABLE, COMMERCIAL: a stable for hire, sale, boarding, breeding, riding or show.
STABLE, PRIVATE: An accessory structure or land use that is designed, arranged, used or intended to be used
as a stable for the exclusive use of the occupants of the premises and not for hire, sale or boarding.
STRUCTURE: A building or other object constructed or erected the use of which requires a fixed ground
location, including mobile homes.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
16
SUBDIVISION: The division of land into two (2) or more lots by means of mapping, platting, conveyance,
change or rearrangement of boundaries.
THEATER: A structure used for dramatic, operatic, motion pictures or other performance, for admission to
which entrance money is received and no audience participation or meal service is allowed
TOWNHOUSES: Buildings with 2 or more units located side by side either attached or only slightly detached.
Refers to style of housing popular in larger urban areas where land is conserved due to expense. (SEE FIGURE
A.3.1.1)
UPLAND: Land that is not considered a resource area pursuant to the Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. c. 131
§ 40) and its implementing regulations (310 C.M.R. 10.00 et seq.).
USE: The purpose or activity for which land or any building therein is designed, arranged or intended, or for
which it is occupied or maintained.
VOGUE: Valid at the date and situation under consideration, e.g. parking fees in vogue the fee valid for parking
at that spot on that date, also IN FORCE, DE RIGUEUR.
WALKABLE DISTANCE: Land or lots within one mile of a business center. The distance shall be measured
along the most commonly traveled public ways.
WAREHOUSE: Facilities characterized by storage, wholesale and distribution of manufactured goods, supplies
and equipment, frequent heavy trucking activity, open storage of material, or nuisances such as dust, noise, and
odors, but not involved in manufacturing or production.
WATERCOURSE: Any natural or man-made stream, pond, lake, wetland, coastal wetland, swamp or other
body of water and shall include wet meadows, marshes, swamps, bogs and areas where ground water, flowing
or standing surface water or ice provide a significant part of the supporting substrate for a plant community for
at least five months of the year.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSYTEMS - All equipment, machinery, and structures, whether
underground, on the surface, or overhead, used to collect, transmit, distribute, store, supply, or sell energy
derived from wind, including but not limited to wind turbines (rotors, electrical generators and towers),
anemometers (wind measuring equipment), transformers, substations, power lines, control and maintenance
facilities, and site access and service roads.
B. COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM (CWES): A wind energy conversion system
consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a
rated capacity greater than 10 kW.
C. RESIDENTIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM (RWES): A wind energy conversion system
consisting of a wind turbine, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated
capacity of not more than 10 kW, located on a single lot, intended as an accessory use in a designated
residential district or in connection with any residential use in a designated commercial district. The
rated capacity of not more than 10 kW can be increased at the discretion of the SPGA.
D. WIND TURBINE: A single device that converts wind to electricity or other forms of energy,
typically consisting of a rotor and blade assembly, electrical generator, and tower with or without guy
wires.
E. OVERALL ENGINEER DESIGNED FALL ZONE: The area on the ground, determined by a
registered professional engineer, within a prescribed radius from the base of a WECS, typically the
area within which there is a potential hazard from falling debris or collapsing material.
F. WIND FARM: A collection of towers in the same location. See Section 5.D for allowance of more
than one (1) tower on the same lot or on contiguous lots held in common ownership.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS: All forms of communications that transmit and receive radio frequency or
microwave signals.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
17
ANTENNA/Wireless Device: A device used to transmit and/or receive electromagnetic waves
conducted through the air.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any frame, pole, tower, or other mechanical device to which
one or more antennas are attached. Examples of antenna support structures are towers, smoke stacks,
roof-mounted poles, or wall brackets.
CARRIER: A company that provides wireless services.
CO-LOCATION: The use of a single mount on the ground by more than one telecommunication
carrier (vertical co-location) and/or several mounts on an existing building or structure by more than
one carrier.
BUILDING-MOUNTED EXTERIOR ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any out-of-doors
antenna support structure mounted on, erected on, or supported in whole or in part by an existing
building or structure occupied and/or used for purposes other than wireless communications.
FALL ZONE: The area on the ground within a prescribed radius from the base of a wireless
service facility. The fall zone is the area within which there is a potential hazard from debris (such as
ice) or collapsing material.
FREE-STANDING EXTERIOR ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any out-of-doors antenna
support structure consisting of any free-standing non-habitable structure, including but not limited to
monopoles, lattice towers (with or without guy wires), flag poles, water towers, or smoke stacks.
FUNCTIONALLY EQUIVALENT SERVICES: Cellular, Personal Communication Services (PCS),
Enhanced Specialized Mobile Radio, Specialized Mobile Radio and Paging.
INTERIOR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY: Wireless Communication Facilities
(WCFs) that are completely inside an existing structure and therefore hidden from view.
MAJOR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY: Anything that is not a minor facility.
This includes new towers or facilities attached to existing structures in areas not specifically allowed
under the minor facility definition.
MINOR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY: Those facilities primarily attached to
existing structures. Minor WCFs include those that are attached to the side of buildings or facilities on
the top of buildings that extend no more than ten (10) feet above the highest point of a building. It
includes new facilities to be collocated on existing towers, facilities to be installed on overhead cable,
smokestacks, steeples, water tanks or billboards.
MONOPOLE: The type of mount that is self-supporting with a single shaft of wood, steel or concrete
and a platform (or racks) for one or more arrays of antennas.
MOUNT: The structure or surface, upon which antennas are mounted, including the following types
of mounts:
1. Roof-mounted: Mounted on the roof of a building.
2. Side-mounted: Mounted on the side of a building.
3. Ground-mounted: Mounted on the ground.
4. Structure-mounted: Mounted on a structure other than a building.
WCF ACCESSORY BUILDING: A structure designed to house wireless communications equipment
that is associated with one or more wireless communications facilities.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF): A system of transmission and/or reception
equipment operated by an FCC licensee or a communications service installed at one location. The
system includes one or more antennas mounted on an antenna support structure, a means to connect the
antenna(s) to communications equipment, communications transmitting and/or receiving equipment
and related equipment required for the operation of the facility. Such related equipment may be, for
example, network interconnection equipment, alternate power sources, or controlling and monitoring
systems
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
18
WETLAND: Those areas that are inundated and saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
including all resource areas as defined by the Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. c. 131 § 40) and its
implementing regulations (310 C.M.R. 10.00 et seq.).
WORKING DAYS: Only those days that the Winchendon Town Hall is officially open for customary business.
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Official designated by the municipality to enforce the provisions of the
zoning bylaw. For the Town of Winchendon, the zoning enforcement officer is the Building Inspector. (see
§13.4)
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
19
ARTICLE 3 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
3.1 DIVISION INTO DISTRICTS
Within the Town of Winchendon are hereby established twelve zoning districts, seven of which comprise the total area
of the Town and are contiguous, and five of which are superimposed over portions of the other seven districts.
“R” refers to a district which is principally residential. Preference is given to land-use that entails the building of houses
similar in character, type and size to those of the surrounding houses and the typical thereof. Small scale businesses and
the like can be allowed if they are not nuisances to the neighbors and burden the Town no more than the equivalent
residential construction. (SEE FIGURES A.3.1.1, A.3.1.2 AND APPENDIX F)
“C” refers to a district which is principally commercial and light industrial. Preference is given to land-use that entails
the building of businesses and shops similar in character, type and size to those of the surrounding businesses and shops
and the typical performance thereof. Residences may be allowed, but only if they are agreeable to, not nuisances or
burdens to, and promote the commercial interests of the district. (SEE FIGURE A.3.1.3 & APPENDIX F)
“I” refers to a district which is principally industrial. Preference is given to land-use that entails the building of factories
and large-scale commercial facilities similar in character, type and size to those of the surrounding facilities and the
typical thereof. Since these are the least compatible with other types of development, care is given to make sure this
district can hold and accommodate this intense usage and that it is sufficiently buffered and regulated to reduce impacts
on neighboring districts. Residences are usually not allowed as their safety, health and freedom from nuisances cannot be
guaranteed. (APPENDIX F)
“PD” refers to a district that caters to both commercial and residential use. Preference is given to facilities that are mixed
use with a higher density sharing resources such as on-street parking, parks and so forth. See Article 4.7. (ALSO SEE
FIGURE A.3.1.4 & APPENDIX F)
“OVERLAY DISTRICTS” recognize the special conditions and values prevalent in wetlands, flood prone areas,
groundwater aquifers, historic districts, and other specially designated areas. These districts are superimposed over
portions of the seven contiguous, regular zones designated in the zoning map. Conditions and requirements of the
underlying zones apply in general, with exceptions and special conditions as described in the section on each overlay
district in Article 4.
Designations are as follows:
TABLE 3.1. Zoning District Designations
Designation Title
R80 Rural Residential
R40 Rural Suburban Residential
R10 Neighborhood Residential
C1 Highway Commercial
C2 Neighborhood Business
PD Planned Development
I Industrial
IR Ice Racing District (overlay)
MCOD Mill Conversion Overlay District
GROD Golf/Residential Overlay District
GAOD Gateway Overlay District
WF Wetlands and Flood Conservancy (superimposed)
Rt. 140 COD Route 140 Corridor Overlay District
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
20
3.2 LOCATION OF DISTRICTS; ZONING MAP
3.2.1 The location and boundaries of the twelve zoning districts designated R80, R40, R10, C1, C2, PD, I, IR, MCOD,
GROD, GAOD and WF are hereby established as shown on a map entitled Zoning Map of Winchendon, Massachusetts,
which accompanies and is hereby declared to be a part of this bylaw and is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.(SEE
FIGURE A.3.2) More specific identification and designation of zoning district boundary lines are as follows:
A. Boundary lines shown on the zoning map as being approximately on the location of property or lot lines,
when exact location is not indicated in dimensions, shall be upon the property lot line as shown on the
Winchendon Assessors map January 1, 2005.
B. Boundary lines shown on the zoning map as following street, road, highway, railroad or utility lines shall
be upon the center line of such ways.
C. Boundary lines shown on the zoning map as being outside of street, road, highway or utility lines, but
approximately parallel thereto, shall be deemed as parallel and at such distance there from as shown on the
zoning map or as determined by scale.
D. Boundary lines shown following a stream, lake, watercourse or other water body shall be at the centerline
thereof, or the jurisdictional limits of the Town of Winchendon.
E. Boundary lines shown as intersecting a street, road, highway, railroad or utility line, watercourse or other
waterbeds shall be construed to intersect at right angles to the centerline thereof; and
F. Any questions or uncertainties as to the precise location of a district boundary line shall be determined by
the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Winchendon.
3.2.2 Determining zoning district boundaries in general followed the ensuing guidelines: (cf. EXAMPLE A.3.2)
A. public health, safety and utility considerations are the principal drive forces in zoning determination.
Zoning districts make an attempt to recognize and preserve the historic development patterns and character
of the neighborhood.
B. areas located in mixed use districts, along key circulation corridors and central to densely populated areas
tend to be zoned PD.
C. residential areas served by both town water and town sewer and that are walkable were in general zoned as
R10. Those that were not walkable and had a development pattern inconsistent with R10 were zoned R40.
D. Residential areas that were not considered within walkable distance of a business center and had a
development pattern inconsistent with R10 were generally zoned R40.
E. Residential areas not served by town water or town sewer tend to be zoned R80.
F. Areas targeted for neighborhood-scale commercial development tend to be zoned C2.
G. Areas targeted for high-intensity commercial and light manufacturing development tend to be zoned C1.
H. Areas zoned as industrial tend to be located in remote areas and allow for more intense industries to
conduct business without being a nuisance to neighbors.
3.2.3 Applicants for projects in residential areas in an R40 zone or an R80 zone which abut an R10 or R40 zone may
apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Winchendon for a Special Permit to allow their areas to have
the same density and dimensional requirements as if they were in an R10 zone provided that their area is served by
both town water and town sewer.
3.3 LOTS SPLIT IN SEPARATE DISTRICTS
In the case of a lot which is split into separate zoning districts, the Board of Appeals may grant a special permit to allow
a use located within the district in which the frontage is situated to extend into the adjacent zoning district. In granting
such a permit, the Board of Appeals shall consider the compatibility of existing uses in the abutting lots consistent with
the spirit of the bylaw and the master plan. The Board of Appeals shall seek input from the Planning Board prior to
rendering a decision on the special permit.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
21
3.4 LOCATION OF SUPERIMPOSED DISTRICTS; MAP REFERENCES
Recognizing the special conditions prevalent in wetlands, flood prone areas and areas characterized by poorly drained
soils, the Wetlands and Flood Plain Conservancy Districts are considered to be superimposed over portions of the seven
regular zones designated on the zoning map.
The Flood Plain Conservancy District includes all areas of Town identified on the Flood Hazard Boundary maps of the
U. S. Federal Insurance Administration as special flood hazard areas of the Town, as approved by the Town of
Winchendon.
Regulations governing permitted and prohibited uses within the Wetlands and Flood Plain Conservancy District are as
set forth in Article 4.
3.5 HISTORIC DISTRICT
Nothing in this bylaw is intended to conflict with any provisions of the Winchendon Centre Historic District bylaw
adopted under the provisions of the Chapter 40C, General Laws and amendments thereto.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
22
ARTICLE 4 SPECIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
4.1 ICE RACING DISTRICT
4.1.1 The following land shall be included in an overlay district to be known as the Ice Racing District: the
bodies of water known as Whitney Pond and Mill Glen Pond, otherwise known as Carter’s Pond, which is
located near Old Baldwinville Road and Mill Glen Road. Within this overlay district, ice racing of motor
vehicles, including automobiles, and practices therefore shall be permitted subject to the conditions in Section
4.1.2 and 4.1.3. The term “ice racing” shall mean the racing of motor vehicles on frozen water bodies.
4.1.2 A special permit issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 9 of Chapter 40A of
the General Laws shall be required. Such special permits shall expire on March 15th each year. Permits may be
renewed after a new hearing. An applicant for a permit shall demonstrate at the public hearing to the satisfaction
of the Zoning Board of Appeals that:
1. The applicant owns or has a legal right to use the body of water involved.
2. The applicant owns or has a legal right to access the body of water from a public way adequate to handle the
expected traffic.
3. Issuance of the permit will not create a nuisance to other persons by way of noise, odors, lights, or traffic
congestion.
4. Adequate parking will be provided.
5. Ice racing will be conducted only according to the rules and guidelines of the International Ice Racing
Association or other recognized sanctioning body.
6. The applicant has secured adequate casualty and liability insurance.
7. The applicant has made arrangements for spills of hazardous materials to be immediately cleaned up by a
qualified hazmat cleanup agency.
8. The applicant has made arrangements for adequate sanitary facilities.
9. The applicant has made arrangements for police details adequate to control traffic, parking and crowd
control.
4.1.3 Ice racing or practices by ice racing vehicles shall be conducted only on Saturdays and Sundays between
January 2 and March 15 in not more than five periods. This restriction shall apply to each body of water
separately. Ice racing and practice sessions shall be conducted only between ten o’clock in the morning and
sunset. On Sundays the hours shall be noon to sunset.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
23
4.2 MILL CONVERSION OVERLAY DISTRICT (MCOD) (amended 1/29/07)
4.2.1 Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to create an overlay district:
1. To allow for conversion of Winchendon’s historic mills while preserving the character of nearby residential
and commercial neighborhoods;
2. To encourage the preservation, reuse and renovation of historic mill properties; and
3. To promote diversified housing opportunities and uses such as commercial, retail or office use, or a
combination of such uses.
4.2.2 Applicability. The applicant must own, or be the beneficial owner of, all the land included in the proposed
Mill Conversion Project (MCP), or have authority from the owner(s) to act for him/her/it/them or hold an option
or contract duly executed by the owner(s) and the applicant giving them the right to acquire the land to be
included in the MCP.
4.2.3 Establishment. The Mill Conversion Overlay District (“MCOD”) is hereby established and shall be
construed as an overlay district. Within the MCOD all regulations of the underlying district(s) shall continue to
be in full force and effect, except where these regulations supersede such underlying requirements or provide an
alternative to such requirements. The MCOD shall consist exclusively of the following properties (as shown on
the assessor’s map dated January 2005):
1. Former Sanborn Mill Property:
Parcel 1: Winchendon Assessors Map 6B1, Parcel 1
Parcel 2: Winchendon Assessors Map 6B1, Parcel 6
Parcel 3: Winchendon Assessors Map 6B1, Parcel 8
Parcel 4: Winchendon Assessors Map 6B1, Parcel 35
Parcel 5: Winchendon Assessors Map 6B1, Parcel 5
2. Former N.D. White and Company Property:
Parcel 1: Winchendon Assessors Map 5B3, Parcel 95
Parcel 2: Winchendon Assessors Map 5B3, Parcel 177
Parcel 3: Winchendon Assessors Map 5B3, Parcel 93
Parcel 4: Winchendon Assessors Map 5B3, Parcel 96
Parcel 5: Winchendon Assessors Map 5B3, Parcel 97
Parcel 6: Winchendon Assessors Map 5B3, Parcel 98
Parcel 7: Winchendon Assessors Map 5B3, Parcel 99
3. Former Goodspeed Machine Company Property:
Parcel 1: Winchendon Assessors Map 5B3, Parcel 100
Parcel 2: Winchendon Assessors Map 5B3, Parcel 102
Parcel 3: Winchendon Assessors Map 5B3, Parcel 153
Parcel 4: Winchendon Assessors Map 5B3, Parcel 157
Parcel 5: Winchendon Assessors Map 5B3, Parcel 158
Parcel 6: Winchendon Assessors Map 5B3, Parcel 159
Parcel 7: Winchendon Assessors Map 5B3, Parcel 160
Parcel 8: Winchendon Assessors Map 5B3, Parcel 161
Parcel 9: Winchendon Assessors Map 5B3, Parcel 162
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
24
4.2.4 Special Permit Required. In accordance with this section, the Planning Board may grant a special permit
for a Mill Conversion Project (“MCP”) within the MCOD. No other use or structures shall be permitted in
conjunction with an MCP, except as specifically provided herein.
4.2.5 Procedures/Administration.
1. Rules and regulations. The Planning Board shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of
this section and shall file a copy of the rules and regulations with the Town Clerk. The rules and regulations
shall address the size, form, contents, style and number of copies of plans and other submittals and the
procedure for review of special permits.
2. Pre-application conference. Applicants are encouraged to request a pre-application conference at a meeting of
the Planning Board.
3. Site visit. The Planning Board may conduct a site visit as part of its review. At the site visit, the board and/or
its agents shall be accompanied by the applicant and/or its agents.
4. Relationship of special permit to other requirements. The submittals and permits of this section shall be in
addition to any other permits or requirements of any other law or regulation, including but not limited to the
Wetlands Act (MGL c.131) and the Subdivision Control Law (MGL c. 41).
4.2.6 Application.
1. Application requirements. An application for a special permit shall be submitted to the Planning Board and
shall include all of the following:
A. Application form. A completed application form.
B. Plans. The following plans:
1. existing site conditions, including topography, water bodies and streams, wetlands, historic
features, existing structures, easements and rights of way, and means of access;
2. proposed grading and landscaping;
3. Proposed lighting;
4. proposed utilities, including but not limited to water, wastewater, electric power, fuel,
security and telecommunications systems, and cable television;
5. Proposed storm water system;
6. proposed pedestrian and vehicular access, circulation, parking and loading;
7. Structures to be retained, demolished, and new construction;
8. Building elevations and perspectives;
9. Floor plans for all buildings, including proposed use of floor space, number of units,
number of bedrooms, and location of affordable units.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
25
C. Narrative Reports. The following narrative reports or data:
1. A proposed development schedule showing the beginning of construction, the rate of
construction and development, including stages, if applicable, and the estimated date of
completion;
2. A development impact statement prepared by qualified professionals detailing the impact of
the development, at all phases including construction and operation, on:
A. the Town’s capacity to furnish services including, but not limited to, roads,
police, fire, emergency services, schools, and water; and
B. vehicular and pedestrian traffic, water and air quality, noise and light pollution
and other environmental concerns;
3. information pertaining to any organization which the Applicant proposes to form where the
development is to be a condominium or other ownership organization, including forms and
plans to be used to organize and manage the same, for approval as to form by Town Counsel;
4. copies of all proposed covenants, easements, and other restrictions which the Applicant
proposes to grant to the Town, the Conservation Commission, utility companies, any
condominium or other ownership organization and the owners thereof, including plans of land
to which they are intended to apply, for approval as to form by Town Counsel;
5. a concise narrative prepared by a preservation consultant including any and all historical
information to be submitted to the Winchendon Historical Commission and the Planning
Board. The narrative will include:
A. architectural history of all structures on the site, including period, style, method of
building construction, and association with any particular architect or builder.
B. Any important association with one or more historic persons or events.
C. Any cultural, political, economic or social history of the site or any structures that
may be significant to the Town, Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the United
States of America.
6. Evidence that the proposed MCP is consistent with applicable standards of the National
Park Service or the Winchendon Historic Commission; and
7. Any and all other information that the Planning Board may reasonably require in a form
acceptable to it to assist in determining whether the Applicant’s proposed development plan
meets the objectives of this Section.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
26
D. Fees. The following fees:
1. Technical Review Fee. The applicant shall pay a technical review fee pursuant to G.L. c.
44, s. 53G and the rules of the Planning Board.
2. Administrative Fee. The applicant shall pay an administrative fee pursuant to the rules of
the Planning Board.
2. Waiver. The Planning Board may waive the submittal of required technical information or documents when,
in the Planning Board’s opinion, due to the simplicity of the proposal, such information is not necessary for or
applicable to the Planning Board’s decision pursuant to this section.
4.2.7 Review by Other Boards. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Board will distribute
copies of the application, accompanying plans, and other documentation, to the Board of Health, Conservation
Commission, Historic Commission, Development Director, Zoning Enforcement Officer, Highway
Superintendent, Police Chief, Fire Chief, and such other municipal boards and departments as the Planning
Board deems appropriate, for their consideration, review, and report. The applicant shall furnish all copies
necessary to fulfill this requirement. Other boards and officials shall submit their reports to the Planning Board
within 35 days of receipt of the review materials, and failure to submit a report within 35 days shall be deemed
a lack of opposition thereto. In the event that the public hearing by the Planning Board is held prior to the
expiration of the 35 day period, the Planning Board shall continue the public hearing to permit the formal
submission of reports and recommendations within that 35 day period. The Planning Board’s decision shall
explain in writing the reason for any departures from the recommendations of the other boards and departments.
4.2.8 Permitted Uses.
1. An MCP shall include one or more of the following residential uses: single family dwelling, duplex dwelling,
multi-family dwelling; condominium, apartment, live and work unit; age-restricted housing; independent living
unit.
2. In conjunction with these residential uses, an MCP may include one or more of the following non-residential
uses:
A. (Commercial uses) Restaurant, retail store, or offices.
B. (Institutional uses) Museum, educational use, charitable or philanthropic institution, municipal use,
club or lodge.
C. Appropriate accessory uses.
4.2.9 Standards. In order to be eligible for consideration for a special permit pursuant to this Section, the
proposed development shall meet all of the following standards:
1. Buffer. Existing vegetation in the setback areas along the perimeter of the site shall be maintained as a buffer,
except for driveways and pedestrian ways necessary for access and egress to and from the site. No vegetation in
this buffer area will be disturbed, destroyed or removed, except for normal maintenance. The Planning Board
may require suitable landscaping or replacement of vegetation. The Planning Board may waive this buffer
requirement where it determines that a smaller buffer will suffice to accomplish the objectives set forth herein.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
27
2. Removal and Replacement of Vegetation. Within the site, no clear cutting shall be permitted, except as
authorized by special permit and incidental to construction of buildings, roads, trails and parking areas. The
Planning Board may require suitable landscaping or replacement of vegetation.
3. Roadways. The principal roadway(s) within the site shall be adequate for the intended use and vehicular
traffic and shall be maintained by the association of unit owners or by the Applicant.
4. Number of Parking Spaces. The applicant shall provide adequate parking to serve all anticipated uses on the
property, with information detailing the method of computation of parking spaces. The minimum number of
parking spaces shall be computed using the requirements of Sections 8.3 and 8.4 of this bylaw. The Planning
Board may increase the required parking by up to 10% to serve the needs of residents, employees, visitors and
service vehicles. The Planning Board may reduce the otherwise required number of parking spaces where the
applicant demonstrates that an adequate number of spaces will be provided.
5. Commercial Vehicles. Commercial vehicles owned or operated by owners or tenants of the MCP, or their
agents, servants, licensees, suppliers and invitees shall be parked inside a garage, or suitably screened or
designated area, except for delivery or service vehicles in the active service of receiving and delivering goods or
services.
6. Parking Areas. All parking areas shall be screened from view from adjacent residentially zoned or occupied
premises located outside the site, including public ways, by a landscaped border at least ten (10) feet in width.
Parking lots shall be located to the rear or side of all buildings and shall not be located in front setbacks or in
buffer areas; provided, however, that the Planning Board may waive these provisions for existing parking lots
and/or existing buildings. Parking lot layouts shall be planned to permit landscaping, buffers, or screening to
prevent direct views of parked vehicles from adjacent streets.
7. Sidewalks or Paths. The Planning Board may require sidewalks or paths which shall be attractively designed
with proper regard for convenience, separation of vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian traffic, adequate
connectivity, completeness of access to the various amenities and facilities on the site and to pathways or
sidewalks to adjacent sites.
8. Loading. Loading areas may be required by the Planning Board where deemed necessary for the efficient
operation of the MCP. Screening and landscaping shall be provided to block all views of loading areas (except
those specifically designated for emergency vehicles) from the public right-of-way and adjacent properties.
9. Stormwater Management. The stormwater management system shall be designed in accordance with the
Regulations of the Planning Board.
10. Utilities. All electric, gas, telecommunications, and water distribution lines shall be placed underground,
except upon a demonstration of exceptional circumstances. The facility shall be served by the municipal water
system.
11. Emergency Systems. The MCP shall have an integrated emergency call, and/or telephone and/or other
communications system for its residents and/or other tenants. There shall be sufficient site access for public
safety vehicles. A plan shall be approved by the Winchendon Fire Department for the emergency evacuation of
the residents with emphasis on ensuring the safety of residents with physical impairments.
12. Lighting. There shall be no illuminated signs, parking lot lighting, building floodlighting, or other exterior
overspill onto adjacent premises such that it casts observable shadows, and such that it shall not create glare
from unshielded light sources.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
28
13. Screening. Exposed storage areas, garbage dumpsters, service areas, loading areas, utility buildings and
structures shall be screened from the view of abutting properties and streets using plantings, fences and other
methods approved by the Planning Board.
14. Minimum residential use. At least 25% of the gross floor area of the MCP shall be used for residential
purposes.
4.2.10 Number of Dwelling Units. The maximum number of dwelling units shall be established by the Planning
Board after reviewing the following criteria:
1. Existing structures;
2. Proposed method and efficacy of wastewater disposal;
3. Availability of public water;
4. Trip generation, traffic safety and internal site traffic;
5. Character of the proposed MCP and its relation to the surrounding neighborhood(s);
6. Character of the existing buildings and the potential for reuse thereof;
7. Number of affordable units, beyond the minimum required, proposed by the applicant;
8. Development Impact Statement;
9. Reports of the technical consultants of the Planning Board and all other reviewing boards.
4.2.11 Number of Bedrooms. The Planning Board may ensure the diversification of dwelling units within an
MCP by establishing the number of dwelling units with one, two, or three bedrooms; but not more than 10%
shall be three bedrooms.
4.2.12 Expansion of Existing Buildings. Existing buildings within an MCP may be expanded, provided that
such expansion:
1. is consistent with the existing buildings’ historic character and scale; and
2. does not cause substantial detriment after considering the factors set forth in Section 4.2.15
4.2.13 New Buildings. Within the MCP, new buildings may be constructed in accordance with the following
requirements:
1. The number, type, scale, architectural style, and uses within such new buildings shall be subject to Planning
Board approval.
2. New buildings shall be permitted only to the extent reasonably necessary to provide for essential services
such as, but not limited to, wastewater treatment facilities.
4.2.14 Affordable Dwelling Units. (APPENDIX B) As a condition of granting a special permit for a MCP, a
minimum of twenty (20%) of the total number of dwelling units shall be restricted in perpetuity in the following
manner:
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
29
1. Five percent (5%) of the units shall be affordable to persons or families qualifying as low income under the
Massachusetts Community Development Block Grant program; five percent (5%) of the units shall be
affordable to persons or families qualifying as moderate income under the Massachusetts Community
Development Block Grant program; and five percent (5%) of the units shall be affordable to persons or families
qualifying as median income under the Massachusetts Community Development Block Grant program. The
remaining 5% of affordable units shall be assigned for low income, moderate income or median income persons
or families as will, in the Planning Board’s opinion, best serve the Town’s current housing needs. Fractional
units shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.
2. The restriction shall be approved as to form by legal counsel to the Planning Board, and a right of first refusal
upon the transfer of such restricted units shall be granted to the Winchendon Housing Authority for a period not
less than 120 days after notice thereof.
3. Affordable units shall be integrated into the overall development of the MCP so as to prevent the physical
segregation of such units.
4. The Applicant shall be encouraged to seek designation of the units referenced in paragraphs 4.2.14.1 as
affordable units which qualify as part of the subsidized housing inventory as approved and complied by the
Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD). The Planning Board may require that the
Applicant affirmatively take steps to utilize the Winchendon Housing Authority, a public agency, a non-profit
agency, limited dividend organization, or other appropriate entity, and through a Local Initiative Program
petition or other similar mechanism or program, cause application to be made to the DHCD, so as to timely
furnish all forms and information necessary to promote the designation of those units referenced in said
paragraphs as affordable units qualifying as part of the subsidized housing inventory. The Planning Board may
require submission of application, forms and appropriate information to the DHCD as a condition of approval.
4.2.15 Decision
1. Criteria for decision. After considering reports from consultants and other boards and departments, the
Planning Board may grant a special permit for a MCP where it makes the following written findings:
A. The application documents and supporting materials comply with all applicable sections of the
zoning bylaw;
B. The proposed MCP complies with the design standards of this section.
C. The proposed MCP constitutes an appropriate renovation as defined above;
D. The proposed MCP does not cause substantial detriment to the neighborhood after considering the
following potential consequences:
1. Noise, during the construction and operational phases;
2. Pedestrian and vehicular traffic;
3. Environmental harm;
4. Visual impact caused by the character and scale of the proposed structure(s); and
5. Other consequences as may be set forth in the Development Impact Statement for the MCP.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
30
E. The proposed MCP furthers the goals and objectives of the Master Plan
2. Time limit. A special permit is granted for a period of 2 years and shall lapse if substantial use or
construction has not commenced by such date, except for good cause shown.
3. Conditions. The Planning Board may impose conditions, safeguards and limitations in the grant of a special
permit including, but not limited to:
A. that all construction or infrastructure improvements shall be completed within a specific time
period;
B. that all aspects of the MCP, including authorized uses, building occupancy, and intensity of use,
shall remain in substantial conformance with the plans and other documents submitted to the Planning
Board as part of the special permit proceeding unless modification of the special permit for the MCP is
authorized, after a public hearing, by the Planning Board;
C. that a performance guarantee suitable to the Planning Board may be required.
4.3 WETLANDS CONSERVANCY DISTRICT
4.3.1 Purpose. The purpose of the superimposed Wetland Conservancy District is as follows:
1. to preserve and protect the lakes, streams, watercourses, floodplains and other wetland types and their
associated flora and fauna within the Town together with adjoining land,
2. to protect the health, safety and property of persons against the hazards of contamination,
3. to preserve and maintain the groundwater level,
4. to protect the community against the detrimental use and development of lands and wetlands surrounding
bodies of water and adjoining streams and watercourses, and
5. To conserve the watershed and recharge areas of the Town for the health, safety and well-being of its
inhabitants.
4.3.2 Permitted Uses. Within the wetlands, the following uses shall be lawful, but only by Special Permit
granted by the Board of Appeals:
1. Municipal purposes, including waterworks, pumping stations, essential services, parks and any buildings
and structures accessory thereto,
2. Public utility lines, facilities, buildings and accessory structures,
3. Flood control installations, facilities and equipment,
4. Non-profit, non-commercial social, civic or recreational lodge or club, and
5. Single family residences constructed and used in such a manner as not to endanger the health or safety of the
occupants and in full compliance with the dimensional and density requirements of the underlying district.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
31
4.3.3 Prohibited Uses. Within the wetlands, the following buildings, structures, installations and uses shall be
prohibited:
1. Septic tanks, cesspools and leaching beds or fields,
2. Business, commercial and industrial buildings, structures or uses except provided in Section 4.3.2 above,
3. Libraries, hospitals, museums, sanitaria, nursing or rest homes, charitable institutions and cemeteries, and
4. Residential buildings, structures, dwellings and mobile homes intended for living purposes other than as
permitted in Section 4.3.2 above.
4.3.4 Uses Permitted by Right. Woodland, grassland, wetland and agricultural, horticultural and recreational
use of land or water not requiring filling or dredging and any building and structures accessory thereto.
4.4 FLOOD PLAIN CONSERVANCY DISTRICTS
4.4.1 Purpose. The purpose of the Flood Plain District is to protect the public safety and general welfare, to
protect human life and property from the hazards of periodic flooding, to preserve the natural flood control
characteristics and the flood storage capacity of the flood plain and to preserve and maintain the ground water
table and water recharge areas within the flood plain.
4.4.2 District Delineation. The general boundaries of the Flood Plain District are shown on the Winchendon
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated June 15, 1982 as Zones A, A 1-30 to indicate the 100-year flood plain.
The exact boundaries of the District are defined by the 100-year water surface elevations shown on the FIRM
and further defined by the Flood Profiles contained in the Flood Insurance Study, dated December 15, 1981.
The floodway boundaries are delineated on the Winchendon Flood Boundary Floodway Map (FBFM) dated
December 15, 1981 and further defined by the Floodway Data Tables contained in the Flood Insurance Study.
These two maps as well as the accompanying Study are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with
the Town Clerk, Planning Board, Building Inspector and Selectmen. Within Zone A where the 100-year flood
elevation is not provided on the FIRM, the developer/applicant shall obtain any existing flood elevation data
and it shall be reviewed by the Conservation Commission. If the data is sufficiently detailed and accurate, it
shall be relied upon to require compliance with this bylaw.
4.4.3 Use Regulations. The Flood Plain District is established as an overlay district to all other districts. All
development, including structural and non-structural activities, whether permitted by right or by Special Permit
must be in compliance with Chapter 131, Section 40 of the General Laws and with the requirements of the
Massachusetts State Building Code pertaining to construction in a flood plain (currently Section 744).
1. Permitted Uses. The following uses of low flood damage potential and being unlikely to cause an
obstruction to flood flows shall be allowed provided they are permitted in the underlying district and they do not
require structures, fill or storage of materials or equipment:
A. Agricultural uses such as farming, grazing, truck farming, horticulture, etc.
B. Forestry and nursery uses.
C. Outdoor recreational uses including fishing, boating, play areas, etc.
D. Conservation of water plants or wildlife.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
32
E. Wildlife management areas, foot, bicycle and/or horse paths.
F. Temporary non-residential structures used in connection with fishing, growing, harvesting, storage
or sale of crops raised on the premises.
G. Buildings lawfully existing prior to the adoption of these provisions.
2. Special Permits. No structure or building shall be erected, constructed, substantially improved or otherwise
created or moved, no earth or other materials dumped, filled, excavated or transferred unless a Special Permit is
granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Said Board may issue a Special Permit thereunder (subject to other
applicable provisions of this bylaw) if the application complies with the following provisions:
A. The proposed plan shall comply in all respects with the provisions of the underlying district, and
B. Within ten (10) days of receipt of the application, the Board shall transmit one copy of the
development plan to the Conservation Commission, the Planning Board, the Board of Health and the
Building Inspector. Final action shall not be taken until reports have been received from the above
boards or until thirty-five (35) days shall have elapsed, and
C. All encroachments including fill, new construction, substantial improvements to existing structures
and other development are prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer is
provided by the applicant demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the 100-year flood, and
D. The Board may specify such additional requirements and conditions it finds necessary to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the public and the occupants of the proposed use.
4.5 GROUNDWATER PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
4.5.1 Purpose. The purpose of this district is to protect public health by preventing the contamination of
existing and potential public and private water supplies and to protect the general welfare by preserving limited
water supplies for present and future use.
4.5.2 District Delineation. The general boundaries of the Groundwater Protection Overlay District are those
areas identified as potential municipal well sites in the July, 1988 “Exploratory Drilling Program” conducted by
the engineering firm of Dufresne and Henry and shown on a “Groundwater Protection Overlay District Map” on
file with the Town Clerk. This map, as it may be amended from time to time, is hereby made a part of this
bylaw. Where the bounds of the Groundwater Protection Overlay District, as shown on the Groundwater
Protection Map, are in doubt or in dispute, the burden of proof shall be upon the owner(s) and/or applicant
of/for the property in question to show where the boundaries should properly be located.
4.5.3 Use Regulations
1. Permitted Uses. Within the Groundwater Protection Overlay District, the following uses are permitted
subject to the provisions of Section 4.5.3(2), Prohibited Uses provided that all necessary permits, orders and
approvals required by local, state and federal law are also obtained:
A. Conservation of soil, water, plants and wildlife;
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
33
B. Outdoor recreation not involving the use of motor vehicles or motorboats, including boating,
fishing, nature study and hunting where otherwise legally permitted;
C. Foot, bicycle and horse paths and bridges;
D. Maintenance and repair of any existing structure, provided there is no increase in impervious
pavement;
E. Normal operations and maintenance of existing water bodies and dams, splash boards and other
water control supply and conservation devices;
F. Residential development permitted in the underlying zoning district provided that not more than
10% of a building lot is rendered impervious;
G. farming, gardening, nursery, conservation, forestry, harvesting and grazing uses, provided that
fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides and other leachable materials are not stored outdoors and that manure
is not stored outdoors uncovered.
2. Prohibited Uses. Within the Groundwater Protection Overlay District, the following uses are prohibited:
A. Storage of liquid petroleum products of any kind, except for storage in a freestanding container of
fuel within a building for the purpose of heating of that building;
B. Disposal of hazardous wastes as defined in chapter 21C of the Massachusetts General Laws ;
C. Storage of hazardous wastes, as defined in Mass. General Laws, Chapter 21C, as amended;
D. Disposal of solid wastes other than brush;
E. disposal of leachable wastes except for subsurface waste disposal from one-family or two-family
residential units, with the approval of the Board of Health ;
F. Storage of road salt or other de-icing chemicals;
G. Disposal of snow that contains de-icing chemicals and that has been brought in from outside the
Groundwater Protection Overlay District;
H. Industrial uses that discharge process waste water on-site;
I. Outside storage of fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides and outdoor uncovered storage of manure;
J. Animal feed lots;
K. Dry cleaning establishments;
L. Boat and motor vehicle service, washing and repair establishments;
M. Junk and salvage yards;
N. The rendering impervious of more than 10% of any lot;
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
34
N. Mining of land except as incidental to a permitted use.
3. Special Permit Uses. The following uses, unless prohibited by a specific provision of Section 4.5.3(2) of this
bylaw, may be permitted by a Special Permit from the Special Permit Granting Authority, which in the case of
Winchendon is the Planning Board, under such conditions as the Planning Board may require:
A. commercial and industrial activities permitted in the underlying district and involving the
manufacture, storage, transportation or use of any hazardous materials other than hazardous wastes as
defined by Mass. General Laws Chapter 21C (as amended);
B. The application of fertilizers for uses that are non-domestic and non-agricultural provided that such
application shall be made in a manner as to minimize adverse impacts on surface water and ground
water due to nutrient transport and deposition of sedimentation.
4. Special Permit Review Procedure. Any application for a Special Permit shall be made, reviewed and acted
upon in accordance with the following procedures:
A. Each application for a Special Permit shall be filed in writing with the Planning Board, and shall
contain a complete description of the proposed use, together with any supporting information and plan
which the Planning Board may require.
B. The Planning Board shall refer copies of the application to the Board of Health, the Conservation
Commission, the Town Engineer (if any) and the Department of Public Works. Each of which shall
review, either jointly or separately, the application and shall submit their recommendations to the
Planning Board . Failure to make recommendations within 35 days of the referral of the application
shall be deemed lack of opposition.
C. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the application in conformity with the
provisions of Mass. General Laws, Chapter 40A, within 65 days after the filing of the application with
the Planning Board.
D. After notice and public hearing, and after due consideration of the reports and recommendations of
the local boards and departments, the Planning Board may grant such a Special Permit provided that
it finds the proposed use:
1. is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this bylaw and will promote the purposes of
the Groundwater Protection Overlay District;
2. is appropriate to the natural topography, soils and other characteristics of the site to be
developed;
3. will not, during construction or thereafter, have an adverse environmental impact on the
aquifer or recharge area;
4. will not adversely affect an existing or potential water supply.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
35
4.6 GOLF/RESIDENTIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT (GROD)
4.6.1 Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to create an overlay district: The GROD provides an opportunity
by special permit for a planned golf course and residential development which shall be governed by the
requirements of this section. The particular intent of this section is to provide for the development of residential
Dwelling Units in conjunction with a golf course on a tract of land which is at least 175 acres in size, but which
may not meet the zoning requirements of an R80, R40, R10, or C2 district. Parcels of land located within this
overlay district shall be subject to the underlying zoning district unless included as part of a project which has
been granted a GROD special permit pursuant to the provisions of this section. It is the intent of this section to
provide for a unique type of living and to encourage:
1. the general purposes of the zoning bylaw;
2. the preservation of open space and the promotion of the use of land more nearly in accordance with the
Winchendon Master Plan 2001;
3. a more creative and flexible approach to land development;
4. land use, which is harmonious with the environment and which preserves natural resources and scenic
qualities;
5. the provision of a more desirable esthetic and functional space and the efficient allocation, distribution, use
and maintenance of land;
6. diversity and variety in the development pattern of the community;
7. better design and land planning resulting in the economic and efficient street utility and public facility
installation, construction and maintenance; and,
8. The enhancement of real property value for the long-range future.
4.6.2 District Delineation. The GROD is hereby established and shall be construed as an overlay district, and
such District is shown within the bounded area which lies to the west of School Street and to the east of Brown
Street, as more particularly shown on a plan entitled “Golf Course Overlay District, Town of Winchendon,
MA,” Scale 1 inch = 1700 feet, dated May 2, 2005 which is attached. (SEE FIGURE A.4.6)
4.6.3 Applicability. The applicant must own, or be the beneficial owner of, or have entered into a purchase
agreement or option agreement for the purchase of, all the land included in the proposed project. In accordance
with this section, the Planning Board, as special permit granting authority, may grant a special permit for a
GROD project. A GROD project, whether created as a subdivision or not, may be created from a single parcel
or contiguous parcels in common ownership which total at least 175 acres in area and which are located entirely
within a GROD in the Town of Winchendon. All other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw shall apply except to the
extent inconsistent with the provisions of this section 4,6, and except for Sections 4.3 and 4.4, Article 7, and
Article 13.
4.6.4 Procedures/Administration.
1. Pre-application conference. Applicants are encouraged to request a pre-application conference at a regular
meeting of the Planning Board.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
36
2. Application. An application for a GROD project special permit shall include the following:
A. Application Form. A completed application form.
B. Plans. The following plans:
1. a project plan conforming to the requirements for a preliminary plan set forth in the
subdivision rules and regulations of the Planning Board if a definitive subdivision of the
property is intended, and otherwise, a plan which demonstrates compliance with the
provisions set forth in this section 4.6;
2. existing site conditions, including topography, water bodies and streams, wetlands, historic
features, existing structures, easements and rights of way, and means of access;
3. where wetlands delineation is in doubt or dispute, the Planning Board may require
appropriate documentation;
4. proposed grading and landscaping;
5. the layout of the golf course including tees, fairways, sand traps, greens and other features;
6. proposed lighting;
7. proposed utilities, including but not limited to water, wastewater, electric power,
telecommunications systems, and cable television;
8. proposed storm water management system;
9. proposed pedestrian and vehicular access, circulation, and parking;
10. structures to be retained, demolished, and new construction;
11. building elevations and perspectives; and
12. floor plans for all buildings, including proposed use of floor space, number of units,
number of bedrooms, and location of affordable units.
C. Narrative Reports. The following narrative reports or data:
1. a proposed project schedule showing the beginning of construction, the rate of construction
and development, including stages, if applicable, and the estimated date of completion;
2. a project impact statement prepared by qualified professionals detailing the impact of the
project, at all phases including construction and operation, on:
a. the Town’s capacity to furnish services including, but not limited to, roads, police,
fire, emergency services, schools, wastewater, and water; and
b. vehicular and pedestrian traffic, water and air quality, noise and light pollution and
other environmental concerns
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
37
D. summary report on the ownership, use, and maintenance of the open space;
E. report pertaining to any organization(s) which the Applicant proposes to form where the project is to
be a condominium or other ownership organization, including plans to be used to organize and manage
the same;
F. Such other information that the Planning Board may reasonably require in a form acceptable to it to
assist in determining whether the Applicant’s proposed project plan meets the objectives of this
section.
3. Review Process. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Board shall distribute copies to the
Board of Health, Conservation Commission, Department of Public Works, and such other municipal boards and
departments as it deems appropriate for their consideration, review, and report. The Applicant shall furnish all
copies necessary to fulfill this requirement. Other boards and departments shall submit their reports to the
Planning Board within 35 days of receipt of the materials for review, and failure to submit the report within 35
days shall be deemed a lack of opposition thereto. In the event that the public hearing by the Planning Board is
held prior to the expiration of the 35 day period, the Planning Board shall continue the public hearing to permit
the formal submission of reports and recommendations within that 35 day period. The Planning Board’s
decision shall explain in writing the reason for any departures from the recommendations of the other boards
and departments.
4. Site visit. The Planning Board may conduct a site visit during the public hearing. At the site visit, the board
and/or its agents shall be accompanied by the applicant and/or its agents.
5. Fees. The following fees shall be paid by the Applicant:
A. Technical Review Fee. The Applicant shall pay a technical review fee pursuant to G.L. c. 44, s. 53G
and the rules of the Planning Board.
B. Administrative Fee. The Applicant shall pay an administrative fee pursuant to the rules of the
Planning Board.
6. Waiver. The Planning Board may waive the submittal of required technical information or documents when,
in the Planning Board’s opinion, due to the nature of the proposal, such information is not necessary for or
applicable to the Planning Board’s decision pursuant to this section.
4.6.5 Permitted Uses.
1. A GROD project shall include a golf course and residential Dwelling Units. The golf course shall have 18-
holes with a minimum length of 6,000 yards, which length may include easements. At the option of the
Applicant, the golf course may be public, semiprivate or private, but the Planning Board may require any
completely private or semiprivate golf course to provide a preference and a discount on membership fees,
greens and cart fees and tee times for Winchendon residents.
2. The following uses may be permitted as incidental to the golf course:
A. club house;
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
38
B. restaurant, snack bar;
C. function hall;
D. putting or practice greens;
E. driving ranges;
F. tennis courts, swimming pools;
G. golf carts and service vehicles incidental to golf course residential communities;
H. non-motorized recreational facilities and passive recreational trails;
I. a pro shop;
J. lounge;
K. ancillary buildings which are incidental to golf course use;
L. other uses that the special permit granting authority may approve which are customarily incidental
to a golf course community.
3. The following uses may be permitted by special permit within the GROD:
A. Single Family Detached Dwellings; (SEE FIGURE A.3.1.1)
B. Two-Family Structures; (SEE FIGURE A.3.1.1)
C. Multiple Family Structures; (SEE FIGURE A.3.1.1)
D. Townhouses and Condominiums; and (SEE FIGURE A.3.1.1)
E. Country Inn, Restaurant (Standard), Hotel.
4.6.6 Dimensional and Other Requirements
1. The following minimum dimensional requirements shall be met for all structures containing residential
Dwelling Units and other Structures created pursuant to this section.
A. Minimum Separation. The minimum separation distance between any two structures shall be at the
reasonable discretion of the Planning Board but in no event shall such minimum distance be less than
25 feet.
B. Maximum Height of Structure. The maximum height of any structure shall be 48 feet.
2. Other requirements. The following requirements shall be met for all residential and non- residential structures
and uses created pursuant to this section.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
39
A. Access. As a mixed use project, access to and from commercial areas through residential areas shall
be permitted, provided that suitable safeguards may be imposed by the Planning Board to ensure the
safety of residential areas.
B. Signage. Signage for residential uses shall be governed by Section 9.9 and non-residential signage
shall be governed by Section 9.10, 9.11, and 9.8 (“Off-Premises Outdoor Signs”).
C. Parking. Parking requirements for residential and non-residential uses shall be governed by Section
8.3 and 8.4 of this bylaw, and loading requirements for nonresidential uses shall be governed by
Section 8.6.
3. Multiple Family Structures. No more than 144 Dwelling Units shall be constructed within “garden-style”
Multiple Family Structure buildings. No more than 6 “garden-style” Multiple Family Structure buildings shall
be constructed in a project, and no more than 28 Dwellings Units shall be constructed within any “garden-style”
Multiple Family Structure building. (SEE FIGURE A.3.1.1)
4.6.7 Design Standards.
1. General requirements
A. Insofar as practicable, the landscape shall be preserved in its natural state by minimizing tree and
soil removal. Any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of the neighboring
developed areas within the project. Individual building sites shall be oriented so as to maintain
maximum natural topography and cover. Topography, tree cover, and natural drainage shall be treated
as fixed determinants of road and lot configuration where practicable rather than as elements to be
altered to follow a preferred development scheme.
B. Streets shall be designed and located in such a manner as to maintain and preserve natural
topography, significant landmarks, and trees; to minimize cut and fill; and to preserve and enhance
views on or off the parcel(s).
C. Development shall be related harmoniously to the terrain and the use, scale and architecture of
existing buildings in the project.
D. The removal or disruption of historic, archeological, or cultural uses, structures, or sites shall be
minimized.
2. Multifamily Buildings. The architecture of all multifamily buildings shall be residential in character,
particularly providing gabled roofs, an articulated footprint and varied facades. Residential structures shall be
oriented toward the street and not toward the required parking area.
3. Roads. The Town, in its discretion, may accept the roadways within the project as public ways. In such event,
such roadway(s) shall be designed and constructed to conform to the standards of the Planning Board’s
subdivision rules and regulations. Private ways shall be adequate for the intended use and vehicular traffic and
shall be maintained by an association of property owners or by the Applicant.
4. Sidewalks and trails. In place of sidewalks a GROD project may substitute a system of internal trails that
provide connections to other existing or proposed sidewalks and trails, public parks or recreation areas or
protected lands.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
40
5. Shared driveways. Dwelling Units may share a common driveway. The shared portion of the driveway shall
not be used to meet parking space requirements of this section.
6. Drainage. The Planning Board shall encourage the use of “soft” (non- structural) storm water management
techniques (such as swales) and other drainage techniques that reduce impervious surface and enable infiltration
where appropriate. All structural surface storm water management facilities shall be accompanied by a
conceptual landscape plan.
7. Number of Parking Spaces. The applicant shall provide adequate and conveniently located parking to serve
all anticipated uses on the property, with information detailing the method of computation of parking spaces.
The minimum number of parking spaces shall be computed using the requirements of Section 8.3 and 8.4 of this
bylaw. The Planning Board may increase the required parking by up to 10% to serve the needs of residents,
employees, visitors and service vehicles. The Planning Board may reduce the otherwise required number of
parking spaces where the applicant demonstrates that an adequate number of spaces will be provided.
8. Screening. Exposed storage areas, garbage dumpsters, service areas, loading areas, utility buildings and
structures shall be screened from the view of abutting properties and streets using plantings, fences and other
methods approved by the Planning Board.
4.6.8 Affordable Dwelling Units. (APPENDIX B) As a condition of granting a special permit for a GROD
project, a minimum of twenty (20%) of the total number of Dwelling Units shall be restricted as Affordable
Dwelling Units in perpetuity or for the longest period allowed by law in the following manner:
1. Affordable Dwelling Units are defined as those units available to those persons whose household income
shall not exceed 80% of area median income based on household size as determined by HUD, subject to
reasonable household asset limits, and initial purchase prices and resale prices shall be established so that
households are not required to spend more than 30% of the income of a household earning 80% of area median
income for annual debt service on a mortgage (at 30-year fixed-interest rates at the time of initial sale), taxes,
insurance, and condominium or homeowners fees with no more than a five percent (5%) down- payment,
including any required entrance deposit, and which shall be subject to a long-term use restriction to preserve
affordability.
2. The long-term affordability use restriction shall be approved as to form by legal counsel to the Planning
Board, and a right of first refusal upon the transfer of such restricted units shall be granted to the Winchendon
Housing Authority or other governmental entity, non-profit organization or other entity acceptable to the
Planning Board for a period not less than 120 days after notice thereof.
3. Affordable units shall be integrated into the overall development of the GROD Project so as to prevent
physical segregation of such units.
4. The Applicant shall be encouraged to seek designation of the units referenced in paragraph 4.6.8.A as
Affordable Units which qualify as part of the Town of Winchendon’s subsidized housing inventory as approved
and complied by the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) through the Massachusetts
Department of Housing and Community Development’s Local Initiative (“LIP”) Program. The Planning Board
may require that the Applicant affirmatively take steps to utilize the Winchendon Housing Authority, a public
agency, a non-profit agency, limited dividend organization, or other appropriate entity, and through a Local
Initiative Program petition or other similar mechanism or program, cause application to be made to the DHCD,
so as to timely furnish all forms and information necessary to promote the designation of those units referenced
in said paragraphs as affordable units qualifying as part of the subsidized housing inventory. The Planning
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
41
Board may require submission of application, forms and appropriate information to the DHCD as a condition of
approval.
5. The Affordable Dwelling Units required to be created under this section shall be evenly dispersed and
allocated among all the types/styles of residential Dwelling Units at the same ratio as the ratio of the total
number of each type to the total number of units.
4.6.9 Decision Criteria
1. Minimum parcel size. The residential golf/residential course project shall be located upon a parcel(s) of land
collectively having a minimum of 175 acres.
2. The maximum number of dwelling units allowed in a GROD project shall not exceed 0.80 residential units
per gross acreage of the parcel(s) within the project.
3. Open Space. At least forty percent of the gross acreage of the GROD project area shall be dedicated “open
space” which is defined to include the pervious areas of the golf course. Buildings accessory to the golf course
which have a floor area not greater than 1,200 square feet and are located well away from the clubhouse or
other main golf course service buildings may be allowed in the open space, and the Planning Board may
authorize the use of open space for those purposes incidental to golf course residential communities as set forth
in Section 11.8.1 of the Zoning Bylaw.
4. Water & Sewer. There shall be public water and sewer available for both the golf course (with the exception
of public water for irrigation for the golf course) and the residential portion of the project. In the event that they
are not currently available, the applicant shall construct them at no expense to the Town of Winchendon.
Alternately the special permit may allow for on site water supply and/or sewage disposal provided the Planning
Board is satisfied that those facilities will be adequate and provision has been made so that they will be properly
operated and maintained.
5. Mandatory Conditions — Golf Course. The special permit shall contain the following mandatory conditions,
with respect to the golf course.
A. Prior to the issuance of the first Building Permit for a residential dwelling all land dedicated to the
golf course shall be:
1. deed restricted to use as a golf course or conservation uses if the golf course ceases to
operate for a period of two years unless extended by the Planning Board; and,
2. deed restricted so that no structure shall be erected thereon except as incident to the uses in
section 4.6.5 above.
6. A Special Permit granted under this section shall lapse, requiring the land affected to comply with the
provision regarding the underlying zoning, if the applicant fails to commence construction or substantial use
within two years, which shall not include such time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal
of the Special Permit, or such longer time if the Applicant demonstrates other cause reasonably acceptable to
the Planning Board for failure to commence construction or substantial use within such time period.
7. The Planning Board may, in its discretion, waive or modify any of the requirements set forth in this section
4.6 if the Planning makes a finding that such waiver and/or modification would be consistent with the objectives
and intent of this Section 4.6.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
42
4.6.10 Security for the Development of the Golf Course
1. The applicant shall secure its obligation to complete the 18-hole course by the following:
A. Entering into an agreement with the Town that no more that 50% of the Dwelling Units shall be
issued occupancy permits prior to substantial completion of 9 holes of the golf course. No occupancy
permits shall be issued for the remaining 50% of the residential Dwelling Units until such time as the
first 9 holes of the golf course are completed and operational, and the second 9 holes of the golf course
are either substantially completed or bonded as provided for in paragraph 2.
B. The posting of a bond or the execution of a covenant or tripartite agreement, either of which shall be
reduced or released as the work is completed so that the amount secured shall be equal to the cost of
completing the remaining work. In the event of a tripartite agreement, the applicant shall inform the
Board of the identity of the parties to the tripartite agreement, and the Board shall not unreasonably
withhold its assent to such agreement. A bond, covenant or tripartite agreement shall be in a form
approved by legal counsel to the Planning Board.
C. The applicant shall initially select between the methods in subsections A and B.
1. No occupancy permit shall be issued for any clubhouse, restaurants, snack bars, country inn
or hotel or lounge described in section 4.6.5.2 until completion of the first nine holes of the
golf course.
2. A review of the Special Permit issued shall be conducted at least yearly after
commencement of operations of the golf course for compliance with the conditions of the
Special Permit.
4.6.11 Security for the Residential Improvements. The Applicant shall secure the completion of the ways and
utilities using the same or similar procedures outlined in MGL Chapter 41, Section 81U and the Planning Board
Subdivision Rules and Regulations. But the Applicant is not obligated to, but may elect to, seek preliminary
and/or definitive subdivision approval for all or a portion of the project parcels pursuant to the State Subdivision
Control Act, M.G.L. c. 41 and the Planning Board Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
4.6.12 Criteria for Decision. After considering reports from consultants and other boards and departments, the
Planning Board may grant a special permit for a GROD project where it makes the following written findings:
1. The application documents and supporting materials comply with all applicable sections of the zoning bylaw;
2. The proposed GROD project complies with the design standards of this section.
3. The proposed GROD project is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the bylaw, and does not
cause substantial detriment to the neighborhood after considering the following potential consequences:
A. Noise, during the construction and operational phases;
B. Pedestrian and vehicular traffic;
C. Environmental harm;
D. Visual impact caused by the character and scale of the proposed structure(s);
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
43
E. The location of dwelling units in proximity to non-residential uses would not be adversely affected,
and that the permitted uses are not noxious to the residential uses.
F. any multi-family residential use in non-residentially zoned areas where the public good would be
served and after a finding by the special permit granting authority, that such non-residentially zoned
area would not be adversely affected by such a residential use, and that permitted uses in such a zone
are not noxious to a multi-family use.
G. Other consequences as may be set forth in the Project Impact Statement for the GROD project;
H. The Planning Board shall consider the effects of the GROD project on available town services and
finances and the willingness of the applicant to address those effects. The Board shall seek the advice
of the Board of Selectmen, the Town Manager and the School Committee in this regard; and
I. The proposed GROD project furthers the goals and objectives of the Master Plan.;
4.6.13 Conditions. The Planning Board may impose conditions, safeguards and limitations in the grant of a
special permit including, but not limited to:
1. Those necessary to ensure compliance with the purposes of this section. Any alteration of lot lines or layout
of ways shall require approval of the Planning Board and shall be in compliance with the requirement of this
section of the zoning bylaw.
2. That all construction or infrastructure improvements shall be completed within a specific time period;
3. That all aspects of the GROD project, including authorized uses, building occupancy, and intensity of use,
shall remain in substantial conformance with the plans and other documents submitted to the Planning Board as
part of the special permit proceeding unless modification of the special permit for the GROD project is
authorized, after a public hearing, by the Planning Board; and,
4. That a performance guarantee acceptable to the Planning Board may be required.
4.7 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (amended 11/08/07)
4.7.1 A planned development district (PD) is an area characterized by a cluster of commercial, industrial, residential,
institutional, and public uses at moderate to high density. Commercial, industrial, and institutional uses in easily
walkable proximity will form the essential center that defines a planned development district. Adjacent multifamily
housing and mixed uses may extend the planned development district from this center.
A. Planned development districts are directed more towards pedestrian travel than vehicle travel. Distances
between buildings will generally be short. Mixed commercial and residential uses are encouraged. It should be
accented with vegetated open spaces such as small public parks. Commercial uses will include retail stores,
personal and professional service businesses, restaurants, and entertainment uses. Home based businesses are
appropriate. Buildings will generally be close to the street with sidewalks provided. Signage will be directed
toward pedestrians on sidewalks rather than motor vehicle users.
4.7.2 Requirements applying to all uses in the Planned Development District.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
44
A. Unless otherwise provided the required lot dimensions shall be those shown in table 7.2.
B. All new development, redevelopment, or building construction shall be in conformity with the planned
development district concept as stated in section 4.7.1.
C. A minimum of 10% of the total land area of a development site which has more than 1.5 acres shall be
dedicated as common open space for recreational use. Developers of smaller projects are encouraged to
preserve the maximum possible open space on site. Such land may be included in the determination of the site
capacity.
D. On developments with water frontage, public access must be established or maintained by way of linear
walkways and/or parks. The waterfront access for the public may be included as a portion of the required open
space.
E. A development proposal by a single developer or by related developers that includes work on more than one
parcel may be considered as a whole and require only a single application to each of the applicable local boards
in lieu of separate applications for each parcel.
F. New side lot lines adjacent to the frontage shall be at an angle of more than 75° to the frontage line. A 90°
angle is preferable.
G. Preferably, parking should be to the side or rear of the main building. Parking shall conform to the parking
standards in article 8.
H. Newly developed or redeveloped lots shall have concrete sidewalks and street trees along the entire lot
frontage typical of those on Central Street between Blair Square and Peterson Square. If such do not exist or are
not in good condition, they shall be installed at the expense of the applicant.
I. Public water and sewer lines are required, provided that connections are available. If such are not up to
Department of Public Works standards, they shall be installed or replaced at the expense of the applicant.
J. Low impact development principles as provided in the Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook are required
except that conventional drainage structures may be allowed by a planning board special permit based on an
engineering demonstration (which must include plans and calculations not just a statement) that application of
low impact principles to the site will be unreasonably difficult.
K. Except for allowed one and two family homes, any new construction project (whether one or more buildings
on one or more lots) shall have a lot area to gross floor area ratio of less than 4:1.
L. Redevelopment of properties within the planned development district, whether by tear down and rebuild or
by an extension of size greater than twenty percent (20%) shall conform to the standards for the planned
development district.
4.7.3 Reserved
4.7.4 Additional provisions for multifamily housing units (more than two units per structure):
A. Townhouses having common walls but located on adjacent separately owned lots will be permitted provided
no more than five such townhouses will be contained in a single structure and that the end townhouses have a
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
45
20 foot side setback on the exposed end and there is adequate road or driveway access to the rear of the
combined structures.
B. The minimum lot width shall be 24 feet and the minimum lot area shall be 3600 square feet per dwelling
unit. Townhouses must be served by public water and sewer.
4.7.5 Requirements for all other projects including mixed use projects.
A. In commercial areas, side setbacks may be waived, as part of site plan review, to allow buildings on adjacent
separately owned lots to be directly connected provided there is adequate road or driveway access to the rear of
the combined structures. The combined frontage length of such connected buildings shall not exceed 100 feet.
B. For new construction for mixed residential and commercial use, the minimum lot area shall be not less than
1.5 times the non-residential gross floor area plus 2000 square feet for each residential unit.
4.7.6 Extended Planned Development District. Development Developments using Planned development district
standards in other zones are permitted if such development will have public water and sewer and is within 500 feet of the
planned development district boundary provided special permits therefore are granted concurrently by the Zoning Board
of Appeals and the Planning Board.
4.8 GATEWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT
4.8.1 Purpose. In order to avoid sprawl and dangerous strip development patterns, development nodes have
been created along the major highways as an attempt to effect responsible, sustainable development in a
commercially advantageous setting. Smart Growth development patterns are hereby encouraged to place high
intensity uses like large-scale retail, cinemas and similar commercial occupancies in these nodes with
consideration of safe traffic access, rather than in allowing sprawl-type strip development. Residential
development adjacent to these nodes and thereby serviced by the commercial area is encouraged to reduce
car traffic. Similarly, walkability and other alternative circulation modes (cf. bike traffic) are also encouraged in
the development patterns, again eliminating unnecessary car traffic and enhancing the quality of life in the
development area.
A Gateway Overlay District is created that will prevent direct access from the highway to abutting commercial
occupancies outside the nodes. Strip commercial development will be seen as sprawl, is unsightly, and is a
deterrent to smooth traffic flow. Accordingly access to commercial occupancies outside of the development
nodes will be restricted.
4.8.2 Modifications to the Underlying Districts
1. That portion of each lot used for commercial purposes, except an allowed home based business, that fronts on
the highway to a depth of not less than 50 feet from the property line shall be preserved or established as a
buffer zone of dense vegetation so as to hide all structures, parking lots, outdoor storage, and other evidences of
commercial activity when viewed from the highway.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
46
2. Access to properties is encouraged via roads other than access to the high speed road. If no other access is
feasible, the buffer zone vegetation may be broken for access roads or driveways at appropriate points. Such
breaks shall not be more than 50 feet wide and shall be spaced not closer than 500 feet apart. The use of a
shared driveway or road by two or more commercial occupancies is encouraged.
3. All commercial occupancies within the Gateway Overlay District shall require full site plan review.
4.9 ROUTE 140 CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT (Rt. 140 COD)
4.9.1 Purpose
The purposes of the Route 140 Overlay District are to:
1. Encourage commercial and industrial development on Route 140 to provide local employment and enhance the
tax base, while also protecting surrounding neighborhoods from land use conflicts;
2. Enhance the appearance, function, and safety of Route 140;
3. Facilitate shared access and connections to adjoining properties, thereby reducing the number of curb cuts and
improving traffic safety on Route 140; and
4. Promote distinctive architecture, efficient site planning, and improved design standards that will achieve high
quality development and preserve the scenic, natural, and cultural resources of the Route 140 Corridor.
4.9.2 Application of Overlay District Regulations
This Overlay District sets forth design standards and flexible development options that apply in the Route 140
Corridor. The Use and Dimensional Regulations of the underlying district remain in place and other provisions
of the Zoning Bylaw apply unless superseded by this Overlay District. The location of the District is shown on a
map entitled Route 140 Corridor Overlay District, which is on file in the office of the Town Clerk. The Overlay
District consists of all parcels within the Highway Commercial (C1) district where the district has frontage on
Routes 140 and 12.
4.9.3 Application Process
1. Site Plan Review
Applicants shall comply with Section 12 of this Bylaw, Site Plan Review, for development in the Route 140 Overlay
District. Developments that meet the thresholds in Section 12.2, Projects Requiring Site Plan Review, shall require
site plan approval by the Planning Board. Developments that are exempt from site plan review by Section 12.3 of
this Bylaw are exempt from the application of the Overlay District.
2. Waivers
The Board may modify or waive any requirement of the Overlay District upon finding that due to topography,
location, or unusual conditions affecting the property, the requirements of this section would unreasonably restrict
development of the property. In modifying or waiving these provisions, the Board may impose conditions it deems
necessary to protect the public interest and promote the orderly development of the Corridor.
3. Inter-Municipal Review
The Planning Board shall send a copy of the application to the Gardner Planning Board and the Montachusett
Regional Planning Commission, which shall have thirty-five (35) days to submit comments to the Board. The
purpose of this review is to insure that regional implications are considered by the Board, and that significant
impacts of the project on corridor communities can be mitigated.
4. Coordination with Abutting Landowners
Applicants shall submit documentation that they have contacted owners of abutting land within the Overlay District
regarding their proposed plans. The intent of this notice is to give those landowners the opportunity to coordinate
existing uses or future development plans with the project before the Board. Where feasible, the parties should work
cooperatively to solve common issues such as improving traffic access, sharing parking, creating frontage roads,
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
47
allowing connections between properties, buffering incompatible uses, or preserving open space and wetland
resources.
4.9.4 Design Standards
1. General
Buildings and landscape treatments, not parking, should serve as the focal points for development along Route 140.
Site design should contribute to a sense of continuity and coherence from Route 140 and distant vantage points.
2. View Protection
The Route 140 Corridor offers many scenic views of the surrounding countryside. Each development shall preserve
the visual quality of its site in relation to the scenic qualities of the immediate area and the Corridor as a whole. The
applicant shall submit photographs of the area to the Board and describe the most prominent features of existing
visual quality. Through means of sketches or computer simulations, the applicant shall document the impacts of the
proposed development on visual quality. This analysis shall present how the project will be viewed from Route 140
in both directions and how views from the site to the surrounding area can be integrated into the development to
enhance the project design. Within the development, the applicant shall preserve open vistas of important features
such as Wachusett Mountain, lakes, farms, forests, historic sites, etc.
3. Access Management
1. Each new development within the Overlay District shall be limited to one entrance and one exit per street.
For multiple building developments, one combined entrance/exit location is preferable at the main entrance
to facilitate traffic movement; such an entrance shall be separated by a traffic island with separate in and
out movements. If needed, the applicant shall construct separate right and/or left turning lanes to facilitate
entry and exit from the site.
2. To reduce turning movements onto Route 140, developers are encouraged to connect internal roadways
with adjacent developments. When adjacent lots have contiguous frontage on Route 140, the Board may
require such lots to share a single driveway, or that the lots be accessed by an internal service road. Where
such sharing cannot be achieved in the short run, the means and location for future long term inter-parcel
connections may be required through right-of-way reservation and/or dedication.
3. Where it is proposed to re-develop property, the Board will evaluate existing access to Route 140 and work
with the applicant to re-design curb cuts to improve safety and traffic flow. Where appropriate, the Board
may require a reconfiguration to the existing access or the removal of unnecessary driveway openings onto
Route 140 in favor of fewer access points with a greater level of traffic control.
4. Where a property proposed for development abuts the North Central Pathway rail trail, the developer shall
consider a proposed connection to the trail and access to the principal uses on the lot to promote alternative
modes of commuting and/or public access.
4. Lighting and Utilities
1. All lighting shall be arranged and shielded so as to prevent direct glare from the light source into any public
street or private way or onto adjacent property.
2. Each outdoor luminaire shall be a full cutoff luminaire to prevent light trespass into the night sky. The
design of light standards and fixtures shall be consistent with the style and character of architecture existing
or proposed on the site.
3. All lights and illuminated signs shall be designed to prevent objectionable light and glare from crossing
property lines. Externally lit signs, display, building and aesthetic lighting must be lit from the top and
shine downward.
4. All electric, telephone, television and other communication lines, both main and service connections, shall
be provided by underground wiring.
5. Preservation of Sensitive Natural Features
Development shall preserve the natural features of the site, avoid areas of environmental sensitivity, and minimize
alteration of natural features. The following resources shall be identified on the site plan and remain undeveloped
unless otherwise approved by the Board:
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
48
1. Unique or fragile areas including wetlands, vernal pools, and 100-year flood plains;
2. Habitats of rare species listed by the Mass. Natural Heritage and Endangered Species Program; and
3. Streams and water bodies.
6. Shared Parking1
1. The number of parking spaces required shall be determined by using the standards for each use as provided
elsewhere in this Zoning Bylaw. The Board may allow a reduction of the required number of spaces by up
to twenty percent (20%) if the applicant demonstrates that two or more uses within a development can
share parking areas due to different hours of activity. A change in use of one of the businesses shall require
the construction of the full amount of parking otherwise required unless the Board grants site plan approval
to allow the parking reductions to remain in effect.
2. When adjacent property owners agree to share parking and a combined entrance, the Planning Board may
allow a reduction in the number of required parking spaces by as much as twenty (20) percent for each
business. In addition, the side yards (including associated landscaping) between the two parcels are not
required. The property owner(s) shall file a written agreement to guarantee long-term joint use of the shared
parking, which shall be recorded at the Worcester District Registry of Deeds. The parties may only revoke
this agreement by constructing the full number of spaces required by the Zoning Bylaw and Planning Board
approval of a revised plan.
7. Parking Lot Design
1. The provisions of Section 8.5, Parking Lot Design Requirements, shall apply unless superseded by the
following standards.
2. Parking lots shall generally be sited to the side or rear of buildings in order to minimize the obtrusiveness
of large parking areas on the visual quality of the Corridor. Up to fifteen percent (15%) of the parking
spaces may be in the front of the building to accommodate short-term parking needs of the proposed uses.
3. Parking lots of twenty (20) or more spaces shall contain interior landscaping covering not less than five
percent (5%) of the total area of the lot. Landscaping shall also be provided around the perimeter of the lot
for a width of ten feet (10') and planted with trees and shrubs. There shall be two shade trees or three
ornamental trees for every ten (10) spaces. Dead or diseased trees shall be replaced during optimal planting
times.
4. Sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall connect the lots to the principal uses they will serve. Such walkways
shall be constructed with brick, decorative pavers, or other materials, and may be bordered with fencing or
shrubbery to clearly separate pedestrians from automobile traffic. Facilities and access routes for deliveries,
service and maintenance shall be separated, where practical, from public access routes and parking areas.
Car stops shall be provided to prevent parked cars from damaging trees and shrubs or disrupting pedestrian
walkways.
5. The Planning Board may modify the above requirements for any interior landscaped areas or islands that
serve as vegetated swales or bioretention cells.
8. Bicycle Accommodation. Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided for any new building, addition or
enlargement of an existing building, or for any change in the occupancy of any building that results in the need
for additional vehicular parking facilities. One bicycle space shall be provided for every 10 vehicle parking
spaces, up to a maximum of 25 spaces.
1. Parking for bicycles shall include provision for secure storage of bicycles. Such facilities shall provide
lockable enclosed lockers or racks or equivalent structures in or upon which the user may lock a bicycle.
2. Bicycle parking facilities shall be sufficiently separated from motor vehicle parking areas to protect parked
bicycles from damage by motor vehicles. The separation may be accomplished through grade separation,
distance or physical barrier, such as curbs, wheel stops, poles or other similar features.
3. Bicycle parking facilities shall be located in a clearly designated safe and convenient location. Whenever
possible, the bicycle parking shall be placed within 50 feet of building entrances and in well-lit areas.
1 The provisions of Section 8.2.1 shall also apply in the Overlay District.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
49
9. Landscaping and Screening
1 Sections 4.8.2.1 and 7.2.5 shall apply in the Overlay District.2
2. A registered landscape architect shall prepare a landscape plan drawn to scale, including dimensions and
distances. The plan shall delineate all existing and proposed parking spaces or other vehicle areas, access
aisles, driveways, and the location, size and description of all landscaping materials and tree cover.
3. The development shall have one central gathering place of unique visual interest. This may include
elements such as a fountain, pond, sculpture, gazebo or similar open space or structure. The area shall be
provided with benches, stone walls, and similar amenities, and shall be accessible to individuals in
wheelchairs.
4. Loading areas and service facilities (dumpsters, storage areas, utility boxes, etc.) shall be placed to the rear
of buildings in visually unobtrusive locations. Screening and landscaping shall prevent direct views of such
areas from adjacent properties or from public ways. Screening shall be achieved through walls, fences,
landscaped berms, evergreen plantings, or combinations thereof. Fences made of wood, stone, or brick are
preferred; chain link or concrete materials are prohibited.
5. HVAC units, telephone boxes, electrical transformers, etc. shall be screened through use of landscaping,
berms, or fences and shall be as unobtrusive as possible. HVAC units may be located behind roof ridge
lines so they are not visible from the front view of the building.
6. When a proposed development abuts a Residential district, whether presently developed or not, landscaped
buffers shall be employed to shield the residential property from view of the proposed development, and to
minimize lighting and noise impacts. Such a buffer shall contain a screen of plantings not less than three
feet (3') in width and six feet (6') in height at the time of planting, and shall thereafter be maintained by the
owner or occupant so as to provide a dense screen year-round. At least fifty percent (50%) of the plants
shall consist of evergreens. A solid wall or fence, not to exceed six feet (6') in height, complemented by
suitable plantings may be substituted for such landscaped buffers.
10. Architectural Standards
1. The site plan application shall contain elevations of all proposed buildings, prepared and stamped by a
registered professional architect.
2. Exterior materials may include clapboard, wood shingles, stone, brick, or materials of comparable
appearance. Applicants are encouraged to use green building technologies and materials, wherever
possible, to limit environmental impacts.
3. Buildings should contain variation in detail to provide visual interest and to avoid monotony. Use of
pitched roofs, breaks in roof and wall lines, towers, cupolas and building ornamentation should be
incorporated into building design. The Planning Board may authorize a flat roof that includes green-roof
technology with plants suited for the local climate.
4. Architecture based upon generic franchise design is prohibited. Rather, architects should rely upon models
of regional building types to incorporate elements of historic design into the development.
5. Except for industrial, warehousing, and similar uses, windowless buildings with standardized facade
treatments are prohibited. No building shall have more than 100 linear feet of unbroken wall area.
6. Architectural Focal Points. In any development with 10,000 square feet or more of retail use, the principal
building on a lot shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances featuring at least two (2) of
the following: canopies or porticos; overhangs; recesses/projections; raised corniced parapets over the door;
peaked roof forms; arches; outdoor patios; display windows; planters or wing walls that incorporate
landscaped areas and/or places for sitting,
2 Ed. Note: Section 4. 8. 2. 1 requires a vegetated buffer zone along the highway of at least 50’ to screen views of
structures, parking lots, and outdoor storage areas from the highway. Section 7.2.5 applies where C1, C2, and I districts
abut residential property and requires a buffer zone/yard of 50’ to screen the residential properties.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
50
ARTICLE 5 USE REGULATIONS (Amended May 15, 2017)
5.1 BASIC REQUIREMENTS
In each zoning district, land, buildings and other structures may be used as a principal use but only as
set forth in Section 5.2 and in accordance with the following:
Y (Yes) Use permitted as a matter of right
SP (Special Permit) Use may be permitted by Special Permit of the Board of Appeals as
provided in Section 13.6.3 B
N (No) Use prohibited
All uses permitted as a matter of right or by Special Permit shall conform to all dimensional
requirements and other pertinent rules of this bylaw. Any use not listed shall be construed to be
prohibited.
5.1.2 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Any proposed use may be subject to the Site Plan Review provision of this Bylaw per Article 12.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
51
5.2 SCHEDULE OF USE REGULATIONS (Last amended May 15, 2017)
5.2.1Principal Use Categories
Zoning Districts
Residential Uses
R80
R40
R10
C1
Hwy
Comm
C2
Nbhd
Bus.
I
PD
A. Single family detached dwelling
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y
B. Two-family detached dwelling
SP
SP
Y
N
Y
N
Y
C. Conversion of a single family
dwelling existing at the adoption of this
bylaw to not more than four family use
(Note 10)
SP
SP
SP
N
Y
N
SP
D. Buildings or lots containing dwellings
in combination with retail stores or other
permitted business use (Note 1)
N
N
SP
SP
Y
N
Y
E. Boarding House
SP
SP
SP
N
SP
N
SP
F. Multi-family dwellings, up to four
units per lot
N
N
SP
N
SP
N
SP
G. Residential Development -
detached/attached units (See Article 11)
amended 5/23/11
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
H. Accessory dwelling unit (Note 11)
(SEE 6.3 ACCESSORY USES)
SP
SP
SP
N
SP
N
Y
I. Mobile home park or court; sales of
demonstration models allowed (Note 5)
SP
SP
SP
N
N
N
N
J. Home based business
(SEE 6.5 HOME BUSINESS)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
52
5.2.2 Principal Use Categories
Zoning Districts
Commercial Uses
R80
R40
R10
C1
Hwy
Comm
C2
Nbhd
Bus.
I
PD
A. Retail store or larger scale retail
services larger than 15,001 sq. ft including
sales room or market for sale of
merchandise to the public
N
N
N
Y
Y
SP
Y
B. Small scale retail services that do not
exceed 15,000 sq. ft.
SP
SP
SP
Y
Y
SP
Y
C. Convenience Store without gas station
SP
SP
SP
Y
Y
N
Y
D. Restaurant, tavern, café or similar
establishment for serving food and/or
beverages
N
N
SP
Y
Y
N
Y
E. Restaurant - take out, fast food, drive
through, walk-up window
N
N
N
SP
SP
N
SP
F. Theater, movie theater, bowling alley or
other indoor amusement or entertainment
use
N
N
N
Y
Y
SP
SP
G. Commercial parking lot or parking
garage
N
N
SP
Y
SP
SP
SP
H. Kennel structure, commercial or
veterinary hospital
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
I. Hotel, motel or similar lodging
N
N
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
J. Bed & breakfast or similar lodging
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
N
Y
K. Country Inn
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
N
SP
L. Bank or financial institution
N
N
N
Y
Y
SP
Y
M. Real estate, insurance or professional
office
N
N
N
Y
Y
N
Y
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
53
N. N. Professional medical office or clinic N N N Y Y N Y
5.2.2 Principal Use Categories
Zoning Districts
Commercial Uses
R80
R40
R10
C1
Hwy
Comm
C2
Nbhd
Bus.
I
PD
O. Office Building
N
N
N
Y
Y
N
Y
P. Self-service storage facility
(*see note 15)
N
N
N
SP
SP
SP
SP*
Q. Big-box retail establishment
N
N
N
SP
N
N
N
R. Sales and/or service establishment for
motor vehicles, Class I, II) recreational
vehicles to include off road and marine,
including storage of motor vehicles and
recreational vehicles.(all types)(Note 12)
N
N
N
SP
SP
N
SP
S. Mobile home sales
N
N
N
SP
N
SP
N
T. Gas station and/or motor vehicle repair
N
N
N
SP
SP
SP
SP
U. Auto body shop and painting
N
N
N
SP
N
SP
N
V. Mixed-use (retail or office with
residential above) (Note 8)
N
N
SP
SP
Y
N
Y
W. Adult uses
N
N
N
N
N
SP
N
X. Retail sales & service facility for boats
and marine equipment
N
N
N
Y
SP
SP
N
Y. Undertaking or funeral establishment
N
N
SP
N
Y
N
N
Z. Retail sales and service of farm
equipment
SP
N
N
Y
SP
SP
SP
AA. Mall or enclosed shopping plaza
N
N
N
SP
SP
SP
SP
BB. Carwash
N
N
N
Y
SP
N
SP
CC. Small engine repair for lawnmowers,
motorcycles, etc. to be enclosed in a barn
or garage and not to include automobiles
or auto body repair
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
N
N
DD. Land transportation passenger
terminal facility
N
N
N
SP
SP
SP
SP
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
54
EE. Sales of Motor Vehicles as an
accessory use to motor vehicle repair shop
or auto body shop.
FF. Gallery
N
N
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
5.2.3 Principal Use Categories
Zoning Districts
Industrial Uses
R80
R40
R10
C1
Hwy
Comm
C2
Nbhd
Bus.
I
PD
A. Warehouse or other building for storage,
assembly or marketing wholesale products
or equipment
N
N
N
Y
N
Y
SP
B. Enclosed heavy manufacturing,
processing, fabrication, packaging,
assembly and storage
N
N
N
N
N
Y
SP
C. Printing or publishing plant
N
N
N
SP
SP
Y
SP
D. Research, experimental or testing
laboratory
N
N
N
Y
SP
Y
SP
E. Building materials or contractor’s yard,
including exterior storage of materials,
products or equipment but with all such
material to be screened by a fence or
appropriate landscaping
N
N
N
Y
N
Y
N
F. Open air salvage yard, junk yard (Class
III) (Note 6)
N
N
N
N
N
SP
N
G. Above ground storage of heating fuel
N
N
N
SP
N
SP
N
H. Enclosed light manufacturing
processing, fabrication, packaging,
assembly and storage, marketing (*see note
16)
N
N
SP*
Y
SP
Y
SP
I. Expansion, conversion or rehabilitation
of existing light industrial uses
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
55
J. Hydropower generation
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
K. Windpower generation
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
L. Solar Energy Collection System
(see Section 6.11 for limitations)
M. Mobile Car Crushing conducted
commercially (Note 13)
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
SP
Y
SP
Y
N
5.2.4 Principal Use Categories
Zoning Districts
Agricultural and Forestry
Uses
R80
R40
R10
C1
Hwy
Comm
C2
Nbhd
Bus.
I
PD
A. Commercial Forestry
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
B. Orchard, market garden or other
commercial agricultural use:
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
C. Commercial nursery, greenhouse or
sales of produce
(5 acres or less)
(More than 5 acres)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
SP
Y
Y
Y
D. Commercial poultry or livestock farm
including riding stable or commercial stable
(Note 2)
(5 acres or less)
(More than 5 acres)
SP
Y
SP
Y
N
Y
SP
Y
SP
Y
SP
Y
SP
Y
E. Accessory poultry or livestock for
noncommercial use, private stable, or
kennel structure, non-profit (Note 2 and 3)
(Under 5 acres)
(5 acres and above)
(SEE 6.3 ACCESSORY USES)
Y
Y
Y
Y
SP
Y
SP
Y
SP
Y
SP
Y
SP
Y
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
56
F. Accessory non-commercial agriculture
excluding poultry and livestock
(SEE 6.3 ACCESSORY USES)
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
G. Commercial earth removal
N
N
N
N
N
SP
N
5.2.5 Principal Use Categories
Zoning Districts
Conservation and Recreation
R80
R40
R10
C1
Hwy
Comm
C2
Nbhd
Bus.
I
PD
A. Conservation and wildlife preserve
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
B. Private club, lodge or cultural civic or
other non-profit social or recreation use
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
C. Recreational activity conducted
commercially, i.e. campground, ski area or
golf course
SP
SP
SP
SP
N
SP
SP
D. Go-cart / off road motorcycle racetrack
(Note 9)
N
N
N
N
N
SP
N
E. Ice Racing (Note 7)
F. Miniature golf, batting cage or driving
range
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
G. Public recreational boating or swimming
area.
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
H .Commercial recreational boating or
swimming area.
N
N
N
SP
SP
SP
SP
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
57
5.2.6 Principal Use Categories
Zoning Districts
Institutional Uses
R80
R40
R10
C1
Hwy
Comm
C2
Nbhd
Bus.
I
PD
A. Church or place of worship including
parish house or rectory
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
B. Religious, sectarian or
denominational, private or public school
building or related use
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
C. School, hospital, medical institution
or government building
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
D. Cemetery
SP
SP
SP
N
N
N
N
E. Day nursery or other similar agency
for day care of children or adults
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
F. Nursing, rest or convalescent home,
assisted living facility
SP
SP
SP
N
SP
N
SP
G. Museum
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
58
5.2.7 Principal Use Categories
Zoning Districts
Governmental and Public Service Uses
R80
R40
R10
C1
Hwy
Comm
C2
Nbh
d
Bus.
I
PD
A. Administration building, police or fire
station or other government-related use
SP
SP
SP
Y
Y
SP
Y
B. Uses related to water supply or sewerage
treatment
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
C. Wireless Communications Facility
(WCF) (See Section 6.6)
Minor WCFs (June 12, 2000)
* only allowed if located on a water
tank, or as a co-location on an
existing wireless facility
(Building Permit Required)
Interior WCFs
(Building Permit Required)
Major WCFs
Y
Y
SP
Y
Y
SP
Y
Y
SP
Y
Y
SP
Y
Y
SP
Y
Y
SP
Y
Y
SP
D. Public Utility Installations
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
5.2.8 Special Use Categories
Zoning Districts
R80
R40
R10
C1
Hwy
Comm
C2
Nbh
d
Bus.
I
PD
A. Non-retail Marijuana Facilities. Non-retail
Marijuana Facilities are subject to the
provisions set forth in Art. 6.12. * see note 14
SP*
N
N
SP
SP
SP
SP
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
59
NOTES (Amended Nov. 8, 2007)
1. Requirements for mixed use buildings. Residential space is not permitted below commercial or
industrial space. The main or ground floor must be commercial or industrial. However, one
residential apartment of not less than 350 square feet nor more than 900 square feet and that does not
occupy more than 25% of the ground floor area may be allowed by special permit. No such
apartment may occupy building frontage beyond a doorway.
2. Provided that no structures housing poultry or livestock or kennels are within 100 ft. of any street or
property line.
3. Raising and keeping of livestock or other farm animals for non-commercial use by owner of record
provided said use is accessory to single family residence.
4. Demonstration models must be placed on individual building lots.
5. An owner and occupier of a residence which has been destroyed by fire or other natural holocaust shall
be allowed to place a mobile home on the site of such residence for a period of twelve months while
the residence is being rebuilt, or such further time as may be approved by a majority of the Zoning
Board of Appeals. Any such mobile home shall be subject to approval by the Board of Health and the
Building Inspector.
6. Requires a minimum lot size of fifteen (15) acres.
7. See Section 4.1 - Ice Racing Overlay District
8. When dealing with mixed uses, note that “use is limited to those commercial uses allowed within
each specific zone”.
9. (A) Requires a minimum lot size of ten (10) acres.
(B) Restricted to go-carts and off-road motorcycles only. Racing of all other motor vehicles is
prohibited.
(C) Hours of activity shall be restricted as follows: Sunday 12:00 P.M. to 6:00 P.M.; Monday through
Thursday 11:00 A.M. to Dusk, Friday and Saturday 9:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M.
(D) Sound emissions shall comply with 310 CMR 7.10.
(E) A buffer area of twenty-five (25) feet from the front lot line and one hundred (100) feet from all
other lot lines shall be maintained in a natural vegetative state and not used for any other purpose.
Installation of signage and driveway access is allowed in the buffer.
(F) Requires Site Plan Approval by the Planning Board.
10. Provided there is no external structural evidence of occupancy by more than one family other than a
second exit for fire purposes from each unit and further provided that each dwelling resulting from
such conversion shall not have less habitable floor space than:
efficiency unit – 450 sq. ft.
1 bedroom unit – 550 sq. ft.
2 bedroom unit (or more) – 750 sq. ft
11. If an accessory dwelling unit is proposed within the footprint of an existing single-family home, no
special permit is required.
12. Any motor vehicle or recreational vehicle (all types) not immediately registerable if required or
inspectable if required through the Massachusetts Registry of Motor Vehicles shall be screened from
view.
13. Requires a minimum lot size of five (5) acres.
14. R80 zone requires a minimum five (5) acre lot with double the setback distance as outlined in Art. 7.2
15. In existing structures only.
16. No Outside storage of materials.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
60
ARTICLE 6 NON-CONFORMING AND SPECIAL BUILDINGS
AND USES (amended 5/19/08)
6.1 APPLICABILITY
The provisions of this section apply to actions in connection with non-conforming, special and accessory uses,
structures, and lots as created by the initial enactment of this bylaw or by any subsequent amendment thereto.
6.2 NON-CONFORMING USES
6.2.1 Continuation of Use. Any lawful building or structure or use of a building, structure or land or any part
thereof existing at the time of adoption of this bylaw may be continued. A nonconforming building or structure
shall not be structurally altered, enlarged or reconstructed except as hereinafter set forth.
6.2.2 Re-establishment of Nonconforming Uses. Any building, structure or use of land devoted to a
nonconforming use, or any building, structure or use of land considered a nonconforming use at the time of
adoption of this bylaw may, if damaged or destroyed by fire or other accidental cause, be reconstructed or
restored within the same portion of the lot as used before, provided that such reconstruction or restoration is
started within twenty-four (24) months following damage or destruction.
6.2.3 Pre-existing Non-conforming Structures or Uses
A. Any lawful pre-existing nonconforming structures or buildings or uses may be reconstructed, extended
or altered provided that such alteration or extension does not create any new nonconformity and further
provided that no such reconstruction, extension or alteration shall be permitted unless the Zoning Board of
Appeals determines, by special permit, that such reconstruction, extension or alteration shall not be
substantially more detrimental than the existing non-conforming use or structure to the neighborhood. No
special permit is needed if the reconstruction, extension or alteration is to be a nonconforming single or
two-family dwelling and said reconstruction, extension or alteration does not increase the nonconforming
nature of the dwelling. In addition, no such building shall be added to, enlarged, or reconstructed to an
extent greater than fifty percent (50%) of its area at the time of the adoption of this Bylaw or such
amendment or except as provided for in Section 4.7.2M.
B. Upon a determination by the Building Commissioner, the reconstruction, extension or alteration to a
nonconforming single- or two-family residential structure shall not be considered an increase in the
nonconforming nature of the structure and shall be permitted by right under the following circumstances:
1. normal repairs or replacement of parts of any nonconforming structure does not constitute
an extension of a nonconforming use of such structure;
2. the reconstruction, extension or alteration to a structure located on a lot with insufficient
area complies with all current minimum setback requirements;
3. the reconstruction, extension or alteration to a structure located on a lot with insufficient
frontage complies with all current minimum setback requirements
4. the reconstruction, extension or alteration to a structure which encroaches upon one or more
required setback areas complies with all other current minimum setback requirements; or
5. the reconstruction, extension or alteration to a structure occurs within the existing footprint
of a nonconforming structure.
C. In the event that the Building Commissioner determines that the nonconforming nature of a single- or
two-family residential structure would be increased by the proposed reconstruction, extension
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
61
or alteration, the Zoning Board of Appeals may, by special permit, allow such reconstruction, extension or
alteration where it determines that the proposed modification will not be substantially more detrimental
than the existing nonconforming structure to the neighborhood.
6.2.4 Non-Use. Wherever a nonconforming use, as determined by state statute, has not been in use for a period
of more than two (2) years, it shall not be re-established and any future use shall conform with this bylaw, and
any amendment thereto.
6.3 ACCESSORY USES AND DWELLINGS
6.3.1 Any use of land or subordinate building which is customarily incidental to that of the main building or
use of land shall be permitted as a matter of right on the same lot with said principal use, or lot adjacent thereto
in the same ownership, provided that such accessory use is not hazardous or detrimental to the property in the
vicinity, and subject further to the following provisions. A parcel that is separated from the principal parcel
only by a public or private way shall be considered adjacent for the purposes of this section. (SEE FIGURE A.
6.3)
6.3.2 Purpose. The purpose of this bylaw is to encourage accessory dwelling units as an alternative housing
choice.
6.3.3 Applicability. An accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted by right in zoning districts as delineated
in the Schedule of Use Regulations if it is to be added to an existing dwelling unit as long as it does not add to
the footprint of the existing dwelling unit. If the accessory dwelling unit involves new construction that adds to
the footprint or will alter the exterior of the structure, the applicant shall submit an application for a special
permit to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The number of accessory dwelling units in a Residential Development
created under the provisions of Article 11 are limited by the provisions of that article.
6.3.4 Requirements for Accessory Dwellings in All Zoning Districts
The following requirements apply in all zoning districts in which an accessory dwelling unit is permitted:
A. The accessory dwelling unit shall clearly be a subordinate part of the single-family dwelling.
B. One private off-street parking space shall be available for use by occupants of each accessory
dwelling unit.
C. No new driveway or curb cut shall be created to service the accessory dwelling unit.
D. The accessory dwelling unit must be designed so that the appearance of the building remains
unchanged, and there shall be no change to the façade of the house. Unless otherwise required by the
Massachusetts Building Code, any new exterior stairs needed to provide primary or secondary means
of egress for the accessory dwelling unit shall be located on the side or rear of the building.
E. The lot where the accessory dwelling unit is located shall conform to the minimum setbacks and
frontage requirements in accordance with Section 7.2 Table of Dimensional and Density Regulations.
F. Not more than one accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted in a single-family home.
G. The living space in an accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed a maximum of seven hundred and
fifty (750) square feet or thirty-three (33) percent of the total square footage of the primary dwelling,
whichever is smaller, and shall contain no more than two bedrooms. For purposes of this section, the
computation of maximum floor area shall be limited to the principal residence and shall exclude the
floor area in an attached or detached structure.
6.3.5 Contractors Home Base Of Operations. The use of property in connection with his trade by a resident
plumber, carpenter, electrician, contractor, painter etc provided that no manufacturing or assembly work
requiring substantial continuous employment shall be carried on and provided that all storage shall be carried on
within the principal building or within suitable accessory buildings. Standards from 6.4 apply for parking.
6.3.6 Home Business Office. The use of an area within a dwelling unit for use by a resident for conducting
business by phone, mail, fax and which does not generate any traffic and has no employee outside the
household (see Article 6.5 Home Based Business ).
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
62
6.3.7 Dwellings Accessory to Commercial or Industrial Uses. (Voted May 19, 2008)
If the particular use of a commercial or industrial property in the industrial zone is such that a caretaker or
attendant is required to live on that property on a 24 hours a day/seven days a week basis, the Zoning Board of
Appeals may grant a special permit to allow one dwelling unit on such commercial or industrial property or
immediately adjacent to the property for the use of such caretaker or attendant and his/her family. Such a permit
shall be supported by a finding by the Board which states in detail the use which requires such caretaker or
attendant and the reasons that necessitate such a dwelling unit. Any such permit shall be limited to a period of
not more than five years but may be renewed. Should such use change or be discontinued during such permit
period, the dwelling space must be converted to non residential use or removed unless a new permit is granted.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
63
TABLE 6.3 SCHEDULE OF ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS (Amended 5/19/08)
Principal Use Categories
Zoning Districts
Accessory Uses
R80
R40
R10
C1
Hwy
Comm
C2
Nbhd
Bus.
I
PD
A. Accessory dwelling unit 6.3.1 through
6.3.4
SP
SP
SP
N
SP
N
SP
B. Accessory poultry or livestock for
noncommercial use, private stable or kennel
structure, non-profit. (See Section 5.2.4)
(Under 5 acres)
(5 acres and above)
Y
Y
Y
Y
SP
Y
SP
Y
SP
Y
SP
Y
SP
Y
C. Accessory non-commercial agriculture
excluding poultry and livestock
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
D. Home based business
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
E. Wireless Communications Facility
(WCF) (See Section 6.8)
Minor WCFs
* only allowed if located on a water
tank, or as a co-location on an
existing wireless facility
(Building Permit Required)
Interior WCFs
(Building Permit Required)
Major WCFs
Y
Y
SP
Y
Y
SP
Y
Y
SP
Y
Y
SP
Y
Y
SP
Y
Y
SP
Y
Y
SP
F. Parking of Heavy Vehicle under 26,000
GVW. (See section 6.4)
Y SP SP Y Y Y SP
G. Parking of Heavy Vehicle over 26,000
GVW. (See section 6.4)
SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
H. Non-Commercial passenger vehicles Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
I. Kennel Structure, Hobby
Y Y SP SP SP SP SP
J. Dwelling accessory to Commercial or
Industrial Use. (6.3.A)
N N N N N Y N
K. Solar Energy Collection System to
produce energy to be consumed entirely
on the premises (See Section 6.11)
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
64
6.4 PARKING OF HEAVY VEHICLES
6.4.1 Parking of not more than two heavy vehicles, other than non commercial passenger vehicles, on residential
property will be an accessory use and is subject to the conditions imposed by this section.
A. Vehicles subject to this section include trucks over 10,000 GVW (even if registered as a passenger vehicle),
tractor trailer units, busses, school busses, bulldozers, and other heavy off road vehicles. Large sport utility
vehicles and motor homes are non commercial passenger vehicles.
B. Weights specified in the accessory use table are gross vehicle weights (GVW) or gross combined weights
(GCW) for tractor trailer units will be determined according to the rules of the Massachusetts Registry of
Motor Vehicles.
C. The principal operator of the vehicle must be a resident of the property.
D. Vehicles shall be parked so as not to be generally visible from the street. Visibility from abutting property
is allowed only when the vehicle operator has obtained the written consent of the abutter. In the event a
new person occupies the abutting property, a new consent shall be required.
E. Such vehicles shall not be operated except to take them to or from the property. A vehicle may be allowed
to idle as allowed by law. The use of a vehicle mounted auxiliary engine for refrigeration or other purpose
while the vehicle is parked shall require a special permit. Only minor repairs or service to such vehicles are
allowed on site. Loading or off-loading of goods in transit is not permitted.
6.5 HOME BASED BUSINESS
6.5.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow residents of the Town of Winchendon to operate a homebased
business as an accessory use in residence zones subject to the following conditions.
6.5.2 Use Regulations. Home based-businesses shall be allowed in Winchendon as an accessory use in residential
zoning districts and the PD and C2 district provided the following use conditions in section 6.5.3 are met. Examples
of a home based business include but are not limited to: professional offices, tax preparation, tutoring, real estate,
insurance, and craft businesses.
6.5.3 Use Conditions
A. No changes to the property may be made that will seriously deter its future use for completely
residential purposes.
B. The principal operator of the business shall be a resident of the property.
C. Not more than 25% of the total floor area of the buildings may be used for the business.
D. The business does not create a nuisance to others in the area by reason of noise, odors, vibration,
unsightly conditions, significantly increased traffic, improper disposal of wastes, or other reason.
E. Not more than two commercial vehicles whose gross vehicle weight does not exceed 10,000 pounds
may be stored or parked out of doors on the property.
6.5.4 Parking Standards. Home based businesses shall not generate nonresidential traffic or vehicle parking above
and beyond what is normal for the typical residential occupancy for the area. A residential structure shall have not
more than two parking spaces to serve the home business. Parking on the street without causing an inconvenience
may be allowed. (See ARTICLE 8)
6.5.5 Signage. Signs are permitted and shall conform to standards set forth in Article 9.9.3 of this bylaw.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
65
6.6 SWIMMING POOLS
6.6.1 All swimming pools shall be subject to the State Building Code as applicable with the following restrictions:
A. A fifteen foot (15') setback from all property lines.
B. Supporting beams of decks shall be included as part of the setback restriction.
6.7 MOBILE HOME PARKS AND COURTS
6.7.1 Mobile home parks and courts may be established by special permit in any residential district and shall be
subject to site plan approval as per Article 12 and to the following additional requirements:
A. a parcel minimum of fifteen acres,
B. a lot minimum for each mobile home, including parking space and access drive, of 10,000 square feet,
C. lot frontage of not less than 75 feet,
D. Consistent with setbacks in R10 in Article 7.2 and also fifty (50) feet from any tract boundary,
E. each lot to be serviced with water, electricity and sanitary drainage suitable for permanent connection,
F. each mobile home to meet the requirements of Article II of the State Sanitary Code and any applicable
regulations of the Winchendon Board of Health,
G. site plan to designate lots, roadways, vehicular access, parking facilities, water and sewerage systems,
landscaping and street lighting arrangements, and licensing, maintenance and operation of each mobile
home park or court to be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 140, General Laws of
Massachusetts.
6.8 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
6.8.1 Purpose. The purpose of this bylaw is to:
A. Minimize adverse visual and environmental impacts of wireless communications facilities, satellite dishes,
antennas, and their support structures to abutting properties and traveled ways;
B. Provide dependable wireless communication service to all areas of the town;
C. Minimize the overall number and height of such facilities to only those that are essential;
D. Promote the integration of such facilities with existing buildings and the shared use of existing tower
facilities;
E. Reduce the need for new individual towers;
F. And to ensure the safety of such facilities.
6.8.2 Permit Requirements
A. Minor Wireless Communications Facilities shall be allowed by right in all zoning districts except
residential districts. Minor facilities are allowed by right in a residential zone only if they are
located on a water tank, or as a co-location on an existing wireless facility.
The Town reserves the right to prohibit facilities on some or all-municipal property by not issuing
requests for proposals on undesirable sites. Building permits issued by the Building Commissioner
shall be required for all Minor WCFs prior to installation and all such installations shall comply with
all applicable provisions of these bylaws. Minor WCF's shall be considered accessory structures and
uses.
B. Interior Wireless Communications Facilities shall be allowed by right in all zoning districts. Building
permits issued by the Building Commissioner shall be required for all such WCFs prior to installation and all
such installations shall comply with all applicable provisions of these bylaws.
C. Major Wireless Communications Facilities are allowed only under a Special Permit granted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of this bylaw. Major WCF's shall be considered
principal uses and shall be subject to the minimum requirements of the zoning district in which they are located
relative to lot size, frontage, and access, except as provided under section 6.7.4 of this bylaw.
D. A permit shall not be granted for a tower or facility to be built on speculation.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
66
6.8.3 General Standards for all WCFs
A. An applicant who seeks to install its first WCF in the town or to install a WCF not in conformity with its
build-out plans previously provided shall provide the town with:
1. A town-wide map showing the location of other existing WCFs and the WCF proposed by this
application in the town and within one (1) mile of the town;
2. A town-wide map showing the applicant's projected build-out plans.
B. Each year, on the anniversary of the issuance of the Building Permit and/or the Special Permit, the
Operator of each WCF shall submit to the Building Commissioner:
1. Certification of their compliance with all applicable federal and state requirements;
2. Certification of their possession of all necessary licenses to operate such a facility;
3. Certification that the WCF is still in use;
4. For towers on Town property, a Certificate of Insurance for liability coverage naming the Town as an
additional insured;
5. For any tower, proof of a current tower removal guarantee bond as required by section 6.8.5(S)(1).
6. Should any Operator fail to produce such certifications, the owner of that facility shall remove the
WCF within sixty (60) days or the town may remove the WCF (and any now unused tower) under the
provisions of section 6.8.5(S).
C. For all WCFs, the Operator shall maintain the WCF - including painted finish, security barrier, and
landscaping - in good condition.
D. Applicants proposing to erect a WCF on municipally owned land or structures shall provide evidence of
contractual authorization for such use from the Town department in charge of the property as part of their
application.
E. The visual impacts of each WCF shall be minimized by employing the Best Available Technology for the
industry.
6.8.4 Special Permit Applications
A. No WCF or part thereof shall be erected or installed outdoors except in compliance with the provisions of
this bylaw. The provisions of this section 14.2 shall apply to all WCFs whether installed or erected as a
principal or an accessory use and to any additions to, or replacement of, existing WCFs.
B. Procedurally, the Zoning Board shall act on an application for a Special Permit for the placement of a WCF
pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 9. In issuing a Special Permit under this subsection, the Zoning
Board may waive or otherwise reduce the effect of any requirements or prohibitions of any zoning bylaw,
providing, however, any zoning bylaw limiting the number of permitted uses or structures on a lot shall not
apply to a WCF authorized this section. Any denial shall be in writing and supported by substantial
evidence contained in the record.
C. The Zoning Board shall review the Special Permit application for conformance with the Special Permit
Review Criteria as provided by section 13.6 of the Winchendon Zoning Bylaw and for conformance with
WCF standards under section 6.7 of this bylaw. Where a WCF already exists and is a legally
nonconforming structure or use, then any change, extension or alteration of the use or structure shall
require a determination by the Zoning Board that the proposed change, extension or alteration is not more
substantially detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing use or structure.
D. To make an informed review of an applicant's proposal, the Board shall request the following information:
1. A locus plan at a scale not smaller than 1 inch = 200 feet showing all property lines, streets,
landscape features, and all buildings within 500 feet of the facility. It shall show the exact location of
the proposed facilities including antennas, mounts, equipment shelters, security barriers, and parking.
It shall also show all proposed changes to the existing property, including grading, vegetation removal
and temporary or permanent roads and driveways.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
67
E. The Zoning Board may also require existing (before condition) photographs and proposed (after condition)
renditions. The before condition photographs shall illustrate what can currently be seen from any public
road within 300 feet. The after condition renditions shall show the same view with the proposed facility
superimposed.
F. The Zoning Board may require the applicant to pay reasonable fees for professional review of the
applicant's proposal by a professional or radio frequency engineer, attorney, or other qualified professional.
G. Any WCF located on or within an historic structure shall employ the Best Available Technology for the
industry to minimize any alteration to the character-defining features, distinctive construction methods, or
original historic materials of the building and to completely conceal from view the proposed WCF. Any
alterations made to an historic structure to accommodate the WCF shall require the approval of the
appropriate Historical Commission and be fully reversible.
6.8.5 General Standards for Towers. Any application for a WCF that includes a tower shall be subject to the
following standards, in addition to those described for all WCFs.
A. Any application for a WCF that includes a Tower shall be considered only after a finding by the Zoning
Board that existing or previously approved towers, buildings, or structures cannot accommodate the
proposed users. New towers shall be considered only upon a finding by the Zoning Board that:
1. The applicant has used reasonable efforts to co-locate its proposed WCF on existing or
approved facilities; and
2. The applicant either was unable to negotiate commercially reasonable lease terms with
the owner of an existing or approved facility that could accommodate the proposed
facilities from both structural and radio frequency engineering perspectives; or that no
structure exists or is proposed.
B. A Tower shall be either a freestanding monopole or be disguised as a naturally occurring object such as a
tree or context-sensitive feature.
C. Any proposed tower shall be the minimum height necessary to accommodate the use. However, any new
tower shall be of sufficient height to accommodate the antennas of at least two WCFs. The visual impact
of the Tower shall be minimized by use of the Best Available Technology for the industry.
D. To demonstrate the visual impact of a proposed Tower, the applicant shall fly a 3-ft diameter balloon or
place a crane at the proposed site at the maximum height of the proposed Tower on a weekend day between
the hours of noon and 3 p.m. The date and location of the demonstration shall be advertised at least 14
days, but not more than 21 days, before the demonstration in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Town. Photographs of the demonstration showing the impact of the proposed Tower on abutting streets,
adjacent property owners and residential neighborhoods shall be submitted. If, during the demonstration,
visibility is obscured by poor atmospheric conditions, the demonstration shall be repeated.
E. The tower site shall have access from a public road or through an adequate easement.
F. Landscaping shall be provided to screen the foundation and the equipment from abutting properties.
G. The maximum feasible amount of vegetation shall be preserved.
H. The tower site shall be suitably fenced to prevent unauthorized entry.
I. Lighting shall be limited to minimal security lighting, emergency lighting, and that required by federal,
state or local regulations.
J. The applicant shall provide evidence that the tower meets the current structural standards for structural
antenna towers and antenna support structures published by the Electrical Association/Telecommunications
Industry Association.
K. Each tower site shall have at least one parking space, to be used in connection with the maintenance of the
facility, and shall not be used for the storage of vehicles or other items.
L. WCF shall not generate noise in excess of 50dB measured at the site property line.
M. The WCF shall meet setback requirements for the zoning district in which it is located, unless the Zoning
Board finds that a greater setback would be more appropriate for the facility and/or the surroundings.
N. A suitable "fall-zone" shall be provided at each site to ensure public safety. Suitability shall be determined
through fact-finding by the Zoning Board. The fall-zone shall be within the required perimeter fence.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
68
O. Towers shall not be sited in or within 500 feet of a historic district or where their location adversely
impacts the visual aesthetics of a historic district.
P. There shall be a sign identifying the facility, the operator and an emergency telephone number where the
operator can be reached at any time. Other permitted signs are "Danger/Warning" and "No Trespassing"
signs. Advertising signs are prohibited. All signs must conform to Article 9 of the Winchendon Zoning
Bylaw.
Q. For Towers located on Town property, the Operator shall execute an agreement with the Town whereby the
Operator indemnifies and holds the Town harmless against any claims for injury or damage resulting from
or arising out of the use or occupancy of the Town owned property by the Operator.
R. For all Towers, the Operator shall execute an agreement with the Town whereby the Operator will allow
other carriers to lease space on the Tower so long as such use does not interfere with the Operator's use of
the Tower.
S. For all Towers, the owner of the tower, which owner may be different from the owner of the land, shall
execute an agreement with the Town whereby each Operator shall, at its own expense, not more than one
(1) year after its use of the tower ceases, remove all of its WCF thereon, and, if the tower is no longer used
for WCF, shall remove the tower and restore the premises to its original condition, all at the owner's
expense. To protect the Town's interest, in the event that the owner or any Operator breaches this
agreement, the owner shall provide the Town with:
1. A bond in an amount sufficient to pay for this removal and restoration, which shall be kept
current and effective; and
2. Written authority from the owner of record of the subject property to bind its successors and
assigns to allow the Town to enter onto the subject property to perform this work.
6.8.6 Standards for Accessory Buildings and Structures
1. Accessory structures and buildings shall comply with the setback requirements of the zoning district in which they are
located.
2. Any additional accessory building(s) added to a site shall abut the original accessory building and shall be compatible
in appearance.
6.8.7 Exceptions. Amateur radio towers used in accordance with the terms of any amateur radio license issued by
the Federal Communications Commission shall be exempt from the provisions of this bylaw, provided that the tower is
not used or licensed for any commercial purpose.
6.9 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
6.9.1 Purpose. The special regulations itemized in this section are for the purpose of preventing a concentration of
adult use establishments in any one area of town, to prevent the associated secondary effects of such establishments and
to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Winchendon.
6.9.2 Adult use establishments are permitted only in the Industrial (I) zoning district with a special Permit as herein
provided.
6.9.3 Adult use establishments require a Special Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals. An applicant for a Special
Permit to operate an adult use establishment must file an application on a form approved by the Zoning Board of
Appeals, with the Zoning Board of Appeals and the Town Clerk. Such form shall require any information required by the
Zoning Board of Appeals, but shall include as a minimum:
A. Name and Address of the legal owner of the establishment;
B. Name and Address of all persons having lawful, equity or security interests in the establishment;
C. Name and Address of the manager(s);
D. The number of proposed employees, including performers;
E. Proposed security precautions;
F. Physical layout of the premises in a format established by the Zoning Board of Appeals;
G. The exact use(s) to be made of the premises.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
69
6.9.4 Adult use establishments require Site Plan Approval from the Planning Board. The applicant for site plan
approval for an adult use establishment must file an application on a form approved by the Planning Board, with the
Planning Board and the Town Clerk. Such form shall contain any information required by the Planning Board, but shall
include as a minimum:
A. Name and Address of the legal owner of the establishment;
B. Name and Address of all persons having lawful, equity or security interests in the establishment;
C. Name and Address of the manager(s);
D. The number of proposed employees, including performers;
E. Proposed security precautions;
F. Physical layout of the premises in a format established by the Planning Board;
G. The exact use(s) to be made of the premises.
6.9.5 Adult use establishments may be permitted under this section only on lots not less than three (3) times the lot
size required in the Industrial (I) zone.
6.9.6 Location
Adult use establishments may not be located less than five hundred (500) feet from the nearest lot line of:
A. other adult use establishments;
B. a public or private nursery school or day care center;
C. a public or private kindergarten;
D. a public or private school;
E. a playground;
F. a church or other place of worship;
G. an establishment serving alcoholic beverages which are consumed on its premises;
H. a hotel, motel, motor court or lodging house;
I. a residential zoning district or residence;
J. an establishment selling alcoholic beverages.
6.9.7 A Special Permit granted under this Article, pursuant to the provisions of the Massachusetts General Laws,
Chapter 40A, Section 9A, shall lapse within six (6) months of issuance, not including the time required to pursue or
await the determination of an appeal as allowed under Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40A, Section 17, from the
grant thereof, if a substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced except for good cause.
6.9.8 The Zoning Board of Appeals shall apply the following criteria in the granting of a Special Permit under this
section:
A. It shall determine that the proposed site will meet, or be altered to meet, all provisions of this Zoning Bylaw
including coverage, densities, buffer areas and parking requirements.
B. Appearance of buildings for adult uses shall be consistent with the appearance of buildings in similar (but
not specifically "adult") uses in Winchendon, and shall not employ unusual color, graphics, lighting or
building design which would attract attention to the premises.
C. No Special Permit shall be issued to any person convicted of violating the Massachusetts General Laws,
Chapter 119, Section 63, or Chapter 272, Section 28 or convicted of any felony in any jurisdiction.
D. Each Special Permit shall be issued with such conditions as may be required by the Zoning Board of
Appeals and shall have at least the conditions specified below:
1. No one under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be allowed on the premises;
2. "Obscene" merchandise or services shall not be available;
3. No one, including employees and patrons, shall be permitted on the premises while such person is
unclothed or in such state of attire as may be considered "nudity" as that term is defined in
Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 272, Section 31, except an entertainer hired by the owner
thereof.
4. A uniformed police officer shall be on duty, at the expense of the owner, at any establishment when
live entertainment takes place.
5. Use of unusual color, graphics, lighting, or building design which would attract attention to the
premises is prohibited;
6. No hostess or other employees or persons may mingle with the patrons while such hostess, or other
person is unclothed or in such state of attire as may be considered "nudity" as this term is defined in
Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 272, Section 31;
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
70
7. No person may be encouraged or permitted to engage in "sexual conduct", as that term is defined in
Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 272, Section 31 on the premises of such establishment;
8. No person shall be employed or permitted to perform an act or acts, or to simulate an act or acts of
"sexual conduct" or engage in any activity which may be considered causing or encouraging a state of
"sexual excitement" as defined in Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 272, Section 31;
9. The permitted uses specifically exclude disseminating or offering to disseminate, adult material or
matter to minors or suffering minors to view displays of such matter or material;
10. Entertainers are required to remain in a designated area such as a stage during performances and are
prohibited from mingling with patrons during their performance;
11. The sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages is prohibited on a premises where an adult use
establishment exists, except as otherwise permitted by the local licensing authorities following the
issuance of an appropriate license therefor;
12. Noncompliance with any of the conditions of a Special Permit issued under this section shall be
deemed a zoning violation. If more than three (3) zoning violations occur within thirty (30) days,
forfeiture of all special permits issued hereunder shall occur, subject to review at a public hearing of
the Zoning Board of Appeals and Planning Board, which may be a joint hearing at the request of either
Board or the Applicant. Repeated abuses (more than two (2) public hearings in one (1) year - 365 days)
shall result in the revocation of all permits issued under this section. In the event of such revocation,
the applicant may not reapply for five (5) years from the date of such revocation.
6.9.9 The Planning Board shall apply the following standards in the issuance of a Site Plan Special Permit:
A. Appropriate landscaping and fencing buffers to protect neighboring properties from light and noise, and to
restrict public access to the adjacent properties is required;
B. Lighting of the exterior of the building and parking lot to reduce congestion, improve public safety and
increase visibility for public safety is required, as specified by the Town Safety Officer;
C. No displays or sexually explicit advertising shall be visible from areas used by the general public, including
areas in and around the exterior of the establishment;
D. Adequate parking, entrances and exits from the public way(s) or other ways to which the public has access
to or from the premises, including but not limited to safe and appropriate sight distances for a reasonably
safe ingress and egress, shall be reviewed for public safety and to address traffic congestion.
E. Noncompliance with any of the conditions shall be deemed a zoning violation. If more than three (3)
zoning violations occur within thirty (30) days, forfeiture of all special permits and licenses granted shall
occur, subject to review at a joint public hearing of the Select Board, Zoning Board of Appeals and
Planning Board. Repeated abuses (more than two (2) public hearings in one (1) year - 365 days) will result
in complete revocation of permits and licenses. If such an event occurs, the applicant must wait five (5)
years before reapplying.
6.10 WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS) (Added May 19, 2008)
1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the development and use of wind power as an alternative
energy source, while protecting public health, safety and welfare, preserving environmental, historic and scenic
resources, controlling noise levels and preventing electromagnetic interference.
2. Applicability. Construction and use of a Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS) or any part thereof shall
comply with this by-law.
3. Definitions.
A. Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) - All equipment, machinery, and structures, whether
underground, on the surface, or overhead, used to collect, transmit, distribute, store, supply, or sell
energy derived from wind, including but not limited to wind turbines (rotors, electrical generators
and towers), anemometers (wind measuring equipment), transformers, substations, power lines,
control and maintenance facilities, and site access and service roads.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
71
B. Commercial Wind Energy System (CWES): A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind
turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity
greater than 10 kW.
C. Residential Wind Energy System (RWES): A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind
turbine, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more
than 10 kW, located on a single lot, intended as an accessory use in a designated residential district
or in connection with any residential use in a designated commercial district. The rated capacity of
not more than 10 kW can be increased at the discretion of the SPGA.
D. Wind Turbine: A single device that converts wind to electricity or other forms of energy, typically
consisting of a rotor and blade assembly, electrical generator, and tower with or without guy wires.
E. Overall Engineer Designed Fall Zone: The area on the ground, determined by a registered
professional engineer, within a prescribed radius from the base of a WECS, typically the area
within which there is a potential hazard from falling debris or collapsing material.
F. Wind Farm: A collection of towers in the same location. See Section 5.D for allowance of more
than one (1) tower on the same lot or on contiguous lots held in common ownership.
4. Special Permit Granting Authority: The Planning Board is hereby established as the Special Permit
Granting Authority (SPGA) in connection with construction of Wind Energy Facilities (WECS). WECS
are allowed in all districts by special permit. Special scrutiny will be given to WECS to be located in a
Historic District. The SPGA may grant a Special Permit only if it finds that the proposal complies with
the provisions of this bylaw and is consistent with the applicable criteria for granting special permits.
5. Development Requirements. The following requirements apply to all Wind Energy Conversion Systems
(WECS).
A. Proposed WECS shall be consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements,
including but not limited to all applicable electrical, construction, noise, safety, environmental and
communications requirements.
B. WECS serving neighborhoods or multiple residences are encouraged however; proposals shall be
permitted as a CWES allowed in residential districts. If applicable, any necessary easements between
property owners must be recorded.
C. RWES and CWES shall be limited to one (1) tower per lot including one (1) tower per lot on
contiguous lots held in common ownership. The SPGA may exceed this limit if the applicant can
demonstrate that additional number is necessary to serve the purposes of this bylaw and that the
additional towers will not create an adverse impact in comparison to the siting of one tower as outlined
in this bylaw with respect to factors including, but not limited to, Noise (Section 5.H.),
Shadowing/Flicker (Section 5.I.), Visual Impact (Section 5.K.), and Electromagnetic Interference
(Section 5.L.).
D. Tower height.
1. CWES. Maximum height three hundred feet. The SPGA may allow the height restriction
to be exceeded as part of the special permit process if it finds that the applicant has
demonstrated that additional height is needed and that increased height does not create a
greater adverse impact than a facility built in compliance with this section with respect to
factors including, but not limited to, Noise (Section 5.H.), Shadowing/Flicker (Section 5.I.),
Visual Impact (Section 5.K.), and Electromagnetic Interference (Section 5.L.).
2. RWES. Maximum height one hundred and fifty feet. The SPGA may allow the height
restriction to be exceeded as part of the special permit process if it finds that the applicant has
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
72
demonstrated that additional height is needed and that increased height does not create a
greater adverse impact than a facility built in compliance with this section with respect to
factors including, but not limited to, Noise (Section 5.I.), Shadowing/Flicker (Section 5.J.),
Visual Impact (Section 5.L.), and Electromagnetic Interference (Section 5.M.).
E. Monopole towers are the preferred type of support.
F. Height Calculation. Overall height of the wind turbine, including any roof mounted wind turbine,
shall be measured from the ground level (the land in its natural state prior to grading or filling) to
the highest point reached by any part of the wind turbine.
G. Fall Zone Setbacks. (See figure A) The minimum setback for the WECS shall be maintained equal
to the overall engineer designed fall zone plus ten (10) feet from all boundaries of the site on
which the WECS is located.
1. No part of the WECS support structure, including guy wire anchors, may extend closer
to the property boundaries than the standard structure setbacks for the zone where the
land is located.
2. WECS shall be set back a distance of the overall engineer designed fall zone plus ten
(10) feet, from ways, drives, access easements, trails, ascertainable paths and above
ground utility lines (See Figure A).
The SPGA may waive the Fall Zone Setbacks in Section 5.G. if it determines that such a waiver does not derogate
from the purpose of this bylaw, and is in the public interest. If any portion of the fall zone setback area referred to in
Section 5.G includes abutting property, in order for the SPGA to grant such a waiver, the applicant must present
evidence that he or she has secured a permanent “fall zone easement” from the abutting property owner(s). The area
of the “fall zone easement” shall be shown on all applicable plans submitted to the SPGA. The easement shall
prohibit the placement of temporary or permanent buildings or structures within the “fall zone” and state that it is for
the benefit of the applicant’s property and that the easement shall run with the land and forever burden the subject
property. The easement shall be recorded no later than ten (10) days from the grant of said waiver, and a copy of the
recorded easement shall be provided to the SPGA promptly. In addition, the SPGA may waive the setback
requirement in Section 5.G. for setbacks from a public way for good cause.
H. Noise. The WECS and associated equipment shall conform to the Massachusetts noise regulation
(310 CMR 7.10). If deemed necessary by the SPGA, an analysis, prepared by a qualified engineer,
shall be presented to demonstrate compliance with these noise standards and be consistent with
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection guidance for noise measurement.
1. Manufacturers specifications may be accepted when, in the opinion of the SPGA, the
information provided satisfies the above requirements.
2. If noise levels are determined to be excessive, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
require the property owner to perform ambient and operating decibel measurements
at the nearest point from the wind turbine to the property line of the complainant and
to the nearest inhabited residence.
I. Shadowing/Flicker. The WECS shall be sited in a manner that does not result in significant
shadowing or flicker impacts. The applicant has the burden of proving that a WECS does not have
significant adverse impact on neighboring or adjacent uses either through siting or mitigation.
J. Prevention of Access. The applicant/owner shall ensure that all related components of the WECS
are protected from unlawful access. Climbing access to the tower shall be limited by the following
methods: by placing climbing apparatus no lower than twelve feet from the ground and by
installation of a six foot high fence with locked gate set back no less than ten (10) feet from the
base of the WECS (See Figure B).
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
73
K. Visual Impact. The applicant shall employ all reasonable means, including landscaping and
alternative locations, to minimize the visual impact of all WECS components. All components of
the WECS and its support structure shall be painted plain non-reflective muted colors without
graphics or other decoration.
The WECS shall not unreasonably interfere with any scenic views, paying particular attention to such views from
the downtown business area, public parks, natural scenic vistas or historic building or districts. WECS shall, when
possible, be sited off ridgelines where there visual impact is least detrimental to scenic views and areas. In
determining whether the proposed WECS will have an undue adverse impact on the scenic beauty of a ridge of
hillside, the SPGA consider, among other things, the following:
1. The period of time during which the proposed WECS will be viewed by the traveling
public on a public highway, public trail, or public body of water;
2. The frequency of the view of the proposed WECS by the traveling public;
3. The degree to which the view of the WECS is screened by existing vegetation, the
topography of the land, and existing structures;
4. Background features in the line of sight to the proposed WECS that obscure it or
make it more conspicuous;
5. The distance of the WECS from the viewing vantage point and the proportion that is
visible above the skyline;
6. The number of travelers or vehicles traveling on a public highway, public trail, or
public body of water at or near the critical vantage point, and
7. The sensitivity or unique value of the particular view affected by the proposed
WECS.
To assist the SPGA in its review it may require the applicant to fly or raise a three-foot diameter balloon at the
maximum height of the proposed WECS at a location within fifty (50) horizontal feet of the center of the proposed
facility. The applicant shall provide photographs of the balloon test taken from at least four vantage points
previously designated by the SPGA.
L. Electromagnetic interference. No WECS installation shall cause electromagnetic interference. The
applicant may be asked to bring in consultants at his/her own expense to certify that the system
will not cause interference. If neighbors can demonstrate that there is excessive interference, the
Building Commissioner shall notify in writing the owner of the WECS to correct the violation. If
the interference is not remedied within 30 days the WECS shall remain inactive until the
interference is remedied, which may include relocation or removal.
6. Procedural Requirements:
A. Site Plan. A site plan must be submitted, prepared to scale by a registered land surveyor or civil
engineer showing the location of the proposed WECS, distances to all property lines, existing and
proposed structures, existing and proposed elevations, public and private roads, above ground
utility lines and any other significant features or appurtenances. Any portion of this section may be
waived if in the opinion of the SPGA the materials submitted are sufficient for the SPGA to make a
decision.
1. Vegetation. Existing vegetation must be shown including average height of trees and
any proposed vegetation removal on the subject property or abutting properties. The
SPGA may also consider the height of vegetation at maturity.
2. Lighting. If lighting is proposed (other than required FAA lights) the applicant shall
submit a plan indicating the horizontal foot candles at grade, within the property line
and twenty-five (25) beyond the property lines. The plan shall also indicate the
locations and types of luminaries proposed.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
74
3. The Site Plan shall be accompanied by any additional documentation necessary to
provide a complete description of WECS including technical, economic,
environmental, and other reasons for the proposed location, height and design.
B. Proof of Liability Insurance. The applicant shall be required to provide evidence of liability
insurance in an amount and for duration sufficient to cover loss or damage to persons and structures
occasioned by the failure of the facility.
C. Compliance with FAA Regulations. WECS must comply with applicable FAA regulations,
including any necessary approvals for installations close to airports.
D. Utility Notification. No WECS shall be installed until evidence has been given that the utility
company has been informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned
generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
E. Discontinuance: A WECS shall be considered to be discontinued if it is not operated for a period of
two years. Once a WECS is designated as discontinued, the owner shall be required to physically
remove the WECS within 90 days of written notice. "Physically remove" shall include, but not be
limited to:
1. Removal of WECS, any equipment shelters and security barriers from the subject property.
2. Proper disposal of the waste materials from the site in accordance with local and state solid
waste disposal regulations.
3. Restoring the location of the WECS to its natural condition, except that any landscaping and
grading shall remain in the after-condition.
If the applicant fails to remove the WECS in accordance with the requirements of this section, the
town shall have the authority to enter the property and physically remove the facility at the owners
cost, which may include placing a lien on the property and/or taking other actions.
F. Modifications. All modifications (excluding routine repairs and maintenance) to a WECS made
after issuance of the Special Permit shall require approval by the SPGA.
G. Professional Fees. The SPGA may retain a technical expert/consultant to verify information
presented by the applicant. The cost for such a technical expert/consultant will be the expense of
the applicant.
H. Unsafe Installation. Should a WECS be deemed unsafe by the appropriate town authority because
of its construction or condition, it shall be repaired or removed at the owner’s expense.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
75
FIGURE A: WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (Illustrative Example Only)
A = Overall Height of WECS.
Maximum Height of a Residential
WECS is 150 Feet and Maximum
Height for a Commercial WECS is 300
Feet. Maximum Height may be
exceeded as part of the special permit
process if there is a demonstrated need.
B = Fall Zone Setback: A
minimum of the overall engineer
designed fall zone plus 10 feet. This
setback does not apply to any
residential or commercial structure that
is owned by the applicant.
C = Standard Structure Setback.
FIGURE B: WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (Illustrative Example Only)
A = Six foot high fence with locked gate set back
no less than ten (10) feet from the base of the
WECS
B = Fall Zone Setback: A minimum of the overall
engineer designed fall zone plus 10 feet. This setback
does not apply to any residential or commercial
structure that is owned by the applicant.
C = Standard Structure Setback.
Guy Wire
C
B
A
0 5 10 20 30 40 50
Feet
B C
B
A
10 Feet
0 5 10 20 30 40 50
Feet
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
76
6.11 SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS (Added May 24, 2010)
6.11.1 The purpose of this bylaw is to promote the creation of solar energy collection systems to further the goal of
making Winchendon a sustainable community as provided in section 1.1.1 of this bylaw. This section seeks to provide
standards for the placement, design, construction, operation, monitoring, modification and removal of such installations
that address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources and to provide adequate financial
assurance for the eventual decommissioning of such installations.
6.11.2 Solar Energy Collection Systems are permitted as follows:
a. Solar Energy Collection Systems which produce energy to be used exclusively on the premises and systems
which generate electricity that is sold to the electric utility, provided the site is/will be a net purchaser of
electricity, are permitted by right in all zones as an accessory use. This shall include recharging electric
automobile batteries on site.
b. Solar Energy Collection Systems which are mounted on buildings are allowed by right in all zones.
c. Ground mounted Solar Energy Collection Systems are allowed by right in the R40, R80, C1, C2, and I zones
but shall be subject to the site plan review requirements of article 12 and the requirements of section 6.11.5
through 6.11.18.
d. Other Solar Energy Collection Systems are allowed in all zoning districts by special permit issued by the
Planning Board and the site plan review requirements of article 12 and the requirements of section 6.11.5
through 6.11.18.
6.11.3 The construction or installation of any Solar Energy Collection System shall require a separate building permit.
6.11.4 The construction and operation of all Solar Energy Collection Systems shall be consistent with all applicable
local, state and federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable safety, construction, electrical, and
communications requirements. All buildings and fixtures forming part of the installation shall be constructed in
accordance with the State Building Code.
a. Lots containing Solar Energy Collection Systems shall conform to the lot area and setback requirements for
the zone in which it is located.
b. The Planning Board may require the installation of wooded-natural buffers to restrict visual impacts on
abutting residential properties and roadways. In those cases where a required wooded buffer
would shade the collectors, the Planning Board may allow substitution of a fence and a grassed buffer.
6.11.5 Sections 6.11.6 through 6.11.18 shall apply only to systems requiring site plan review under section
6.11.2 c and 6.11.2 d.
6.11.6 In addition to the other requirements for site plan review, each application shall include:
a. One or three line electrical diagram (if electrical generation is proposed) detailing the solar installation,
associated components, and electrical interconnection methods, with all National Electrical Code and National
Electrical Safety Code compliant disconnects and over current devices;
b. Documentation of the major system components to be used, including the collector panels, mounting
system, and appurtenant devices;
c. A statement bearing the seal of a licensed professional engineer stating the measured normal pre
construction noise levels at points (generally 100 feet apart) along the property lines and the expected
operational noise levels at the same locations. Particular attention shall be paid to property lines abutting
developed sites. A properly calibrated sound level meter meeting ANSI class 2 standards shall be used for all
measurements.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
77
d. Name, address, and contact information for proposed system installer;
e. An operation and maintenance plan (see also Section 6.11.9);
f. Proof of liability insurance; and
g. Description of financial security that satisfies Section 6.11.18.
6.11.7 If the area where the collector panels are installed is so designed that all stormwater will be returned to the soil
within the area, the whole area will be considered as pervious area. Otherwise the actual ground area covered by
collector panels will be considered impervious.
6.11.8 A Low Impact Development Permit under article 31 of the general bylaws will be required for Solar Energy
Collection Systems.
6.11.9 Operation & Maintenance Plan The project proponent shall submit a plan for the operation and maintenance of
the installation, which shall include measures for maintaining safe access to the installation, storm water controls, as well
as general procedures for operational maintenance of the installation.
6.11.10 Utility Notification No installation proposed to generate electricity for use off site shall be approved until
evidence has been given to the Planning Board that the utility company that operates the electrical grid where the
installation is to be located has been informed of the solar installation owner or operator’s intent to install an
interconnected customer-owned generator.
6.11.11 Appurtenant Structures All appurtenant structures to installations; including but not limited to, equipment
shelters, storage facilities, transformers, substations; pumps, and turbines shall be included in the required site plan
review and shall be evaluated based on the criteria in section 12.6. Whenever reasonable, structures should be shaded
from view by vegetation and/or joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts.
6.11.12 Design Standards
Solar energy collections systems shall be surrounded by a chain link or similar fence adequate to prevent entry by
unauthorized persons.
a. If the noise level measured at any property line of the system in normal operation is more than 10 db greater
than the reported pre construction noise level at the same location, sound deadening measures may be required
as a condition of allowing further operation of the system.
b. Each installation shall have a sign showing the name and address of the operator thereof and a telephone
number where a responsible representative of the operator may be reached at any time.
c. Reasonable efforts, as determined by the Planning Board, shall be made to place all utility connections
from the installation underground, depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape, and topography of the site
and any requirements of the utility provider. Electrical transformers for utility interconnections may be above
ground if required by the utility provider.
6.11.13 Safety and Environmental Standards
a. Emergency Services The system owner or operator shall provide a copy of the project summary, electrical
schematic, and site plan to the local fire chief. Upon request the owner or operator shall cooperate with local
emergency services in developing an emergency response plan. All means of shutting down the system shall be
clearly marked. The owner or operator shall identify a responsible person for public inquiries throughout the
life of the installation. This contact information and telephone number shall also be provided to the local
emergency dispatch center.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
78
b. Solar Energy Collection System Conditions: The installation owner or operator shall maintain the
facility in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs, and
integrity of security measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable to the local Fire Chief
and Emergency Medical Services. The owner or operator shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining
the installation and any access road(s), unless accepted as a public way.
6.11.14 Modifications
a. All material modifications to a Solar Energy Collection System installation made after approval of the
site plan shall require a modification of the approval.
b. The Planning Board shall review each site plan at intervals of not less than five years and may, after
public notice and hearing, modify the approved plan to insure the public safety and compliance with the
town bylaws and regulations.
6.11.15 Abandonment or Decommissioning Any installation which has reached the end of its useful life or has been
abandoned as defined in section 6.11.17 of this bylaw shall be removed. The owner or operator shall physically remove
the installation no more than 150 days after the date of discontinued operations. The owner or operator shall notify the
Planning Board by certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for removal.
Decommissioning shall consist of:
a. Physical removal of the solar collectors, appurtenant structures, equipment, security barriers and
transmission lines from the site.
b. Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local, state, and federal waste disposal
regulations.
6.11.16 Stabilization or revegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion. The Planning Board may allow the
owner or operator to leave landscaping or designated below-grade foundations in order to minimize erosion and
disruption to vegetation.
6.11.17 Abandonment Absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning or written notice of extenuating
circumstances, the installation shall be considered abandoned when the system fails to operate for more than one year
without the written consent of the Planning Board. If the owner or operator of the installation fails to remove the
installation in accordance with the requirements of this section within 150 days of abandonment or the proposed date of
decommissioning, the town may enter the property and physically remove the installation.
6.11.18 Financial Surety Operators of installations shall provide security, either escrow account, bond, or otherwise, to
cover the cost of removal of the system in the event the town must remove it and remediate the landscape. The form and
amount of the security shall be determined by the Planning Board, The amount of the security shall reasonably reflect the
anticipated cost of such removal and remediation. If the Board and the operator disagree, it shall be determined by an
disinterested and qualified independent engineer. Such surety will not be required for municipally- or state-owned
facilities. The amount shall include a mechanism for calculating increased removal costs due to inflation.
Article 6.12 Medical/Adult Use Marijuana Facilities and the Medical/Adult Use
Marijuana Retail Overlay District (added May 21, 2018)
6.12.1. Purpose.
1.1. To provide for the limited establishment of Medical/Adult Use Marijuana Facilities (collectively, known hereafter
as Marijuana Facilities) in appropriate places for such use and under conditions in accordance with Chapter 334 of
the Acts of 2016, entitled, “Regulation and Taxation of Marijuana Act”, as amended by Chapter 55 of the Acts of
2017, “An Act to Ensure Safe Access to Marijuana”, and all regulations which have or may be issued by the
Department of Public Health (“DPH”) and the Cannabis Control Commission (“CCC”), including, but not limited
to 105 CMR 725.00, et seq. and 935 CMR 500.00, et seq.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
79
1.2. To minimize the adverse impacts of Marijuana Facilities on adjacent properties, residential neighborhoods, schools
and other places where children congregate, and other land uses potentially incompatible with Marijuana Facilities.
1.3. To regulate the siting, design, placement, safety, monitoring, modification, and removal of Marijuana Facilities.
1.4. To limit the overall number Marijuana Facilities in the Town of Winchendon to what is essential to serve the public
convenience and necessity.
6.12.2. Applicability.
2.1 The commercial cultivation, production, processing, assembly, packaging, retail or wholesale sale, trade, distribution
or dispensing of Marijuana for Medical Use or Adult Use is prohibited unless licensed by all applicable Massachusetts
licensing authorities and permitted as a Marijuana Facility under this Bylaw.
2.2. No Marijuana Facility shall be established except in compliance with the provisions set forth herein.
2.4 If any provision of this Section or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstance shall be held
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this Section and to this end the provisions of
this Section are severable.
6.12.3. Administration
3.1 The Planning Board shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) and shall also conduct Site Plan Review
for an applicant for a Marijuana Facility.
3.2 A special permit is required for all Marijuana Facilities.
6.12.4. Definitions.
Any term not specifically defined herein shall have the meaning as defined in 105 CMR 725.00 and 935 CMR 500.00 as
such regulations may from time to time be amended.
Designated contact persons – Any and all persons whose names appear on the Special Permit and Formal Site Plan
Approval Applications as the applicant’s designee.
Independent Testing Laboratory - An entity licensed to test marijuana and marijuana products.
Locked Area –An area equipped with locks or other security devices, which is accessible only to consumers 21 years of
age or older, employees or owners of a Marijuana Facility or agents thereof, registered qualifying patients that are 18
years or older, or care givers.
Marijuana – The same substance defined as “marihuana” or “marijuana” under Chapter 94C and 94G of the
Massachusetts General Laws.
Marijuana cultivator - An entity licensed to cultivate, process and package marijuana, and to transfer marijuana to other
Marijuana Facilities, but not to consumers.
Marijuana for Adult Use – Marijuana that is regulated by 925 CMR 500.00 and cultivated, processed, manufactured,
transported or sold for recreational purposes for individuals 21 years of age or older.
Marijuana Facility – A commercial marijuana cultivator, independent testing laboratory, product manufacturer, research
facility, transporter, retailer, or any other type of licensed marijuana-related business, including a Marijuana Treatment
Center.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
80
Marijuana for Medical Use – Marijuana that is regulated by 105 CMR 725.00 and designated and restricted for use by,
and for the benefit of, Qualifying Patients in the treatment of Debilitating Medical Conditions.
Marijuana product manufacturer - An entity licensed to obtain, manufacture, process and package marijuana and
marijuana products and to transfer these products to other Marijuana Facilities, but not to consumers.
Marijuana products - Products that have been manufactured and contain marijuana or an extract from marijuana,
including, but not limited to concentrated forms of marijuana and products composed of marijuana and other ingredients
that are intended for use or consumption, including edible products, beverages, topical products, ointments, oils and
tinctures.
Marijuana retailer - An entity licensed to purchase and transport marijuana and marijuana products from Marijuana
Facilities and to, sell or otherwise transfer marijuana and marijuana products to Marijuana Facilities and to consumers.
Medical Marijuana Treatment Center – An entity register under 105 CMR 725.100 that acquires, cultivates, possesses,
processes, transfers, transports, sells distributes, dispenses, or administers marijuana, products containing marijuana for
medical use, related supplies, or educational materials to registered qualifying patients or their personal caregivers.
Non-Medical Marijuana- Any marijuana that is NOT regulated by 105 CMR 725.00 and designated and restricted for
use by, and for the benefit of, Qualifying Patients in the treatment of Debilitating Medical Conditions.
6.12.5. Eligible Locations for Marijuana Facilities.
5.1 Non-Retail Marijuana Facilities which shall include marijuana cultivator, product manufacturer, independent testing
laboratory, research facility, transporter of marijuana and Medical Marijuana Treatment Centers engaged in any of
the above-listed non-retail uses may be permitted in certain zoning districts pursuant to a Special Permit and Site
Plan Approval as set forth in the Zoning Bylaw Article 5.2.8, Use Regulations.
5.2 Adult Use/Medical Marijuana Facilities Retail Overlay District
5.2.1 Establishment
The Medical/Adult Use Marijuana Facilities Retail Overlay District (the “MFROD”) is hereby established and is
identified on the Town of Winchendon Zoning Map. The boundaries of the MFROD are shown on the Zoning Map on
file with the Town Clerk.
Within the MFROD, all requirements of the underlying zoning district remain in effect, except where these regulations
provide an alternative to such requirements. Land within the MFROD may be used for adult use marijuana retailers and
Medical Marijuana Treatment Centers engaged only in the dispensing of medical use-marijuana for retail sale, in which
case the requirements set forth in this section shall apply; or a use allowed in the underlying district, in which case the
requirements of the underlying district shall apply. If the provisions of the MFROD are silent on a zoning regulation, the
requirements of the underlying district shall apply. If the provisions of the MFROD conflict with the requirements of the
underlying district, the requirements of the MFROD shall control. A Medical Marijuana Treatment Center that is
proposing to operate all of the uses permitted under its license in a single location will be permitted only on sites located
within the MFROD.
6.12.6. Application Requirements for all Marijuana Facilities.
6.1 All Marijuana Facilities shall be subject to the application requirements set forth in Rules and Regulations for the
Review and Approval of Site Plans and Site Development in Winchendon, Ma. for Formal Site Plan Review.
6.2 In addition to the application requirements set forth in in the Regulations for Site Plan Review, a special permit/site
plan application for a Marijuana Facility shall also include the following:
(a) a statement from the Applicant, setting forth the following information:
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
81
(i) the name and address of each owner of the Facility.
(ii) the source of all marijuana that will be sold or distributed at the Marijuana Facility, if applicable;
(iii) the source of all marijuana that will be cultivated, processed, and/or packaged at the Marijuana
Facility, if applicable;
(iv) the quantity of marijuana that will be cultivated, processed, packaged, sold and/or distributed at the
Marijuana Facility; and
Plans must show all proposed security measures for the Marijuana Facility, including lighting and alarms, to
ensure the safety of persons and to protect the premises from theft.
(b) If the Applicant is a non-profit organization, a copy of its Articles of Organization, a current Certificate of
Legal Existence from the Secretary of the Commonwealth, and the most recent annual report; if the Applicant is
a for-profit corporate entity, a copy of its Articles of Incorporation or equivalent documents, a current
Certificate of Legal Existence from the Secretary of the Commonwealth, and the most recent annual report; if
the Applicant is a public agency.
(c) Copies of all licenses issued by the CCC or DPH, and any materials submitted to these entities by the
Applicant for purposes of seeking licensing. CCC or DPH licensing is not required at the time of submission of
a Special Permit application; however, issuance of a special permit shall be conditioned on the applicants
receipt of a provisional license from the CCC or DPH, and no operations shall commence prior to the CCC or
DPH issuance of a final license.
(d) A detailed floor plan of the premises of the proposed Marijuana Facility that identifies the square footage
available and describes the functional areas of the facility, along with a deed, lease, purchase and sale
agreement or other legally-binding document for the site of the proposes Marijuana Facility;
(e) The resume(s) of the Applicant, including company history, references, and relevant experience, where
applicable;
6.2 Additional Requirements
6.2.1 Use Requirements
(a) No marijuana shall be smoked, eaten, or otherwise consumed or ingested on the premises of any Marijuana
Facility absent a positive vote by ballot question presented to the voters of the city or town at a biennial state
election pursuant to G.L. c.94G, §3(b). The prohibition on on-site consumption shall also include private social
clubs or any other establishment which allows for social consumption of marijuana or marijuana products on the
premises, regardless of whether the product is sold to consumers on site.
(b) Marijuana Facilities shall provide the Special Permit Granting Authority and all abutters located within 500 feet
of the Marijuana Facility with the name, phone number and email address of an on-site community relations
staff person to whom one can provide notice if there are operating problems associated with the establishment.
(c) The hour of operation of Retail Marijuana Facilities shall be set by the Special
Permit Granting Authority.
6.2.2 Limitation on number of Retail Marijuana Facilities – No more than three (3) Adult Use Marijuana Retailers
and no more than one (1) Medical Marijuana Treatment Center retail dispensary shall be permitted to be located
in the Town of Winchendon.
6.2.3 Locational and Physical Requirements
All aspects of a Marijuana Facility relative to the acquisition, cultivation, possession, processing, sales, distribution,
dispensing, or administration of marijuana, products containing marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
82
must take place at a fixed location within a fully enclosed building and shall not be visible from the exterior of the
business.
No outside storage of marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials is permitted.
(a) No Retail Marijuana Facility shall have a gross floor area accessible to patients or customers which is in excess
of 2,500 square feet. Space which is dedicated to administration or operations and is accessible only to
employees of the Retail Marijuana Facility shall not be included in this limitation.
(b) In the R80 District all Marijuana Facilities shall be subject to siting on a parcel no less than 5 acres. In addition,
all Marijuana Facilities in the R80 district shall be subject to double the setback distance requirements to those
outlined in Article 7.2 of the Winchendon Zoning Bylaws.
6.2.4 All Marijuana Facilities shall provide adequate ventilation such that the application of pesticides shall be performed
in compliance with M.G.L. c. 132B and the regulations promulgated at 333 CMR 2.00 through 333 CMR 14.00.
No use shall be allowed at a Marijuana Facility which creates a nuisance to abutters or to the surrounding area, or
which creates any hazard, including but not limited to, fire, explosion, fumes, gas, smoke, odors, obnoxious dust,
vapors, offensive sound or vibration, flashes, glare, objectionable effluent or electrical interference, which may
impair the normal use and peaceful enjoyment of any property, structure or dwelling in the area.
6.2.5 Buffer. No Marijuana Facility excluding areas designated for parking, shall be located within 500 feet of any of
the following pre-existing uses:
(a) any public or private school providing education in kindergarten or grades 1 through 12;
(b) any drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility;
(c) any correctional facility, half-way house, or similar facility; or
(d) any playground or athletic fields, recreational facilities, youth centers such as a YMCA, and parking areas for
the bike path, or similar facility in which children commonly congregate.
6.2.6. The distance specified above shall be measured by a straight line from the point of the front door for which the
proposed Marijuana facility is to be located to the property line of the facility in question.
6.2.7. No Marijuana Facility shall be located inside a building containing residential units, including transient housing
such as motels and dormitories, or inside a movable or mobile structure such as a van or truck.
6.2.8 Signage for Marijuana Facilities will be subject to the Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Article 9 and the
provisions for marketing set forth in 935 CMR 500.105 (4).
6.12.7. Reporting Requirements
7.1 All Special Permit holders for uses under this section shall provide the Police Department,
Fire Department, Building Commissioner, Board of Health, and Special Permit Granting
Authority with the names, phone numbers, mailing and email addresses of all management staff and key-holders,
including a minimum of two (2) operators or managers of the facilities identified as designated contact persons to whom
notice should be made if there are operating problems associated with any use under this section. All such contact
information shall be updated as needed to keep it current and accurate.
7.2 The designated contact persons shall notify the Police Department, Fire Department, Building Commissioner, Board
of Health and Special Permit Granting Authority in writing a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to any change in
ownership or management of a facility regulated under this section.
7.3 All Marijuana Facilities shall file an annual report with the
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
83
Special Permit Granting Authority and owner or operations manager for the Marijuana Facility shall appear before said
Authority to present the report no later than January 31st of each year, providing a copy of all current applicable state
licenses to demonstrate continued compliance with the conditions of the Special Permit.
7.4 Within twenty-four hours of contact by a municipal official concerning the operation of a Marijuana Facility, the
designated contact persons shall be required to respond by phone or email to any such inquiry.
6.12.8. Transfer/Discontinuance of Use
8.1 A Special Permit granted under this Section is non-transferable and shall have a term limited to the duration of the
applicant’s ownership or leasing of the premises as a Marijuana Facility.
8.2 Any Marijuana Facility permitted under this section shall be required to remove all material, plants, equipment and
other paraphernalia upon registration or licensure revocation, expiration, termination, relocation to a new site or any
other cessation of operation as regulated by the CCC or DHP in compliance with applicable state regulations.
6.12.9 Outside Consultants and Review Fees.
9.1 An outside consultant review escrow deposit shall accompany the Application for special permit. The escrow for
review fees is intended to cover the Planning Board’s potential cost of hiring consultants to review the Applicant’s
compliance with the special permit requirements under this Bylaw to include provisions set forth in Section 6.2.2 of the
Winchendon Planning Board Site Plan Rules and Regulations and may include legal counsel. The initial escrow deposit
amount shall be set by the Special Permit Granting Authority on a case-by-case basis, when such consultants or counsel
are deemed necessary. Any unexpended monies in the escrow account will be returned to the applicant only after all
obligations are satisfied. Failure to fulfill escrow requirements may render an Application incomplete and be considered
sufficient grounds for its denial.
9.2 The Applicant may appeal the selection of a consultant(s) whose fees are to be paid from the escrow deposit to the
Board of Selectmen. The grounds for such an appeal shall be limited to claims that the consultant selected has a conflict
of interest or does not possess the minimum required qualifications. The minimum qualifications shall consist of either
an educational degree in or related to the field at issue or three or more years of practice in the field at issue or a related
field. Pursuant to M.G.L. c. 44, § 53G, the required time limits for action upon the Application by the Special Permit
Granting Authority shall be extended by the duration of the appeal. If no decision is made by the Board of Selectmen
within one month following the filing of the appeal, the Special Permit Granting Authority’s selection shall stand.
9.3 The escrow deposit shall be deposited in a special account established by the Town Treasurer pursuant to M.G.L. c.
44, § 53G. Funds from the special account shall be administered in accordance with M.G.L. c. 44, § 53G, and may be
expended only for the purposes described above.
6.12.10. Findings.
The Special Permit Authority shall not issue a special permit for a Marijuana Facility unless it finds that:
(a) the Facility is designed to minimize any adverse visual impacts on abutters and other parties in interest, as
defined in G.L. c. 40A, §11;
(b) the Facility has received a provisional certificate of registration or provisional license from the appropriate
licensing authority and is in compliance with all applicable state laws and regulations;
(c) the applicant has provided a copy of a signed Host Agreement with the Town of Winchendon, in accordance
with M.G.L. Chapter 94G;
(d) the applicant has provided adequate security measures to protect the health and safety of the public, and that the
storage and/or location of cultivation of marijuana is adequately secured in an enclosed, locked area;
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
84
(e) the applicant has adequately addressed issues of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, circulation, parking and
queuing, especially during peak periods at the facility.
6.12.11. Waiver.
The Planning Board may, in its discretion, may waive or modify any of the requirements set forth in this section, if the
Board determines that such a waiver does not derogate from the purpose of this bylaw, and is in the public interest.
6.12.12. Violations.
Any violation of this Section shall be grounds for revocation of a special permit issued under this Section.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
85
ARTICLE 7 SITE CONSIDERATIONS – DIMENSIONAL AND
DENSITY REGULATIONS
7.1 PURPOSE (Amended May 23, 2011)
The purpose of this section is to ensure that building lots conform to and are conducive to land usage patterns designed
by the town of Winchendon, that they do not restrict the acceptable land uses of others either through land-locking,
limiting access or gerrymandering lots to such an extent that it limits the value of developable land in the town, except
where topography or environmental considerations dictate. Normal polygonal lot shapes with ample width to allow for
attractive, neighborhood-consistent buildings well-suited to their purpose that do not impact their neighbors adversely,
shall be allowed without requiring a burdensome review process (lots).
The purpose of this section is also to ensure that building designs, land development and the public setting retain the
charm and appeal of a small rural town with walkable neighborhoods, reasonable privacy and easy access to green
spaces (buildings).
The provisions of this article do not apply to new construction built under the provisions of Article 11, Residential
Development. For those projects, the provisions of Article 11, shall supersede those contained in this article.
7.2 BASIC REQUIREMENTS (Amended May 21, 2012)
7.2.1 Each lot shall have a street frontage line which conforms to the minimum stated in table 7.2, side lines and a rear
line. Lots other than a reduced frontage lot permitted under Section 7.3 of the Bylaw, shall have an area in square feet
greater than the square of its perimeter divided by 30 and shall have no non-adjacent side lines closer than one half of the
minimum frontage distance at any point between the frontage and the buildable portion of the lot.
A. The area of a lot required to meet the minimum stated in table 7.2 shall be the area of the lot determined by
excluding from the actual area of the lot the areas of any streams, ponds, wetlands, vernal pools and areas with
a slope greater than 1:4. The areas of such wetland related areas shall be as determined by Chapter 131 of the
General Laws and any state or local regulations adopted thereunder.
B. The street frontage of a buildable lot must be on;
1. A public way maintained by the state or town; or a way which the Town Clerk certifies is maintained
and used as a public way; or
2. A private way which has been built and is currently maintained adequately for the uses to which it is to
be put as determined in a finding by the planning board. Such a finding shall be made only after the board has
sought advice from the fire department, the police department and the department of public works; or
3. A way shown on a subdivision plan approved and endorsed by the planning board the construction of
which is guaranteed under the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 41 section 81U.
7.2.2 Buildings and structures erected, reconstructed or enlarged in any zoning district shall conform to the dimensional
and density regulations set forth in the Table 7.2. (SEE FIGURES A.7.2.3 & A.7.2.5)
7.2.3 No more than one principal building or use shall be permitted per lot unless specifically provided for below
or in another part of this bylaw, such as the GROD or MCOD districts described in Article 4.
7.2.3.1 The Planning Board may authorize by special permit more than one principal building and/or more than
one use per lot in connection with the approval of a definitive subdivision or site plan if such action will
allow more orderly development of the lot. All of the following requirements shall be met:
7.2.3.1.1 The Board must determine that such action will not be detrimental to area property values, the
neighborhood, or the intent of the Master Plan;
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
86
7.2.3.1.2 The Board must determine that the area of the lot is fully sufficient to provide for the existing
and proposed buildings as well as for driveways, walkways, parking, and any other proposed or
required amenities
A. For residential uses the requirements of section 11.12.2.1 shall also be met.
7.2.3.1.3 The lot frontage and setbacks conform to those required in table 7.2 or, in the case of
residential development, by section 11.12.2;
7.2.3.1.4 Principal buildings are separated by not less than 20 feet;
7.2.3.1.5 Each principal building has adequate access from the lot frontage.
7.2.3.1.6 If multiple uses are allowed, all such uses are allowed in the zoning district as provided in
article 5;
7.2.3.1.7 Any change to the lot, either by the construction of additional buildings or changes of use, shall
require a modification of the special permit.
7.2.4 Special Conditions
A. Limitations on height of buildings and structures in the dimensional table shall not apply to chimneys, towers,
ventilators, spires or ornamental features.
B. A previously plotted lot or parcel of land containing less than the area or frontage required by the dimensional
table may be developed for single residential use only in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 40A of the
General Laws of Massachusetts.
7.2.5 Buffer Zone/Yard
In areas where Highway Commercial (C1), Neighborhood Business (C2), and Industrial (I) zones abut residential
property, a minimum buffer zone of 50 feet in the C1 and C2 districts and 100 feet in the I district shall be required to
screen the residential properties. In the buffer zone, every effort shall be made to preserve the existing trees and ground
vegetation. Where suitable vegetation is non-existent, a dense mixture of native or non-invasive trees shall be planted.
The trees planted shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet and shall be of at least two (2) inch diameter at the height
of forty-two (42) inches from ground level. (SEE FIGURE A.7.2.4)
7.2 TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL & DENSITY REGULATIONS (Amended Nov. 8, 2007)
These provisions do not apply to projects built under the provisions of Article 11, Residential Development, unless that
article so provides.
Zoning
District
Minimum
Lot Area
Square
Feet
Frontage
Note 6
Front
Setback
Note 7,8
Side
Setback
Note 7,8
Rear
Setback
Note 7,8
Maximu
m
Structure
Height
(floors)
Maximum
Man Made
Structure
Height
Maximum
Impervious
Area as %
of Lot (1)
R80 80,000 200 40 25 50 2-1/2 35’ 10%
R40 40,000 150 40 25 50 2-1/2 35’ 15%
R10 10,000 75 20 10 20 2-1/2 35’ 25%
C1 75,000 250 75 25 25 3 45’ 45%
C2 20,000 100 30 15 30 3 45’ 45%
I 43,560 150 40 25 50 no 50’ no
PD except
residential
Note 2
5,000 75 5 0 0 3 45’ 70%
PD 1 & 2
family
residential
10,000 75 20 20 20 2 1/2 35 feet 25%
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
87
Notes:
1. Includes all buildings, structures, and paved surfaces.(SEE FIGURES A.7.2.3-6)
2. Includes mixed use developments.
3. But not less than 3600 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit. Measured parallel to the frontage, except where
attached buildings are allowed in sections 4.7.4 and 4.7.5.
4. As per special use regulations of Sections 4.3 and 4.4, lots partially within the Wetlands and Flood Plain
Conservancy Districts may be governed by dimensional and density requirements of the underlying district as
determined by the Board of Appeals, provided that more than 50 percent of the lot area and all non-sewered sanitary
facilities, lie outside the WF district.
5. RESERVED
6. Lots having frontage on more than one street shall maintain the front setback for all such frontage streets appropriate
for the zone in which it lies. Any remaining lot lines shall be considered side lot lines for setback purposes.
7. The distances shown in table 7.2 for front setback, side setback, and rear setback are the minimum distances from the
respective lot lines on which any structure, whether temporary or permanent, other than a fence, a retaining wall, a
driveway, a walkway, a lamppost, or an allowed sign may be placed unless allowed by the Planning Board under site
plan review. The Planning Board may also waive the maximum height and maximum impervious area requirements
as part of site plan review neither shall there be any regular storage of materials allowed closer to the property line than
the setback unless allowed by the Planning Board through Site Plan Review. (added May 18, 2015)
8. Temporary structures of less than 125 square feet gross floor area may have a side set back of 5 feet and a rear
setback of 10 feet in the R10 zone only.
9. Except as provided in section 4.7.4.B.
7.3 REDUCED FRONTAGE LOTS (amended 1/29/07)
7.3.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow for optional limited development of lots with deep back land in
order that the efficient use of land will be encouraged, the rural character of Winchendon will be retained and that
adequate access to lots is ensured.
Parcels located in residential "R" districts with frontage on an accepted town road may, with the issuance of a Special
Permit by the Planning Board, be divided into lots, one of which may be a “reduced frontage lot " for use by a single
family dwelling only, under the alternative lot area and frontage requirements described below.
Special Permit approval may be granted by the Planning Board if the Board finds that:
a) the standards described in this section have been met,
b) adequate access to the lot is provided,
PD Other
residential
10,000
Note 3, 9
75
Note 9
20 Combined
30
feet
Note 4
50 3 45 feet 70%
WF
Note 4
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
88
c) public safety, including that of the lot inhabitants, is protected.
d) The existence of the lot will not create a nuisance for neighbors.
7.3.2 Applicability. The provisions of this section may be applied only to lots being created from lots of record in
existence for not less than ten years. A lot from which any portion has been removed and thus has become a new lot
during that time will not qualify.
A. A lot that meets the requirements of this section and has been in existence for more than ten years may
be granted a Special Permit by the Planning Board to create a Reduced Frontage Lot and the provisions
of Sections 7.3.3, 7.3.4, 7.3.5 and 7.3.6 shall apply.
7.3.3 Standards for Reduced Frontage Lots. Each such lot shall meet the following standards. All plans for such lots
shall indicate how these standards are met.
A. There shall be a minimum building location area on each reduced frontage lot; where a circle with a
diameter equal to the "normal" frontage requirement can be placed. Such area shall contain an area of land
which, in the opinion of the Planning Board, provides a suitable dwelling site (SEE FIGURE A.7.3).
1. House circle shall be drawn on plan.
2. The house shall be located in the house circle.
3. House circle shall not contain any wetlands.
4. Adequate access to the house circle from the pipestem (i.e. the narrower portion of the lot connecting
the building area with the street frontage) shall be designated on the plan.
5. Center of the circle shall be flagged on the site.
6. Pipestem shall be flagged on the site.
7. The minimum street frontage shall be 50 feet on an accepted town way.
8. The minimum lot size shall be twice the required zoning area.
9. The reduced frontage lot and all residual land shall have accessible frontage on an accepted and
maintained town road.
10. No more than two such reduced frontage lots shall have contiguous frontage.
11. Once approved as a "reduced frontage" lot, such lot shall not be subsequently subdivided, nor be
approved by variance for other than single family residential use.
12. Yard requirements in Section 7.2 shall also apply to buildings on reduced frontage lots.
13. Only one reduced frontage lot may be created from applicable lots. In all cases where a reduced
frontage lot is created, the remainder of the original lot shall meet all applicable zoning requirements in
that district. The approval of a reduced frontage lot may not result in the creation of a nonconforming
situation. The applicant shall supply proof that no other reduced frontage lots have been taken from the
original parcel. This proof shall be in such form as may be required by the Planning Board.
14. Access to a reduced frontage lot is restricted to along the pipestem of the lot. This access is subject to
the review and approval of the Department of Public Works and the Fire and Police.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
89
15. An occupancy permit shall not be issued until a driveway has been constructed which complies with
all standards required in the zoning bylaw and the regulations of the Planning Board as determined by
the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works.
16. Width of the pipestem along its entire length shall not be less than the width of the frontage required
for a reduced frontage lot in the district in which the lot is located.
17. Pipestem length is limited to the length of a cul de sac allowed in the subdivision rules and regulations
of the Planning Board for the zoning district in which the lot is located.
18. To ensure proper drainage and to ensure the lot remains buildable under Title V and other regulations,
loam and topsoil shall remain on the property. Gravel removal from the lot shall not exceed nineteen
(19) cubic yards except as may be waived by the Planning Board.
19. The Planning Board may apply other conditions, safeguards and limitations to the plan as they deem
necessary.
7.3.4 Standards for Plan. The Special Permit Application shall comply with the requirements of the subdivision
regulations or other regulations duly adopted by the Planning Board. This requirement may include a site visit.
7.3.5 "Approval Not Required" Plan. Once a Special Permit for the creation of a reduced frontage lot has been
granted, a plan showing the lot is entitled to endorsement as an "Approval Not Required" plan as provided in M.G.L.
Chapter 41 Section 81P.
7.3.6 Lapse of Permit. Special Permit lapses if not exercised within two years from the date of filing of the permit with
the Town Clerk by the Planning Board. “Exercised” shall be deemed to mean construction in accordance with a duly
issued building permit, including excavation of a cellar hole or pouring of a foundation, but not including landscaping or
driveway construction.
7.4 ACCESS TO LOT
All residential uses shall be accessed from the way on which the lot has legal frontage for zoning purposes.
Driveways shall be constructed over the lot’s frontage except as provided below;
7.4.1 The Planning Board may grant a special permit to access a residential use over a lot line other than the
frontage if:
A. access over the lot frontage is not possible or is impractical;
B. the lot can be assigned an address on the way from which the access is obtained that will insure
that emergency services can locate the residence;
C. up to three dwelling units may share a common driveway; provided that the shared portion of the
driveway shall not be used to meet parking space requirements; and further provided that each
dwelling is on a conforming lot; and further provided that suitable easements to guarantee access
to each lot are in place.
D. the granting of the special permit will not derogate from the intent of the Zoning Bylaw.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
90
ARTICLE 8 TRAFFIC, PARKING AND CIRCULATION
REGULATIONS
8.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Since our society is heavily based on the use of motor vehicles, parking for these vehicles will be required for all uses of
property within the town. This is for the purpose of lessening roadway congestion and decreasing safety hazards. If such
is required for a particular use, facilities and space for the loading and off loading of vehicles will be required in
addition. The provision of parking facilities for bicycles and other conveyances is encouraged. The layout of parking
spaces, the number and size of spaces required will vary by use and by zoning district. While all required parking may be
provided on-site, other parking options will be considered as provided in this article.
Any variations from or interpretation of the requirements of this article will require site plan review by the Planning
Board even if such review is not otherwise required. In this article the word Board shall mean the Planning Board.
8.2 PARKING LOCATIONS
The required parking may be located on the same site as the use by right. Parking spaces inside garages or other
structures shall be counted.
The use of shared parking, off site parking, and on street parking where such parking is available is encouraged so as to
reduce the number of required on site parking spaces and thus the amount of impervious surface. Permission to count
such spaces as meeting the parking requirement will be determined by site plan review. (SEE FIGURE A.8.2)
8.2.1 Shared Parking. In the R10, C1, C2, I, and PD Districts, the Town encourages shared parking for different
structures or uses, or for mixed uses. At the applicant’s request, the Board may permit shared parking, subject to the
following conditions:
A. A reciprocal agreement shall be executed by all parties concerned that ensures the long-term joint use of
such common parking, and that a copy has been submitted, and is acceptable to the Board.
B. The Board may require the applicant to provide a parking study with all information it deems necessary to
render a decision. The study shall include:
1. The hours of operation and parking demand for each use;
2. The hours of operation and peak demand for parking;
3. The number of spaces required for each individual use pursuant to Section 8.4 of this bylaw;
4. A description of the character of the land use and the parking patterns of adjacent uses;
5. An estimate of the anticipated turnover in parking space use over a 24 hour period of time; and
6. A site plan showing the shared use spaces in the lot and the walking distance to the uses sharing the
lot.
C. Uses sharing the parking facility do not need to be contained within the same lot, but shall be a maximum of
500 feet from the closest parking space.
D. The applicant shall demonstrate that vehicles occupying a particular number of spaces are unlikely to
require the use of those spaces at the same time of day or same day of the week.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
91
E. In making its decision on shared parking, the Board shall consider the degree to which the applicants are
committed to implementation of transit demand management measures such as those to promote car and van
pooling, bicycling, and public transit.
F. In the event that the conditions for shared parking change, or if the shared parking arrangement is
discontinued, the applicant shall notify the Board within 10 days. The Board may then require the applicant to
meet the applicable parking requirements found in this bylaw without credit for the shared parking.
8.2.2 Off Site Parking. Off site off street parking may be provided on another lot. The spaces may be owned by the
user or rented. It shall be within walkable distance of the use for which it is provided. For the purposes of this section a
walkable distance is defined as 500 feet. The Planning Board may reduce or increase this distance because of
topographical or street layout conditions. If municipal or other public parking lots are available, consideration will be
given to counting some or all of such spaces toward meeting the parking requirement.
8.2.3 On Street Parking. On street parking spaces may be counted as part of the required parking for a particular use
if the Board so allows. A user will have the first claim to count spaces in front of his/her premises. Counting spaces in
front of other uses may require the consent of the other user. In general 22 feet of available street frontage will count as
one space. Time of use differentials will be given consideration.
8.3 NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
8.3.1 The current guidelines of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) will be used in determining the number of
spaces required. These figures will be considered as a maximum and any proposal to provide more than this number plus
10% will require Board approval. If a proposed use is not listed in the ITE standards the Board will set the requirements
for the use. (SEE FIGURE A.8.3)
8.3.2 In zoning districts R80, R40, C1, C2, and I each use of property shall be provided with parking spaces in
accordance with the ITE guidelines with an allowed variance of plus or minus 10%.
A. Alternately, two parking spaces may be provided for each dwelling unit of more than 500 square feet
floor area and one space for smaller units.
8.3.3 Because of the walkable distances expected in these districts, in zoning districts R10 and PD each use of property
shall be provided with parking spaces at 75% of the ITE guidelines with an allowed variance of plus or minus 10%.
A. In these districts, the Board may modify or waive minimum parking requirements when, in its judgment,
standard parking is not required.
8.4 SIZE AND NUMBER OF SPACES
8.4.1 In general, parking must accommodate, as a minimum, the number of the employees on a given shift plus two
extra spaces for security purposes. Off-street parking shall meet the ITE standards for sizes and layout of parking
spaces. Up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the total number of parking spaces required may be designed for compact
cars. A compact car space shall not be less than 8 feet in width and 16 feet in length.
A. Alternately, the applicant may use a layout as shown in the Design Standards for Off Street Parking
included in this bylaw. (SEE FIGURE A.8.5.1)
8.4.2 Parking spaces for the exclusive use of handicapped individuals shall be provided in accordance with the most
recent rules and regulations of the Architectural Barriers Board. (ADA or 521 CMR).
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
92
8.5 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
8.5.1 All parking areas shall be shown on a plan which shall be filed with the Building Commissioner if site plan review
is not required, otherwise with the Board indicating the layout of the parking area including access, location of trees and
shrubs, and provisions for lighting and drainage, if any. The parking spaces and aisles shall conform to the ITE suggested
design requirements. (SEE FIGURE A.8.2 & A.8.5)
8.5.2 All proposed curb cuts, access drives and parking areas shall comply with all applicable requirements of the
Department of Public Works.
8.5.3 Off-street parking and loading areas shall have durable and dustless surfaces and shall be so graded and drained as
to dispose of all surface water accumulation. The surface of the parking area shall be delineated so that the parking
spaces are apparent.
8.5.4 Surface materials shall be asphalt, bituminous concrete, concrete, or other properly bound pavement. As
impervious pavement surfaces are included in the maximum allowed impervious surface for a lot, special consideration
will be given to pervious paving systems.
A. Provided there is a proper stormwater handling and maintenance system in place,
1. Parking areas covered with a pervious paving system shall be considered as being 50% of its actual area
when calculating total impervious lot coverage.
2. Parking areas covered with managed gravel shall be considered as being 90% of its actual area when
calculating total impervious lot coverage.
8.5.5 Illumination shall be required for any parking area to be used at night. All parking areas which are proposed to be
illuminated shall provide an illumination level of at least one foot candle (10 lumens). All illumination shall be shielded
so as not to shine directly onto a public or private way or onto any property in a residential district (not to exceed 20
lumens at lot line unless agreed to in writing by abutters).
8.5.6 For all parking lots requiring 10 or more spaces, landscaped areas shall be provided. Such areas shall be at least
5% of the total parking area and shall include trees and shrubs. One tree shall be provided for every 10 spaces or fraction
thereof. Such trees shall be located within the lot and shall be at least 2 inches trunk diameter. Not less than 40 square
feet of soil or other permeable surface area must surround each tree. Planting beds shall be at least 4 feet wide.
8.6 LOADING AND UNLOADING REQUIREMENTS
8.6.1 Adequate off-street loading facilities and space with unimpeded access shall be provided for all new construction
and for all building additions greater than 200 square feet of net floor area for businesses, commercial or public
buildings.
8.6.2 The necessity for loading and unloading facilities will be determined by the Building Commissioner unless the
use is undergoing site plan review, in which case it will be part of the review.
8.7 STACKING REGULATIONS FOR DRIVE-UP AND DRIVE-THROUGH LINES
8.7.1 Any establishment installing a drive-up window or service must provide for the safe stacking of vehicles and an
escape lane from the drive-up lane. (SEE FIGURE A.8.7)
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
93
8.7.2 An escape lane shall be adjacent to the stacking lane so as to allow a patron to exit from the stacking lane prior to
reaching the service area. Multiple service areas may use common escape lanes.
8.7.3 Both stacking and escape lanes shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width except that curved sections shall be a
minimum of twelve 12 feet wide.
8.7.4 All drive-up and escape lanes must be laid out in a way so as not to block or interfere with the parking lot internal
traffic circulation and parking spaces.
Table 8.7 Stacking & Escape Lane Requirements
Principal Use Number of spaces
Fast food restaurant
Stacking per window
Escape lane per window
10
1
Bank – automated or full service
Stacking per window/machine
Escape lane per window/machine
5
1
Pharmacy/retail services/offices
Stacking per window
Escape lane per window
5
1
Gas station (Note 1)
Stacking per service lane
Escape lane per service lane
3
1
Note 1 – Stacking requirements start at end of service island and do not include the space directly in front of the
service area.
8.8 DRIVEWAY STANDARDS
8.8.1 All driveways shall meet the following standards:
A. All driveway work may be subject to the review of the DPW Director or his designee at any point. The
DPW Director may impose other conditions at his discretion that are necessary to ensure safe access to the
public way and to prevent any damage or dangerous situation because of drainage, icing, pooling, etc.
B. All driveways shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width and be kept clear of branches and other obstructions
above said width to a height of 12 feet The internal radius of any curve shall be no less than 32 feet to allow for
safety vehicle access.
C. All driveways shall have an apron from the pavement to the property line. This apron shall be composed
of Type I bituminous concrete over 2 inches of processed gravel over 10 inches of 4 inch or smaller gravel.
D. No non-residential driveway slope shall be greater than 10% at any point and the apron shall not exceed
4% positive slope.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
94
E. No residential driveway slope shall be greater than 20% at any point and the apron shall not exceed 4%
positive slope.
F. Dust, debris, excess runoff or other nuisance shall not be allowed to enter the paved way. Any such
occurrence shall require prompt remediation by the property owner.
G. The driveway drainage system design shall be approved by the DPW Director. If the Wetland Protection
Act applies to the driveway area, the proposed driveway shall meet all conditions imposed by the Conservation
Commission.
8.9 TRAFFIC GENERATION
8.9.1 If development shall occur outside of areas targeted for a given type of development, or a given development is
larger than 2 acres, a traffic impact study may be required and any adverse impacts may require redress or remediation at
the expense of the applicant or developer.
8.10 OTHER MEANS OF ACCESS
8.10.1 All developments shall be designed so that there will be pedestrian, bicycle and ADA-friendly access to all
structures or it may trigger a review by the board and remediation or redress at the expense of the applicant may be
required.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
95
ARTICLE 9 SIGNS (amended 1/29/07)
9.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this article of the Zoning Bylaw is to:
1. Preserve the character of the community while allowing all residents and businesses their constitutional right to
freedom of speech;
2. Protect the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, and general welfare.
3. Permit only signs that do not constitute a hazard to public safety or create a nuisance either by their location,
their appearance, their message or their condition;
4. Provide Winchendon businesses an opportunity to promote themselves as well as the goods and services they
offer in order to enhance their viability and profitability;
5. Permit commercial signs appropriate to each business with reasonable consideration of aesthetics, lot size,
building size, the type of traffic, nearby signs, and nearby land uses; (SEE FIGURE A.9.1)
6. Enhance the scenic and natural beauty of Winchendon and its visual environment by reducing the hazards,
distractions, and visual clutter common with signs; and by creating a more aesthetically pleasing community;
7. Enhance the overall property values by encouraging signs that have appropriate size, quantity, clarity and
innovation;
8. Provide guidance to businesses and residents to design signage that is attractive, positive and purposeful.
9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS
9.2.1 A sign shall be designed, erected, altered, reconstructed, moved and maintained in accordance with the provisions
of this section unless specifically modified by another section of this section of this Zoning Bylaw.(SEE FIGURE A.9.2)
A. The Building Commissioner may require design changes for any sign or decline to issue a building permit
if he determines the sign would be inappropriate as measured by the purposes of this bylaw. His decision
shall be subject to appeal as is provided in Chapter 40A, section 8 of the Massachusetts General Laws.
B. Permits Required: A building permit shall be required for the construction, erection, relocation or alteration
of any sign except as specifically exempted by this section. A sign shall comply with all applicable zoning,
building, electrical and fire codes.
C. Maintenance of Signs: Every sign, whether requiring a permit or not, shall be maintained in a safe,
presentable and structurally sound condition at all times, including the replacement of defective parts and
painting and cleaning of said sign.
D. Removal of Dangerous or Defective Signs: The Building Commissioner may immediately remove or cause
to be removed any sign deemed to be defective and/or to be a danger to public health or safety. The costs of
said removal shall be charged to the owner of the property where said sign is located.
E. Removal of unlawful signs in the Public Right of Way: The Building Commissioner may remove or cause
to be removed any unlawful sign located in the public right of way. Fines per sign may be levied against the
owner of said sign(s) under the provisions of Chapter 40 Section 21D of the Massachusetts General Laws.
F. Commercial messages: Except as otherwise permitted, all information conveyed by any sign shall pertain to
the premises on which the sign is located.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
96
9.3 TEMPORARY SIGNS
A temporary sign refers to a small sign that is usually stuck by hand in the ground, is meant to provide information of
temporary significance and is removed shortly after the period of significance has passed. Such a sign does not usually
require a permit or inspection. Larger signs and those intended for posting for longer periods can become dangerous if
they are not more structurally sound than are traditionally found in temporary signs and hence are reviewed by the
building inspector for structural integrity.
9.3.1 Display of Temporary Signs: Temporary signs as permitted by these Zoning Bylaws may be erected for a period
not to exceed 60 days, except as otherwise provided in these Zoning Bylaws. Signs related to an event or period of time
(e.g. festival…) shall be posted no more than thirty (30) days prior to said event or period and shall be removed within
forty-eight (48) hours of the completion of said event or period. Extensions to this limitation may be granted by the
Building Commissioner upon application and demonstration of reasonable justification, proof of safety and structural
integrity by the agent or owner of the temporary sign.
9.3.2 Temporary signs may not exceed six (6) square feet in size without a permit. They may not be directly illuminated
internally or externally in any zone. Temporary signs larger than six (6) square feet are permitted in zones that allow for
larger signs, but these require a permit from the building inspector to ensure safety and structural integrity. These shall
conform to the size and height requirements of the zone in which they are located. No signs may be posted on utility
poles or trees in a public way.
9.3.3 Temporary Sign(s) allowed by this bylaw are listed below. Up to two (2) temporary signs shall be permitted per lot
subject to the following requirements:
A. Signs displaying information which pertain only the "For Sale", "For Rent", "For Lease" status of the
premises on which the sign is located.
B. Pertains to future use status of property under construction.
C. Local activity advertising of a temporary nature (e.g. yard sales, sales, reunions).
D. Political signs referring to an election or town meeting.
E. Portable signs (e.g. unattached, not stuck in ground, on wheels – cf. Appendix A.9.1) are permitted to
announce special events. These shall be considered temporary signs, shall require a permit, and must
comply with stated zoning requirements for the zone in which they are located. Portable signs must be
located on the premises of the sponsoring organization or at the location of the special event.
9.4 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL ZONES
9.4.1 The following signs are permitted in all zones and do not require a permit.
A. Temporary or permanent signs, including banners, erected and maintained by the Town, County,
State or Federal Government for traffic direction, direction to or identification of an historic site or
structure, government facility or event as approved by the Board of Selectmen.
B. Any privately posted sign, not to exceed two square feet and posted on private property, giving
warning or notice e.g. No Trespassing, Beware of Dog, No Hunting Allowed.
C. Markers indicating the street number of each numbered building as required by general bylaw are
allowed.
D. Flags, emblems and insignias of national, state or local political subdivisions.
E. Name and/or address descriptions mounted to the front of a building, lamp post or similar post in the
front yard of the building not to exceed (2) two square feet in area.
F. Flags which are considered to be home flags that are placed to show spirit, pride or some type of
seasonal activity.
G. Flags which advertise that an organization is open for activity such as “open” or “welcome” flags.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
97
H. Signs located within a property that are situated in such a manner to only be visible to persons on
said property and not beyond the property lines.
9.5 SIGNS PROHIBITED IN ALL ZONES
1. Abandoned signs
2. Billboard and off premise signs with the exception of those permitted by this bylaw.
3. Beacons and searchlights, except for emergency health and safety purposes;
4. Blinking, flashing, intermittent lighted, moving, animated or rotating signs including electronic message center
signs;
5. Roof signs which extend above or beyond the roof line;
6. Signs on public property attached to any tree, utility pole or fence;
7. Any sign or other feature that may constitute a traffic hazard or a detriment to public safety or may be confused with
a traffic control signal or device or the light of an emergency or road equipment vehicle;
8. Signs painted directly onto buildings, rocks, trees or the ground, with the exception of the demarcation of parking
spaces reserved for the disabled;
9. Signs which make use of words, symbols or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse
vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
10. Signs or parts thereof that are erected within or above a public right of way, except as may be permitted by the
Board of Selectmen;
11. Spinning devices or strings of spinning devices. ( pennants or other moveable distractions to motorists)
9.6 SPECIFICATIONS APPLYING TO ALL SIGNS
9.6.1 Projecting signs shall be mounted or installed with a minimum clearance of (9) nine feet above the ground under
the sign. The maximum height of a projecting sign shall be (15) fifteen feet above ground.
9.6.2 A wall sign shall not extend more than twelve inches from the wall of the building to which it is mounted, shall not
extend beyond the limits of the wall to which it is attached, and shall have hidden structural supports.
9.6.3 Sign Spacing Requirements: No ground, pole or projecting sign shall be located within (50) fifty feet of another
ground, pole or projecting sign.
9.6.4 Where a sign is adjacent to a paved surface accessible to vehicular traffic, a raised non-mountable curb to prevent
the encroachment of vehicles shall be required.
9.6.5 Awning signs may not be illuminated internally or externally.
9.6.6 The equivalent area of any sign which has a reflective colored type message, lettering in more than two colors, or a
background color other than white, black, or a dark color shall be two times its actual area. (SEE EXAMPLE A.9.6.6)
9.6.7 The area of a sign consisting of illuminated neon tubing or signs having an appearance similar to illuminated neon
tubing, regardless of color, shall be calculated as twice the actual area. (SEE EXAMPLE A.9.6.7)
9.6.8 In those instances where a sign is not a separate physical object, the size of the sign shall be that of a common
geometrical shape that fully encloses the message and artwork, if any, that comprises the sign.
9.6.9 Posts or brackets supporting a sign shall not be regarded as part of the sign unless the posts or brackets contain
lettering or are decorated so as to attract attention to the sign.
9.6.10 Two face signs which are mounted perpendicular to the street from which they are primarily visible and have the
same or similar message on each side shall be regarded as one sign.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
98
9.6.11 Ground signs shall not be allowed on any lot with less than (50) fifty feet of frontage on a public right of way.
9.6.12 Window signs are allowed and calculated at the same rate as wall signs.
9.7 LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
9.7.1 A permanent ground or pole sign shall require a single continuous landscaped area to be maintained beneath the
sign in accordance with the following standards:
A. The minimum landscaped area shall be equal to the area of the sign face.
B. The landscaped area shall include all points where sign structural supports attach to the ground.
C. Where the required landscaping area is adjacent to a paved surface accessible to vehicular traffic, a
raised non-mountable curb to prevent the encroachment of vehicles shall be required.
D. The landscaped area shall contain living plantings aesthetically located and maintained.
9.8 OFF PREMISES DIRECTIONAL SIGNS
A. Off premises signs directing persons to a specific business at another location may be allowed in all
zones.
B. Such signs shall not be greater than two square feet in area and shall not be illuminated. The maximum
height shall not be greater than that allowed for a ground sign in the zone in which it is located.
C. Not more than three such directional signs per business may be allowed directing persons to a
particular business location.
D. Whether to allow such sign(s), the location(s) thereof, and the content of the sign(s) shall be at the
discretion of the Building Commissioner subject to appeal to the Board of Appeals. The decision shall
be made on the basis of a demonstrated need for the sign(s) and the appropriateness of the proposed
location(s).
E. An off premise directory sign located within the right of way of a street or immediately adjacent
thereto will be allowed when that street is the principal access to one or more commercial properties.
Such sign shall be included in the basic sign area for the property to which it relates. The area of such
sign shall be no more that thirty two (32) square feet. Only one such sign may be located within fifty
(50) feet of any intersection.
F. Permits are required for such signs.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
99
9.9 SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
A. Permanent signs may be externally illuminated with a white light during business hours. Lighting is
limited to the sign face only and shall not exceed sign face area.
B. Each dwelling unit that has a separate outside entrance may have one sign of not more than one square
foot. This may be a wall sign, hanging sign or projecting sign. No such sign shall be more than 10 feet
above the street level.
C. Each home based business may have one or more signs with a total area of not more than six square
feet: Wall signs, ground signs, pole signs, projecting signs, and hanging signs are allowed. The highest
point of any such sign shall not be greater than ten feet above ground level.
D. When a use other than a residence or home based business is allowed in a residence zone; either by
right, by special permit, or as a non conforming use; it may have signs as allowed under section 9.10,
for businesses in the PD zone, provided that any buffers required by section 7.1.2 are in place.
E. Permanent subdivision signs may be erected subject to the following requirements:
1. One (1) ground sign may be erected at each major entrance to a subdivision.
2. The sign face shall not exceed (16) sixteen square feet in sign area and (6) six feet in height.
3. Each sign base shall be landscaped in an area equal to the total sign area.
4. Each sign may be externally illuminated by white light, provided that the illumination does
not extend beyond the face of said sign
5. A permit shall be required for each approved sign allowed under this subsection.
6.
F. Temporary signs are allowed as provided in section 9.3 but the area of such signs is limited to six
square feet.
9.10 SIGNS ALLOWED IN THE C-2 & PD DISTRICTS
9.10.1 Ground signs shall be allowed as follows:
A. Only one (1) sign shall be permitted on each premises. Alternately, two single face ground signs may
be situated at the main entrance of a development, provided that each face does not exceed the
maximum dimensions allowed by this subsection.
B. The sign height shall not exceed (8) eight feet.
C. The allowed sign area shall not exceed one (1) square foot of sign area per ten (10) linear feet of lot
frontage and not exceed a total of thirty-two (32) square feet in sign face area and sixty-four (64)
square feet in sign area.
9.10.2 Wall signs shall be allowed as follows:
A. Wall signs shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in sign face area.
B. The aggregate area of signs on any single building shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in sign area.
C. Temporary signs may be allowed in accordance with section 9.3
D. Signs may be externally illuminated with white light. Illumination shall be limited to sign face only
and not extend beyond the sign area.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
100
E. On a premises where non-residential tenants occupy upper floors, business plaques may be displayed
at each major entrance up to a maximum of six (6) square feet of sign area at each entrance, identifying
said tenants.
F. All permanent signs require building permits.
9.10.3 Projecting Signs shall be allowed as follows:
A. Projecting signs, where used, shall be mounted or installed at a minimum of nine (9) feet above the
surrounding ground level and shall not extend within twenty-four (24) inches of the curb line of any
street.
9.11 SIGNS ALLOWED IN C-1 & I DISTRICTS
9.11.1 All permanent signs may be illuminated.
9.11.2 No sign or lighting for said sign shall be located in such a manner as to be viewed from residential used or zoned
property.
9.11.3 Permanent pole signs shall be permitted as follows: (SEE EXAMPLE A.9.11)
A. Only one (1) pole sign shall be allowed on a premise.
B. The pole sign shall not exceed one-half (1/2) square foot of sign area per one (1) linear foot of lot
frontage and not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in sign face.
C. If pole sign is located in an area where the speed limit is greater than 40mph, the sign area may be
increased by 50% not to exceed (96) square feet.
D. Pole signs shall be a maximum height of twenty (20) feet at the street right-of way line and for each
additional five (5) feet of sign set-back, one (1) foot may be added in sign height not to exceed total
sign height of thirty (30) feet.
9.11.4 Permanent wall or projecting signs shall be permitted as follows:
A. There is no restriction on the number of wall signs permitted per premise, however, the total area of
all wall signs shall not exceed one and one-half (1 ½) square feet of sign area per one (1) linear foot of
building frontage.
B. Projecting signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in total sign face.
9.11.5 Temporary signs shall be allowed in accordance with Section 9.3.
9.12 NONCONFORMING SIGNS
Signs legally existing at the time of adoption of this bylaw may continue as a nonconforming use subject to the
provisions of Section 6.2.4.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
101
ARTICLE 10 SOIL, VEGETATION, ROCK AND GRAVEL REMOVAL
10.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this section is to prevent the degradation of the town’s natural resources including its soil, surface and
groundwater and naturally occurring vegetation due to the improper or uncontrolled removal or redisposition of soils,
vegetation and earth materials. Unless otherwise provided for in this bylaw, this section shall not apply to the removal of
less than 19 cubic yards of material from a lot for noncommercial purposes for maintenance or improvement of the lot or
the removal or alteration of existing vegetation upon a lot for noncommercial purposes related to the routine maintenance
or improvement of the lot.
10.2 GENERAL REMOVAL PROVISIONS
10.2.1 Excavation, removal, stripping, or mining of any earth material, soil and vegetation except as hereinafter
permitted on any parcel of land, public or private, in Winchendon is prohibited.
10.2.2 The Building Commissioner shall have the authority to enforce all conditions of any permit issued under this
section of the zoning bylaw.
10.2.3 All earth removal operations in existence in Winchendon on the effective date of this section shall be subject to
the requirements stated herein. However, all Earth Removal Permits issued prior to the effective date of this section
shall remain in effect until their expiration date. At such time, said operation shall be subject to the provisions of this
section, unless otherwise allowed by the Board of Appeals for a period not to exceed six (6) months.
10.2.4 An annual fee shall be required for an earth removal permit as established by the Board of Appeals.
10.2.5 Any earth removal over 19 yards for the sole purpose of commercial processing and/or sale may only be done in
an Industrial Zone.
10.3 APPLICATION FOR SOIL, VEGETATION, ROCK AND GRAVEL REMOVAL
10.3.1 Materials For Submission. An applicant for a Soil, Vegetation, Rock and Gravel Removal Permit must, at a
minimum, submit to the Board of Appeals such number of copies as that Board may require of the following materials:
A. A plan or plans to scale, (1 " = 40') prepared and stamped by a Registered Engineer and a Registered Land
Surveyor, showing the property lines of the parcel of land under consideration along with all abutters to the
property, The parcel shall be sub divided into five acre sections. For each section, the existing and final
contours in two foot (2') elevation increments, existing and proposed final drainage of the site, including all
culverts, streams, ponds, swamps, and siltation basins, and all wetlands pursuant to MGL Ch. 131, Sec. 40,
the means of entrance and egress from the property, a locus map, and any other pertinent data deemed
necessary the by Board of Appeals shall be shown.
B. A plan, study, or report showing the proposed ultimate use of the land which must conform with the
existing zoning bylaw. Proper planning for future land use shall be a primary consideration in determining
whether to issue a Soil, Vegetation, Rock and Gravel Removal Permit.
C. A complete list of the names and addresses of current abutters of the property where such removal is
proposed. Such list shall be certified by the Board of Assessors
D. An operation schedule showing the active area (not to exceed five (5) acres) where the removal will begin
and also how the total parcel will be developed in progressive five (5) acre increments.
E. A log of soil borings taken to the depth of the proposed excavation with a minimum of five borings per five
acre section. Additional borings may be requested by the Board of Appeals if necessary.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
102
F. A plan showing all refuse and debris burial sites on or off the property. (May be shown on plan as required
in (a) above).
G. The full legal name and address of the owner of record, the operator of the removal operation and of the
applicant.
10.4 PLAN DISTRIBUTION
Within ten (10) days of receipt of application and plan, the Board of Appeals shall furnish the Planning Board and the
Conservation Commission with a copy of said plan. Each board may investigate the case and make a written report of its
recommendations to the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall not take final action on an application until it has
received reports thereon from the Boards or until thirty-five (35) days have elapsed since the those boards received the
plan without the submission of a report.
10.5 PERMIT FOR SOIL, VEGETATION, ROCK AND GRAVEL REMOVAL
10.5.1 General. The Board of Appeals may issue Soil, Vegetation, Rock and Gravel Removal Permits in accordance
with provisions of this Section of the bylaw, complete with conditions imposed, for areas not to exceed twenty (20)
acres. All permits shall conform to the minimum restoration and operating standards contained herein and such other
conditions as the Board of Appeals may deem necessary. Said permit shall allow the working of only five (5) acres at
any one time. Upon completion of the earth removal operation on a five (5) acre parcel, or a part thereof, and substantial
restoration of said parcel as determined by the Board of Appeals, according to the restoration standards and the permit
conditions, application may then be made to the Board of Appeals for a permit renewal. Such permit renewal may allow
the removal of earth on another five (5) acre section, as shown by the operating schedule submitted with the permit
application.
This procedure shall be followed until the operation is completed. No soil being removed under Special Permit may take
place within 300 feet of a street or way, nor within 100 feet of the high water mark of any natural water course, nor
within 100 feet of a lot line. Soil may be disturbed within these established boundaries if it is considered part of the site
restoration work and has received prior approval by the Board of Appeals.
No removal of material shall take place below a level that is considered by the Board to be an undesirable grade for the
future development of the area, or to a level less than six (6) feet above the springtime high water table unless such
elevation has been approved by the Board of Appeals as being a desirable improvement that will enhance the future
development of the area. A monitoring well shall be installed by the property owner to verify groundwater elevations.
The Board of Appeals may require an engineering review of the application and plan. The registered professional
engineer shall be specified by the Board of Appeals and fees shall be borne by the applicant.
10.5.2 Conditions of the Permit. The permit shall be considered a non-transferable revocable permit to remove earth
materials. If it is found that incorrect information was submitted in the application, or that conditions of the permit are
being violated, or that the governing regulations are not being followed, the permit may be suspended until all the
requirements have been met and promises made to conform. Failure of the permit holder to comply within the time
specified by the Board of Appeals for correction of violations shall be cause for the permit to be revoked, and may
permit forfeiture of the security to the town, and the imposition of all allowable fines.
10.5.3 Compliance Review. The Board of Appeals shall discuss and review the permit periodically, and at a minimum,
annually. Written progress reports showing conformance with regulations and permit conditions shall be submitted to the
Board of Appeals by the Building Commissioner or his designated agent every three (3) months at a minimum, or when
otherwise deemed appropriate by the Board of Appeals. The Building Inspector may employ a registered professional
engineer to act as his agent in the inspection of the work to insure compliance with this section of the zoning bylaw and
to report to the Building Commissioner his recommendations as to the approval or disapproval of the work. In the event
that the Board of Appeals employs an engineer under Section 10.5.1 of this bylaw for plan review, then the Building
Commissioner will, if possible, employ the same engineer for site inspection. Inspection fees shall be at the permittee's
expense.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
103
10.5.4 Effective Date. A Soil, Vegetation, Rock and Gravel Removal Permit shall not be in effect until the applicant has
filed the proper security as required in Section 10.9, paid the required fees as required by Section 10.2.4, recorded the
Special Permit at the Registry of Deeds, and paid for an engineering review under Section 10.5.1.
10.6 REMOVAL INCIDENTAL TO DEVELOPMENT, CONSTRUCTION OR
IMPROVEMENT
10.6.1 The Planning Board, as part of a definitive subdivision approval or site plan review, may allow the redistribution
on or removal of earth materials from that site. Such permission may allow only such minimal alteration of the site as
may be necessary for the permitted development and may not allow mining of earth materials.
10.6.2 Conformance with the standards provided in Section 10.7 below shall be required insofar as they are applicable.
A permit from the Board of Selectmen under the Winchendon General Bylaw shall not be required. Suitable security
from the applicant shall be required to ensure that the project is carried out as permitted. This requirement shall be in
addition to any performance guarantee that may other wise be required.
10.6.3 Where material is to be removed in connection with the preparation of a specific site for building, removal may
take place only after the issuance of a building permit by the Building Commissioner. Removal will be allowed only
from the area for the building, driveways, parking areas, and from areas where removal is specifically required by the
Board of Health in connection with disposal systems. Mechanical crushing, screening and/or processing is not allowed
on site.
10.7 OPERATION STANDARDS FOR REMOVAL AND RESTORATION
10.7.1 All soil, vegetation, rock and gravel removal activities controlled by this section shall be subject to the following
standards:
A. Time of Operation
1. Excavation and site maintenance may be carried on from 8:00 a.m. until 4:30 p.m., Monday through
Friday excluding state and national holidays.
2. Trucking from the site may be carried on from 9:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday
only excluding state and national holidays.
B. Site Preparation
1. Only the active area described in the permit application may be made ready for earth removal.
2. No standing trees are to be bulldozed over, or slashed and bulldozed into piles. All trees must be cut
down. All wood and brush must be piled for removal or chipping. Wood chips may remain on the site.
No trees are to be buried on the site.
3. Stumps shall be buried in pre-designated areas as shown on application plans.
4. Any change in stump burial must be submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals for approval.
5. All topsoil removed from the active removal area shall be piled and adequately protected from erosion
for future site restoration.
6. Prior to any excavation or earth removal, adequate siltation basins shall be constructed to prevent the
runoff of silted water from the site.
7. All excavation shall be done so as to create contours to channel runoff waters into the siltation basins.
8. No siltation basin shall exceed seven (7) feet in depth.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
104
9. Siltation basins must be cleaned when sediment deposits are within eighteen (18) inches of the outfall
invert.
C. Site Maintenance
1. No open face excavation shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height.
2. No excavation shall be closer than one hundred (100) feet to a property line.
3. No slope shall exceed a three (3) foot horizontal to a one (1) foot vertical (3:1) grade.
4. No earth removal operation shall create excessive amounts of dust or allow roads leading into or from
a site to become excessively dust producing.
5. Proper dust control methods shall be employed and approved by the Board of Appeals.
D. Screening and Access
1. An immediate program of site screening shall start when site preparation begins.
2. All visual access to the site shall be screened with natural vegetation, evergreens, or other suitable
natural methods, so as to prevent a direct view into the earth removal area at any time.
3. All areas within a hundred (100) feet of a traveled way or abutting property lines shall be reforested
immediately upon completion of the earth removal operation of that area. Said reforestation shall be
done in accordance with the standard as stated in 10.8.6 of this section.
4. A minimum of one hundred fifty (150) trees per acre shall be used for this reforestation.
5. All access roads shall be level with intersecting streets for a distance of sixty (60) feet.
6. A STOP sign shall be installed so as to warn any vehicle entering onto a town street.
7. All access roads shall be equipped with a suitable locking gate to prevent unauthorized entry.
8. The Board of Appeals may prescribe routes for transporting material in and out of the site within the
town boundaries.
9. If no route is deemed adequate by the Board of Appeals, it may require the improvement of a transport
route at the expense of the permittee.
10. The permittee shall be responsible for the cleaning, repair and/or resurfacing of streets used in removal
activity which have been adversely affected by such activities.
E. Temporary Buildings
1. All temporary structures shall be specified in the Special Permit application and shown on the plan.
2. Any structure erected on the premises for use by personnel or storage of equipment shall be located at
least forty (40) feet from any existing roadway and at least thirty (30) feet from any lot line.
3. Any temporary structure will be removed no later than ninety (90) days after the expiration date of the
permit.
F. Mechanical Crushing and Screening
1. The crushing and screening of material on a removal site shall require a separate special permit from
the Board of Appeals.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
105
2. All crushing and screening permits shall be granted for a period not to exceed six (6) months.
3. Washing of processed materials will not be allowed.
4. Operation of crushing or screening equipment shall be from 8:00 a.m. until 4:30 p.m. Monday through
Friday.
5. All crushing and screening equipment shall be equipped with suitable dust and noise control devices.
6. Under no conditions shall the crushing and screening cause a nuisance beyond the property line.
7. Crushing and screening operations are only allowed in an Industrial Zone.
10.8 RESTORATION STANDARDS
10.8.1 All restoration, if such is being required, must be completed within sixty (60) days after the termination of a Soil,
Vegetation, Rock and Gravel Removal Permit or by the first of June if the permit terminates between December first
through March thirty-first.
10.8.2 No slope shall be left with a grade steeper than a three (3) foot horizontal to a one (1) foot vertical (3:1).
10.8.3 All siltation basins shall be filled with earth, and a natural drainage pattern must be reestablished. No area upon
the site which will collect water shall remain unless approval is granted by the Board of Appeals or unless the area was
shown on the original application plans.
10.8.4 All topsoil which was on the site prior to earth removal operations shall be replaced to a minimum depth of six
(6) inches on all disturbed areas. Sites that had less than six (6) inches of topsoil shall be restored with a minimum of
four (4) inches over the entire area.
10.8.5 Seeding: The entire area shall be seeded with grass or legume which contains at least sixty percent (60%)
perennials. The planted area shall be protected from erosion during the establishment period using good conservation
practices. Areas which wash out shall be repaired immediately.
10.8.6 Reforestation: Except as hereafter provided, all areas which are disturbed in the earth removal operation shall be
reforested with fifty percent (50%) coniferous and fifty percent (50%) deciduous trees planted at the rate of one hundred
fifty (150) trees per acre. All trees used are to be a minimum of two (2) year transplants. Areas which are to be used for
agricultural or other purposes after earth removal operations are completed may be reforested in the following manner:
A. Trees shall be planted fifty (50) feet deep from a public road or property line.
B. The remaining area shall immediately be planted with grass or other suitable agricultural planting
material.
10.8.7 Within ninety (90) days of completion of operations, all equipment, accessory buildings, structures, and unsightly
evidence of operation shall be removed from the premises.
10.9 SECURITY REQUIREMENTS
There shall be filed with the Town Treasurer a continuous security in the form of a bond or deposit of money as has been
approved by the Board of Appeals, the Board of Selectmen, and Town Counsel in the minimum amount determined in
order to return entire property to its original condition. Not less than one (1) year after the completion of the total
project, the Board of Appeals and the Board of Selectmen may issue a final release of the security, at the applicant's
written request, if, in the opinion of the Board of Appeals and the Board of Selectmen no damage or deterioration to the
finished project has developed. If, during the year following the completion of the project, slumping, gullying, erosion,
or any other unsatisfactory condition appears, the applicant shall be responsible for, and shall make any necessary
repairs, before final release of security is granted. The bonding agent shall be required to give the Board of Appeals, the
Board of Selectmen, and Town Counsel, by Registered or Certified Mail, a sixty (60) day notice prior to any termination
or cancellation of the bond.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
106
ARTICLE 11 RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (Added May 23, 2011)
Section 11.1 Purpose
The purposes of this article are:
To ensure that the housing needs of the people are met in a manner that preserves a maximum amount of open space
and helps to retain the rural character of the town.
To encourage the permanent preservation of open space, undeveloped land, agricultural land, forest land, wildlife
habitat, and other natural resources including aquifers, bodies of water, wetlands, and historical and archeological
resources in a manner that is consistent with the Town of Winchendon’s Master Plan and Open Space and
Recreation Plan;
To allow for greater flexibility and creativity in the design of residential developments;
To encourage a less sprawling and more efficient form of development that consumes less open land and conforms
to existing topography and natural features better than conventional or grid subdivision;
To minimize the total disturbance on the site;
To enhance the quality and cohesiveness of our neighborhoods and reduce the cost of serving the homes created
under the provisions of this article.
Section 11.1.1 References within article 11. Unless it is otherwise stated, all references to the board in this article
shall refer to the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall be the special permit granting authority for all special
permits mentioned in this article unless otherwise stated..
Section 11.2 Applicability The provisions of this article will apply to all new residential development within the town
except as specifically exempted in section 11.3.
Section 11.2.1 Compliance with Subdivision Regulations Required All residential projects subject to this article shall
be built in conformity to the current Subdivision Regulations as promulgated by the Winchendon Planning Board. If the
development will not constitute a subdivision, compliance with the site plan regulations of the Winchendon Planning
Board will be required. The Planning Board may grant waivers from their regulations as provided therein when such
action serves to further the purposes of this article.
Section 11.3 Exceptions
Section 11.3.1 Existing Lots The application of this article to a lot or two adjacent lots for single and two-family
residential use which at the time of recording or endorsement, whichever occurred earlier was/were not held in common
ownership with any adjoining land, conformed to zoning requirements in effect when the lot(s) was/were created, and
contain not more than 160,000 square feet per lot excluding from the actual area of the lot(s) the areas of any streams,
ponds, wetlands, stream buffers, wetland buffers, vernal pools and areas with a slope greater than 1:4 shall be optional
with the property owner. The areas of such wetland related areas shall be as determined by article 29 of the Winchendon
Town Bylaws or by Chapter 131 of the General Laws and any state or local regulations adopted thereunder. Common
ownership shall include lots held by separate legal entities, persons, or trusts under common control or having common
beneficial interests.
Section 11.3.2 Existing Buildings Except as provided in sections 11.10.6 and 11.10.7 this article shall not apply to the
conversion of residential buildings in existence prior to the adoption of this article to provide more dwelling units
therein.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
107
Section 11.4 Open Space Requirements
Section 11.4.1 Open Space Required All residential development subject to this article shall require the preservation in
perpetuity of open space in conjunction with the development project.
Section 11.4.1.1 Open space in larger tracts will be preferred, as will open space contiguous with other already
preserved open space. Except land reserved as public parkland or playgrounds in the PD and R10 zones, no parcel
smaller than two acres that is not contiguous with such other open space may be counted as part of the required open
space in projects larger than ten acres.
Section 11.4.1.2 The open space should protect valuable natural and cultural elements including waterbodies, streams,
wetland buffers, unfragmented forest, wildlife habitat, open fields, scenic views, trails, stone walls, archeological sites
and to avoid development in hazardous areas such as floodplains and on steep slopes. In areas where public sewage
disposal is not available, consideration shall be given to the suitability of soils for on site disposal systems both within
and outside the protected open space. Particular consideration for protection will be given to land that expands land that
is already protected or which is recommended for protection under the town master plan or opens space and recreation
plan, or will tend to expand or complete wildlife or recreational corridors between such parcels
Section 11.4.1.3 R80 and C2 zones Of that portion of a residential development project that is located in the R80 and
C2 zones, not less than 50 percent of the area (without any deduction for streams, ponds, wetlands, stream buffers,
wetland buffers, vernal pools and areas with a slope greater than 1:4) shall be preserved as dedicated open space. If the
total wetlands related areas (streams, ponds, wetlands as defined by law, and vernal pools) within the dedicated open
space will exceed 33 percent of the total area of the development site, only that 33 percent may be counted in making up
the required 50%.
Section 11.4.1.4 R40 zone Of that portion of a residential development project that is located in the R40 zone, not less
than 33% of the area (without any deduction for streams, ponds, wetlands, stream buffers, wetland buffers, vernal pools
and areas with a slope greater than 1:4) shall be preserved as dedicated open space. If the total wetlands related areas
(streams, ponds, wetlands as defined by law, and vernal pools) within the dedicated open space will exceed 25% of the
total area of the development site, only that 25% may be counted in making up the required 33%.
Section 11.4.1.5 R10, and PD zones Of that portion of a residential development project that is located in the R10,
and PD zones, not less than 25% of the area (without any deduction for streams, ponds, wetlands, stream buffers,
wetland buffers, vernal pools and areas with a slope greater than 1:4) shall be preserved as dedicated open space. If the
total wetlands related areas (streams, ponds, wetlands as defined by law, and vernal pools) within the dedicated open
space will exceed 15% of the total area of the development site, only that 15% may be counted in making up the required
25%.
Section 11.4.1.6 C1, Highway Commercial and I, Industrial Zone Residential development is not allowed in these
zones.
Section 11.5 Use of the Dedicated Open Space
Section 11.5.1 Agriculture Dedicated open space may be used for agriculture. This includes the growing of crops and
the keeping of livestock or poultry. Open space dedicated to agriculture may be combined with other land that is within
1000 feet used for agricultural purposes by the same farmer when calculating the 5 acre minimum for zoning as
commercial agriculture under section 5.2.4.
Section 11.5.2 Conservation Dedicated open space may be used for conservation purposes. Such uses may include
protection of flora and fauna, trails for hiking, hunting, fishing, camping, swimming, and boating.
Section 11.5.3 Commercial Forestry Dedicated open space may be used for commercial forestry. Such land shall be
managed using best management practices for long term sustained forest yield under a management plan approved by the
state forester. Best management practices shall be used in cut areas to insure immediate regrowth.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
108
Section 11.5.4 Storm water management systems. Subject to the approval of the Board, storm water management
systems may be located within the required open space. Surface systems, such as retention and detention ponds shall not
qualify towards the minimum open space required.
Section 11.5.5 Recreation Dedicated open space may be used for recreational purposes on tracts of more than ten
acres. by Planning Board Special Permit. This may include structured uses such as a campground. However, the
restrictions contained in section 11.8 shall apply and no special permit may be granted under that section for such uses.
This shall not prohibit the use of unprotected land in the same ownership for purposes prohibited on the protected land.
Section 11.6 Restrictions on the Use of Dedicated Open Space Except as are allowed by special permit under
section 11.8 , the following are prohibited in the dedicated open space:
Section 11.6.1 Any structure for residential, commercial or industrial use.
Section 11.6.2 Any building having a floor or ground area in excess of 600 square feet.
Section 11.6.3 The total of all buildings shall not exceed one quarter of one percent of the total area of the open space.
Section 11.6.4 The total man made impervious area shall not exceed 1% of the total area of the open space.
Section 11.6.5 Paved roads or driveways.
Section 11.6.6 Mining, excavating, dredging or removing from the Premises of soil, loam, peat, gravel, sand, rock or
other mineral resource or natural deposit.
Section 11.6.7 Placing, filling, storing or dumping on the Premises of soil, refuse, trash, vehicle bodies or parts, rubbish,
debris, junk, waste or other substance or material whatsoever or the installation of underground storage tanks;
Section 11.6.8 The subdivision of the Premises;
Section 11.6.9 Activities detrimental to drainage, flood control, water conservation, erosion control or soil conservation;
Section 11.6.10 Any other use of the Premises or activity which would materially impair significant conservation
interests.
Section 11.7 Specific Uses Allowed in the Dedicated Open Space :
Section 11.7.1 Fences as necessary to enclose pastures, protect livestock from natural hazards, or to protect crops from
animals. Specific approval by the Winchendon Agricultural Commission may be required.
Section 11.7.2 Underground sewage disposal systems for dwellings in the development.
Section 11.7.3 Underground sewer lines which must necessarily run through the area to meet grade requirements.
Section 11.7.4 Necessary access roads, including fire roads that are unpaved and minimally improved. Bridges and
culverts to properly handle stormwater are permitted when necessary.
Section 11.8 Improvements that may be allowed by Special Permit:
Section 11.8.1 Road or driveway paving on slopes so steep that washouts would otherwise be likely. Steps on steep
trails.
Section 11.8.2 Parking areas to serve the permitted open space uses provided the surfaces shall be pervious to
stormwater.
Section 11.8.3 Impervious area greater than that allowed by section 11.6.4 .
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
109
Section 11.8.4 Buildings having a floor or ground area greater than 600 square feet.
Section 11.9 Legal Protection Requirements All land dedicated as open space under this article shall be protected in
a manner that will afford it full protection under the law. The dedicated open space shall be protected from development
by one of the following means:
Section 11.9.1 Such open space shall either be conveyed to the town and accepted by it for park or open space use, or be
conveyed to a non-profit organization the principal purpose of which is the conservation of open space, or be conveyed
to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned by the owners of lots or residential units within the plot. If such a
corporation or trust is utilized, ownership thereof shall pass with conveyances of the lots or residential units. In any case
where such land is not conveyed to the town, a restriction enforceable by the town shall be recorded providing that such
land shall be kept in an open or natural state except as required in this bylaw. The named agency and the terms and
conditions of such transfer must be acceptable to the Board. Such open space shall be conveyed free of any mortgage
interest, security interest, liens or other encumbrances.
Section 11.9.2 Property that is owned by any other entity but is protected by a suitable conservation easement that will
protect the land from development or uses, except as provided in this article, in perpetuity. All the conditions of such
easement must be acceptable to the Board.
Section 11.9.3 A single parcel may include both protected open space and other uses provided proper easements are in
place to secure the protection of the required open space.
Section 11.9.4 The title or easement holder other than a governmental unit of each parcel accepted as protected open
space under this bylaw shall and governmental units should, within six months after its dedication as open space,
complete an assessment of the property detailing its location, boundaries, the condition of the vegetation, streams,
wetlands, walls, roads, improvements and other features; and any restrictions or requirements for its future use or
development. Thereafter not less than annually the title or easement holder shall physically view the property and
prepare a detailed statement as to the present condition of the property with particular reference to the features recorded
in the initial assessment. Copies of each such report shall be filed with the board. Any failure to file such reports shall be
a violation of the zoning bylaw and shall be subject to the penalties therefor.
Section 11.10 Maximum Number of Dwelling Units
Section 11.10.1 The maximum number of dwelling units for land in the R80 and C2 zones shall be equal to number of
acres of such land divided by two.
Section 11.10.2 The maximum number of dwelling units for land in the R40 zone shall equal to the number of acres of
such land.
Section 11.10.3 The maximum number of dwelling units for land in the R10 and PD zones shall equal to six times the
number of acres of such land.
Section 11.10.4 If the land is located in more than one zone, the allowed dwellings shall be calculated for the land in
each zone and then combined.
Section 11.10.5 In those cases where the total of allowable dwelling units as determined in section 11.10.4 results in a
fraction, the number shall be rounded down to the lower whole number.
Section 11.10.6 If a residential development project includes existing residential buildings, the dwelling units in those
buildings shall be considered as part of the maximum number of units. The number of units in such building(s) may be
increased or decreased provided the lot can accommodate the dwellings under sections 5.2.1 and 11.12.2.
Section 11.10.7 Unless a greater number is allowed under section 11.12.1.5, principal residential buildings in the R80,
C2 and R40 zones shall be limited to three dwelling units per building. One additional accessory dwelling may be
allowed in those zones by special permit provided the maximum for the project is not exceeded and the lot area is
adequate under section 11.12.2.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
110
Section 11.10.8 The Board may, by special permit, allow any number of units per building or more than one residential
building per lot on lots in the R10 and PD zones provided the maximum number of dwelling units is not exceeded.
Section 11.11 Development Procedures
Section 11.11.1 Residential development other than on sites exempt from this article under section 11.3, and those that
may be allowed by a special permit shall be undertaken only in accordance with the following procedure.
Section 11.11.1.1 Before any work, including but not limited to, brush removal, tree cutting, and grading, is done on a
development site, the developer shall submit a sketch plan to the Board. Cutting of vegetation necessary for surveys and
soil testing is permitted.
Section 11.11.1.1.1 The sketch plan shall be drawn to scale and shall show the total tract that includes the land on which
development is proposed. It shall also show the surrounding area, wetlands, contours, vegetation and other features as the
Board my require by its regulations. It need not have been prepared by a professional engineer or land surveyor.
Section 11.11.1.2 Following submission of the plan, the Board or its designee(s) shall undertake a site visit so the
Board will fully understand the site and its features.
Section 11.11.1.3 The Board will then meet with the developer at a regular or special meeting and discuss which land is
most appropriately preserved as open space, which are the locations most suitable for houses and other factors that may
enter into the choice of open space. However, no plan showing house lots or new roads may be presented or considered
at this time. An agreement between the Board and the developer on the land to be preserved is required as a condition of
moving forward.
Section 11.11.1.4 After the open space has been agreed upon, the developer may locate the houses on the property.
Section 11.11.1.5 The developer may now locate any road or roads needed to properly access the houses and other
amenities. Open space shall not be landlocked. Access over other land in common ownership is acceptable. Otherwise
adequate provision shall be made for access to each tract of preserved open space from a road.
Section 11.11.1.6 Then and only then may the developer or an engineer or surveyor on his behalf lay out proposed
property lines for the various house lots. Neither shall any preliminary or definitive subdivision plan be prepared prior to
this time.
Section 11.11.1.6.1 Following the layout of property lines, the developer shall submit a definitive subdivision plan or an
application for site plan review, as the case may be, in accordance with the board’s regulations. Such plan shall include,
without limitation,:
1. Existing site conditions, including topography, water bodies and streams, wetlands, historic features,
existing structures, easements and rights of way, and means of access;
2. Proposed grading and landscaping;
3. Proposed utilities, including but not limited to water, wastewater, electric power, fuel, security and
telecommunications systems, and cable television;
4. Proposed storm water system;
5. Proposed pedestrian and vehicular access, circulation, parking and loading;
6. Structures to be retained, demolished, and new construction;
Section 11.11.1.6.2 Copies of the application shall be circulated to the Board of Health, the Conservation Commission,
the Department of Public Works, the Police Department, the Fire Department, and such other town agencies as the Board
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
111
deems appropriate with a request for their comments and suggestions. Failure of any such agency to repond within 35
days shall be deemed lack of opposition to the proposal.
Section 11.12 Design Standards
Section 11.12.1 General requirements
Section 11.12.1.1 Insofar as practicable, the landscape shall be preserved in its natural state by minimizing tree and soil
removal. Any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of the neighboring developed areas.
Individual building sites shall be oriented so as to maintain maximum natural topography and cover. Topography, tree
cover, and natural drainage shall be treated as fixed determinants of road and lot configuration rather than as elements to
be altered to follow a preferred development scheme.
Section 11.12.1.2 Streets shall be designed and located in such a manner as to maintain and preserve natural
topography, significant landmarks, and trees; to minimize cut and fill; and to preserve and enhance views on or off the
parcel(s).
Section 11.12.1.3 Development shall be related harmoniously to the terrain and the use, scale and architecture of
existing buildings in the vicinity. Proposed buildings shall be related to their surroundings.
Section 11.12.1.4 The removal or disruption of historic, archeological, or cultural uses, structures, or sites shall be
minimized.
Section 11.12.1.5 A project serviced by municipal water and sewer services may consist of any combination of singlefamily,
two-family and multiple family residential structures. A multiple family structure shall not contain more than 5
dwellings except by special permit. The architecture of all multiple family buildings shall be residential in character,
particularly providing gabled roofs, an articulated footprint and varied facades. Residential structures shall be oriented
toward the street serving the lot and not toward a required parking area.
Section 11.12.1.6 Sidewalks and trails. In place of sidewalks a system of internal trails that provide connections to
other existing or proposed sidewalks and trails, public parks or recreation areas or protected lands may be substituted.
Section 11.12.1.7 In the R10 and PD zones, each dwelling unit shall be served by two (2) off-street parking spaces.
Parking spaces in front of garages may count in this computation.
Section 11.12.1.8 In the R80, R40,and C2 zones, each dwelling unit shall be served by at least three (3) off-street
parking spaces. .
Section 11.12.1.9 Common Shared driveways. Up to three residential buildings may share a common driveway;
provided that the shared portion of the driveway shall not be used to meet parking space requirements of this section.
Maintenance of shared driveways shall be clearly provided for.
Section 11.12.1.10 There shall be no more than one curb cut per lot which includes 5 or fewer dwelling units. Lots with
more than 5 dwelling units may have curb cuts as the board determines.
Section 11.12.2 Requirements for Individual Lots
Section 11.12.2.1 In the R80, R40, and C2 zones, each individual lot shall contain not less than 7500 square feet for the
first dwelling unit and 1500 square feet for each additional unit. In the R10 and PD zones, each individual lot shall
contain not less than 3750 square feet for the first dwelling unit and 1500 square feet for each additional unit. If a lot
lies in more than one zoning district, the minimum for the more restricted zone shall apply. .
Section 11.12.2.2 The Board may, however, allow lesser minimum lot area per dwelling unit for the development of
dwelling units in existing buildings
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
112
Section 11.12.3 Except as provided above, there shall be no minimum area per lot, The minimum required setback
(front, sides or rear) shall be five feet. Lot shapes should, as nearly as possible, conform to the standard of section 7.2.1.
Except for lots served by an approved common driveway, lots shall have not less than 50 feet of street frontage. Lots
which provide street access for a common driveway shall have not less than 75 feet of street frontage. Maximum
Structure heights and maximum impervious area shall meet the requirements of table 7.2. If separate sewage disposal
systems are required, the requirements of the Board of Health shall be met. This may be accomplished by providing an
easement for sewage disposal works in the open space.
Section 11.12.3.1 Each lot served by a common driveway shall have an address on the way from which access is
obtained that will insure that emergency services can locate the residences.
Section 11.13 Approval of the Plan
Section 11.13.1 Approval by Right Upon findings by the Board (adopted by a majority of the members voting) that
the proposed development meets the minimum requirements of this article for preservation open space and the location
thereof, contains no more than the maximum number of dwelling units, meets the requirements of its subdivision
regulations for a definitive residential subdivision (or of its site plan regulations if it is not a subdivision), a Low Impact
Development Plan for the site has been approved (if such plan is required), the required open space has been fully
protected by conveyance or easement, an Order of Conditions has been issued by the Conservation Commission (if
required), the Board of Health has approved the septic systems (if required), the subdivision plan (or site plan) shall
thereby be approved, and the project may then be built according to that plan by right.
Section 11.13.1.1 Conditions. The Board may impose conditions, safeguards and limitations in its plan approval as
necessary to ensure compliance with the purposes of this article.
Section 11.13.1.2 No residential lot created under this article shall be further subdivided or any alteration of lot lines or
layout of ways be allowed except by a special permit which special permit shall be in compliance with the requirements
of this article and the subdivision (or site plan) rules and regulations.
Section 11.13.1.3 Upon the approval and filing in the registry of deeds of a definitive subdivision plan for the
development and further provided that all roads, utilities, and other improvements required by the plan were installed
within two years, not including the time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal as allowed under
Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40A, Section 17, the lots shown thereon shall become conforming lots. Should
such work not be accomplished within two years, the plan approval shall lapse. Any structures shown on the approved
plan and actually built within two years, not including the time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal
as allowed under Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40A, Section 17 shall be considered conforming structures. The
Board may extend any of the required times for cause.
Section 11.13.1.4 Should a subdivision plan not be required, site plan review shall be required. All roads, utilities, and
other improvements required by the plan must be installed within two years, not including the time required to pursue or
await the determination of an appeal as allowed under Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40A, Section 17, or the
plan approval shall lapse. Any structures shown on the approved plan and actually built within two years, not including
the time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal as allowed under Massachusetts General Laws,
Chapter 40A, Section 17 shall be considered conforming structures. The Board may extend any of the required times for
cause.
Section 11.13.1.5 No work, including but not limited to, brush removal, tree cutting, and grading, shall be done on a
development site and no building permits shall issue for buildings on the site prior to the end of any required appeal
period following approval of the required plan.
Section 11.13.1.6 Any change to open space dedicated under this article and owned by the town will require a two thirds
vote of the town meeting. Where the open space is not conveyed to the town, a restriction enforceable by the town shall
be recorded providing that such land shall be kept in as open space under the provisions of this bylaw unless the town
meeting agrees to a modification by a two thirds vote. No such vote shall be taken until after the planning board has held
a public hearing thereon at which interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and
place of such public hearing and the subject matter hereof shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
113
town once in each of two successive weeks, the first publication to be not less than fourteen days before the day of said
hearing, No town meeting vote thereon shall be taken until a report with recommendations by the planning board has
been submitted to the town meeting or twenty-one days after said hearing has elapsed without submission of such report
Section 11.13.1.7 Any changes to the house locations, house lots, streets, or other provisions of the approved
subdivision shall require the modification of the subdivision plan or site plan by the Board.
Section 11.13.2 Special Permit Development Any plan for residential development that does not meet the
requirements of this article may be built only according to a special permit upon a finding that development on the
parcel according to the requirements of this article is not feasible.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
114
ARTICLE 12 SITE PLAN REVIEW (amended 1/29/07)
12.1 PURPOSE
Development of land is the means by which a community grows. How and where this development or redevelopment
occurs, how it affects the environment; the neighborhood; and the entire community are matters of concern to everyone.
Zoning districts, use tables and dimensional tables address these matters on the lot level. These matters are generally
considered zoning issues and dealt with by the Zoning Board of Appeals or its agents.
What happens in the way a particular site is developed is of equal concern. This is the role of site plan review. Since any
development will have impacts on the total environment and particularly on the neighborhood and the community, site
plan review seeks to prevent or to minimize adverse impacts that may occur as an owner seeks to develop his or her
property. The process intends to conform to the spirit of this bylaw (SEE ARTICLE 1 & APPENDICES C, D &E).
12.2 PROJECTS REQUIRING SITE PLAN REVIEW
12.2.1 The following types of activities and uses require site plan review by the Planning Board:
A. Construction, exterior alteration or exterior expansion or change of use of a municipal, institutional,
commercial, industrial, or multiple-family structure;
B. Three or more dwelling units started within one year by entities controlled by one person on land that
at any time within the ten years preceding was a single parcel or were abutting parcels. No building
permits may be issued for additional work that will make such projects subject to this section until site
plan approval has been granted for all units involved. A single site plan application may cover
contiguous lots. For the purposes of this section, the term “ person” shall include an individual, joint
owners, or any other entity commonly recognized by law as a person.
C. Any use or change in use of any structure or group of structures in common ownership that requires 10 or
more parking spaces under this zoning bylaw, or the construction, reconstruction, alteration or expansion of
a stand alone parking area that has 10 or more parking spaces.
D. Grading, clearing, or other land development activity which will require disturbance of more than
10,000 square feet of land area or 35% of the area of the lot, whichever is less, with the exception of
agricultural activity, or work in conjunction with a approved subdivision plan or earth removal permit.
E. Any use requiring a special permit in accordance with section 5.2 Schedule of Use Regulations if
required by the Board of Appeals and which does not qualify for an exemption under Article 12.3 of
this Zoning By-law.
F. A property owner or occupant may apply for site plan review for a project even if such review is not
required. Such an application may not be withdrawn except with the consent of the planning board.
At the request of the applicant, the Planning Board may waive any or all requirements of site plan review
for exterior enlargements of less than 25% of the existing floor area, and for building or site alterations
where the Board determines that the standards set forth in this bylaw are not relevant to the alterations.
12.3 EXEMPTIONS FROM SITE PLAN REVIEW
12.3.1 Except as provided in section 12.2.1 B, site plan review shall not be required for:
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
115
A. The construction or enlargement of any single family or two family dwelling or building accessory to such
dwelling unless the accessory building contains more than 500 square feet of floor area;
B. Any building used exclusively for agriculture, horticulture or floriculture;
C. Projects not involving (a) additional coverage of the lot, either in the form of construction of or addition to
a structure, whether permanent or temporary, (b) grading changes, or (c) additional paving, asphalting or
other equivalent method of lot coverage;
D. Projects involving only the construction, reconstruction or alteration of any feature, which the building
inspector or other duly authorized town inspector certifies in writing, that are required by public safety
in order to correct an unsafe or dangerous condition.
12.4 REQUIRED SUBMITTALS
12.4.1 Applicants are encouraged to meet with the Planning Agent or Board prior to making a formal submission of
plans to discuss site plan requirements and possible waivers. The agent or board may provide a set of guidelines to assist
applicants in meeting site plan, architectural, and landscaping objectives. (APPENDICES C, D,E, & F)
12.4.2 Each request for site plan evaluation shall include:
A. A completed application with the applicant’s original signature;
B. A plan set prepared in accordance with Planning Board Rules and Regulations;
C. A fee determined by the current fee schedule adopted by the planning board;
D. Any additional applicable information including but not limited to drainage reports, traffic studies,
historical data, National Heritage data, hydrogeological data, and soil testing logs.
12.5 PROCEDURE
12.5.1 The applicant shall submit a complete application as detailed above to the Department of Planning and
Development.
12.5.2 Upon determining the application is complete the Planning Agent shall, transmit copies of the application and
reduced size plans to the Building Commissioner, the Police Chief, the Fire Chief, the Conservation Commission, the
Board of Health, the Zoning Board of Appeals and the Board of Selectmen for their advisory review and comments.
Each board shall be requested to provide its comments to the planning board within 35 days of such submittal. A failure
to respond shall be considered as lack of objection to the project as submitted.
12.5.3 The Planning Board reserves the right to hire a review engineer or other services as necessary at the applicant’s
expense under the provisions of section 53G of Chapter 44 of the General Laws.
12.5.4 The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing to consider the application in accordance with the requirements of
M.G.L. 40A, s.11. The decision of the Planning Board shall be upon a majority of those present and shall be in writing.
Failure of the Board to take final action on an application within 90 days after the completed application was filed plus
any extensions that have been mutually agreed upon shall constitute constructive approval. All decisions of the Board
shall be subject to judicial appeal as is provided in section 17 of Chapter 40A of the General Laws.
12.6 SITE PLAN EVALUATION
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
116
12.6.1 Particular effects of development must be considered in the process of site plan review. These include, but are not
limited to the following:
A. Adequacy of Traffic Access. Curb cuts should be so arranged and limited in number as to reduce
congestion and improve traffic safety. Proper sight triangles and sufficient turnarounds for vehicles should
be provided to reduce the potential for accidents at points of egress;
B. Adequacy of Traffic Circulation and Parking. Plans should maximize pedestrian and vehicular convenience
and safety both within the site and in relation to adjacent ways. Internal and external traffic circulation, and
pedestrian and bicycle access should be adequately provided. Potential traffic impacts both on and off the
site, should be mitigated as may be prescribed by the Board, including, but not limited to, measures
designed to reduce automobile trip generation, especially on roadways with demonstrated deficiencies in
capacity. There should be sufficient parking as required in Article 8 laid out in a manner to provide ease in
maneuvering of vehicles and so as not to be detrimental to the surrounding properties or to create an
undesirable visual effect from the street. Sufficient area for loading and unloading may be required if the
need for such loading zone is found to be necessary;
C. Provide efficient and effective circulation. With respect to vehicular and pedestrian circulation, special
attention shall be given to the location and number of access points to public streets and sidewalks, to the
separation of vehicles and pedestrians, to the arrangement of parking areas and to service and loading areas,
and to the location of accessible routes and ramps for the disabled;
D. Adequacy of Landscaping and Screening. There shall be a sufficient amount of landscaping and screening,
as may be reasonably determined by the board, to insure protection of and to enhance the quality of the
project in question and the adjacent properties. Plans should minimize the visibility of parking, storage or
other outdoor service areas as viewed from public ways or premises residentially used or zoned;
E. Exterior and parking lot lighting should be adequate to provide for security and public safety
F. Plans should minimize light pollution and lighting intrusion onto other properties and public ways with
proper arrangement and shielding, and minimize glare from headlights through plantings or other
screening.
G. Adequacy of Protecting the Use of Renewable Energy Resources. Where appropriate and feasible, the site
plan shall be so designed as to not unreasonably deter the actual or potential use by the subject property or
adjacent properties of energy available for collection or conversion from direct sunlight, wind, running
water, or organically derived fuels.
H. Relate development to its environment. The proposed development shall relate appropriately to its context.
It shall relate harmoniously to the terrain and to the use, scale and architecture of existing buildings in the
vicinity that have a functional or visual relationship to the proposed structure(s). Proposals that deviate
substantially from established neighborhood patterns are discouraged;
I. Preserve the landscape. The landscape, existing terrain, and any significant trees and vegetation shall be
preserved in its natural state insofar as practicable. Tree and soil removal shall be minimized and any grade
changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring developed areas. If natural features
and existing landscaping are proposed to be removed, special attention shall be accorded to plans to replace
such features and landscaping;
J. Provide open space. All open space shall be designed to be visually and physically accessible to the extent
feasible. Open space shall add to the visual amenities of the vicinity by maximizing its visibility for persons
passing or overlooking the site from neighboring properties. If open space is intended for active use, it shall
be so designed as to maximize its accessibility for all individuals, including the disabled, encourage social
interaction, and facilitate ease of maintenance;
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
117
K. Provide for nature's events. Special attention shall be accorded to stormwater runoff so that neighboring
properties and/or the public stormwater drainage system are not adversely affected. Plans should allow no
net increase in the rate of flow of stormwater runoff (calculated using a 100-year storm event) from the
project site consistent with the Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook. Attention shall also be accorded to
design features which address the affects of rain, snow and ice at building entrances and to provisions for
snow and ice removal from circulation areas;
L. Make advertising features understandable. The size, location, design, texture, lighting, and materials of all
exterior signs and advertising features shall not detract from the use and enjoyment of proposed buildings
or surrounding properties. Signs and similar features shall be appropriately sized and located in a manner
that does not detract from nor disrupt the immediate visual environment.
M. Integrate special features with the design. Exposed storage areas, machinery and equipment installation,
service areas, truck loading areas, utility connections, meters and structures, mailboxes, lighting, and
similar accessory structures shall be subject to such setbacks, screen planting or other mitigation or
screening methods as shall reasonably be required to prevent their being incongruous with or offensive to
existing or proposed structures and surrounding properties. Special features, which are essential to a
structure's function, shall be incorporated into the original structure design, not added as an afterthought;
N. Make spaces secure and safe. With respect to personal safety, all open and enclosed spaces shall be
designed to facilitate building evacuation, maximize accessibility by fire, police or other emergency
personnel and equipment, and, to the extent feasible, provide for adequate and secure visibility for persons
using and observing such spaces;
O. Protect Winchendon's heritage. The removal or disruption of historic, traditional or significant, uses,
structures or architectural features or neighborhood patterns shall be minimized insofar as practicable,
whether these exist on the site or on adjacent properties. Significant structures and/or structures with
important architectural features shall be identified by the Winchendon Historical Society. New structures,
additions, and alterations shall be sympathetic to and complement the scale and design of surrounding
historic structures and locally significant buildings of architectural merit; and
P. Consider the microclimate. A developer who proposes new structures, additional lot coverage, or the
installation of machinery or equipment which emits heat, vapor, fumes, or noise shall endeavor to
minimize, insofar as practicable, any adverse impact on light, air, and water resources, or on the noise and
temperature levels of the immediate environment.
Q. Consider Winchendon’s Resources. The applicant should be prepared to adequately describe the likely
demands on local infrastructure, schools and municipal services and offer proposals to mitigate such
demands on the Town's ability to provide such services to the project.
R. Achieve design excellence. Endeavors to achieve design excellence in all new structures are encouraged.
Where the existing character and quality merit change, the design of new structures shall be directed
towards a specific design objective. In every case the structure shall be made compatible with the character
of Winchendon by means of the following factors:
1. A silhouette harmonious with the natural landforms and building patterns produced by height limits;
2. Maintenance of an overall height similar to that of surrounding buildings, or a sensitive transition,
where appropriate, to development of a dissimilar character; and
3. Use of materials, colors and scales similar to or harmonizing with those of nearby structures and
neighborhoods.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
118
12.7 PLANNING BOARD REGULATIONS
The Planning Board shall adopt rules and regulations governing the submission and review of site plans. These
regulations shall include a statement of the maximum impacts of a proposal that may be approved without review by the
Board, the application procedure including the required contents of an application, the review procedure, and any
requirements for implementing its decision.
12.8 ENFORCEMENT
12.8.1 The Planning Board may require the posting of a bond or other adequate security to assure compliance with the
site plan and conditions and may suspend any permit or license when work is not performed as required.
12.8.2 Any site plan approved under this section shall lapse within two (2) years, unless specifically noted otherwise in
this bylaw, if the project has not been completed, except for good cause. The time required to pursue and await
determination of a judicial appeal pursuant to Chapter 40A of the General Laws shall be excluded from the two (2) year
time limit.
12.9 VIOLATIONS
Failure to conform to any conditions, safeguards or limitations imposed on a site plan by the Board shall be a violation of
the zoning bylaw. Penalties for violations may include the issuance of a cease and desist order and are otherwise
provided in section 13.4.
12.10 SPECIAL PERMITS (amended 11/2014)
12.10.1 Granting Authority. Special permits may be granted by the Planning Board or
by the Board of Zoning Appeal as specified elsewhere in this Bylaw. Each of said boards shall
be considered a ‘‘permit granting authority’’
12.10.2 Criteria. Special permits will normally be granted where specific provisions of this
Bylaw are met, except when particulars of the location or use, not generally true of the district or
of the uses permitted in it, would cause granting of such permit to be to the detriment of the
public interest because:
A. It appears that requirements of the Bylaws cannot or will not
be met, or
B. Traffic generated or patterns of access or egress would
cause congestion, hazard, or substantial change in established
neighborhood character, or
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
119
C. The continued operation of or the development of adjacent
uses as permitted in the Zoning Bylaw would be adversely affected
by the nature of the proposed use, or
D. Nuisance or hazard would be created to the detriment of
the health, safety and/or welfare of the occupant of the
proposed use or the citizens of the Town, or
E. For other reasons, the proposed use would impair the
integrity of the district or adjoining district, or otherwise
derogate from the intent and purpose of this Bylaw.
12.10.3 Conditions. In acting upon special permits the special permit granting authority shall take
into account the general purpose and intent of this Bylaw and, in order to preserve community
values, may impose conditions and safeguards deemed necessary to protect the surrounding
neighborhood, in addition to the applicable requirements of this Bylaw, such as, but not limited to
the following:
F. Front, side or rear yards greater than the minimum required
by this Bylaw.
G. Screening of parking areas or other parts of the premises
from adjoining premises or from the street by specified walls,
fences, planting, or other devices.
H. Modification of the exterior features or appearance of the
structure.
I. Limitations of size, number of occupants, method or
time or operation, or extent of facilities.
J. Requirement of off street parking or other special features
beyond the minimum required by this or other applicable codes or
regulations.
K. Control of the number, location, size and lighting of signs.
L. Requirement of number, design, and location of access drives or other traffic features.
Any development application requiring a special permit from the Planning Board that contains
elements requiring a special permit from the Board of Zoning Appeal may be allowed by the
Planning Board within the scope of the Planning Board special permit and shall not require a
separate application to the Board of Zoning Appeal.
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
120
ARTICLE 13 ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND
AMENDMENT
13.1 EFFECTIVE DATE
This zoning bylaw shall become effective upon adoption of the Town, subject to its approval by the Attorney General of
Massachusetts and the publication and posting required by Massachusetts General Laws. All language of this bylaw
which remains unchanged from previously adopted language shall be considered to have been adopted on the date of its
initial adoption by the Town.
13.2 SEVERABILITY OF BYLAW
If any provision of this bylaw or boundary depicted on the zoning map is held invalid, the validity of the remaining
bylaw provisions and boundary lines shall not be affected thereby. Each article may be updated separately by Town
approval and be valid based on a date posted on the Article; the definitive version of the most up-to-date bylaw is
available in the Town Clerk’s office.
13.3 BYLAW INTERPRETATION
To the extent that any specific provisions of this bylaw shall conflict with any general provisions thereof, the specific
provisions shall prevail.
13.4 ENFORCEMENT
This bylaw and the conditions and stipulations of permits and variances issued thereunder shall be enforced by a
Building Commissioner, acting as Zoning Enforcement Officer in accordance with any or all action necessary to enforce
full compliance, as prescribed by the bylaws of this Town and Massachusetts General Laws.
13.5 BUILDING PERMITS
In processing an application for a building permit, the Building Commissioner shall determine by direct reference to the
Zoning Map, Soil Limitation Map and Flood Plain Hazard Boundary Maps the extent to which any constraints imposed
by such maps within the zoning district in question are applicable, and shall adhere to and be guided by such constraints.
13.6 BOARD OF APPEALS
13.6.1 A Board of Appeals of five (5) members and three (3) associate members shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen in accordance with the provisions of the General Laws of Massachusetts and the Winchendon Home Rule
Charter. The Board of Appeals shall possess and exercise those powers granted by the Massachusetts General Laws and
shall establish procedures consistent with the provisions of this bylaw.
13.6.2 All applications received by the Board of Appeals shall immediately be referred to the Planning Board for its
comments. Comments by the Planning Board are not required, but should be considered by the Board of Appeals, if
such are received.
13.6.3 The Board shall carry out the following specific powers and duties:
A. Appeals. To hear and decide appeals taken by any person aggrieved by reason of inability to secure a permit
or enforcement action from the Building Commissioner pursuant to Massachusetts General Law and the bylaw
of this Town.
B. Special Permits. Section 5.2 of these bylaws provide for specific types of uses which are only permitted in
specific districts upon the issuance of a special permit (“SP”). Special Permits may be issued only for uses
which are in harmony with the general purpose and intent of these bylaws and shall be subject to the general or
specific provisions set forth therein, in addition to which the Board shall consider whether the future use is
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
121
detrimental to adjacent uses or to the existing or planned future character of the neighborhood, whether the
proposed use will create undue traffic congestion or unduly impair pedestrian safety, whether the proposed use
will overload any public water, drainage or sewer facility, or whether the proposed use will be offensive,
dangerous or harmful to abutters or to the general public due to excessive noise, odor, vibration, dust, smoke or
for any similar reason.
1. Special Permit Time Limitations. Special Permits shall lapse if not exercised within twenty-four
(24) months from the date of filing with the Town Clerk. “Exercised” shall be defined as having
obtained any necessary building or other permits and having begun the use of or construction. More
particular requirements for the “exercise” of a special permit may be contained in specific sections of
this zoning bylaw.
C. Variances. To hear and decide petitions for variances from the requirements of this bylaw, and to authorize
such variances upon appeals, or upon petition in cases where a particular use is sought for which no permit is
required, with respect to a particular parcel of land or to an existing building thereon.
1. Variances shall be granted only when:
a. owing to conditions specifically affecting such parcel or building but not affecting generally the
zoning district in which located, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this bylaw would
involve substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the applicant, and
b. desirable relief may be granted without substantially derogating from the intent and purpose of
this bylaw, but not otherwise.
13.7 SCHEDULED DEVELOPMENT
(Amended May 13, 2002)
13.7.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section, “Scheduled Development”, is to promote orderly growth in the Town of
Winchendon, to phase growth so that it will not unduly strain the community’s ability to provide basic public facilities
and services to the town, to provide its boards and its agencies information, time and capacity to incorporate such growth
into the Master Plan for the community, and to preserve and enhance existing community character and the value of
property. (Amended May 13, 2002)
13.7.2 General. Beginning on January 1, 2003, building permits for not more than fifty (50) dwelling units shall be
issued in each of the five (5) calendar years following said date, for the construction of new residential dwellings.
Further no person or entity nor their successors in interest, nor any entity in which they hold a legal or beneficial
ownership shall be issued more than six (6) of the total number of permits available in any one year. For the purpose of
this section, an accessory apartment shall constitute a dwelling unit. (Amended May 13, 2002)
13.7.3 Procedures. Any building permits issued shall be issued with the following procedure:
A. The Building Commissioner shall act on each permit in order of submittal. Any permit application that is
incomplete or inaccurate shall be returned to the applicant within five (5) business days and shall require a
new submittal.
B. The Building Commissioner shall accept applications and issue permits one year at a time.
C. The Building Commissioner shall mark each application with the time and date of submittal.
D. Any building permits not issued in any calendar year shall not be available for issuance in any subsequent
year.
E. At the end of each calendar year in which this bylaw is in effect, the Building Commissioner shall retain all
applications for which a building permit has not been issued. Upon being informed in writing by the
applicant before the end of January of the succeeding calendar year that the applicant desires the
application to remain in effect, the Building Commissioner shall treat said application in accordance with
section 13.7.3(1) above. (Amended May 13, 2002)
13.7.4 Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to, nor limit in any way, the granting of building or
occupancy permits required for enlargement, restoration, or reconstruction of dwellings existing on lots as of the date of
Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw Adopted May 22, 2006
Last Amended on May 20, 2019
122
passage of this bylaw, or assisted living facilities, but shall apply to the conversion of single-family to two-family
dwellings. (Amended May 13, 2002)
13.7.5 Time Limitation and Extension. This section shall expire on January 1, 2008; provided however, that this
section may be extended without lapse of its provisions and limitations, by vote of the Town Meeting prior to January 1,
2008. (Amended May 13, 2002)
13.8 PENALTIES
Any person, firm or corporation violating any article or provision of this bylaw shall be fined the maximum amount
allowed by statute, and each day shall constitute a separate violation.
As an alternative to criminal prosecution in a specific case, the Building Commissioner may issue citations under the
non-criminal disposition procedure set forth in General Laws Ch. 40, Section 21D.
13.9 AMENDMENT
This bylaw may be amended from time to time in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 40A, General Laws of
Massachusetts.
13.10 PLANNING BOARD ASSOCIATE MEMBER (Amended Dec. 12, 2011)
The Planning Board, which consists of five (5) members, shall also include one (1) associate member who shall be
appointed in the same manner as regular members for terms of one year. Associate member should attend board
meetings and may participate in board deliberations but shall not count in determining a quorum nor have voting powers
except as provided herein. Any associate member may, from time to time, be designated by the Chairman of the Planning
Board in the case of the absence, inability to act or conflict of interest of a regular member, or a vacancy on said board,
to act on special permits under the requirements of this bylaw.
Winchendon LID Regulations - 1 - 11/17/09
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) REGULATIONS FOR THE
TOWN OF WINCHENDON
Adopted 11.17.09
1.0 PURPOSE
The purpose of these Low Impact Development (LID) Regulations is to protect the public
health, safety, environment, and general welfare by establishing requirements and
procedures for new development and redevelopment to prevent water pollution and
maintain groundwater recharge as provided by the Low Impact Development Bylaw of
the Town of Winchendon.
2.0 DEFINITIONS
These definitions are in addition to those provided in the LID Bylaw and shall apply to
issuance of a LID Permit established by the Town of Winchendon LID Bylaw and
implemented through these Low Impact Development Regulations. Terms not defined in
this section or in the Bylaw shall be understood according to their customary and usual
meaning.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate or secondary building situated on the same lot
or parcel with a principal building, the use of which is customarily incidental to that
of the main building or land use.
ALTER: Any activity, which will measurably change the ability of a ground surface area
to absorb water or will change existing surface drainage patterns. Alter may be
similarly represented as “alteration of drainage characteristics,” and “conducting
land disturbance activities.” A land altering activity includes the cutting of trees of
greater than 6 inch caliper Diameter Breast Height (DBH).
APPLICANT: A property owner, agent of a property owner, person or persons,
including a corporation, trust or other legal entity, who applies for issuance of a LID
Permit in accordance with this bylaw.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP): Structural, non-structural and managerial
techniques that are recognized to be the most effective and practical means to
prevent and/or reduce increases in stormwater volumes and flows, reduce point
source and nonpoint source pollution, and promote stormwater quality and
protection of the environment. “Structural” BMPs are devices that are engineered
and constructed to provide temporary storage and treatment of stormwater runoff.
“Nonstructural” BMPs use natural measures to reduce pollution levels, do not
require extensive construction efforts, and/or promote pollutant reduction by
eliminating the pollutant source.
BETTER SITE DESIGN: Site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site’s
impact on the watershed through the use of nonstructural LID Management
practices. Better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and
Winchendon LID Regulations - 2 - 11/17/09
greenspace, reducing impervious cover, and using natural features for LID
Management.
BUILDING ENCLOSURE: The building assemblies comprising the outer structure of a
building that enclose living and storage spaces including walls, windows, doors,
roof, floors and foundation; also, building envelope, building shell.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION (COC): A document issued by the LID Authority
after all construction activities have been completed which states that all conditions
of an issued LID Permit have been met and that a project has been completed in
compliance with the conditions set forth in a LID permit.
CONVEYANCE: Any structure or device, including pipes, drains, culverts, curb breaks,
paved swales or man-made swales of all types designed or utilized to move or direct
stormwater runoff or existing water flow.
CURRENT FEE SCHEDULE: The schedule of Fees as most recently adopted by the LID
Authority.
DEVELOPER: A person who undertakes or proposes to undertake land disturbance
activities.
DEVELOPMENT: The modification of land to accommodate a new use or expansion of
use, usually involving construction.
DISTURBANCE OF LAND: Any action that causes a change in the position, location,
or arrangement of soil, sand, rock, gravel or similar earth material. A land altering
activity includes the cutting of trees of greater than 6 inch caliper Diameter Breast
Height (DBH).
DRAINAGE EASEMENT: A legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing
the use of private land for LID management purposes.
EROSION CONTROL: The prevention or reduction of the movement of soil particles or
rock fragments.
EROSION CONTROL PLAN: A plan that shows the location and construction detail(s)
of the erosion and sediment reduction controls to be utilized for a construction site.
FLOOD CONTROL: The prevention or reduction of flooding and flood damage.
FLOODING: A local and temporary inundation or a rise in the surface of a body of
water, such that it covers land not usually under water.
GRADING: Changing the level or shape of the ground surface.
Winchendon LID Regulations - 3 - 11/17/09
GROUNDWATER: All water beneath any land surface including water in the soil and
bedrock beneath water bodies.
HOTSPOT: Land uses or activities with higher potential pollutant loadings, such as auto
salvage yards, auto fueling facilities, fleet storage yards, commercial parking lots
with high intensity use, road salt storage areas, commercial nurseries and
landscaping, outdoor storage and loading areas of hazardous substances, or marinas.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any material or structure on or above the ground that
prevents water from infiltrating through the underlying soil. Impervious surface is
defined to include, without limitation: paved parking lots, sidewalks, roof tops,
driveways, patios, paved recreation areas and paved, gravel and compacted dirt
surfaced roads.
INFILTRATION: The act of conveying surface water into the ground to permit
groundwater recharge and the reduction of stormwater runoff from a project site.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT: Low Impact Development (LID) is an approach to
land development that uses land planning and design practices and technologies to
simultaneously conserve and protect natural resource systems and reduce
infrastructure costs. LID seeks to design the built environment to remain a
functioning part of an ecosystem rather than exist apart from it. LID tools are used to
plan and engineer urban and rural sites to maintain or restore the hydrologic and
ecological functions of their watersheds.
LID AUTHORITY: The Town of Winchendon Planning Board is duly authorized to
administer, implement, and enforce these LID Bylaws. The LID Authority is
responsible for coordinating the review, approval and permit process as defined in
this Bylaw. Other Boards and/or departments participate in the review process as
defined in Section 4 of the LID Bylaw.
LID DESIGN CRITERIA: Best management practices and specifications for the use of
LID. Projects that comply with prescribed requirements may be allowed reductions
in stormwater management requirements when techniques are used to reduce
stormwater runoff at the site.
LID MANAGEMENT: The use of structural or non-structural stormwater management
devices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge
volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT PERMIT (LIDP): A permit issued by the LID
Authority, for projects in the categories and meeting the standards defined in this
Bylaw, after review of an application, plans, calculations, and other supporting
documents. Projects in these categories that meet these generic standards and are
Winchendon LID Regulations - 4 - 11/17/09
properly implemented are assumed to meet the requirements and intent of this
Bylaw which is designed to protect the environment of the Town of Winchendon
from the deleterious affects of uncontrolled and untreated stormwater runoff.
MASSACHUSETTS STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS AND
HANDBOOK: The policy issued by the Department of Environmental Protection,
and as amended, that coordinates the requirements prescribed by state regulations
promulgated under the authority of the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act G.L.
c. 131 § 40 and Massachusetts Clean Waters Act G.L. c. 21, §. 23-56. The policy
addresses stormwater impacts through implementation of performance standards to
reduce or prevent pollutants from reaching water bodies and control the quantity of
runoff from a site.
NEW DEVELOPMENT: Any construction or land disturbance of a parcel of land that is
currently in a natural vegetated state and does not contain alteration by man-made
activities.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION: Pollution from many diffuse sources caused by
rainfall or snowmelt moving over and through the ground. As the runoff moves, it
picks up and carries away natural and human-made pollutants, finally depositing
them into water resource areas.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN: A plan that defines the functional,
financial and organizational mechanisms for the ongoing operation and maintenance
of a LID Management system to insure that it continues to function as designed.
OWNER: A person with a legal or equitable interest in a property.
PERSON: Any individual, group of individuals, association, partnership, corporation,
company, business organization, trust, estate, the Commonwealth or political
subdivision thereof to the extent subject to Town Bylaws, administrative agency,
public or quasi-public corporation or body, the Town of Winchendon, and any other
legal entity, its legal representatives, agents, or assigns.
POINT SOURCE: Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not
limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, or
container from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
POST-DEVELOPMENT: The conditions that reasonably may be expected or anticipated
to exist after completion of the land development activity on a specific site or tract
of land. Post-development refers to the phase of a new development or
redevelopment project after completion, and does not refer to the construction phase
of a project.
Winchendon LID Regulations - 5 - 11/17/09
PRE-DEVELOPMENT: The conditions that exist at the time that plans for the land
development of a tract of land are submitted to the LID Authority. Where phased
development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.),
the existing conditions at the time prior to the first plan submission shall establish
pre-development conditions. For the purpose of meeting the sizing criteria of
structural stormwater management devices as required in these LID Regulations
[Section 7.2.9.2], the standard for characterizing pre-development land use for onsite
areas shall be woods.
RECHARGE: The replenishment of underground water reserves.
REDEVELOPMENT: Any construction, alteration, transportation, improvement
exceeding land disturbance of 20,000 square feet, where the existing land use is
commercial, industrial, institutional, or multi-family residential.
RESOURCE AREA: Any area protected under including without limitation: the
Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act, Massachusetts Rivers Act, Town of
Winchendon Wetlands Protection Bylaw, Wetland Conservancy District and Flood
Plain Conservancy Districts.
RUNOFF: Rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface.
SEDIMENTATION: A process of depositing material that has been suspended and
transported in water.
SITE: The parcel of land being developed, or a designated planning area in which the
land
development project is located.
STOP WORK ORDER: An order issued which requires that all construction activity on
a site be stopped.
TSS: Total Suspended Solids.
WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQv): The storage needed to capture a specified
average annual stormwater runoff volume. Numerically (WQv) will vary as a
function of drainage area or impervious area.
3.0 AUTHORITY
3.1 These Regulations have been adopted by the Planning Board in accordance with the
Town of Winchendon LID Bylaw.
3.2 These Regulations are adopted to administer the LID Bylaw and do not replace the
requirements of the Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw, Wetlands Protection Bylaw,
Wetland Conservancy District, Flood Plain Conservancy Districts, Groundwater
Winchendon LID Regulations - 6 - 11/17/09
Protection Overlay District or any Rules and Regulations adopted thereunder.
3.3 These LID Regulations may be periodically amended by the LID Authority in accordance
with the procedures outlined in Section 4.0, Administration, of the Town of Winchendon
LID Bylaw.
4.0 ADMINISTRATION
4.1 The Planning Board is the LID Authority and shall administer, implement and enforce
these Regulations. The LID Authority may, with the concurrence of the Applicant,
designate another Town Board, including, but not limited to, the Conservation
Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals and Board of Health, as its authorized agent for
the purposes of reviewing LID submittals and approving LID Permits for any project
within that particular Board’s jurisdiction, provided that the designated Board has
formally adopted these regulations, either directly, or by reference. A designated Board
shall have approval authority under these LID Regulations in those instances where
Planning Board review is not required.
4.2 If the approving board is other than the Planning Board, that Board must forward written
documentation of said approval and all conditions of approval to the LID Authority
within 10 business days of said approval. Upon receipt of written approval, the LID
Authority shall issue a LID Permit to the applicant within 10 business days.
4.3 Projects or activities approved by the LID Authority shall be deemed in compliance with
the intent and provisions of these LID Regulations. The LID Authority shall issue a LID
Permit to the applicant in accordance with the time frames for issuance of a Definitive
Subdivision Plan, Special Permit or Site Plan Review Permit. Where none of these is
required, the LID Authority shall act upon a complete application within 90 days unless
an extension is mutually agreed upon. There shall, however, be no right for constructive
approval.
5.0 APPLICABILITY
5.1 These LID Regulations apply to all new development and redevelopment that are not
exempt under the Town of Winchendon LID Bylaw. Projects within the jurisdiction of
the LID Bylaw must have received a LID Permit from the LID Authority in accordance
with the permit procedures and requirements defined in Section 6 of these Regulations
before any site disturbance or construction begins. For projects and/or activities within
the jurisdiction of the LID Authority, the specific application submission requirements,
public notices, and fees of that board shall govern. The contents of the LID Management
Plan, Operation and Maintenance Requirements, and LID Review Fee, (under Sections
6.12, 6.13 and 6.5) of these Regulations must also be met.
6.0 PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS
6.1 Applicants for projects requiring a LID Permit shall submit the materials specified in this
section, and meet the LID criteria as specified in Section 7, Performance Standards: LID
Design Criteria.
Winchendon LID Regulations - 7 - 11/17/09
6.2 Permit Required
6.2.1 Applicants shall not receive any permits affecting the development or redevelopment
of land without first meeting the requirements of these Regulations.
6.2.2 The project shall begin within two years after issuance of the LID Permit. If the
project does not begin within two years, the permittee may apply for a Permit
extension. A Permit extension shall be granted unless the LID Authority finds that site
conditions have changed so that the approved LID Management Plan and/or the
Operation and Maintenance Plan are inadequate, in which case the permittee shall
submit a modified Plan which will require approval prior to the commencement of
land disturbing activities.
6.3 Filing Application
6.3.1 The applicant shall file with the LID Authority a properly completed, tax certified
application, five (5) full-size paper copies of the
• LID Management Plan;
• Operation and Maintenance Plan;
• Erosion and Sediment Control Plan;
ten (10) paper copies of said plans in reduced size of no less than 11”X17”; fifteen (15)
copies of the required supporting narrative for the LID Management Plan, Operation and
Maintenance Plan, Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, Inspection and Maintenance
agreements and Surety bond; and one electronic file of the complete application. A LID
Permit must be issued prior to any site disturbing or altering activity. While the applicant
may be a representative, the permittee must be the owner of the site or holder of an
easement. The LID Application package shall include all items described in Sections
6.3.1.1 through 6.3.1.8.
6.3.1.1 The applicant shall submit a completed Application with original signatures of all
applicants and owners. The Application shall be made on the appropriate form of the
Department of Planning and Development. Any communication, purporting to be an
application, shall be treated as mere notice of intention to seek approval until such time as
it is made on the official application form, tax certified by the Town Collector/Treasurer,
accompanied by all required supporting documents and materials, filed as required by
statute or LID Authority regulation, and the required fees have been paid.
6.3.1.1.1 All information requested on the form and by these LID Regulations shall
be furnished by the applicant. If an application is signed other than by the property
owner, the applicant’s interest in the property and her/his authority to sign shall be
clearly indicated. Supporting documentation shall be provided if the LID Authority so
requires. If an applicant signs in more than one capacity, each capacity shall be
clearly indicated. If some person, other than the applicant, is authorized to sign other
documents related to the matter, that authority shall be clearly indicated in the
application or in a separate document. The names and full contact information for
every person involved in developing the plan and who may be contacted for
clarifications or additions shall be provided. Such information must include mail
Winchendon LID Regulations - 8 - 11/17/09
address, land line phone number, fax number and email address. A cellular phone
number shall be included, if available.
6.3.1.2 The LID application shall include a list of abutters, to include owners of land
directly opposite on any public or private street or way, and abutters to abutters within
300 feet of the property line of the petitioner as they appear on the most recent applicable
tax list (notwithstanding that the land of any such owner is located in another city or town
or across a body of water) and the planning boards of Ashburnham, Fitzwilliam (NH),
Gardner, Rindge (NH), Royalston, and Templeton. The names and addresses supplied by
the assessors office for this purpose must be certified by the assessors and such
certification shall be conclusive for all purposes. A list prepared by the Assessors
showing the Assessor's parcel numbers, names and addresses of all owners of property
abutting upon the land included in the site plan as they appear on the most recent tax
assessor's list shall also be provided.
6.3.1.3 The LID application shall include the LID Management Plan and project
description (1 electronic, 5 full-size, 10 reduced size, 11”X17” copies and 15
copies of supporting narrative);
6.3.1.4 Payment of the application and review fees;
6.3.1.5 Operation and Maintenance Plan (1 electronic, 5 full-size, 10 reduced size,
11”X17” copies and 15 copies of supporting narrative);
6.3.1.6 Inspection and Maintenance agreements (1 electronic and 15 paper copies of
narrative);
6.3.1.7 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan (1 electronic, 5 full-size, 10 reduced size,
11”X17” copies and 15 copies of supporting narrative);
6.3.1.8 Surety bond, if required by the LID Authority (1 electronic and 15 paper copies of
narrative). See Section 9.0, Surety.
6.4 Entry
Filing an application for a permit grants the LID Authority, or its agent(s), permission to
enter the site to verify the information in the application and to inspect for compliance
with the resulting permit.
6.5 Fees
Application fees established by the LID Authority are required to cover expenses for the
review of the LID Permit, including professional services. The LID Authority is
authorized to retain a Registered Professional Engineer or other professional consultant to
advise on any aspects of the permit application. Applicants must pay the fees specified in
the Board’s current fee schedule before the review process will begin. These fees are in
addition to any other local or state fees that may be charged.
6.5.1 The fee schedule may be altered by the LID Authority at a public hearing at least 30
days before the effective date of the change.
6.5.2 Application Fees
Winchendon LID Regulations - 9 - 11/17/09
6.5.2.1 File with the Planning Agent as representative of the LID Authority, a properly
completed, tax certified Application for a LID Permit, and pay the Application filing fee
and Consultant Review Deposit required by the current LID fee schedule.
6.5.3 Engineering and Consultant Review Deposit and Fees
6.5.3.1 The LID Authority is authorized under the provisions of M.G.L. Ch. 44, Section
53G to require an applicant to pay an "Engineering and Consultant Review Fee" for the
reasonable costs for engineering and other consultant services necessary for the LID
Authority to come to a decision on the application.
6.5.3.2 Payment may be required at any point in the deliberations and shall be paid prior
to a final decision.
6.5.3.3 Consultant fees shall be determined at the time of project review. A fee under the
provisions of Mass.General Laws, Chapter 44, section 53G may be required to cover the
cost of consultants performing review of LID plans and compliance monitoring of such
plans. The initial fee deposit will be as specified in the fee schedule adopted by the
Board. Payment of the initial fee will be required with the application. An additional
amount as determined by the Board will be required before any on site work is started. In
the case of a phased project, the deposit fee may be phased as well with payment due
prior to the start of each phase. Should the actual cost of consultants exceed the amount
on deposit with the Town, the developer shall pay an additional amount as the Board or
the Planning Agent may determine. [M.G.L. Chapter 44, section 53G: “
Notwithstanding section 53, any city or town that provides by rules promulgated under
section 9 or 12 of chapter 40A, section 21 of chapter 40B, section 81Q of chapter 41…for
the imposition of reasonable fees for the employment of outside consultants may deposit
such fees in a special account. Such rules shall provide for an administrative appeal from
the selection of the outside consultant to the city council or town board of selectmen. The
grounds for such an appeal shall be limited to claims that the consultant selected has a
conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum required qualifications. The
minimum qualifications shall consist either of an educational degree in or related to the
field at issue or three or more years of practice in the field of issue or a related field. The
required time limits for action upon an application by a municipal permit granting board
shall be extended by the duration of the administrative appeal. In the event that no
decision is made by the city council or the town board of selectmen within one month
following the filing of the appeal, the selection made by the municipal permit granting
authority shall stand. Such an administrative appeal shall not preclude further judicial
review, if otherwise permitted by law, on the grounds provided for in this section. Any
such account shall be established by the municipal treasurer in the municipal treasury and
shall be kept separate and apart from other monies. The special account, including
accrued interest, if any, shall be expended at the direction of the authorized board or
authority without further appropriation; provided however, that such funds are to be
expended by it only in connection with carrying out its responsibilities under the law.
Any excess amount in the account attributable to a specific project, including any accrued
interest, at the completion of said project shall be repaid to the applicant or to the
applicant’s successor in interest and a final report of said account shall be made available
to the applicant or to the applicant’s successor in interest…”]
Winchendon LID Regulations - 10 - 11/17/09
6.5.3.4 The services for which fees may be utilized include, but are not limited to,
wetland survey and delineation, hydrologic and drainage analysis, wildlife evaluation,
analyses of stormwater quality and other site characteristics, site inspections, as-built plan
review, and analysis of legal issues.
6.5.3.5 Any unused portion of any fees collected, other than Application fees, shall be
returned by the LID Authority to the applicant, along with accrued interest, within fortyfive
(45) calendar days of a written request by the applicant or his successor.
6.5.3.6 Engineering and Consultant Review Deposit and Fees collected under this section
shall be deposited in a revolving account.
6.6 Public Hearings No separate public hearing shall be required for a LID Permit. The
applicant will be afforded an opportunity to appear before the Board to explain and, if
necessary, defend the application. The LID Authority shall hold a public hearing in
accordance with their usual procedures for Subdivision Review, Special Permit and Site
Plan Review. If the LID Permit is to be issued in conjunction with another required
permit, approval, or order of conditions for which a public hearing is required, the
conformity of the pending project to the LID bylaw and these regulations shall be
considered as part of that required hearing. No LID permit shall be issued unless such
other permit or approval is granted. No LID permit shall issue unless the application
meets the requirements of the LID Bylaw and Regulations.
6.7 Actions
The LID Authority’s action, rendered in writing, shall consist of either:
6.7.1 Approval of the LID Permit Application based upon determination that the proposed
plan meets the Standards in Section 7 and is in compliance with the requirements in the
LID Bylaw and Regulations;
6.7.2 Approval of the LID Permit Application subject to any conditions, modifications or
restrictions required by the LID Authority;
6.7.3 Disapproval of the LID Permit Application based upon a determination that the
proposed plan, as submitted, does not meet the Standards in Section 7 or the requirements
in the LID Bylaw and Regulations.
6.8 The LID Authority shall act on an application within the time limits prescribed for any
concurrent proceeding or as have been extended by mutual agreement. If there is no
concurrent proceeding, the LID Authority shall act within 90 days of the receipt of the
completed application.
6.9 Plan Changes
The permittee must notify the LID Authority in writing of any proposed change in a
project regulated by a LID Permit, and no further land disturbing activity may take place
until the LID Authority has determined that the proposed change meets the standards in
Section 7 and is in compliance with the LID Bylaw and Regulations.
6.10 Appeals of Actions of the LID Authority
Winchendon LID Regulations - 11 - 11/17/09
A decision of the LID Authority shall be shall be reviewable in the Superior Court by an
appeal filed within 60 days of the decision. An appeal of a decision by a delegated Town
Board shall be conducted under the applicable appeal provisions of that Board. An
appeal shall result in revocation of a written approval for a LID Permit until the appeal
process has been resolved.
6.11 Project Completion
6.11.1 The permittee shall submit as-built drawings of all structural stormwater controls
which shall show deviations from the approved plans and be certified by a Registered
Professional Engineer.
6.11.2 All LID practices and techniques within or on individual lots and/or within Town
easements adjacent to the lots, and the terms of the Operation and Maintenance Plan,
shall be:
6.11.2.1 Recorded at the Worcester County Registry of Deeds as a condition of approval
of the Plan referenced below in Section 6.11.2.4;
6.11.2.2 Placed on individual deeds as restrictions;
6.11.2.3 Filed with the Department of Planning and Development, with the Town
Building Commissioner; and
6.11.2.4 Placed on the final approved Definitive Subdivision Plan, Special Permit or
approved Site Plan.
6.12 LID Management Plan Contents
6.12.1 The LID Management Plan submitted with the permit application shall contain
sufficient information for the LID Authority to evaluate the environmental impact and
effectiveness of the measures proposed for reducing adverse impacts from stormwater
runoff. This plan shall comply with the criteria established in these Regulations and must
be submitted with the stamp and signature of a Registered Professional Engineer (PE)
and/or a Registered Landscape Architect, both of whom are licensed in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts. If the plan shows structural stormwater controls, such
plans must include detailed stormwater disposal calculations.
6.12.1.1 The LID Authority or its agent may allow the applicant to omit from the
Application such of the materials listed in section 6.12 (LID Management Plan Contents)
that will not be needed to adequately evaluate the proposal. If the LID Authority later
finds that such materials are needed, the applicant shall then supply them.
6.12.1.2 It will not be necessary to repeat in the LID Application information included
in other applications, e. g. Subdivision or Site Plan, being submitted concurrently or
already under LID Authority consideration, but appropriate references to that material
shall be included in the LID Management Plan.
6.12.1.3 All LID Management Plan data as required by Section 6.3.1 of these LID
Regulations shall be submitted on compact disk in a format that can be read by AUTO
CAD with all data related to state plane coordinates. Narrative and tables may be in
WORD or EXCEL format.
6.12.2 The LID Management Plan shall fully describe the project in drawings, narrative, and
calculations. It shall include:
6.12.2.1 Contact Information. The name, address, telephone number and email of all
Winchendon LID Regulations - 12 - 11/17/09
persons having a legal interest in the property and the tax reference number and street
address(es) of the property or properties affected;
6.12.2.2 A locus map;
6.12.2.3 The existing and proposed land use at the site;
6.12.2.4 The existing and proposed zoning at the site;
6.12.2.5 The existing and proposed property lines;
6.12.2.6 The location(s) of existing and proposed easements;
6.12.2.7 The location of existing and proposed utilities;
6.12.2.8 The location of existing and proposed open storage areas and facilities for
waste disposal;
6.12.2.9 The site’s existing and proposed topography with contours at 2-foot intervals;
6.12.2.10All areas of the site designated as open space;
6.12.2.11A description and delineation of existing stormwater conveyances,
impoundments, and wetlands, wetland buffer zones, water supply areas, swimming
beaches or other environmental resources on or adjacent to the site into which stormwater
flows;
6.12.2.12A delineation of 100-year flood plains, if applicable;
6.12.2.13Estimated seasonal high groundwater elevation in areas to be used for
stormwater retention, detention, or infiltration;
6.12.2.14The existing and proposed vegetation and ground surfaces with runoff
coefficients for each;
6.12.2.15A drainage area map showing pre- and post-construction watershed boundaries,
drainage area and stormwater flow paths, including municipal drainage system flows;
6.12.2.16A recharge area analysis that calculates pre-and post-project annual
groundwater recharge rates on the parcel;
6.12.2.17A description and drawings of all components of the proposed LID stormwater
management system including:
6.12.2.17.1 Locations, cross sections, and profiles of all brooks, streams, drainage
swales and their method of stabilization;
6.12.2.17.2All measures for the detention, retention or infiltration of water;
6.12.2.17.3Descriptions of non-structural best management practices (BMPs);
6.12.2.17.4All measures for the protection of water quality;
6.12.2.17.5The structural details for all components of the proposed drainage systems
and LID Management facilities;
6.12.2.17.6Notes on drawings specifying materials to be used, construction
specifications, and expected hydrology with supporting calculations;
6.12.2.17.7Proposed site plan including location of buildings or other structures,
impervious surfaces, and drainage facilities, if applicable;
6.12.2.17.8Any other information requested by the LID Authority.
6.12.2.18 Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and
post development conditions for the design storms specified in these Regulations. Such
calculations shall include:
6.12.2.18.1Description of the design storm frequency, intensity and duration;
6.12.2.18.2Time of concentration;
Winchendon LID Regulations - 13 - 11/17/09
6.12.2.18.3Soil Runoff Curve Number (RCN) based on land use and soil hydrologic
group;
6.12.2.18.4Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area;
6.12.2.18.5Information on construction measures used to maintain the infiltration
capacity of the soil where any kind of infiltration is proposed;
6.12.2.18.6 Infiltration rates, where applicable;
6.12.2.18.7 Culvert capacities;
6.12.2.18.8 Flow velocities;
6.12.2.18.9 Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff
for the specified design storms, and
6.12.2.18.10 Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test
results.
6.12.2.19Post-Development downstream analysis if deemed necessary by the LID
Authority;
6.12.2.20Soils Information from test pits performed at the location of proposed LID
Management facilities, including soil descriptions, depth to seasonal high groundwater,
depth to bedrock, and percolation rates. Soils information will be based on site test pits
logged by a Massachusetts Certified Soil Evaluator;
6.12.2.21Landscaping plan prepared by a Massachusetts licensed Registered Landscape
Architect, describing the woody and herbaceous vegetative stabilization and management
techniques to be used within and adjacent to the stormwater impact area.
6.13 Operation and Maintenance of Stormwater Management Devices
All property owners are responsible for maintaining the proper operation of all permitted
stormwater management devices on their property. Stormwater management devices
shall be maintained to ensure compliance with the Permit, the LID Bylaw and that the
Massachusetts Surface Water Quality Standards are met in all seasons and throughout the
life of the system.
6.13.1 Stormwater Management Easements: Where the LID Authority determines it is
necessary, a stormwater management easement shall be provided by the property
owner(s) to allow access to stormwater management devices for inspection and
maintenance. Easements shall be recorded with the Worcester County Registry of Deeds
prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completion by the LID Authority.
6.13.2 Operation and Maintenance Plan: An Operation and Maintenance Plan (O&M
Plan) is required at the time of application for a LID Permit and shall remain on file with
the LID Authority. The O&M Plan shall include:
6.13.2.1 The name and contact information of the owners of all components of the
system;
6.13.2.2 A map showing the location of the stormwater management devices including
all structural and nonstructural components;
6.13.2.3 Inspection and Maintenance agreements that specify names and addresses of
person(s) responsible for operation and maintenance and its financing, an Inspection and
Maintenance schedule, including maintenance tasks to be performed, a list of easements
with the purpose and location of each and the signature(s) of the owner(s).
6.13.3 Where applicable, the O&M Plan shall also comply with the requirements of a
Winchendon LID Regulations - 14 - 11/17/09
Homeowners Agreement as required by the Planning Board.
7.0 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: LID DESIGN CRITERIA
7.1 All projects shall comply with the most recent version of the Massachusetts Department
of Environmental Protection (DEP) Stormwater Management Standards and Handbook and
achieve the following performance standards:
7.2 General Criteria
7.2.1 Site Planning Process
The site planning process shall include the following steps: 1) Identify, map and clearly
delineate on plans critical environmental resources that shall be withheld from
development as conservation areas. These areas shall include wetlands, riverfront areas,
floodplains and their buffers that are regulated by local, state and federal law. They may
also include steep slopes, mature woodlands, prime farmland, meadows and Core and
Priority Habitats as defined by the MA Natural Heritage and Endangered Species
Program. The potentially developable area shall consist of land outside identified
conservation areas; 2) Identify, map and clearly delineate on plans potential building
enclosures within the potentially developable area, avoiding environmental resource areas
and buffers. Include the delineation of private yards and shared amenities, so as to reflect
an integrated community; 3) Identify, map and clearly delineate on plans proposed
roadways, sidewalks and other impervious surfaces. Align streets and walkways to access
house lots and to create internal and external connections to existing and/or potential
future streets, sidewalks and trails; 4) Draw in the lot lines; 5) Develop methods to
minimize impervious surfaces and to protect and preserve open space.
7.2.2 No Untreated Discharges
Stormwater shall not be discharged directly to a wetland, local water body, municipal
drainage system or abutting property without adequate treatment, as defined in Section
7.2.3 through 7.2.12 of these LID Regulations.
7.2.3 Construction/Land Disturbance
A sediment and erosion control plan shall show best management practices for site
conditions and minimize the area of the land disturbance. The plan shall also establish
requirements for the control of wastes, including discarded building materials, concrete
truck washout, chemicals, litter and sanitary wastes. BMPs shall be in conformity with
the most recent version of the Massachusetts Erosion & Sediment Control Guidelines for
Urban & Suburban Areas (FHHCD, 1997).
7.2.4 Channel Protection
The post-development peak discharge rate from the 2-year, 24-hour storm event shall be
equal to the pre-development rate in order to prevent stream bank erosion and channel
degradation.
7.2.5 Flood Protection
The post-development peak discharge rate for the 10-year, 24-hour frequency storm
event shall be equal to the pre-development rate in order to protect downstream
property. The 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event shall be controlled and
conveyed to prevent extreme flooding and protect public safety.
7.2.6 Groundwater Recharge
Winchendon LID Regulations - 15 - 11/17/09
Post-development recharge rates shall equal pre-development conditions. Annual
groundwater recharge rates shall be maintained by use of structural and nonstructural
management practices. The stormwater runoff volume to be recharged to groundwater
shall be determined using the methods in the latest version of the Massachusetts DEP
Stormwater Management Standards and Handbook. The LID Authority may relax or
eliminate the recharge requirement if the site is an area where contaminated soils are
documented.
7.2.7 Structural Practices for Water Quality
All structural Stormwater Management devices shall be based on design criteria from the
most recent version of the Massachusetts DEP Stormwater Management Standards and
Handbook and shall remove at least 80% of total suspended solids (TSS).
7.2.8 Water Quality Volume
The volume for sizing a structural stormwater management device shall be designed
according to criteria specified by the Massachusetts DEP Stormwater Management
Standards and Handbook.
7.2.9 Hydrologic Basis for Design of Structural Practices
For facility sizing criteria, the basis for hydrologic and hydraulic evaluation of
development sites include, but are not limited to the following:
7.2.9.1 Impervious cover is measured from the site plan and includes any material or
structure that prevents water from infiltrating through the underlying soil. These include,
but are not limited to, paved parking lots, sidewalks, roof tops, driveways, patios, and
paved, gravel and compacted dirt surfaced roads.
7.2.9.2 The standard for characterizing pre-development land use for on-site areas shall
be woods.
7.2.9.3 Peak discharge rates will be determined using the most recent version of models
approved for use by MA DEP. Maximum length of sheet flow for time of concentration
calculations shall be no more than 50 feet for pre- and post-development conditions.
7.2.9.4 For purposes of computing runoff, all pervious lands in the site shall be assumed
prior to development to be in “good hydrologic condition” (as referenced in the USDA,
Natural Resource Conservation Service’s Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, TR
55, June 1986), and regardless of conditions existing at the time of computation.
7.2.9.5 Flooding and channel erosion impacts to streams due to development shall be
determined at each point of discharge from the development project. A determination of
impacts shall include runoff from the watershed which also contributes to that point of
discharge.
7.2.9.6 The design storms shall be defined as a 24-hour storm using the rainfall
distribution recommended by the Northeast Regional Climate Center Atlas of
Precipitation Extremes for the Northeastern United State and Southeastern Canada.
7.2.9.7 Proposed residential, commercial, or industrial development shall apply these
stormwater management criteria to the land development as a whole. Individual lots in
new subdivisions shall not be considered separate land development projects, but rather
the entire subdivision shall be considered a single land development project. Hydrologic
parameters shall reflect the ultimate land development and shall be used in all
Winchendon LID Regulations - 16 - 11/17/09
engineering calculations.
7.2.10 Sensitive Areas
Stormwater discharges to swimming beaches, aquifer recharge areas, water supplies and
other sensitive water resources may be subject to additional criteria, established by the
LID Authority after conducting a public hearing in accordance with the Town of
Winchendon LID Bylaw.
7.2.11 Hotspots
Stormwater discharges from land uses with higher potential pollutant loadings, known as
“hotspots,” require treatment practices specified in the most recent version of the MA
DEP Stormwater Management Standards and Handbook.
7.2.12 Low-Impact Development (LID) Design Criteria
Applicants are required to use LID Design Criteria to assess the effectiveness of the use
of LID better site design practices to decrease stormwater runoff at the site. Projects that
comply with LID Design Criteria may be allowed reductions in stormwater management
requirements specified in this section (Section 7) of the Regulations. Improved site
design and nonstructural controls may minimize the use of structural stormwater controls.
The LID Authority may adopt additional criteria for LID site design practices. The LID
site design criteria and procedures for their calculation and application are identified in
Appendix A of these Regulations.
8.0 WAIVERS
8.1 The LID Authority may waive strict compliance with these regulations if such action is
allowed by federal, state and local statutes and/or regulations; is in the public interest;
and is consistent with the purposes of the Town of Winchendon LID Bylaw.
8.2 Any applicant may submit a written request for a waiver, accompanied by supporting
information explaining how the waiver will comply with the purposes of the LID Bylaw
and is in the public interest.
8.3 All waiver requests shall be acted on within 90 days, and the LID Authority will provide
a written decision. If additional information is required, the LID Authority may extend
the review period. If the applicant objects to an extension, or fails to provide requested
information, the waiver request may be denied by the LID Authority. All waivers shall be
granted only conditionally until the final LID Permit is granted. Should other changes in
a plan so require, the LID Authority may rescind a waiver which has been conditionally
approved.
9.0 SURETY
The LID Authority may require the permittee to post a bond, cash, or other acceptable
surety in an amount deemed sufficient to ensure that the work will be completed in
accordance with the permit. A portion of the bond may be released as each phase is
completed in compliance with the permit, but the bond shall not be fully released until the
LID Authority has received the final inspection report and issued a Certificate of
Completion. Where applicable, the LID surety shall be coordinated with other surety
requirements.
Winchendon LID Regulations - 17 - 11/17/09
10.0 CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS
10.1 The permittee must notify the LID Authority at least three (3) business days before
starting a land disturbing activity. The permittee must also notify the LID Authority at
least three (3) business days before constructing the key components of the stormwater
management system.
10.2 At the discretion of the LID Authority, periodic inspections of the construction of
stormwater management devices shall be conducted by the Town, a professional engineer
or a landscape architect approved by the LID Authority. Written reports shall include:
the inspection date and location; evaluation of compliance with the stormwater permit;
any variations from approved construction specifications or violations of the LID
Management Plan. The inspection report shall be filed with the LID Authority.
10.3 At a minimum, inspections shall include: Initial site inspection, prior to approval of any
plan; inspection of site erosion controls; inspection of stormwater management devices
prior to backfilling of any underground drainage or stormwater conveyance structures;
evaluation of the system within 24 hours of a 2-year storm event, if possible; and a final
inspection before the surety is released. The stormwater management system shall be
inspected to verify its as-built features. If the inspector finds the system adequate, this
shall be reported to the LID Authority which will issue a Certificate of Completion.
As-built plans shall be full size plans and include all final grades. All changes to project
design shall be recorded on plans.
10.4 Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Completion, if the system is found to be
inadequate due to operational failure, even though built according to the LID
Management Plan, the system shall be corrected by the permittee. If the permittee fails to
act, the LID Authority may use the surety bond to complete the work. If the system does
not comply with the Plan, the permittee shall be notified in writing of the violation and
the required corrective actions. A Stop Work order shall be issued until any violations
are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the LID
Authority.
11.0 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION
11.1 Upon completion, the permittee shall certify that the project is in accordance with Plan
specifications and shall provide inspections to adequately document compliance.
11.2 The LID Authority will issue a letter certifying completion upon its receipt and
approval of the final inspection and reports and/or upon otherwise determining that all
work was completed in conformance with these Regulations.
12.0 PERPETUAL INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE
12.1 Maintenance Responsibility
Stormwater management devices and practices shall be inspected to document
maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the LID
Winchendon LID Regulations - 18 - 11/17/09
Management Plan, the O&M Plan and these Regulations. The current owner of the
property shall maintain in good condition and promptly repair all grade surfaces, walls,
drains, dams, vegetation, and erosion controls and other protective measures in
accordance with approved Plans.
12.2 Maintenance Inspections
12.2.1 Inspections shall occur during the first year of operation and at least once every three
years thereafter. An agreement between the property owner and the LID Authority shall
be executed for privately-owned stormwater management systems which specifies the
responsible party for conducting and financing long term inspections.
12.2.2 Inspection reports shall be submitted to and maintained by the LID Authority.
Inspection reports shall include: the date of inspection; an evaluation of the condition of
structures and devices used to manage stormwater; and a description of any needed
maintenance.
12.3 Right-of-Entry for Inspection
The inspection agreement shall allow the LID Authority or its designee to enter the
property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection.
12.4 Records of Maintenance and Repair Activities
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management
device shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the LID Authority, upon
request, and shall retain those records for 5 years.
12.5 Failure to Maintain
If the responsible person fails to meet the requirements of the inspection agreement, the
LID Authority, may take action to restore the stormwater management device after 30
days written notice. If the violation is an immediate threat to public health or public
safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient prior to actions required to return the facility or
practice to proper working condition. The LID Authority may assess the owner(s) of the
facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property.
13.0 ENFORCEMENT
13.1 The LID Authority or an authorized agent of the LID Authority shall enforce these
Regulations, and may pursue all remedies for violations, including a written enforcement
order. If remediation is required, the order may set forth a deadline when work shall be
completed. Said order may advise that failure to remedy violations may require the
Town of Winchendon to correct violations and to obtain reimbursement from the
property owner. Within thirty days after correcting the violation, the violator and the
property owner shall be notified of the costs incurred by the Town of Winchendon
including administrative costs.
13.2 Criminal Penalties and Non-Criminal Disposition Any person who violates any
provision of the Town of Winchendon LID Bylaw, or any Regulation, order or permit
issued thereunder, may be ordered to correct the violation and/or shall be punished as
Winchendon LID Regulations - 19 - 11/17/09
provided by Town bylaw. The LID Bylaw will include the provisions for non-criminal
disposition of complaints.
13.3 Appeals The decisions or orders of the LID Authority may be appealed to a court of
competent jurisdiction. The remedies described in these Regulations do not exclude
other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law.
14.0 SEVERABILITY
The invalidity of any section, provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of these
Regulations shall not invalidate any section, provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause
thereof, nor shall it invalidate any permit or determination that previously has been
issued.
Winchendon LID Regulations - 20 - 11/17/09
APPENDIX A: Example System of Low Impact Development (LID) Design Criteria
Low Impact Development encourages minimization of impervious surfaces, protection of critical
environmental resource areas, and preservation of naturally-vegetated buffers. Any reductions in
impervious cover result in reduced stormwater runoff and, consequently, smaller land
consumption areas and lower construction costs. In an effort to apply a more holistic approach
to stormwater management, five specific non-structural practices called LID Design Criteria for
better environmental site design, are provided for designers that will significantly reduce the size
and cost of structural practices.
Non-structural practices are increasingly recognized as a critical feature of effective stormwater
management, particularly with respect to site design. In most cases, non-structural practices will
need to be combined with structural practices to meet stormwater requirements. The key benefit
of non-structural practices is that they can reduce the generation of stormwater from the site. In
addition, they can provide partial removal of many pollutants and contribute to groundwater
recharge. The five non-structural LID Design Criteria are:
Criterion 1. Environmentally Sensitive Development
Criterion 2. Disconnection of Rooftop Runoff
Criterion 3. Disconnection of Non-Rooftop Runoff
Criterion 4. Stream Buffers
Criterion 5. Grass Channels
This section describes each of the criteria for the five groups of non-structural practices and
specifies minimum standards for their application to a site.
The Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) will need to validate the
volume reductions in order to ensure compliance with the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection
Act.
The application of these criteria does not relieve the design engineer or reviewer from the
standard of engineering practice associated with safe conveyance of stormwater runoff and good
drainage design.
Several of the stormwater criteria apply towards meeting the Massachusetts Stormwater Policy’s
recharge requirement. The Massachusetts Stormwater Policy currently only recognizes a volume
based approach to meeting this standard. Recently however, it has been demonstrated that
disconnecting impervious area to drain over pervious areas can result in significant recharge to
groundwater. Therefore, some jurisdictions (most notably the States of Vermont and Maryland)
have developed recharge criteria that credit recharge based on an “area method,” as opposed to
strictly a volume method. To better understand this approach both the “volume method” and
“area method” are described as follows.
The intent of the recharge criteria (which is often denoted as Rev) is to maintain pre-developed
groundwater recharge rates at development sites to preserve existing water table elevations,
Winchendon LID Regulations - 21 - 11/17/09
thereby helping to support baseflow to streams and wetlands, as well as to help augment drinking
water supplies.
The objective of the criteria is to mimic the average annual recharge rate for the prevailing
hydrologic soil group(s) (HSG) present at a development site. Therefore, the recharge volume
can be determined as a function of annual predevelopment recharge for a given soil group,
average annual rainfall volume, and amount of impervious cover at a site. Being a function of
site impervious cover, the criterion provides an incentive to engineers and developers to reduce
site imperviousness.
The recharge can be satisfied by one of two methods or a combination of both. The first is
designated as the “Percent Volume Method,” and is based on infiltrating the recharge volume
using one or more of the approved structural practices (such as infiltration trench, infiltration
basins, or drywells). The second method is designated as the “Percent Area Method,” and is
based on draining runoff from some or all of a site impervious area through one or more of the
approved nonstructural practices.
Based on this approach, the Percent Volume Method is as follows:
Rev = (F)(A)(I)/12
Where: Rev = Recharge volume (acre-feet)
F = Recharge factor (in inches, see below)
A = Site area (in acres)
I = Site imperviousness (expressed as a decimal)
Hydrologic Soil Group Recharge Factor (F)
A 0.40
B 0.25
C 0.10
D waived
An example calculation of this method is provided below.
Example: A 50-acre site is to be developed as a residential subdivision near
Burlington, MA. The impervious area for the development will be 20 acres (i.e.,
40% imperviousness). Half of the impervious area overlays HSG "B" soils and
half of the impervious area overlays HSG "C" soils. The recharge requirement
would be calculated as follows:
Compute a weighted F = [(0.25 in)(10 ac) + (0.10 in)(10 ac)]/20 ac = 0.175 inches
Rev = (0.175 in) (50 ac) (0.4)/(12 in/ft) = 0.29 ac-ft
Winchendon LID Regulations - 22 - 11/17/09
The pervious area method is an option to the volume method to allow nonstructural
practices to meet the volume-based re-charge criteria.
Under the Percent Area Approach, the recharge requirement can be met by draining a
calculated recharge area through one or more of several nonstructural approaches. The
calculation is as follows:
Rea = (F)(A)(I)
Where: Rea = Recharge area requiring treatment (acres)
F = Recharge factor based on Hydologic Soil Group (HSG) (same values as
above, but dimensionless)
A = Site area in acres
I = Site imperviousness (expressed as a decimal)
The required recharge area (Rea) is equivalent to the recharge volume and can be achieved by a
non-structural practice (e.g., filtration of sheet flow from disconnected impervious surfaces). In
addition, a combination of both of the methods can be used to meet the recharge requirement at a
site.
If an applicant elects to utilize both the Percent Volume and Percent Area Methods to meet the
recharge requirement, the following applies:
1. Calculate both the Rev and Rea for the site;
2. The site impervious area draining to an approved nonstructural practice is subtracted from
the Rea calculation from step 1, above;
3. The remaining Rea is divided by the original Rea to calculate a pro-rated percentage that
needs to be met by the Percent Volume Method;
4. The pro-rated percent is multiplied by the original Rev to calculate a new Rev that must be
met by an approved structural practice(s).
With this basic understanding of how the recharge requirement can be met on a project, it is now
appropriate to review the suite of LID Design Criteria that can meet both recharge, water quality
and, in a few cases, some of the water quantity controls as well.
Winchendon LID Regulations - 23 - 11/17/09
Criterion No. 1: Environmentally Sensitive Development
This practice is utilized when a group of environmental site design techniques are applied to
lower density or rural residential development. The criterion eliminates the need for structural
practices to treat both the Rev and water quality and can reduce required volumes for peak
control of the 2-year, 10-year and 100-year storms.
Minimum Standards
The Rev and water quality requirements are completely met without the use of structural
practices in certain low density (less than 1 dwelling unit per acre) residential developments
when the following conditions are met:
• The total impervious cover footprint is less than 15 % of lot area;
• A minimum of [25%] of the site is protected in natural conservation areas;
• Rooftop runoff is disconnected in accordance with the specifications outlined under Criterion
2;
• Grass channels are used to convey runoff versus curb and gutter for roads and/or driveways
(with no specific constraints on water quality volume, velocity or minimum retention time);
and
• Stream buffers are incorporated into the site design on both perennial and intermittent
streams (where applicable).
The designer must still address applicable stormwater detention for all roadway and connected
impervious surfaces (i.e, 2-year, 10-year, and 100-year control).
Environmentally Sensitive Rural Development Example Application
Base Data
Site Data: a single-family lot that is part of an 8-acre low density subdivision in a critical area
Lot Area = 2.5 ac
Conservation Area = 0.65 ac
Impervious Area = .35 ac = 14%
Site Soils Types: 100% “B”
F = 0.25
Original water quality volume = 1.0” (.35) (43,560/12) = 1,270.5 ft3
Original Rev = (2.5) (0.08) (.25) (43,560/12) = 182 ft3
Environmentally Sensitive Rural Criterion (see Figure 1)
Required recharge is considered met by site design.
Required water quality volume is considered met by site design.
2-year, 10-year & 100-year control: No change in CN, tc may be longer which would reduce
storage requirements.
Percent Reductions Using Environmentally Sensitive Rural Criterion:
Winchendon LID Regulations - 24 - 11/17/09
• Rev = 100%
• Water quality requirement = 100%
Figure 1. Schematic of Environmentally Sensitive Rural Development
Winchendon LID Regulations - 25 - 11/17/09
Criterion No. 2: Disconnection of Rooftop Runoff
This criterion may be satisfied when rooftop runoff is “disconnected” and then directed over to a
pervious area where it can either infiltrate into the soil or flow over it with sufficient time and
velocity to allow for filtering. The standard is typically met by grading the site to promote
overland flow through vegetated channels or by providing bioretention1 areas either on-lot or in
common areas.
If a rooftop is adequately disconnected, the disconnected impervious area can be deducted from
total impervious cover, therefore reducing water quality volume requirements. In addition,
disconnected rooftops can be used to meet the recharge requirement as a non-structural practice
under the Percent Area Method.
Restrictions on Application of the Criterion
The rooftop disconnection criterion is subject to the following restrictions:
• Disconnection must be designed to adequately address the issue of basement seepage;
• The contributing length of rooftop to a discharge location shall be 75 feet or less;
• The rooftop contributing area to any one discharge location cannot exceed 1,000 ft2;
• The length of the "disconnection" shall be equal to or greater than the contributing rooftop
length;
• Disconnections will only be allowed for residential lot sizes greater than 6,000 sq. ft;
• The entire vegetative "disconnection" shall be on a slope less than or equal to 5.0%;
• Where provided, downspouts must be at least 10 feet away from the nearest impervious
surface to discourage re-connection to the drainage network;
• Where a gutter/downspout system is not used, the rooftop runoff must drain as either
sheetflow from the structure or drain to a subsurface drain field that is not directly connected
to the drainage network;
• Disconnections shall be used on relatively permeable soils (HSGs A and B); therefore, no
soil evaluation is required;
• In less permeable soils (HSGs C and D), the water table depth and permeability shall be
evaluated by a responsible professional engineer to determine if a spreading device is needed
to provide sheetflow over grass surfaces. In some cases, dry wells (see Figure 2), french
drains or other temporary underground storage devices may be needed to compensate for a
poor infiltration capability;
• For those rooftops draining directly to a stream buffer, one can meet either the rooftop
disconnection criterion or the stream buffer criterion (Criterion 3), not both; and
1 Bioretention systems (also referred to as "rain gardens" or "biofilters") are so-called low impact
development stormwater management systems that manage and treat stormwater runoff using a
conditioned planting soil bed and planting materials to filter runoff stored within a shallow depression.
The method combines physical filtering and adsorption with bio-geochemical processes to remove
pollutants. The system consists of an inflow component, a pretreatment element, an overflow structure, a
shallow ponding area (less than 9" deep), a surface organic layer of mulch, a planting soil bed, plant
materials, and an underdrain system to convey treated runoff to a downstream facility.
Winchendon LID Regulations - 26 - 11/17/09
• To utilize rooftop disconnection for a designated hotspot land use, the rooftop runoff must
not co-mingle with runoff from any paved surfaces.
An example of this criterion is provided below.
Figure 2. Schematic of Dry Well (Source: adapted after Howard County, MD)
Rooftop Disconnection Example Application
Given the following base data:
Site Data: 108 Single-Family Residential Lots (~ ½-acre lots)
Site Area = 45.1 ac
Original Impervious Area = 12.0 ac;
Site Soils Types: 78% “C”, 22% “D”
Composite Recharge Factor, F = 0.08
Original Rev = 0.08 acre-feet; Rea = 0.96 acres
Original water quality requirement = 1.0”/impervious acre = 1.0”(12.0 ac)/12 = 1.0 acre-foot
(site is located in a critical area)
Winchendon LID Regulations - 27 - 11/17/09
Rooftop Criterion (see Figure 3)
42 houses disconnected
Average house area = 2,500 ft2
Net impervious area reduction = (42)(2,500 ft2) / (43,560 ft2/ac) = 2.41 acres
New impervious area = 12.0 – 2.41 = 9.59 acres;
Required recharge (Rea) is 0.96 acres and 2.41 acres were disconnected thereby meeting
100% of the recharge requirement.
New water quality volume = 1.0” (9.59)/12 = 0.80 acre-feet; or a 0.20 acre-foot reduction
Percent Reductions Using Rooftop Disconnection Criterion:
• Rev = 100%
• Water quality = (1.0 – 0.8) / 1.0 = 20.0%
Figure 3. Schematic of Rooftop Disconnection
Winchendon LID Regulations - 28 - 11/17/09
Criterion No 3: Disconnection of Non-Rooftop Runoff
These standards apply to practices that disconnect surface impervious cover runoff by directing it
to pervious areas where it is either infiltrated into the soil or filtered (by overland flow). This
criterion can be satisfied by grading the site to promote overland vegetative filtering.
These "disconnected" areas can be subtracted from the site impervious area when computing the
water quality treatment volume. In addition, disconnected surface impervious cover can be used
to meet the recharge requirement as a non-structural practice under the Percent Area Method.
Restrictions on Application of the Criterion
The criterion is subject to the following restrictions:
• The maximum contributing impervious flow path length shall be 75 feet;
• Runoff cannot come from a designated hotspot land use;
• The length of the "disconnection" must be equal to or greater than the contributing length;
• The entire vegetative "disconnection" shall be on a slope less than or equal to 5.0%;
• The surface impervious area to any one discharge location cannot exceed 1,000 ft2;
• Disconnections shall be used on relatively permeable soils (HSGs A and B); therefore, no
soil evaluation is required;
• In less permeable soils (HSGs C and D), the water table depth and permeability shall be
evaluated by a professional engineer to determine if a spreading device such as a french
drain, gravel trench or other temporary storage device is needed to compensate for poor
infiltration capability; and
• For those areas draining directly to a wetlands or stream buffer, only the non-rooftop
disconnection criterion or the stream buffer criterion can be used, not both.
Winchendon LID Regulations - 29 - 11/17/09
Criterion No. 4: Stream Buffer
These standards apply to treat stormwater runoff by a stream buffer. Effective treatment
constitutes capturing runoff from pervious and impervious areas adjacent to a stream buffer and
treating runoff through the overland flow in a natural vegetative or forested buffer. The use of a
filter strip is also recommended to treat overland flow in the green space of a development site
(see Figure 4). The standards include:
• The impervious area draining by sheet flow to a stream buffer is subtracted from the site’s
initial impervious area in the water quality calculation.
• The impervious area draining to stream buffer contributes to the recharge requirement, (Rev),
under the Percent Area Method.
Restrictions on Application of the Criterion
The criterion is subject to the following conditions:
• The minimum stream buffer width (i.e., perpendicular to the stream flow path) shall be 50
feet as measured from the bank elevation of a stream or the boundary of a wetland;
• The maximum contributing path shall be 150 feet for pervious surfaces and 75 feet for
impervious surfaces;
• The average contributing overland slope to and across the stream buffer shall be less than or
equal to 5.0%;
• Runoff shall enter the stream buffer as sheet flow. A level spreading device shall be utilized
where local site conditions prevent sheet flow from being maintained;
• The criterion is not applicable if rooftop or non-rooftop disconnection is already provided
(i.e., no double counting); and
• Stream buffers shall remain ungraded and uncompacted, and the over-story and under-story
vegetation shall be maintained in a natural condition.
Winchendon LID Regulations - 30 - 11/17/09
Figure 4. Example of Application of Stream Buffer Criterion
Criterion No. 5: Grass Channel
Winchendon LID Regulations - 31 - 11/17/09
Open grass channels may be used to reduce the volume of runoff and pollutants during smaller
storms (i.e., 1.0 inches and less).
Use of a grass channel will automatically meet the minimum recharge Rev requirement (under
the Percent Area Method) regardless of the geometry or slope. If designed according to the
following design criteria, the grass channel will meet the water quality treatment requirements
for certain kinds of residential development.
Note: Runoff curve numbers (CNs) for 2-year, 10-year, and 100-year control will not change.
Grass Channel Design Criteria
Grass channels shall meet the following specifications.
• Land use is moderate to low density residential (maximum density of 4 dwelling unit/ac);
• The bottom width shall be 2 foot minimum and 6 foot maximum (if a larger channel is
needed, a compound cross section may be used);
• The side slopes shall be 3Horizontal:1Verticle or flatter;
• The channel slope shall be less than or equal to 4.0%; and
• The length of the grass channel shall be equal to the roadway or parking lot length.
Grass Channel Example Application
Base Data
Site Data: 108 Single Family Residential Lots (~ ½ acre lots)
Site Area = 45.1 ac
Original Impervious Area = 12.0 ac; or I = 12.0/45.1 = 26.6%
Site Soils Types: 78% “C”, 22% “D”
Composite F = 0.08
Original Rev = 0.08 acre-feet; Rea = 0.96 acres
Original WQv = 1.0 acre-feet
Grass Channel Criterion (see Figure 5)
Entire site is open section road, but only 11.2 acres meet the water quality requirement design
criteria for the grass channel (i.e., 3:1 sideslopes, 2 foot bottom width and slope less than or
equal to 4%).
Required recharge (Rea) is 0.96 acres and the full site is drained by grass channels, thereby
meeting 100% of the recharge requirement.
New water quality Area = (45.1 – 11.2) = 33.9 acres, assume new impervious cover = 0.266(33.9
ac) = 9.0 acres.
New WQv = 1.0”(9.0 acres)/12 inches/foot = 0.75 acre-feet; or a 0.25 acre-foot reduction
Percent Reductions Using Grass Channel Criterion:
Winchendon LID Regulations - 32 - 11/17/09
• Rev = 100%
• WQv = (1.0 acre-feet– 0.75) / 1.0 acre-feet = 25.0%
Figure 5. Schematic of Grass Channel
Winchendon LID Regulations - 33 - 11/17/09
Dealing with Multiple LID Design Criteria
Site designers shall utilize as many LID Design Criteria as they can on a site. Greater reductions
in stormwater storage volumes can be achieved when many criteria are combined together (e.g.,
disconnecting rooftops and utilizing grass channel for drainage design). However, criteria
cannot be claimed twice for an identical area of the site (e.g., claiming credit for stream buffers
and disconnecting rooftops over the same site area, draining to the same location).
Other Strategies to Reduce Impervious Cover
Site planning practices that reduce the creation of impervious area in new residential and
commercial developments and therefore reduce the water quality requirements for the site should
be encouraged whenever feasible2. Examples of progressive site design practices that minimize
the creation of impervious cover include:
• Narrower residential road sections;
• Shorter road lengths;
• Smaller turnarounds and cul-de-sac radii;
• Permeable spill-over parking areas (these areas should be valued as 50% impervious, unless
designed specifically for infiltration);
• Smaller parking demand ratios;
• Smaller parking stalls for a percentage of lots;
• Angled one way parking;
• Cluster subdivisions;
• Smaller front yard setbacks;
• Shared parking and driveways; and
• More creatively designed pedestrian networks.
Where these techniques are employed, it may be possible to reduce stormwater storage volumes.
For example, since the water quality treatment volume is directly based on impervious cover, a
reduction in impervious cover reduces required storage. For 2-year, 10-year, and 100-year
management, the designer can compute curve numbers (CNs) based on the actual measured
impervious area at a site using the following equation (adopted from TR-55, 1986):
(98) I + (CN) P = CN
where: I = percent impervious area at the site
P = percent pervious area at the site
2 The reader is referred to the following two references for a more detailed presentation of better site
design and low impact development: 1) Center for Watershed Protection. 1998. Better Site Design A
Handbook for Changing Development Rules in Your Community. Ellicott City, MD; and 2) Prince
George’s County MD Dept. of Environmental Resources. 1999. Low Impact Development Design
Strategies: An Integrated Design Approach. Largo, MD.
Winchendon LID Regulations - 34 - 11/17/09
CN = curve number for the appropriate pervious cover
Figures 6 and 7 show an example of a retail site designed as a conventional development, and as
a site planned using improved site design practices and techniques, respectively. Some of the
noteworthy features of the innovative site plan include: preservation of some forested areas,
establishment of a stream buffer, reduced parking ratios, compact and pervious overflow parking
spaces, and use of vegetated stormwater practices such as filter strips and bioretention areas.
Though not all land use types and developments are amenable to every approach described here,
there are more opportunities for flexibility and creativity in site design than many realize.
Redevelopment sites also can utilize several of these practices and techniques in the redesign of
an area.
The following example (using Figures 6 and 7) quantifies the water quality and recharge
requirement reductions that can be realized by implementing several of these practices and
design techniques.
Base Data (see Figure 6)
Site Area = 9.3 ac
Original Impervious Area = 6.5 ac; or I = 6.5/9.3 = 69.9%
Site Soils Types: 50% “B”, 50% “C,” split evenly over the impervious area
Composite F = [0.25 (6.5/2) + 0.10 (6.5/2)]/6.5 = 0.18
Original Rev = 0.18 (6.5)/12 = 0.10 acre-feet
Original Water Quality Requirement = 1.0”(6.5 ac)/12 = 0.54 acre-feet
Site Planning Strategies (see Figure 7)
The revised site incorporates the following features:
• 1.8 acres preserved in a conservation easement.
• 0.46 acres of parking lot drain to a buffer with an overland flow path less than 75 feet
(Criterion No. 3: stream buffer).
• 0.28 acres of parking lot/loading area drain to a filter strip with an overland flow path less
than 75 feet (Criterion No. 2: disconnection of non-rooftop runoff).
• The total site impervious area was reduced from 6.3 acres to 5.8 acres by the site design
revision; the new site I = 5.8/9.3 = 62.4%.
The new storage requirements for Rev:
• New composite F = [0.25 (5.8 ac/2) + 0.10 (5.8 ac/2)]/5.8 = 0.18
• New Rev (Percent Volume Method) = 0.18 (5.8 ac)/12 = 0.09 acre-feet
• New Rea (Percent Area Method) = FAI = 0.18 (9.3 ac)(.624) = 1.04 acres
• Using the Percent Area Method and noting that 0.46 acres drain to the buffer and 0.28 acres
drain to a filter strip, then Rea = 1.04 ac – (0.46 ac + 0.28 ac) = 0.3 acres
• Therefore, the remaining Rev = (0.3 ac/1.04 ac) (0.09 ac-ft) = 0.02 acre-feet
Winchendon LID Regulations - 35 - 11/17/09
0.02 acre-feet must be managed by an approved “structural” practice.
The new storage requirement for water quality control is:
• New Impervious Area (to satisfy specifications for non-rooftop disconnection and buffer
criteria) = 5.8 ac – (0.28 ac + 0.46 ac) = 5.06 acres;
• New water quality requirement = 1.0”(5.06 ac)/12 = 0.42 acre-feet; or a 0.12 acre-foot
reduction
Percent Reductions Using Site Planning Strategies:
• Rev = (0.10 – 0.02) / 0.10 = 80.0%
• WQv = (0.54 – 0.42) / 0.54 = 22.0%
Also, with a 0.5-acre net reduction in site imperviousness, the CN for computing the 2-year, 10-
year and 100-year control will be lower, thereby reducing the storage requirements for these
storms by a modest amount.
Figure 6. Example of Conventional Retail Site Design
Figure 7. Example of Improved Retail Site Design
Winchendon LID Regulations - 36 - 11/17/09
Rules and Regulations
For the Review and Approval
of Site Plans and Site Development
In
Winchendon, Massachusetts
January 15, 2008
Winchendon, Planning Board
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 2.
SITE PLANS AND SITE DEVELOPMENT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section 1. General, Definitions 6
1.1.1 Authority 6
1.1.2 Purpose 6
1.1.3 Applicability 6
1.1.4 Scope of Planning Board Review 6
1.1.5 Decisions, Determinations and Findings 9
1.2 Definitions 9
1.3 Changes Requiring a new Site Plan Review 11
1.4 Residential Sites Requiring Site Plan Review 12
Section 2. Informal Review and Determination 13
2.1 Review by the Planning Agent 13
2.1.1 Meeting with the Planning Agent 13
2.1.2 Planning Agent Review 13
2.1.3 Planning Agent Decision 13
2.2 Maximum Impacts of Development Proposal that Will
NOT Require Formal Site Plan Review 14
2.3 Informal Review by the Planning Board 14
2.3.1 Application Requirements 14
2.3.2 Site Visit 16
2.3.3. Notice to Abutters 16
2.3.4 Board Conference 16
Section 3. Formal Site Plan Review Application and Determination 18
3.3.1 Application 18
3.3.2 Unnecessary Materials May be Omitted From the Application 18
3.3.3 Form and Contents of Site Plan 19
3.3.4 Supplemental Plan Information Required 20
3.3.5 Impact Statement 24
Section 3.4 Agency Review 30
3.4.1 Distribution of Copies to other agencies 30
3.4.2 Review by the Planning Agent 30
3.4.3 Report of the Consulting Engineer 31
3.4.4 Board of Health Review 32
3.4.5 Conservation Commission and other Reviews 32
3.4.6 Approval of Water Mains and Hydrants 33
3.4.7 Site Visit 33
Section 3.5 Public Hearing 33
3.5.1 Schedule for Hearing 33
3.5.2 Delay Because Site Cannot be Viewed 33
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 3.
3.5.3 Incomplete Application 33
3.5.4 Hearing Procedures 34
3.5.5 Continuation of Hearing 34
3.5.6 Board Evaluation of the Plan 35
3.5.7 Approval of the Plan 35
Section 3.6 Conditions of Approval 35
3.6.1 Standard Conditions 35
3.6.2 Special Conditions 37
Section 3.7 Performance Guarantee 37
3.7.1 Requirement for a Performance Guarantee 37
3.7.2 Filing of the Performance Guarantee 37
3.7.3 Form of Guarantee 37
Section 3.8 Endorsement and Recording 38
3.8.1 Plan for Endorsement 38
3.8.2 Endorsement of the Plan 38
3.8.3 Transfer of Interests 38
3.8.4 Duties of the Applicant 39
Section 4 Design Standards for Site Development 40
4.1 Laying Out the Site 40
4.2 Adequate Access from Public Way 40
Section 4.3 Streets, Driveways and Walkways 41
4.3.1 Streets, Driveways and walkways to provide safe travel 41
4.3.2 Adequate means of egress from the site 41
4.3.3 Streets and Driveways Within A Site 41
4.3.4 Curb Specifications 41
4.3.5 Walkways Within a Site 41
4.3.6 Accessibility 42
4.3.7 Individual Driveways 42
Section 4.4 Other Requirements 42
4.4.1 Open Spaces 42
4.4.2 Site Drainage 42
4.4.3 Snow Storage 42
4.4.4 Wetlands Protection 43
4.4.5 Uses within the Setback Areas 43
4.4.6 Parking requirements 43
4.4.7 Utilities 43
Section 4.4 Other Requirements (Cont) 43
4.4.8 Other Utilities 43
4.4.9 Stormwater Disposal 44
4.4.10 Landscape Plan Required 44
4.4.11 School Bus Stops 44
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 4.
4.4.12 Signs 44
4.4.13 Exterior Lighting 44
4.4.14 Site Remediation 45
Section 4.5 Overlay Districts 45
Section 4.6 Protection of Town Property 45
Section 4.7 Easements 45
4.7.1 Utility Easements 45
4.7.2 Stormwater Easements 45
Section 4.8 Building Design 46
4.8.1 Basement Drainage 46
4.8.2 Fire Protection 46
Section 5 Construction Standards 47
5.1 Notice of Commencement of Construction 47
5.1.1 Notice of Construction 47
5.1.2 No Nuisance 47
5.1.3 Use of Existing Ways 47
Section 5.2 Construction Standards: Land Clearing 47
5.2.1 Must Minimize Site Alteration, Clearing and Grading 47
5.2.2 Required Measures 47
5.2.3 Site Management Techniques 48
5.2.4 Site Protection during Construction 48
5.2.5 Revegetation 49
5.2.6 Protection of Abutters 49
5.2.7 Monitoring and Inspection 49
5.2.8 Slope Stabilization 50
5.2.9 Required Security 50
Section 5.3 Construction Standards 50
5.3.1 Ways to be Paved 50
5.3.2 Ways Not to be Paved 50
5.3.3 Treatment of Other Areas 51
5.3.4 Utilities 51
5.3.5 Trees and Other Plantings 51
Section 5.4 Slopes Planting and Grading; Preservation of Vegetation 51
5.4.1 Erosion Control 51
5.4.2 Slope Stabilization 51
5.4.3 Guide for Slope Stabilization 52
5.4.4 Temporary Measures 52
Section 5.5 Protection of Natural Resources 52
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 5.
Section 5.6 Fire Alarm System 52
Section 5.7 Fire Protection Water Supply Regulations 52
A. General Requirements 52
B. Hydrant Requirements 53
C. Fire Cistern Requirements 53
D. Suction Connection 55
E. Vehicle Parking Area 55
F. Filler Connection 55
G. Vent Pipe 56
H. Backfilling of Cistern 56
I. Site Work 56
J. General Conditions 57
K. Fire Department Acceptance Sequence 57
L. Dry Hydrant Requirements General 58
Section 6 Construction, Compliance, Plan Modifications, 60
Completion
6.1 Construction 60
6.2 Compliance Monitoring 60
6.2.1 Monitoring During Construction 60
6.2.2. Monitoring Procedures 60
6.2.3 Stop Work Orders 61
6.3 Applicant’s Responsibility 61
6.4 Modification of the Approved Site Plan 61
6.5 Completion of Site 61
6.5.1 Notice of Completion 61
6.5.2 As-Built Plans 61
6.5.3 Conveyance of Easements and Utilities 61
6.5.4 Release of Security 62
Section 7 Miscellaneous Provisions 63
7.1 Forms 63
7.2 Authority 63
7.3 Enforcement 63
7.4 Agents of the Board 63
7.5 Consultant fees 63
7.6 Waiver of Compliance 64
7.7 Severability 64
7.8 Invalidation by State Law 64
7.9 Amendments 64
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 6.
Section 1. General, Definitions
Section 1.1.1 Authority
These Rules and Regulations are adopted by the Planning Board as authorized by M. G. L. Chapter
40A and the Winchendon Zoning Bylaw, as amended. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
Section 1.1.2 Purpose
The purpose of these Rules and Regulations is to establish uniform procedures for the Site Plan
Approval Process. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
Section 1.1.3 Applicability
Any applicant for Site Plan Review under article 12 of the Winchendon Zoning Bylaw shall
comply with the provisions of these Rules and Regulations. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
Section 1.1.4 Scope of Planning Board Review
Since any development will have impacts on the total environment and particularly on the neighborhood
and the community, site plan review seeks to prevent or to minimize adverse impacts
that may occur as an owner seeks to develop his or her property. The process intends that
projects will conform to the spirit of the zoning bylaw. It establishes criteria for the layout, scale,
appearance, safety, and environmental impacts of developments in an attempt to integrate those
projects into the community. Therefore, in reviewing a site plan, the Planning Board will consider
the effects of the proposal as listed in section 12.6 of the zoning bylaw:
A. Adequacy of Traffic Access. Curb cuts should be so arranged and limited in number as to reduce
congestion and improve traffic safety. Proper sight triangles and sufficient turnarounds for
vehicles should be provided to reduce the potential for accidents at points of egress;
B. Adequacy of Traffic Circulation and Parking. Plans should maximize pedestrian and vehicular
convenience and safety both within the site and in relation to adjacent ways. Internal and external
traffic circulation, and pedestrian and bicycle access should be adequately provided. Potential
traffic impacts both on and off the site, should be mitigated as may be prescribed by the
Board, including, but not limited to, measures designed to reduce automobile trip generation, especially
on roadways with demonstrated deficiencies in capacity. There should be sufficient
parking as required in Article 8 laid out in a manner to provide ease in maneuvering of vehicles
and so as not to be detrimental to the surrounding properties or to create an undesirable visual effect
from the street. Sufficient area for loading and unloading may be required if the need for
such loading zone is found to be necessary;
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 7.
C. Provide efficient and effective circulation. With respect to vehicular and pedestrian circulation,
special attention shall be given to the location and number of access points to public streets
and sidewalks, to the separation of vehicles and pedestrians, to the arrangement of parking areas
and to service and loading areas, and to the location of accessible routes and ramps for the disabled;
D. Adequacy of Landscaping and Screening. There shall be a sufficient amount of landscaping
and screening, as may be reasonably determined by the board, to insure protection of and to enhance
the quality of the project in question and the adjacent properties. Plans should minimize
the visibility of parking, storage or other outdoor service areas as viewed from public ways or
premises residentially used or zoned;
E. Exterior and parking lot lighting should be adequate to provide for security and public safety
F. Plans should minimize light pollution and lighting intrusion onto other properties and public
ways with proper arrangement and shielding, and minimize glare from headlights through plantings
or other screening.
G. Adequacy of Protecting the Use of Renewable Energy Resources. Where appropriate and
feasible, the site plan shall be so designed as to not unreasonably deter the actual or potential use
by the subject property or adjacent properties of energy available for collection or conversion
from direct sunlight, wind, running water, or organically derived fuels.
H. Relate development to its environment. The proposed development shall relate appropriately
to its context. It shall relate harmoniously to the terrain and to the use, scale and architecture of
existing buildings in the vicinity that have a functional or visual relationship to the proposed
structure(s). Proposals that deviate substantially from established neighborhood patterns are discouraged;
I. Preserve the landscape. The landscape, existing terrain, and any significant trees and vegetation
shall be preserved in its natural state insofar as practicable. Tree and soil removal shall be
minimized and any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring
developed areas. If natural features and existing landscaping are proposed to be removed, special
attention shall be accorded to plans to replace such features and landscaping;
J. Provide open space. All open space shall be designed to be visually and physically accessible
to the extent feasible. Open space shall add to the visual amenities of the vicinity by maximizing
its visibility for persons passing or overlooking the site from neighboring properties. If open
space is intended for active use, it shall be so designed as to maximize its accessibility for all individuals,
including the disabled, encourage social interaction, and facilitate ease of maintenance;
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 8.
K. Provide for nature's events. Special attention shall be accorded to stormwater runoff so that
neighboring properties and/or the public stormwater drainage system are not adversely affected.
Plans should allow no net increase in the rate of flow of stormwater runoff (calculated using a
100-year storm event) from the project site consistent with the Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook.
Attention shall also be accorded to design features which address the affects of rain, snow
and ice at building entrances and to provisions for snow and ice removal from circulation areas;
L. Make advertising features understandable. The size, location, design, texture, lighting, and
materials of all exterior signs and advertising features shall not detract from the use and enjoyment
of proposed buildings or surrounding properties. Signs and similar features shall be appropriately
sized and located in a manner that does not detract from nor disrupt the immediate visual
environment.
M. Integrate special features with the design. Exposed storage areas, machinery and equipment
installation, service areas, truck loading areas, utility connections, meters and structures, mailboxes,
lighting, and similar accessory structures shall be subject to such setbacks, screen planting
or other mitigation or screening methods as shall reasonably be required to prevent their being
incongruous with or offensive to existing or proposed structures and surrounding properties.
Special features, which are essential to a structure's function, shall be incorporated into the original
structure design, not added as an afterthought;
N. Make spaces secure and safe. With respect to personal safety, all open and enclosed spaces
shall be designed to facilitate building evacuation, maximize accessibility by fire, police or other
emergency personnel and equipment, and, to the extent feasible, provide for adequate and secure
visibility for persons using and observing such spaces;
O. Protect Winchendon's heritage. The removal or disruption of historic, traditional or significant,
uses, structures or architectural features or neighborhood patterns shall be minimized insofar
as practicable, whether these exist on the site or on adjacent properties. Significant structures
and/or structures with important architectural features shall be identified by the Winchendon Historical
Society. New structures, additions, and alterations shall be sympathetic to and complement
the scale and design of surrounding historic structures and locally significant buildings of
architectural merit; and
P. Consider the microclimate. A developer who proposes new structures, additional lot coverage,
or the installation of machinery or equipment which emits heat, vapor, fumes, or noise shall
endeavor to minimize, insofar as practicable, any adverse impact on light, air, and water resources,
or on the noise and temperature levels of the immediate environment.
Q. Consider Winchendon’s Resources. The applicant should be prepared to adequately describe
the likely demands on local infrastructure, schools and municipal services and offer proposals to
mitigate such demands on the Town's ability to provide such services to the project.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 9.
R. Achieve design excellence. Endeavors to achieve design excellence in all new structures are
encouraged. Where the existing character and quality merit change, the design of new structures
shall be directed towards a specific design objective. In every case the structure shall be made
compatible with the character of Winchendon by means of the following factors:
1. A silhouette harmonious with the natural landforms and building patterns produced
by height limits;
2. Maintenance of an overall height similar to that of surrounding buildings, or a sensitive
transition, where appropriate, to development of a dissimilar character; and
3. Use of materials, colors and scales similar to or harmonizing with those of nearby
structures and neighborhoods. — Winchendon Zoning Bylaw, May 22, 2006] [Section
added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 1.1.5 Decisions, Determinations and Findings
Unless such authority is clearly assigned to another entity by these regulations, all decisions, determinations
or findings made under these regulations shall be made by the Board. The Board
may, however, assign that authority to others in special instances. Such decisions, determinations
and findings will be made in accordance with the intent of these regulations, the town bylaws,
and the laws. The recommendations of town staff and board consultants will be carefully considered
by the Board in making such decisions. Unless a super majority vote is required, such decisions
will be made by a majority vote of the Board members. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 1.2 Definitions
In construing the meanings of these regulations, the definitions in Section 81L, of Chapter 41 of
the general laws and the Winchendon zoning bylaw shall apply unless a contrary intention clearly
appears. Words and meanings subject to question but not addressed herein, in the zoning bylaw,
or in Section 81L of Chapter 41 of the MGL will be defined by the Board.
Abutter Owner of property contiguous to the lot(s) being developed under the site plan
review rules and regulations. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Applicant The person(s) who applies for approval or endorsement of a plan. An applicant,
other than a natural person or persons, must submit evidence that the person actually
signing the application is authorized to sign on behalf of the applicant. If the applicant is
not the owner of the site being developed, the owner must also sign the application indicating
his/her/its consent to the work. See also Developer.
Approval After receiving submitted plans, the Board may vote to approve them. Such
action by the Board requires a simple majority vote of those present at a meeting, unless
specified otherwise in the general laws. In the case of final approval on a site plan, only
those board members present at the public hearing or otherwise fully conversant with the
plan and the information gathered at the hearing may vote. [Note: Board members who have
missed one session of a hearing may vote on that matter pursuant to section 23D of chapter 39 of the M. G.
L. as voted by the town meeting May 22, 2007.] [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 10.
A S T M American Society for Testing and Material [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
B M P Best Management Practices as are determined by the Massachusetts Department
of Environmental Protection or other environmental groups. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Brownfield A site that has previously been used and contains or may contain materials
that constitute environmental contamination. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Board See Planning Board
Certified Mail Mail sent certified mail, return receipt requested, via the United States
Postal Service. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
CMR Code of Massachusetts Regulations [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Current Fee Schedule The schedule of Fees as most recently adopted by the Board.
[Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Dbh (diameter breast high) The diameter of a tree at breast height, normally 4 feet
above the ground. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Determination A decision made by the Board [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Developer See Applicant. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Drainage The control of surface water within the tract of land to be developed. [Section
added Jan. 15, 2008]
Earth Sod, loam, clay, sand, gravel, stone, or peat. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
Environmental Site Assessment An assessment made to determine the possible presence
of environmental contamination. These sites are commonly referred to as brownfields.
Such site assessments should be made under the ASTM E-1527 protocol. [Section
added Jan. 15, 2008]
Lot An area of land in one ownership, with definitive boundaries, used, or available for
use, as the site for one or more buildings. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
M. G. L. The General Laws of Massachusetts as are currently in force. [Section added Jan.
15, 2008]
Owner The owner of record as shown by the records of the Worcester County Registry
of Deeds or Land Court. An owner, other than a natural person or persons, must submit
evidence that the person actually signing the application is authorized to sign on behalf of
the owner. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Parties in Interest The applicant(s), abutters, owners of land directly opposite on any
public or private street or way, and abutters to the abutters within 300' of the property line
of the applicant as they appear on the most recent applicable tax list, notwithstanding that
the land of any such owner is located in another city or town, the planning board of the
city or town, and the planning board of every abutting city or town. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 11.
Person A natural person, a partnership, a corporation, a trust or any other entity that has
a right to contract, convey land, sue or be sued under the laws of the Commonwealth.
[Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Planning Board or Board The Planning Board of the Town of Winchendon, established
under section 81A, of chapter 41 of the Massachusetts General Laws.
Receipt Receipt by the Planning Board establishes the date upon which the time limitation
for processing begins. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Recorded A document, plan, deed, etc. which has been recorded in the Worcester District
Registry of Deeds in Worcester, Massachusetts, except that, as affecting registered
land, it shall mean filed with the recorder of the land court. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Register of Deeds The Register of Deeds of the County in which the land in question, or
the city or town in question, is situated, and, when appropriate, shall include the recorder
of the land court. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Registry of Deeds The Worcester District Registry of Deeds located in Worcester, Massachusetts,
and, when appropriate, shall include the Land Court. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Slope The ratio of vertical rise over horizontal distance. It may be expressed as a ratio,
1:2 or as a percentage: vertical rise / horizontal distance * 100. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Specimen tree a native, introduced or naturalized tree which is important because of its
impact on community character, its significance in the historic/cultural landscape or its
value in enhancing the effects of wildlife habitat. Only trees with a diameter breast high
(dbh) of 6 inches or larger will be considered specimen trees except trees that have a
small height at maturity or are slow growing, such as flowering dogwood or American
holly with a dbh of 4 inches or larger will be considered specimen trees. [Section added Jan.
15, 2008]
Wetlands Those areas subject to the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws, chapter
131, section 40, the state regulations issued thereunder, or the Winchendon Wetlands Bylaw
whichever is the most restrictive. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 1.3 Changes Requiring a new Site Plan Review
A. A change in the shape or dimensions of the lot on which a business or other use is located
will require a new site plan review. Included in this requirement is the sale of a part of the lot. A
lease of part of the premises will also require a new site plan review.
B. Site plan approval is granted to a particular site owner or business. It does not run with the
land. A change of the owner or operator of a business will require a new site plan review. If the
new owner or operator proposes no significant changes in the operation, a planning agent review
under section 2.1 may be sufficient.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 12.
C. A change of use may trigger site plan review. Because the requirements for parking or the effects
of traffic will be different, the Board will regard a change of a use listed in one of these
groups to a use listed in another group as a change of use:
Family restaurant serving primarily sit down meals at customer tables
1. Restaurant primarily serving “fast food”; restaurant offering primarily counter
meal service
2. Restaurant offering take-out food
3. Retail store not offering on site services except garment alterations
4. Retail establishment offering carry in service of electronics, appliances, small
equipment, etc.
5. Professional office, e.g.: dentist, attorney, accountant, real estate office
6. Service establishment offering primarily service at other locations (e.g. Home
service, field service) and having few customers that actually go to the site in question.
(e.g. Contractor, plumber, electrician)
7. A commercial or industrial business, other than a retail store, which receives,
ships or delivers, on average, more than one ton of material per day from the proposed
site.
8. A commercial or industrial business, other than a retail store, which ships or delivers,
on average, less than one ton of material per day from the proposed site. [Section
added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 1.4 Residential Sites Requiring Site Plan Review
A. Site Plan review shall be required for housing developments as required by section 12.2.1 B
of the zoning bylaw.
B. Formal Site Plan review shall also be required for proposed residential subdivisions consisting
of three or more dwelling units. This site plan review shall be conducted as part of the definitive
subdivision approval process.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 13.
Section 2. Informal Review and Determination
Section 2.1 Review by the Planning Agent
Section 2.1.1 Meeting With the Planning Agent
Any person planning to develop a site, redevelop a site, or use it for a different purpose should
meet with the Planning Agent. An appointment is suggested. The proponent should have a
sketch of the planned use and be ready to explain the proposal. Pictures may be helpful. The
Planning Agent will try to understand the proposal and may ask for additional information. [Section
added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 2.1.2 Planning Agent Review
After the Planning Agent has all needed information (s)he may need to consult other officials
and will have five working days to make a decision.
If the Planning Agent determines that there may be an impact on abutters or that the abutters
should have an opportunity to comment, (s)he will require review by the Planning Board which
requires notice to the abutters. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 2.1.3 Planning Agent Decision
The Planning Agent will make one of the following decisions:
A. The proposal does not require site plan review under the provisions of article 12 of the zoning
bylaw or the likely impacts of the proposal on the site, the abutters, the neighbors, and the
community are minimal and no further review is needed. The Planning Agent will issue a letter
to that effect.
1. Before issuing such a letter, (s)he will advise the planning board members of
her/his decision. If within 48 hours, any two members object to the letter, the matter
shall be moved to the board conference level as hereinafter provided.
2. Copies of the letter will be placed in the files of the Department of Planning and
Development for a permanent record and provided to the building commissioner.
B. The proposal may qualify for a waiver of formal review by the Board because it, with such
mitigation as may be agreed upon, will impact the site, the abutters, the neighbors, and the community
less than the maximum impacts stated in section 2.2. The Planning Agent will arrange an
informal conference with the Board at a regular meeting. A development review meeting prior to
the Planning Board conference may be suggested and arranged.
C. The proposal will require full site plan review by the Board. The Planning agent will explain
the process, provide forms, and may suggest waivers that the Board might grant to simplify the
process of gaining formal approval. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 14.
Section 2.2 Maximum Impacts of a Development Proposal that Will Not Require Formal
Site Plan Review
A. Additional traffic generated by the proposed activity will neither cause nor increase congestion
on any road; nor at any intersection; nor adversely affect the surface or foundation of the
road; nor will it increase the safety hazard at any such location.
B. Stormwater disposal and other site improvements will not require the installation of catch basins,
underground piping, or other heavily engineered structures. Simple septic systems consisting
only of a septic tank and a leach field below the natural grade will not trigger review under
this condition.
C. There will be no construction in wetlands, wetlands buffers, stream buffers, verified vernal
pools, or potential vernal pools.
D. No earth will be removed from the site beyond the 19 cubic yards allowed by section 10.1 of
the zoning bylaw.
E. There will be no constructed slope of steeper than 1:5.
F. There will be no more than 24 inches of retaining walls on any slope.
G. Any proposed signs will conform to the provisions of article 9 of the zoning bylaw.
H. The proposed activity will not handle or generate any hazardous wastes.
I. The site has not been previously developed or, if it has been previously developed, a level I
or, if necessary, a level II environmental site assessment report indicates there will be no significant
risk resulting from the proposed use.
J. The project, with such mitigation measures as may be agreed upon, will substantially meet
the impact criteria listed in section 12.6 of the zoning bylaw. [See listing in section 2.2 J of these regulations.]
[Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 2.3 Informal Review by the Planning Board
Section 2.3.1 Application Requirements
The applicant for informal review shall submit the following materials:
A. An application form signed by the applicant and tax certified by the tax collector. If the applicant
is not the owner, the owner shall also sign the application as consenting to the work proposed.
B. A minor site plan review application fee as stated in the Board’s current fee schedule.
C. Ten copies of each of the following:
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 15.
1. A plan showing existing conditions on the site:
a. The plan must be to scale and sufficiently large to show the information required.
Multiple sheets will be allowed.
b. Boundaries of the entire parcel which is occupied by the site shall be shown
c. The various details shown shall extend at least 100 feet onto contiguous properties.
Location of details on adjacent properties may be approximate.
d. Wetlands, verified vernal pools, and possible vernal pools shall be shown in at
least approximate location.
e. All existing structures must be shown in at least approximate locations.
f. General indications of the existing ground cover shall be shown.
g. Steep grades (over 1:4) shall be shown. Some indication should be made of the
existing general topography.
h. Other significant items such as old roads, rock outcrops or large trees should be
shown. Items that may be of archeological interest are significant and shall be shown.
2. A map showing the location of the site in relation to roads, etc. This may be a copy of part of
the zoning map or the assessor's map.
3. A plan showing the proposed work in detail. This shall include:
a. The proposed changes in topography;
b. Existing and proposed buildings;
c. Existing and proposed roadways and parking areas;
d. Existing and proposed walkways;
e. Proposed stormwater removal methods;
f. Proposed landscaping;
g. Proposed lighting.
h. Sufficient data shall be included to determine readily the location of all existing or
proposed improvements to the site, including structures, roads, driveways, walks,
loading areas, parking areas and landscaping; and sufficient also to reproduce the
same on the ground. All proposed improvements shall be staked out on the ground or
otherwise appropriately marked;
i. The location of all outdoor storage areas for materials or merchandise and the nature
of the materials to be stored; [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 16.
j. The location of all existing and proposed signs;
4. A narrative description of the proposed use and how it will affect each of the decision criteria
in section 12.6 of the zoning bylaw. [See section 2.2. J of these regulations for a copy.]
5. If a environmental site assessment has been undertaken, a copy of the full report. [Section added
Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 2.3.2 Site Visit
It will be the policy of the Board to conduct a site visit. The applicant, and any professionals that
have contributed to the plan will be expected to attend unless excused by the Board. This visit
will be arranged at the convenience of the Board usually before the Board conference. The purpose
of the visit is to acquaint the Board members with details of the site, access to the site, and
to envision the proposed development. This will enable the members to more accurately assess
the proposal. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 2.3.3 Notice to Abutters
All abutters and abutters to abutters who would be entitled to notice under the formal site plan
review procedure shall be notified by regular mail that a plan has been submitted for review and
of the date and time of the scheduled conference. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 2.3.4 Board Conference
A. A conference with the Board shall be scheduled for a regular meeting of the Board. This
should be within 30 days of the date a complete application is received by the Planning Agent as
determined by the agent.
B. The applicant must appear at the conference and be ready to discuss the application with the
Board.
C. The purpose of the conference is to determine if the proposal, with mitigation if necessary,
will have less impact on the land, the abutters, the neighborhood and the community than the
maximums allowed by section 2.2 of these regulations.
D. At the conference the Board will consider separately each of the maximum impacts allowed
by section 2.2 and each of the criteria listed in section 12.6 of the bylaw. [See section 1.1.4 of these
regulations for a copy.]
E. Should the Board need additional information, the conference may be continued to another
date so that the information can be obtained.
F. The Board may then make a finding that the proposed project does not exceed the maximum
impacts allowed by section 2.2 and that formal site plan review is not required
1. If such finding is made, the Board shall issue a Notice of Decision which shall
state that formal review is waived and shall include any conditions that have been
agreed upon. Signed copies of the notice shall be filed in the Department of Planning
and Development as a definitive statement of the Board’s action and be provided to
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 17.
the applicant. Additional copies shall be provided to the building commissioner and
to the abutters and any other persons who have requested a copy.
G. Should such a finding not be made, the applicant must proceed to formal site plan review.
[Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 18.
Section 3. Formal Site Plan Review Application and Determination
Section 3.3.1. Application
Any person who requires formal review of a site plan under article 12 of the zoning bylaw and
these regulations must:
A. File with the Planning Agent as representative of the Planning Board, a properly completed,
tax certified Application for Site Plan Approval, and pay the filing fee and consultant review deposit
required by the current fee schedule.
1. If the applicant is not the owner of record of the site, the form shall require the
signature of the owner of record indicating that (s)he has no objection to the site work
proposed by the plan.
B. File notice of submission of the plan with the town clerk.
C. The following documentation shall be submitted with the plan:
1. Proof of the owner’s title to the property, e.g. a copy of the deed to the property.
If the site is subject to easements, information on applicable easements should be
provided.
2. A list prepared by the Assessors showing the Assessor's parcel numbers, names
and addresses of all owners of property abutting upon the land included in the site
plan as they appear on the most recent tax assessor's list; [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
3. 5 paper copies of the plan, 5 copies of the plan in reduced size of approximately
11 x 17 inches, 10 copies of the required documentation;
4. An Impact Statement as provided in section 3.3.4 (15 copies).
5. Unless the property has never been previously developed, a copy of all environmental
site assessments that have been done on the property or any part that is to be
developed. If no previous environmental site assessment has been done on property
being redeveloped, the board may require a level I environmental site assessment. If
the level I assessment indicates the possibility of contamination, a level II assessment
will be required.
6. A detailed description of the existing and proposed use. The applicant shall declare
whether the facility in question is expected to generate, store, use or dispose of
hazardous materials or wastes. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998] [Revisions, Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.3.2 Unnecessary Materials May be Omitted From the Application
The planning agent after consultation with the board chairman may allow the applicant to omit
from the application such of the listed materials that will not be needed to adequately evaluate
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 19.
the proposal. If the board later finds that such materials are needed, the applicant shall then
supply them. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.3.3 Form and Contents of Site Plan
A. The site plan size shall be 24 x 36 inches. The drawing shall be at a scale of one inch to forty
feet (1"=40’) or such other scale as the Board may approve. Where a plan is drawn on multiple
sheets it must be accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire parcel involved and in such
case for ease of reading, matching lines and consecutive numbering shall be provided. The site
plan shall contain the following information:
1. Site location by street and number, boundaries, north point, date, scale and legend;
an index or key plan showing the site location at a scale of one inch equals one
thousand feet (1’ =1000’);
2. A map showing the location of the site in relation to roads, etc. This may be a
copy of part of the zoning map or the assessors’ map.
3. The name and address of the record owner and the applicant, and the name, address,
the seal, signature, and date of signing of the registered professional engineer
or registered land surveyor as appropriate to the data;
4. Sufficient data to determine readily the location of all existing or proposed improvements
to the site, including structures, roads, driveways, walks, loading areas,
parking areas and landscaping; sufficient also to reproduce the same on the ground.
All proposed improvements shall be staked out or otherwise appropriately marked on
the ground, and the location of said stakes and marks shall be shown on the topography
sheet;
5. The proposed topography with contour lines at two foot (2') intervals. The surface
elevation of all water bodies and wetlands within the tract shall be given, All wetlands
shall have been properly flagged and the locations thereof clearly shown. Street
and lot lines shall be shown to facilitate orientation. Benchmarks shall be shown and
designated. The topographic plan shall bear the stamp, date, and signature of either a
registered professional engineer or a registered land surveyor; the location of all outdoor
storage areas for materials or merchandise and the nature of the materials so
stored or to be stored;
6. The location of all existing and proposed signs;
7. Suitable space shall be provided to record the action of the Board and the signatures
of the members of the Board (or officially authorized person). Directly above
this space shall be the words, "Approval of this plan is granted on the conditions
listed in a separate Statement of Conditions which is part of the approval of this site
plan.” This block shall be just below the required ID block and both shall be within 6
inches of the right side of the plan.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 20.
B. The above data and that required by section 3.3.3. shall also be submitted on compact disk in
AUTO CAD format with all data related to state plane coordinates. Narrative and tables may be
in WORD or EXCEL format. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.3.4 Supplemental Plan Information Required
The following information shall be provided on the same sheet, on separate sheets, or in narrative
or table format as appropriate.
A. The names and full contact information for every person involved in developing the plan
and who may have to be contacted for clarifications or additions. Such information must include
mail address, land line phone number, fax number and email address. A cellular phone number
should be included, if available.
B. The existing topography with contour lines at two foot (2') intervals. The surface elevation
of all water bodies and wetlands within the tract shall be given, and ground surface shall be identified
as to type, such as woodland, swamp, flowages, etc. All wetlands shall have been properly
flagged and the locations thereof clearly shown. Street and lot lines shall be shown to facilitate
orientation. Benchmarks shall be shown and designated. Brooks, ditches, walls and structures
and spot elevations of high and low points shall be shown and identified. 100 year flood plain
limits shall be clearly indicated. Any additional information required by the Conservation Commission
or the Board of Health shall also be shown. The topographic plan shall bear the stamp,
date, and signature of either a registered professional engineer or a registered land surveyor;
C. Site Improvements A table shall show the legal requirements (minimums, maximums) of
the zoning district (where applicable), existing conditions (where applicable) and the proposed
site conditions for the following characteristics: lot size, total lot coverage, open space, percent
wetlands, percent flood plain, developable site area, front yards, side yards, rear yard, any buffers,
building height, minimum distance to groundwater, pre- and post-development runoff rates
and groundwater recharge, net floor area and the number of parking spaces (including numbers
of reserve parking, handicapped, and small car spaces) with supporting calculations. The table
shall give the percentage of reserved parking spaces with respect to the total number of spaces
provided. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
D. The volume of "earth" as defined in the Winchendon Zoning Bylaw to be removed if applicable,
or a statement indicating that "no earth is to be removed" Calculations for determining the
amount of earth to be removed and/or the amount of fill to be brought to the site shall be prepared
by and show the signature and seal of a Registered Professional Engineer
E. The plan shall indicate all easements, covenants or restrictions applying to the land including
zoning setbacks, sideyards and rear yards. In addition, the plan shall show the proposed location
of all buildings, wells and septic systems, if applicable, within the site. There must be a profile
plan at a horizontal scale of forty feet to the inch showing the size and location of existing
and proposed water mains, fire hydrants, sewer lines, their appurtenances, and any other underground
utilities including but not limited to electric, gas, telephone, or cable television services
within and adjacent to the site. All fire hydrants off the site but within 500 feet of the principal
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 21.
building on the site shall be shown. If the site is to utilize an on-site well, its proposed location
must be shown in addition to its setbacks from any building, structure, or sewage disposal system.
The location of wells on abutting properties should be shown on the plan. [Adopted Nov. 19,
1998, expanded]
F. The location of any proposed municipal fire alarm boxes or other warning systems and any
proposed fire lanes shall be clearly shown and identified. Any underground conduit for municipal
fire alarm connections shall be shown.
G. The location of any underground storage tanks for fuel or other chemical storage, including
the tank types, capacities, and conditions shall be shown. If existing underground storage
tanks are present at the site, their location, size, capacities, type and date of installation shall be
given. The Fire Chief will determine whether the tanks may be reused or should be removed.
[Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
H. Storm drainage runoff calculations used for the drainage system design must be prepared
by and display the seal of a Registered Professional Engineer. These calculations must be based
on a recognized standard method (usually the Rational Formula or Soil Conservation Service
Method). The calculations must contain a written summary explaining the rationale of the design
so that a lay person can understand the basic design approach and its validity for the site in
question. Furthermore, the calculations should be fully documented including copies of charts or
other reference sources to make review possible. The pre- and post-development runoff rates
must be provided. The use of computer generated reports is acceptable, however, the source of
the software should be identified. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
1. Calculations shall be provided to support the sizing of all drainage structures and
pipes. The system design shall not result in serious flood hazards during a 100-year
storm. If the site plan includes a ‘reserve parking’ area, the storm drainage system for
this area should be included in these calculations. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
2. Location and types of stormwater drainage facilities including notes on the construction
materials of any pipes, culverts, catchbasins or any other system component.
Sufficient information relating to placement of the drainage system components (rim
and invert elevations, pipe slopes, amount of cover, etc.) shall be shown so that the
operation of the system can be evaluated. Any drainage ponds intended to be constructed
shall be shown, fully dimensioned. If a ‘Reserve Parking Area’ is proposed,
the plan shall show the stormwater drainage structures intended for construction
should the reserve parking area be built in the future. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
3. A typical detail of a proposed catch basin, diversion box, emergency slidegate,
manhole, headwall, retaining wall, walkway, subdrain, waterway, leaching basin,
drainage pond, or other similar structure, if any must be shown. In the Groundwater
Protection Overlay District, catchbasins must be precast concrete with gas traps (Lebaron
1-219, Neenah 3705, or equivalent). Precast catchbasins must show gas traps
and construction joints sealed with a minimum of one (1) inch butyl-rubber gas tight
sealant or equivalent caulking material. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
4. Water Balance Calculations for sites all or partly within a Groundwater Protection
Overlay District: The portion of the site in each Groundwater Protection Overlay DisTown
of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 22.
trict shall be noted. A yearly hydrologic water balance calculation for pre- and postdevelopment
conditions based on annual precipitation that quantifies evapotranspiration,
runoff, recharge and septic flow shall be included. Compliance with applicable
portions of section 4.5 of the Bylaw shall be demonstrated. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
I. If the site lies within a known aquifer or potential area the Board may require a hydrogeological
study based on the most current groundwater survey.
J. The plan must include existing and proposed pavement, sidewalks, grass strips and side
slopes. ..
K. The perimeter outline of any existing or proposed on-site sewage disposal systems including
any required reserve areas shall be shown. The type of sewage disposal system shall be identified
by a simple notation. Design and construction specifications for a sewage disposal must
comply with the Board of Health’s regulations and be approved by that board prior to final approval
of the site plan. The proposed location of the sewer main running from the building to the
sewage disposal system must be shown. If a sewage system other than an on-site sewage disposal
system is to be used, the location of any sewer main to be installed on the property in question
must be shown and adequate capacity at the off-site system demonstrated. If the proposed development
includes the construction of a sewage treatment plant, then the location of the plant
and the sewer main to serve the facility in question must be shown. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
L. The front, sides, and rear elevations of each building shall be shown at an appropriate
scale generally not less than one-eighth (1/8) inch equals one (1) foot. The sill height and peak
height of each building shall be shown referenced to the site benchmark used for the topographical
plan. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998, expanded]
M. All provisions for off-street loading and unloading shall be shown on the plan. A detailed
description of the loading/unloading needs of the proposed use shall be provided and shall include
at a minimum: the number of deliveries/departures expected per day; size and type of vehicles
loading/unloading at the site; type of goods, materials, etc. being loaded/unloaded. Location
of loading/unloading areas at the site and access/egress to/from the site shall be shown on
the plan. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
N. All parking facilities shall be shown with proper dimensions. Parking spaces must be identified
as either standard size, handicapped, or small-car parking spaces. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
1. A Floor Plan shall be provided for each floor of each building whether such building
is existing or proposed so that compliance with the parking requirements of the
Zoning Bylaw for the use to be conducted on the floor in question can be demonstrated.
Each floor plan must be dimensioned to show the net floor area. The floor plan
shall be drawn at a scale of one-fourth (1/4) inch equals one (1) foot or other scale acceptable
to the board. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
2. A typical detail of each type of parking space to be used on the site showing the
dimensions of the ‘Parking Stall Length of Line’ and the ‘Width of Parking Stall’ so
that compliance with the parking area design standards of the Zoning Bylaw or its appendices
is evident. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 23.
O. The location of any existing or proposed outdoor lighting facilities shall be shown. [Adopted
Nov. 19, 1998]
P. Landscaping information must be shown on a separate plan sheet or sheets. In addition to
showing landscape treatments planned for the site, the Landscape Plan shall include general site
features such as lot lines, existing and proposed structures, parking areas, curbs, walkways, loading
areas, land contours, water bodies, wetlands, streams, ledge outcroppings, and large boulders
so that it may be easily related to the other plans. Any area intended to meet parking lot
landscaping area requirements of the Zoning Bylaw shall be fully dimensioned and its area noted
so that compliance with the Zoning Bylaw may be determined. The screening of parking areas
facing public ways and residential zones or uses shall be required. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
1. Planting Table: The botanical and common name of each species, its height (at
planting), its spread (at maturity) and the quantity intended to be planted shall be
listed in a table along with the symbols used to represent the plants on the plan.
[Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
2. Landscaping Details: A typical detail of a tree well, tree planting, and specialty
planting area, if applicable, shall be shown. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
3. Limits of Work - Any area where existing conditions may reasonably be expected
to be disturbed during construction shall be shown and identified on the Landscape
Plan. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
4. Perimeter of Trees - The perimeter of any existing wooded areas on the site shall
be shown. Existing wooded areas intended for preservation shall be noted. The location,
size, and proposed fate of any existing trees larger than 16 inches Dbh shall be
shown. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
Q. All proposed signage shall be shown on the site plan. Each sign shall also be fully described
on a separate sheet. Said description shall include, at a minimum, dimensions, materials of
which it (they) is (are) to be constructed, how and where they are to be displayed, etc. All signage
shall conform to the requirements of article 9 of the Zoning Bylaw. The outline or footprint
of any existing signs shall be shown and their final disposition must be noted. [Adopted Nov. 19,
1998]
R. If licenses, permits, orders of conditions and other approvals have been issued by any public
authority in connection with this site development, copies of such documents shall be furnished.
The applicant shall also provide copies of any such approvals issued during the pendency
of the application. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998, modified]
S. Notes shall be included on the plan that: (1) forbid the use of fill containing hazardous
materials (2) require the marking of the limits of work in the field before the start of construction
or site clearing, (3) require the cleaning of catchbasins, sumps and stormwater basins following
construction and annually thereafter, (4) restrict the hauling of earth materials to or from the site
to the hours between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. on weekdays , (5) describe the materials to be used in the
construction of impermeable surfaces such as sidewalks and driveways.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 24.
T. If the project is to be built in phases, a plan or series of plans showing specific limits of construction
for each phase and detailing the work to be accomplished in each phase shall be provided.
Interim curbing and landscaping shall be shown as needed between phases.
U. Design Certifications. Each plan sheet shall show the seal of a Registered Professional Engineer,
Registered Land Surveyor, Registered Landscape Architect, Registered Professional Architect,
or some combination of these as appropriate to the data on the sheet.
V. The plan shall show the following, where applicable:
1. Clear identification of each area intended to be used as OPEN SPACE on the site
with the square footage of each such area shown. A separate sheet may be necessary
to show these areas adequately. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
2. All driveway entrances dimensioned so that compliance with the access requirements
of the Zoning Bylaw may be determined. The size of the largest truck expected
to use the site shall be noted. All the drives and entrances must be designed to
accommodate the designated size of truck. The smallest size for the design shall be
the SU-30 design vehicle so that fire trucks may maneuver on the site. [Adopted Nov.
19, 1998]
3. Intersections and driveway entrances on other lots within 75 feet of the site with
the distance between driveways dimensioned. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
W. The application may contain such additional information the applicant feels is necessary to
inform the Board properly about the development including legal opinions, copies of deeds, historical
data, studies, and reports.
X. The Board is empowered by the Bylaw to require information in addition to that specifically
required by the Bylaw. The Board will require the applicant to supply additional information
if it finds that such information is necessary to act properly upon the application. [Section
substantially modified Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.3.5 Impact Statement
A. The Impact Statement shall clearly and methodically assess the relationship of the proposed
development to the natural and man-made environment of the Town. It is intended that the
statement be a guide to the Planning Board in its judgment and deliberation on the proposed development
and its compatibility with existing conditions and planning efforts of the Town. While
reviewing the Statement, the Board will consider the degree to which the applicant has proposed
to sustain the environmental health of the community, minimize adverse effects on the natural
resources, promote safety of the inhabitants of the area, and preserve the character of the Town.
Failure of the plans or the impact statement for the proposed development to indicate such compatibility
may be grounds to require revision of the proposal at the determination of the Planning
Board.
B. The Planning Board may waive any section, or sections, of the Statement, which it deems
inapplicable to the proposed project.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 25.
C. It will not be necessary to repeat in the impact statement material covered elsewhere in the
application but appropriate references to that material should be included in the impact statement.
D. The elements of the statement shall be prepared by professionals registered in Massachusetts
to practice in their fields where so specified or by authorities recognized in their field having
reached a professional status or its recognized equal.
E. Each Impact Statement shall address the following elements:
1. Existing Conditions Element This element may reference the existing conditions
plan provided as part of the application and shall describe the following:
a. Location, size, and current use of existing parcel(s)
b. Existing infrastructure and buildings on site
c. General description of the soil and geological conditions of the site,
including results of any soil testing.
d. Inclusion of any unique site characteristics, including but not limited to
features deemed important by the Massachusetts’s Historical Commission,
Natural Heritage, FEMA.
2. Proposed Development Element shall describe the following:
a. List of all other permits, Federal, State and Local required for the proposed
development
b. An area tabulation which will state along with the total area and percentage
of the following:
i. Site area
ii. Wetland and other resource areas on site
iii. Area dedicated to drainage and other utilities
iv. Proposed impervious area
v. Total area of disturbance
vi. Area reserved for recreation, parks or other open land
3. Transportation Element which will include:
a. Traffic Generation – A comparison of the estimated pre-developed traffic to
post-developed traffic. Including: volume, overall average daily traffic
generation, composition, peak hour levels, directional flows and street
capacities. The methodology used to derive these predictions shall be
included.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 26.
b. Description of all proposed roadways and other travel areas, including
pavement width, right of way width, total length, means of egress, and
maximum grade
4. Construction Element This element may reference the development plan provided
as part of the application and shall include the following:
a. Estimated Construction Schedule including phasing, clearing schedule, hours
of operation, exposure time.
b. Estimates of the cost of performing the various items of required work.
(This is for consideration in determining the amount of performance bond or
cash security as required in section 3.7.)
c. Estimate of proposed cut and fill volumes, schedule for bringing fill on and
off site, and the source(s) of purchased fill
d. Describe the methods to be used during construction to control erosion and
sedimentation (i.e., use of sediment basins and type of mulching, matting, or
temporary vegetation), describe the size and location of land to be cleared at any
given time and length of time of exposure, covering of soil stockpiles, and other
control methods and their effect on the site and on the surrounding area.
e. Describe permanent methods to be used to control erosion and
sedimentation. Include description of:
i. any areas subject to flooding or ponding
ii. proposed surface drainage system
iii. proposed land grading and permanent
vegetative cover
iv. methods to be used to protect existing vegetation
v. the relationship of the development to the topography
vi. any proposed alterations of shorelines, marshes or seasonal
wet areas
vii. any existing or proposed flood control or wetland easements
viii. calculated increase of peak run-off caused by altered surface
conditions and methods to be used to return water to the
soils.
f. In reviewing the Statement, the Board will consider the degree to which water
is recycled back into the ground, the maintenance and improvement of the flow
and quality of surface waters, the preservation or promotion of wildlife refuges,
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 27.
historic sites, unique geological, botanical and archeological features, existing
or potential trails and accesses to open space areas, and the health and safety of
the inhabitants of the area.
5. Public Utility Element prepared by a professional engineer registered in Massachusetts,
to consist of the following sub-elements:
a. Water Supply and Distribution - The average daily and peak demand;
method of supply to the proposed buildings. Coordination with the Town
Water Department, and if deemed advisable, appropriate State agencies, is
strongly recommended.
b. Sewage Treatment - The average daily and peak demand; and any unusual
composition or concentration of component flows into the proposed
system(s), the method to serve the proposed buildings. Coordination with the
Board of Health, the Department of Public Works, and if deemed advisable,
appropriate State agencies, is strongly recommended.
c. Storm Drainage – Description of existing surface drainage characteristics of
the site and surrounding areas. Methodology of post-developed storm water
management, including methods of maintaining existing drainage pattern, and
explanation of how the proposed storm water management system complies
with Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook.
d. Solid Waste - The average weekly demand; expected contents; recycling
potential; on-site incineration, reduction or compaction; and method of
disposal including its ultimate destination.
6. Conservation and Recreation Element to contain the following:
a. Description of existing vegetation, water, wetlands and resource areas and
explanation of any proposed activity within a resource area.
b. Surface Water and Soils. Describe the location, extent and type of existing
water and wetlands, including existing surface drainage characteristics, both
within and adjacent to, the project including existing surface drainage
characteristics, both within and adjacent to, the project.
c. Subsurface Conditions. Describe any limitations on the proposed project
caused by subsurface soil and water conditions, and methods to be used to
overcome them.
i. Describe the procedures and findings of percolation tests
conducted on the site.
ii. Evaluate the impact of sewerage disposal methods on the quality of
subsurface water.
a. Water quality impact from run-off on adjacent and downstream surface
water bodies and subsurface ground water and the water table shall be
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 28.
detailed. Coordination with State and Town water quality agencies
including that Board of Health and Conservation Commission is recommended
so that necessary agreements and responsibilities can be included
in the study of the proposed development and its alternatives. The relationship
of the proposed development to navigable streams, flood plains, and
municipal water supply impoundments and reservations shall be shown.
b. General Ecology - The relation of the proposed development to the major
botanical, zoological, geological and hydrological resources of the site shall
be examined. Consideration of those resources adjacent to the site shall also
be made where deemed appropriate by the Planning Board. Consideration
shall also be given to rare or endangered species of plant and wildlife found
on the site.
c. It shall also deal with the compatibility of existing soils with the proposed
development.
d. It shall describe any proposed recreational facilities/open space, a statement
of intended owner(s) of any proposed recreational facilities/open space, and
indication as to whether the recreational facilities/open space will be avail
able to the public.
7. Sustainable Energy Element
This element shall discuss the effects of the proposed development on the production
and consumption of energy; on the generation and absorption of green
house gasses and other conditions which will affect the sustainability of our
community in the rapidly changing environment. The Board will welcome
proposals that will reduce net effects on global warming.
8. Aesthetics Element to consist of the following:
a. Architecture - The style of architecture of the proposed buildings shall be de
scribed and their compatibility with the function of and the architectural style
of adjacent buildings. Sketches, photos, elevations and renderings are encouraged
to illustrate architectural appropriateness as well as innovation. Consultation
with the Building Commissioner is recommended.
b. Lighting - The type, design, location, function and intensity of all exterior
lighting facilities, existing and proposed, shall be described. Attention given
to safety, privacy, security, avoidance of light pollution, and daytime and
nighttime appearance shall be detailed.
c. Landscaping - Provisions for landscaping shall be described including type,
location and function.
d. Visual- Attention given to views into the site and from the site shall be described.
Included shall be long-distance views as well as to and from
adjacent properties. Visual impact may be related to the preceding subelements
concerning the overall aesthetics of the proposed development.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 29.
9. Neighborhood and Community Element to consist of the following:
a. Schools - The expected impact on the school system pre- kindergarten ,
elementary, middle school, and secondary levels, by type of housing (single
family, garden apartment, townhouse, high rise, etc.), and by bedroom
(one-bedroom, two-bedroom, etc.). The number of students; school bus rout
ing changes if found necessary. Coordination with the Superintendent of
Schools is recommended, particularly for large residential developments.
b. Police - The expected impact on police service, time and manpower needed
to protect the proposed development; provision for special alarm or warning
devices or agents and other needs shall be presented. Coordination with the
Police Department is recommended.
c. Fire - Expected fire protection needs, on-site fire fighting capabilities,
on-site alarm or other warning devices, flow water needs, source and
delivery system and other needs shall be presented. Coordination with the
Fire Department is recommended.
d. Existing Neighborhood Land Use - Compatibility with adjacent or nearby
existing land uses, or approved private development plans, if known, for
adjacent or nearby land use changes to occur during the life of the proposed
development. If the proposed uses are not compatible, the reasons therefore
shall be detailed. Consultation with the Planning Agent is strongly
recommended.
e. Master Plan Element - The statement shall detail the compatibility of the
proposed development and its alternatives to any established plans of the
Planning Board, Conservation Commission, Department of Public Works
and other Town and State agencies as applicable. If not compatible, the
reasons therefore shall be detailed.
10. Social-Economic Element to consist of the following:
a. Population — In residential development, the overall population; ranges in
expected family size by housing type and bedroom count; ranges in expected
income and other relevant social data shall be estimated.
b. Low/Moderate Income Housing — In residential developments, any
provisions for low and/or moderate income housing shall be identified
as to type of housing and bedroom count; State or Federal subsidies proposed
to be applied for; and indication, if any, from the appropriate agencies
including the Winchendon Housing Authority as to its desirability and
feasibility in regard to its location, financing, and any operating subsidy.
c. Employment - In all nonresidential developments and in large residential
developments the number and types of job skills to be employed shall be
detailed. This shall include both construction labor and full-time work force
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 30.
when the development is in operation; employment by shift; estimates as to
the amount of local labor which is intended to be used.
11. Municipal Benefit/Cost Element
A primary part of this element shall be an analysis of the net benefit or cost
to the Town in dollars, as complete as is practicable. This municipal
benefit/cost analysis should follow standard and usual procedures and
parameters for measuring both the benefits to be derived and costs to be
incurred by the Town of Winchendon as a result of the implementation
of the proposed development. It will be helpful to provide one or more
benefit/cost analyses for alternative uses to provide for a basis for
comparison. Except in unusual cases, or when the construction of a
proposed development is scheduled to take place in distinct and separate
phases and each phase may be functional and operable without any or all
of the others, the municipal benefit/cost analysis may assume full and
complete development and occupancy. In phased development or in other
unusual cases, the Planning Board may require more than one analysis
(an analysis for each phase) and/or more than one impact statement.
This element may also estimate net benefit or costs of non-qualifiable
environmental impacts.
12. Waste Generation and Disposal Element
The types and volumes of solid waste likely to be generated by the proposed
use shall be listed. The means of handling these wastes shall be given in
detail. Particular attention shall be paid to the type, location, and screening
of outdoor waste containers. If hazardous wastes will be produced, full
detail as to their nature and means of disposal shall be provided.
[Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.4 Agency Review
Section 3.4.1 Distribution of copies to other agencies
Upon determining the application is complete the Planning Agent shall, transmit copies of the
application and reduced size plans to the Building Commissioner, the Department of Public
Works, the Police Chief, the Fire Chief, the Conservation Commission, the Board of Health, the
Zoning Board of Appeals and the Board of Selectmen for their advisory review and comments. If
the site lies partially or wholly within a historic district, the Historic District Commission shall
be provided with a copy. Should any part of the proposed project lie within 200 feet of the town
line or such copies be requested by any board or agency in an adjoining town, copies of the proposal
shall be provided to that board, agency, and the planning board of such adjacent town.
Each board shall be requested to provide its comments to the planning board within 35 days of
such submittal. A failure to respond shall be considered as lack of objection to the project as
submitted. [Zoning bylaw, section 12.5.2] [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.4.2 Review by the Planning Agent
The Planning Agent should review the plan as time permit. This review should endeavor to insure
the completeness of the plan and to highlight parts of the plan that particularly further the
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 31.
intent of the Winchendon Master Plan, the Open Space and Recreation Plan, any other plans that
have been approved by the Planning Board, and any policies of other departments of the town
government; or which diverge from the provisions of those plans and policies. Specific attention
is to be paid to:
A. That copies of the plan have been properly submitted to the Board of Health, the Conservation
Commission, the Department of Public Works, and that a consulting engineer has been engaged
(if such is being required), and
B. That the applicant is the owner of record of all the property shown on the plan or has legal
authority from the owner to submit the plan, and
C. That the abutters list is certified by the assessors , that the abutters have been properly notified,
the hearing has been properly advertised and posted, and
D. That the plan shows the entire lot or lots on which the site is located, and
E. That each of the elements and sub elements of the application and impact statement have
been addressed unless those elements are deemed unnecessary, and
F. The effects of the proposed development on the sustainable energy and greenhouse gases
production policies of the board, the town, and the state.
G. Provide comments to the Board on the effects and proposals that she/he has highlighted in
the impact statement and any other statements that have been required. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.4.3. Report of the Consulting Engineer
If, in the opinion of the planning agent, after consultation with the chair of the board, the complexity
of the plan or specific details so require, the plan will be reviewed by a consulting engineer
retained by the Board at the expense of the applicant. The cost and payments will be handled
in accordance with M. G. L. Chapter 44, section 53G. This review will include the following
items:
A. the proposed locations, sizes and grades of water mains, sanitary sewer mains and storm
drainage facilities;
B. The location of existing and proposed structures, roads, driveways, loading and unloading
areas, parking areas, and landscaping particularly with respect to on site traffic and pedestrian
movement and stormwater disposal.
C. Any deviations from the design and work requirements specified in these Rules and Regulations
or the Town of Winchendon's Design Standards and Construction Specifications, if any, issued
by the Town Engineer or Department of Public Works, the applicant's detailed specifications
for performing the required work and all special construction requirements, if any, applicable
to the site;
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 32.
D. Comments as to the accuracy of the applicant’s estimates of the cost of performing the various
items of required work. (This is for consideration in determining the amount of performance
bond or cash security as required in Section 3.9.2)
E. Such other items as the board, in its sole judgment, shall deem necessary for the proper evaluation
of the plan and any changes or conditions which should be included in its decision. [Section
added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.4.4. Board of Health Review
The Board of Health shall, within forty-five (35) days following receipt of a site plan, report to
the Planning Board, in writing, its approval or disapproval of said plan. In the event of disapproval,
it shall make specific findings as to why the plan or any portion of the plan will cause injury
to the public health, and shall include the reasons therefor in its report. Failure to so report
shall be deemed lack of objection by the Board of Health. Should the Board of Health be unable
to complete a full review of the project within the required 35 day window, is shall file a preliminary
statement indicating any problems found within the 35 days and a completed statement as
soon as possible thereafter.
A. Every site so situated that it cannot be served by a connection to the municipal sewer system
shall undergo a percolation test carried out under the supervision of the Board of Health's Septic
Inspector, according to the procedures required by state law and Title V of the state regulations.
Such lot shall be provided with a septic tank and drain field or other disposal system whose design
and placement are satisfactory to the Septic Inspector.
1. Extreme care shall be practiced in the layout of a site in unsewered areas. The extent of soil
evaluation should be determined by the Winchendon Board of Health based on the Town of
Winchendon soils map and whatever other soil information is available.
2. Required testing should include deep test holes, percolation tests and test borings, and the
number of tests required shall be determined by the Board of Health investigator.
3. Notwithstanding the above, a permit to construct one or more subsurface absorption areas
must be obtained from the Board of Health.
B. Site Plan approval will not be granted on any site unless the Board of Health has approved
the sewage disposal provisions. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.4.5. Conservation Commission and other Reviews
A. The Conservation Commission, Town Engineer and any other agency designated to receive
and review a site plan shall, within thirty-five (35) days following receipt of such plan, report
their findings in writing to the Planning Board, and shall make recommendations thereon. Should
the agency be unable to complete a full review of the project within the 35 day window, it shall
file a preliminary statement indicating any problems found within the 35 days and a completed
statement as soon as possible thereafter. Failure to so report shall be deemed a lack of objection
to the plan.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 33.
B. The Department of Public Works is specifically requested to report on the likely effect of the
proposed site plan on any plans for road or infrastructure improvements, the effect of any such
improvement plans on the site plan, and the need for future road and infrastructure improvements
that may result from implementation of the site plan. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.4.6. Approval of Water Mains and Hydrants
If water mains and hydrants are to be installed, the written approval of the Department of Public
Works and the Fire Department shall be required before site approval is granted. [Section added Jan.
15, 2008]
Section 3.4.7 Site Visit
It will be the policy of the Board to conduct a site visit. The applicant, his/her engineer or surveyor,
and any other professionals that have contributed to the plan will be expected to attend
unless excused by the Board. This visit will be arranged at the convenience of the Board either
before or during the public hearing process. The purpose of the visit is to acquaint the Board
members with details of the site, access to the site, and to envision the proposed development.
This will enable the members to more accurately assess the proposal. If the Board has conducted
a site visit relating to this proposal previously, they may waive another visit. [Section added Jan. 15,
2008]
Section 3.5 Public Hearing
Section 3.5.1. Schedule for Hearing
The Board shall set a date for the Public Hearing within 14 days after receipt of the completed
application.
A. The date of the hearing shall be not more than 45 days after the receipt of the completed application.
B. Notice of the time and place and the subject matter, sufficient for identification, of the hearing
shall be given:
1. by the planning board, at the expense of the applicant, by advertisement in a newspaper of
general circulation in Winchendon once not less than fourteen days before the day of such hearing,
Prepayment of the advertising charge will be required with the application.
2. by posting a notice in a conspicuous place in the town hall for a period of not less than fourteen
days before the day of such hearing,
3. by mailing a copy of such advertisement to the applicant and to all owners of land abutting
upon the land included in such plan as appearing on the most recent tax list. [Section added Jan. 15,
2008]
Section 3.5.2 Delay Because Site Cannot be Viewed
The time allowed for any review of the application will be extended by the time during which
the part of the site proposed for development is covered with water, snow, or ice. Such time will
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 34.
be determined by the Board. Until the site can be properly viewed, the application will be considered
incomplete. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.5.3. Incomplete Application
If, at the scheduled hearing, the Board determines that the application does not include all the information
required by statute, town bylaw or Board regulation, the Board will entertain a request
for a continuance of the hearing for such number of days as the applicant may request provided
the applicant also agrees in writing to an extension of the time in which the Board must take final
action on the application by thirty days more than the requested continuance. This process will
be repeated as many times as is necessary to secure a complete application. Should such a request
and agreement not be made, it will be the policy of the Board to deny the application as incomplete
without further proceedings. Resubmission of the application thereafter will require a
new application fee and advertising charge. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.5.4 Hearing Procedures
A. An applicant may appear on his/her own behalf or be represented by an agent or attorney. It
is the responsibility of the applicant or the agent of the applicant to present the application to the
Board and to the public. In the absence of an appearance, the Board may decide the matter using
the information it has received. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
B. Presentation of the application by the applicant should not exceed ten (10) minutes in duration
except for good reason. The applicant may be requested to answer questions raised by the
Board or the public. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
C. At the beginning of the hearing, the Board will consider any requests by the applicant that
specific information be omitted from the application as unnecessary. A grant of such requests
shall not preclude the Board from requiring that such material be submitted at a later date if the
Board then finds such material essential to its consideration of the application.
D. The Board will retain any evidence that has been introduced at the hearing for reference in its
deliberations on the case. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
E. In no case will the Board allow new evidence to be admitted after the close of the public
hearing unless this evidence was specifically requested by the Board before the close of the public
hearing. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
F. Any application for site plan approval submitted hereunder may be withdrawn without prejudice
by notice in writing to the Board before the notice of public hearing is posted or mailed pursuant
to Section 4.1 above. Withdrawal of any application thereafter requires Board approval.
No refund of fees will be provided if an application is withdrawn. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
Section 3.5.5. Continuation of Hearing
A. If a hearing is continued to another date in order for the applicant to submit additional information,
that additional material must be submitted to the office of the Planning Agent not less
than ten days prior to the continuation date so that it may be reviewed by the Board’s consultant(
s) and by the Board prior to the actual continued hearing.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 35.
B. The Board’s consultant is instructed to submit copies of his reports directly to the applicant at
the same time they are provided to the Board through the planning agent. The applicant and the
consultant(s) are encouraged to consult directly so that all issues may be resolved as quickly as
possible. The Board, through the Planning Agent, must be informed of the substance of such direct
consultations.
C. The period within which final action shall be taken may be extended for a defined period of
time by written agreement between the Board and the applicant. If the Board determines that the
application is inadequate for the Board to make a decision, the Board may, at its discretion, continue
the hearing to a later date to permit the applicant to submit a revised application provided
the applicant agrees to a time extension. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.5.6. Board Evaluation of the Plan
The Board will evaluate the plan based on its conformity to the requirements of the statutes, local
bylaws, the zoning bylaw with particular reference to the criteria contained in section 12.6 [see
section 1.1.4 of these regulations for a copy of the criteria], the findings of the Consulting Engineer, the
Board of Health report, the Conservation Commission report, and the willingness of the applicant
to address, and if necessary to mitigate, the various impacts shown by the impact statement.
The Board will work with the applicant in an effort to achieve a project that will meet the needs
of the applicant and those of the town. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.5.7. Approval of the Plan
After the reports from the Consulting Engineer, the Board of Health, and the Conservation
Commission, have been received, or after the lapse of 35 days with no such report(s), and after
the public hearing, the Board shall approve or (if the plan does not comply with the Winchendon
zoning and other bylaws, the Winchendon Site Plan Review Rules and Regulations or with the
recommendations of the Board of Health or the Conservation Commission) shall modify and approve,
or disapprove such plan, shall file a certificate of its action with the Town Clerk, and shall
send notice of its said action by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the applicant at
his/her address stated on the application. Approval of a plan requires the vote of a majority of the
Board members present. [Zoning bylaw section 12.5.4] [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.6 Conditions of Approval
Section 3.6.1 Standard Conditions
The following standard conditions will be applied to all plans unless particular sections are
waived by the Board:
A. Approval of this site plan is granted to the named applicant only and only for the purpose(s)
stated in the application or as it may have been amended. It is not transferable for any other use
of the site by the applicant nor to any other person except with the approval of the Board. The
Board reserves the right to review any work done on the site even after any proposed construction
is completed and to determine that the actual use(s) of the site conform to those allowed by
this approval.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 36.
B. Any officer, agent or employee of the Planning Board, Conservation Commission, Zoning
Board of Appeals or Board of Health may enter upon the site at reasonable times, with or without
prior notice to the applicant. in pursuit of official duties, such as examinations and surveys, examination
of construction undertaken, and the purposes for which the site is used (Massachusetts
General Laws Chapter 41, Section 81CC; Chapter 131, Section 40; Chapter 111, Sections 31, 122 and 127A)
C. The time allowed for any inspection required under these conditions, the Planning Board's
regulations, or the town bylaws will be extended by the time during which the site is covered
with water, snow, or ice. Such time will be determined by the Board.
D. A performance guarantee, in the amount of $ is required to assure completion of the project.
Such guarantee shall be filed with the town collector/treasurer within thirty (30) days from the
date of this site plan approval, unless an extension of time is mutually agreed upon in writing by
the developer and the Planning Board. A copy of the receipt issued by the Town Treasurer for
this guarantee shall be filed with the Planning Board forthwith.
E. This site plan approval, together with this list of conditions and the performance guarantee,
must be filed at the Worcester Registry of Deeds forthwith, but not later than sixty (60) days after
the expiration of the appeals period plus such time as may be consumed in any appeals
process. A copy of the receipt from the Registry must be filed with the Planning Board forthwith.
No construction may be started until there has been such filing. If these required documents are
not filed within the required time, this site plan approval shall be void.
F. Upon completion of the project, notice shall be given as provided for in section 6.5.1 of these
regulations.
G. Construction shall be in full conformity with the "Rules and Regulations Governing Site Plan
Review” as issued by the Planning Board, unless an exemption is granted by the Planning Board.
Such exemption, if granted, is stated below as one of the conditions.
H. No sand, soil, loam, sod, gravel, or other natural or quarried earth product shall be removed
from the site until the entire parcel has been graded and condition I. satisfied. Loam must be
stockpiled and covered so as to be protected from erosion.
I. The clearing, excavation or removal of vegetation or the excavation or removal of sand, soil,
loam, sod, gravel, or other natural or quarried earth products is allowed only in accordance with
section 10.6 of the Winchendon Zoning Bylaw and specific conditions for such removal or redistribution
are included in the special conditions appended to these general conditions.
J. The project must be completed to the satisfaction of the Planning Board within two (2) years
from the date of this site plan approval unless an extension of time is mutually agreed upon in
writing by the applicant and the Planning Board. If this work is not completed within the required
time including approved extensions, this site plan approval shall lapse and become void.
K. If the site contains pond, lake, brook, stream, river, standing water, or any indication of the
presence of wetlands, the applicant must comply with all Wetlands Protection regulations, including
those found in Sections 4.3 and 4.4 of the Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw.
L. The applicant must comply with all orders of the Winchendon Conservation Commission.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 37.
M. Work under this site plan shall be commenced within six months of the date of its approval
increased by any time consumed by appeals of the approval and shall be diligently pursued thereafter
until the completion of the work. The Planning Board may extend this period if so requested
by the applicant. If the work is not so commenced and pursued, this site plan approval
shall lapse and become void.
N. This approval and conditions are in addition to other permits and approvals. Nothing in this
decision shall be deemed to relieve the applicant from its obligation to obtain other permits and
approvals required by law or regulation.
O. Any substantive error in the application or any subsequent filing by the applicant or his successor
shall be cause for revocation of the Board’s approval. Due notice and hearing shall be required
prior to any Board action.
P. The Board on its own motion or on the petition of any interested person reserves the power to
modify, amend or rescind its approval of this plan or to require a change in the plan after due notice
and opportunity for the applicant to be heard. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.6.2. Special Conditions
The Board may attach special conditions to the approval of the site plan. Such special conditions
may include such waivers as may be granted from the design and construction standards of these
regulations and inclusion of any other conditions the Board may deem necessary. The special
conditions will be appended to the general conditions stated in section 3.6.1. [Section added Jan. 15,
2008]
Section 3.7 Performance Guarantee
Section 3.7.1. Requirement for a Performance Guarantee
If the Board determines that the applicant’s failure to properly complete the proposed site work
after such work has been started will have a significant adverse impact on neighboring uses, the
community, or on the site itself, the Board may require the applicant to post a guarantee of performance
in an amount acceptable to the Board as provided below. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.7.2. Filing of the Performance Guarantee
Such required performance guarantee must be filed with the Board within thirty days after the
expiration of the appeal period of the approval or the site plan approval shall be void. [Section
added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.7.3. Form of Guarantee
If a performance guarantee is required under this section and before endorsement of its approval
of a plan, the guarantee shall be by one of the methods described in the following subsections A
or B which method may be selected by the applicant:
A. By a proper bond with surety, sufficient in the opinion of the planning board to secure construction
in accordance with the approved plan. The planning board may require that the applicant
specify a time acceptable to the Board within which such construction shall be completed.
Each bond filed shall be approved as to form, manner of execution and sureties by the Town
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 38.
Treasurer and all deposit agreements and securities shall be approved as to form and manner of
execution by the Town Treasurer.
B. By a deposit of money or negotiable securities, sufficient in the opinion of the planning board
to secure construction in accordance with the approved plan, and the planning board may require
that the applicant specify a time acceptable to the Board within which such construction shall be
completed. [Use Form G.]
C. If the Board shall decide at any time during the term of the performance that:
a. improvements have been installed in a satisfactory manner in sufficient amount to warrant
reductions in the security, or,
b. the character and extent of the site require additional improvements, previously waived, then
the Board may modify its requirements for any or all such performance bond, or amount of deposit
of money or value of securities, which may thereupon be reduced or increased respectively
by an appropriate amount after suitable notice to the applicant. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.8 Endorsement and Recording
Section 3.8.1. Plan for Endorsement
Upon approval of the plan by the Board, the applicant shall submit five copies of a complete plan
which includes any changes that were made during the approval process, The applicant shall also
submit a 5 sets of the plans reduced to 11 inches by 17 inches size and a copy of the revised
plan and the conditions thereof in electronic format as required in section 3.3.2 B. This submission
may be made during the appeal period. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.8.2. Endorsement of the Plan
The plan having been approved by the Board and no appeal having been taken within twenty
(20) days after notice to the Town Clerk or after the entry of a final decree sustaining approval of
the plan, and after the applicant has met the requirements of any required performance guarantee,
the Board shall endorse upon the plans submitted as required in section 3.10.1. its written endorsement
of approval and the plan and its appended statement of conditions. One copy of this
plan shall be filed in the office of the Department of Planning and Development as a definitive
statement showing the work or use that is approved. Another copy shall be delivered to the applicant
as shall a notice for recording signed by a majority of the Board which includes any conditions
imposed on the approval. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.8.3 Transfer of Interests
If the plan as approved by the board requires that any interest in any part of the subject premises
be transferred to the town or other political entity for any purpose or to a non profit entity for
conservation or management purposes, the applicant shall prepare, with the approval of the board
and town counsel, and execute the necessary documents to effect such transfer, whether immediate
or future, and deliver the same to the office of the Department of Planning and Development
together with a check for the fees for recording the documents. This shall be done within 30
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 39.
days after the end of the appeal period and before any permits for work on the site are issued.
[Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 3.8.4 Duties of the Applicant
A. The applicant shall submit the board’s signed Notice For Recording of site plan approval and
statement of conditions for recording in the Worcester Registry of Deeds (or properly file the
same with the recorder of the Land Court if the land is registered land) and shall obtain a receipt
therefor.
B. The applicant shall present the receipt(s) to the Department of Planning and Development
which will make a copy thereof for its records and shall then distribute copies of the approved
plans to the various town departments according to the policy of the department.
1. The Building Commissioner will not issue any permits until he has received these plans.
[Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 40.
Section 4. Design Standards for Site Development
Section 4.1 Laying Out the Site
A. The site and all buildings thereon should be designed so as to enhance the use of sustainable
energy principles including the use of renewable energy (including solar energy, wind energy,
and biofuels), the conservation of energy of all types, the limitation of carbon dioxide and other
greenhouse gas production , and enhancement of carbon absorption from the atmosphere. The
Board will consider tradeoffs in other areas when so doing will better accomplish these purposes.
B. Site/building design shall preserve natural topography outside of the development footprint
to reduce unnecessary land disturbance and to preserve natural drainage channels on the site.
C. Hilltops and/or scenic views within the town of Winchendon shall be protected.
D. Wildlife habitat shall be protected.
E. Sites shall be designed in such a way as to avoid impacts to rare and endangered species and
wildlife habitat on a site, and to maintain contiguous forested areas.
F. Open space and specimen trees on the site shall be preserved insofar as possible.
G. In the design of a development, priority shall be given to retention of existing stands of trees,
trees at site perimeter, contiguous vegetation with adjacent sites (particularly existing sites protected
through conservation restrictions), and specimen trees.
H. Whenever possible forested areas shall be preserved if they are associated with:
1. significant forest communities as defined herein;
2. wetlands, water bodies and their buffers;
3. critical wildlife habitat areas;
4. slopes over 15 percent.
I. Cut and fill in site development shall be minimized.
J. Finished grades in disturbed areas should be limited to no greater than a 1:2 slope, while preserving,
matching, or blending with the natural contours and undulations of the land to the greatest
extent possible. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.2 Adequate Access from Public Way
A. When the physical condition or width of the public ways by which a site will be accessed is
inadequate for access to such site in the opinion of the Board, the Board may require the Applicant
dedicate a strip of land for the purpose of widening the abutting public way to a width adeTown
of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 41.
quate to serve the needs of the uses proposed for the site while also providing access at the current
level to such other land as the way serves and to make physical improvements to and within
such public way(s) as may be necessary to adequately serve these uses. This may include drainage
improvements, utility improvements, improvement of intersections, signage, signalization,
or other amenities necessary for safety and orderly traffic flow. Any such dedication of land for
the purpose of such a way and any such work performed within such public way(s) shall be made
only with permission of the governmental agency having jurisdiction over such way, and all
costs of any such widening or construction shall be borne by the Applicant.
B. As an alternative to the applicant’s making the actual required improvements, the board may
require the applicant pay to the town the estimated cost of such improvements which money
shall be used only toward the cost thereof. The timing of any such payment shall be as the board
directs. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.3 Streets, Driveways, Walkways
Section 4.3.1 Streets, Driveways and Walkways to provide safe travel
All streets, driveways, and walkways shown on the plan shall be designed so that, in the opinion
of the Board, they will provide safe travel and be of sufficient design and construction to adequately
handle the traffic loads anticipated. The Board requires, as a minimum, 12 inches of gravel
and three inches of bituminous concrete paving laid in two courses on impervious areas. [Section
added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.3.2 Adequate means of egress from the Site
All site plans shall show adequate means of egress from the site and from each building and use
thereon. Sites showing buildings with more than 50,000 square feet of gross floor area or likely
to have more than 100 persons on the site at a time shall have two or more exits to public ways.
The public way(s) used for such access shall also provide two or more exits. This provision is to
ensure access for emergency vehicles in case an access is blocked. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.3.3 Streets and Driveways Within A Site
The Board will determine the design standards for streets, driveways and walkways within a site
depending on the use(s) proposed for the site based on the prospective traffic load in number
and types of vehicles and pedestrian use. These standards will be based on recommendations of
the Institute of Transportation Engineers. Appropriate traffic control improvements may be required.
[Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.3.4 Curb Specifications
Where curbing is required, whether it be granite or berms it shall be installed in accordance with
the specifications of the Department of Public Works. Where low impact disposal of stormwater
is provided, appropriate curb cuts for drainage shall be provided. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 42.
Section 4.3.5 Walkways Within a Site
Walkways shall be provided within a site as may be necessary for convenient traffic flow and the
safety of pedestrians within the site. All walkway and sidewalk specifications must be approved
by the Board. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.3.6 Accessibility
All streets, curb cuts, walkways, ramps, parking spaces, passenger loading zones and other outdoor
improvements shall be designed to conform to the requirements of the Massachusetts Architectural
Access Board as provided in 521 CMR. This includes the making provision for accessible
parking spaces. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.3.7 Individual Driveways
No principal building on a site shall be located so as to require principal access by a road or driveway
longer than 500 feet measured from the serving road to the nearest point on the building
except by a waiver granted by the Board upon a finding that a shorter access is impracticable.
[Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.4 Other Site Requirements
Section 4.4.1 Open Spaces
Before approval of a site plan, the Board may also, in proper cases, require the plan to show
areas suitably located for playground or recreation purposes, or for providing light and air. The
area(s) shall not be unreasonable in area in relation to the land in the site and to the prospective
uses of such land. Such parks shall be conveniently located. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.4.2 Site Drainage
Site drainage should preferably follow best management practices for low impact development
such as the use of swales or bioretention areas. The use of catchbasins and underground piping
will be approved only when no other stormwater management system is practical as determined
by the board. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.4.3 Snow Storage
Adequate provision for snow storage should be made and be shown on the plan. Such storage
shall be accomplished in a manner that will eliminate or minimize polluted runoff or other hazards
to the environment. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.4.4 Wetlands Protection
The Wetlands Protection Act, MGL Chapter 131, Section 40, provides:
no person shall remove, fill dredge, or alter any bank, beach, flat, marsh, meadow, or swamp bordering …
on any … creek, river, stream, pond, or lake, or any land under said waters … without filing written notice
of his intention to so remove, fill, dredge, or alter, including such plans as may be necessary to describe
such proposed activity and its effect upon the environment, at least sixty days prior to any such removing,
filling, dredging, or altering. Said notice shall be sent by certified mail to the Conservation
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 43.
Commission. No such notice shall be sent before all permits, variances, and approval required by local
bylaw, with respect to the proposed activity have been obtained.
The Board will condition its approval of the plan upon issuance of an “Order of Conditions” by
the Conservation Commission if such an order is required. Applicants are reminded that the Conservation
Commission will not conduct site visits when the land is obscured by snow. [Section
added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.4.5 Uses within the Setback areas
The setback areas of a site are those provided by table 7.2 of the zoning bylaw. Uses within those
areas are regulated as follows:
A. Roadways, driveways, walkways, retaining walls, and perimeter fences are allowed within
the setback areas as necessary.
B. Signs conforming to the zoning bylaw or allowed by special permit may be installed.
C. Installation of underground or overhead utilities and drainage structures is allowed.
D. Buildings and other structures, whether temporary or permanent, will be allowed only on a
finding that such is the best location, that such location will not have a significant impact on the
abutters, the neighbors or the community, and that such location is in accordance with the general
intent of the zoning bylaw. Such a finding may also be made based on probable substantial
hardship for the applicant.
E. The outdoor storage or display of goods or materials in the setback areas, whether offered for
sale or not, is not will normally be allowed only except in the PD zone. A waiver for such storage
or display will be required. in the PD zone for such display or other use. [Section added Jan.
15, 2008]
Section 4.4.6 Parking Requirements
Parking shall be provided in accordance with the zoning bylaw. [See zoning bylaw, article 8.] [Section
added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.4.7 Utilities
A. Water Supply All sites being reviewed shall have a water supply adequate for the uses proposed.
Since the water supply may be used for fire protection as well as normal on site uses,
connection to the public water supply will be preferred and may be required. Non public water
supplies shall require the approval of the Board of Health.
B. Sanitary sewer All sites being reviewed shall have sewage disposal adequate for the uses
proposed as determined by the Board of Health. Connection to the town disposal system will be
preferred. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 44.
Section 4.4.8 Other Utilities
Gas, Electric, Telephone, etc. shall, if situated in a flood prone area, be flood-proofed and approved
by the Department of Public Works or the Board’s consulting engineer. Applicants will
be encouraged and may be required to install utility services, including electricity, telephone and
cable antenna television services underground, and will be required to follow an approved distribution
plan. Any associated overhead structures shall be in conformity with Town standards.
Any related equipment, such as transformers, switching mechanisms, or other vital components
shall, if situated in a flood prone area, be flood-proofed and approved by the Department of Public
Works or the Board’s consulting engineer. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.4.9 Stormwater Disposal
Insofar as possible stormwater disposal shall be accomplished through the use of structures and
facilities that return the stormwater to the soil as expeditiously as possible such as grassed swales
or bioretention basins. Current state standards for low impact development must be followed.
The construction of systems that will discharge storm water into a stream or wetland may be
permitted only when no other feasible option is available.
A. If catch basins and underground piping are allowed for stormwater disposal, catch basins
shall be constructed in conformity with specifications of the Board of Public Works and shall be
so located as to properly perform their function. Stormwater management systems, explanations
of their operation, including methods of maintaining any existing drainage pattern, and explanation
of how the proposed storm water management system shall comply with the Massachusetts
Stormwater Handbook.
B. All stormwater disposal systems shall be designed and built so as to prevent the discharge of
stormwater onto adjacent properties in greater amounts or at greater flow rates than existed prior
to the development. Neither shall stormwater from the site be discharged onto another lot so as
to create a nuisance. Remediation of existing nuisances may be required. [Section added Jan. 15,
2008]
Section 4.4.10 Landscape Plan Required
A. The applicant, shall submit as part of the site plan application a landscape plan prepared by a
registered landscape architect which shall specify the number, location, and type of trees and
other plants to be planted on the site.
B. Appropriate landscaping and/or fencing buffers to protect neighboring properties from lighting
and noise and to restrict public access to the adjacent properties will be is required. [Section
added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.4.11 School Bus Stops
If the site will include residential units and is in an area where transportation of school students
may be required, the applicant shall consult with the school department as to likely school bus
stop locations and shall make sure such locations will provide safe access for students. Student
shelter(s) may be required. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 45.
Section 4.4.12 Signs
Signs proposed for the site must be shown on the plans. Signs must conform to the Winchendon
Zoning Bylaw. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.4.13 Exterior Lighting
If parking areas are likely to be used after dark, adequate lighting of the parking areas shall be
provided so that pedestrians can see and be seen.
A. All parking areas which are proposed to be illuminated shall provide an illumination level of
at least one foot candle at ground level. Descriptions and specifications for the proposed fixtures
shall be provided.
B. Walkways likely to be used after dark shall be adequately illuminated to provide pedestrian
safety from pavement irregularities, obstructions, and improper persons.
C. All exterior lighting shall be so designed that it will not shine onto public ways so as to blind
oncoming drivers or onto other properties so as to create a nuisance. Fixtures shall be of a design
that will aim the light downward or horizontally and be designed to prevent illumination of areas
not intended for illumination including the sky. This is to prevent “light pollution.,
D. The use of light fixtures that reduce the use of electricity, including those that derive their
energy directly from the sun (photovoltaics), and high efficiency lamps, including light emitting
diode lamps, are strongly encouraged. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.4.14 Site Remediation
If the site has been found to contain environmental contamination (a brownfield site), the site
plan shall provide for adequate protection of workers and adequate measures to prevent injury or
damage to users of the finished site or to others. Contaminants shall be removed or contained as
may be recommended by qualified environmental professionals and approved by the board. [Section
added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.5 Overlay Districts
Land located within all overlay districts is subject to the provisions of the Winchendon Zoning
Bylaw, which in general restricts the use of land in such district. The Board may modify these
regulations as necessary for sites in those districts. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.6 Protection of Town Property
No natural feature wholly or partially within a road right of way or other property of the Town,
such as trees, stonewalls, etc. may be removed or disturbed until approval is obtained by the
Winchendon Tree Warden and the Department of Public Works or other appropriate town department.
If the road is designated as a scenic road, the permit and other requirements for work
on scenic roads shall be followed. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 46.
Section 4.7 Easements
Section 4.7.1 Utility Easements
Easements to the Town for utilities shall be provided where necessary and shall be at least twenty
feet wide. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.7.2 Stormwater Easements
Where a site is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel or stream, the Board may require
that a a storm water easement to the Town be provided for a drainage right-of-way of adequate
width that conforms substantially to the lines of such water course, and the boundary of
which shall be no closer than 12 feet from the high water line, drainage way channel or stream,
to provide for construction, repair, or other necessary purposes. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.8 Building Design
A. All buildings thereon should be designed so as to enhance the use of sustainable energy principles
including the use of renewable energy (including solar energy, wind energy, and biofuels),
the conservation of energy of all types, the limitation of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas
production , and enhancement of carbon absorption from the atmosphere. The Board will consider
tradeoffs in other areas when so doing will better accomplish these purposes.
B. Development envelopes for structures, driveways, wastewater disposal, lawn areas and utility
work shall be designed to limit clearing and grading.
C. Impacts to archaeological resources shall be avoided.
D. Applicants shall submit a response from the Massachusetts Historical Commission (MHC)
regarding the potential for archaeological or historical resources on the site.
E. Placement of buildings, structures, or parking facilities shall not detract from the site's scenic
qualities and shall blend with the natural landscape. Building sites shall be directed away from
the crest of hills, and foundations shall be constructed to reflect the natural terrain.
F. Buildings shall be designed, insofar as possible, to harmonize with other buildings in the area
and with the natural environment. Special consideration shall be given to making buildings complement
any nearby historic buildings or a historic area in which it is located.
G. Adequate access to each building shall be provided for pedestrians and vehicles. Adequate
building separation and fire lanes shall be provided as designated by the fire chief. [Section added
Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.8.1 Basement Drainage
If any building which will have a basement is to be erected or expanded, the means of basement
drainage shall be specified. It shall be so designed so that neither will it empty into the sanitary
sewer nor will the occupant be likely to change it so that it empties into the sanitary sewer. [Section
added Jan. 15, 2008]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 47.
Section 4.8.2 Fire Protection
A. A fire alarm system shall be provided according to the provisions of section 5.6.
B. A water supply for fire protection shall be provided according to the provisions of section
5.7. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 48.
Section 5. Construction Standards
Section 5.1 Notice of Commencement of Construction
Section 5.1.1 Notice of Construction
Any person intending to commence construction on any site subject to site plan review or in
any way shall give ten (10) days advance notice to the Board’s compliance official, if any, otherwise
to the building commissioner/zoning enforcement agent before commencing construction.
[Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 5.1.2 No Nuisance
The Board will require adequate measures including, without limitation, barriers and restricted
hours of operation to insure that the work does not become a nuisance to abutters. [Section added
Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 5.1.3 Use of Existing Ways
A. Construction equipment including trucks which, because of its size or weight, may damage
public or other ways will not be allowed to use existing ways. Track type equipment or other
equipment which may damage pavements will not be allowed on paved ways. The developer will
be responsible to the town or the private way owner for any damage to such ways or pavements
caused by such use.
B. Measures that prevent construction vehicles from tracking dirt, mud, and dust from construction
sites onto the public ways will be required at all access points. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 5.2 Construction Standards: Land Clearing.
Section 5.2.1 Must Minimize Site Alteration, Clearing and Grading
BMPs and other efforts to minimize the clearing and grading on a site associated with construction
activities shall be employed, such as parking of construction vehicles, offices/trailers, stockpiling
of equipment/materials, etc. in areas already planned for permanent structures. Earth materials
shall not be stockpiled in areas of protected trees, wetlands, and/or their vegetated buffers.
[Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 5.2.2 Required Measures
The applicant shall employ the following measures in development of the site:
A. Unless an approved plan allows a greater area, clearing of vegetation and alteration of topography
shall be limited to that necessary for the proposed site development but not more than the
maximum impervious area allowed by the Zoning Bylaw. Native vegetation shall be planted in
disturbed areas as needed to maximize absorption of rainwater, reduce runoff, and enhance or restore
wildlife habitat.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 49.
B. Clearing for utility trenching shall be limited to the minimum area necessary to maneuver
trenching or other construction equipment. Roots should be cut cleanly rather than pulled or
ripped out during utility trenching. Tunneling or routing along driveways for utilities installation
should be utilized wherever feasible to protect root systems of trees.
C. Understory vegetation beneath the dripline of preserved trees shall also be retained in an undisturbed
state. During clearing and/or construction activities, all vegetation to be retained shall
be surrounded by temporary protective fencing or other measures before any clearing or grading
occurs, and maintained until all construction work is completed and the site is cleaned up. Barriers
shall be large enough to encompass the essential root zone of all vegetation to be protected.
All vegetation within the protective fencing shall be retained in an undisturbed state. [Section added
Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 5.2.3 Site Management Techniques
Proper site management techniques shall be employed during construction:
A. BMPs shall be employed to avoid detrimental impacts to existing vegetation, soil compaction,
and damage to root systems.
B. The extent of a site exposed at any one time shall be limited through phasing of construction
operations. Effective sequencing shall occur within the boundaries of natural drainage areas.
C. Trees, stumps, brush, and similar material may be left or buried on the site only with the advance
approval of the Board. This requirement is to prevent future erosion and sinkholes. [Section
added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 5.2.4 Site Protection during Construction
The applicant must protect the site during construction through adequate erosion and sedimentation
controls:
A. Temporary or permanent diversions, berms, grassed waterways, special culverts, shoulder dikes
or such other mechanical measures as are necessary may be required by the Board to intercept
and divert surface water runoff. Runoff flow shall not be routed through areas of protected
vegetation or revegetated slopes and other areas. Temporary runoff from erosion and sedimentation
controls shall be directed to BMPs such as vegetated swales. Retaining walls may be required
where side slopes are steeper than a ratio of 1:2.
B. Erosion and sedimentation controls shall be constructed in accordance with the Massachusetts
Stormwater Handbook.
C. Erosion control measures shall include the use of erosion control matting, mulches and/or
temporary or permanent cover crops. Mulch areas damaged from heavy rainfalls, severe storms
and construction activity shall be repaired immediately.
D. Erosion control matting or mulch shall be anchored where plantings are on areas subject to
mulch removal by wind or water flows or where side slopes are steeper than 1:2 or exceed 10
feet in height. During the months of October through April when seeding and sodding may be
impractical, anchored mulch may be applied at the Board's discretion.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 50.
E. Runoff from impervious surfaces shall be recharged on the site by stormwater infiltration basins,
vegetated swales, constructed wetlands or similar systems covered with natural vegetation.
Runoff shall not be discharged directly to rivers, streams, or other surface water bodies. Dry
wells shall be used only where other methods are not feasible. All such basins and wells shall be
preceded by oil, grease, and sediment traps as may be required. The mouths of all catch basins
shall be fitted with filter fabric during the entire construction process to minimize siltation or
such basins shall be designed as temporary siltation basins with provisions made for final cleaning.
F. The applicant shall be required to conduct weekly inspections of all erosion and sedimentation
control measures on the site to ensure that they are properly functioning as well as to conduct
inspections after severe storm events. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 5.2.5 Revegetation
The applicant shall revegetate the site promptly after grading:
A. Stabilization of cleared sites shall occur within seven calendar days of final grading.
B. Proper revegetation techniques shall be employed using native plant species, proper seed bed
preparation, fertilizer and mulching to protect germinating plants. Areas shall be sodded or
loamed with not less than four (4") inches compacted depth of good quality topsoil, and seeded
with turf grass seed of a mixture approved by the Board. Plantings shall be made during the season
appropriate to the selected plant species.
C. Finished grade shall be no higher than the trunk flare(s) of trees to be retained. If a grade
change of 6" or more at the base of the tree is proposed, a retaining wall or tree well may be required.
[Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 5.2.6 Protection of Abutters
An increase in the volume of surface drainage from the properties under construction onto abutting
properties is not permitted. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 5.2.7 Monitoring and Inspections
A. Prior to commencement of construction, the applicant, land owner, contractor and construction
crew, compliance monitor (if one is designated), zoning enforcement officer, and site engineer
shall conduct a meeting to review the proposed construction phasing and number and timing
of site inspections.
B. Initial site inspection of erosion and sedimentation controls and placement of tree protection
measures shall occur after installation of barriers around preserved areas and construction of all
structural erosion and sedimentation controls, but before any clearing or grading has begun.
C. Routine inspections by the developer of preserved areas and erosion and sedimentation controls
shall be made at varying intervals depending on the extent of site alteration and the frequency
and intensity of rainfall. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 51.
Section 5.2.8 Slope Stabilization
Effective stabilization of revegetated areas must be approved by the compliance monitor before
erosion and sedimentation controls are removed. The compliance monitor shall complete an inspection
prior to removal of temporary erosion and sedimentation controls. [Section added Jan. 15,
2008]
Section 5.2.9 Required Security
As part of the performance guarantee provided for in section 3.7, the Board may require a performance
guarantee to cover the costs associated with compliance with this land clearing regulation.
[Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
A. The guarantee, if required, will be in the amount of 150% of the cost of site restoration .
B. The performance guarantee shall be held for the duration of any prescribed maintenance period
required by the Board to ensure establishment and rooting of all new plantings, and may be
reduced from time to time to reflect completed work. Plantings which die within the prescribed
maintenance period shall be replaced. Securities shall not be fully released without a final inspection
and approval of vegetation replacement by the compliance monitor. [Section added Jan. 15,
2008]
Section 5.3 Construction Standards
Section 5.3.1. Ways to be Paved
A. The entire area of each way shall be cleared of all stumps, brush, roots, boulders, or like material
and all trees or other plants not intended for preservation.
B. All loam and other yielding material shall be removed from the area of each way and replaced
with suitable material.
C. All roadways shall be brought to finished grade as shown on the profiles of the plan. The
roadway shall be surfaced with at least the top twelve inches consisting of two six-inch layers of
well-compacted binding gravel to the specified width and location.
D. The completed gravel surface of the travel lanes of all streets shall be treated for the full
width of the roadway with a minimum of 1 1/2 inches of bituminous concrete wearing course
pavement, over a minimum 2 inch binder course of bituminous concrete. [Section added Jan. 15,
2008]
Section 5.3.2 Ways Not to be Paved
A. The entire area of each way shall be cleared of all stumps, brush, roots, boulders, or like material
and all trees not intended for preservation.
B. All loam and other yielding material shall be removed from the area of each way and replaced
with suitable material.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 52.
C. All roadways shall be brought to finished grade as shown on the profiles of the plan. The
roadway shall be surfaced with at least the top twelve inches consisting of two six-inch layers of
well-compacted binding gravel to the specified width and location. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section5.3.3 Treatment of Other Areas
A. Temporary access roads for use during construction may be constructed if necessary. Such
road(s) shall be shown on the plans. All such roads shall be removed and the land restored to its
original condition before the end of construction.
B. All cleared areas of a site that are not to be paved or built upon, including all disturbed areas,
shall be sodded or loamed and seeded with turf grass seed of a mixture approved by the Board.
Plantings shall be made during the season appropriate to the selected plant species. [Section added
Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 5.3.4 Utilities
A. If water or sewer lines are to be connected to the town systems, all materials used, including
pipe and fittings, shall be manufactured by firms and be models thereof approved by the Department
of Public Works.
B. All construction without limitation including trenches, excavations, the backfilling thereof
and subsurface masonry shall be performed according to standards approved by the Department
of Public Works.
C. Any such subsurface work shall be performed before the gravel surface or pavement is laid.
[Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 5.3.5 Trees and Other Plantings
The applicant shall make plantings as provided in the landscape plan submitted as part of the site
plan application according to the requirements of this section, [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 5.4 Slopes Planting and Grading; Preservation of Vegetation
Section 5.4.1 Erosion Control
All cut or fill slopes subject to erosion shall be planted with suitable plant materials. Transplants
shall be well-rooted, properly set and watered as necessary. Perennial grasses shall be suited to
the landscape and located to provide adequate cover as determined by the Board on advice of its
engineers. In areas subject to potential serious erosion, the Board may require the planting of sod
and the use of additional erosion control measures. A wood chip or comparable mulch shall be
used with ground cover plants to minimize erosion. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 5.4.2 Slope Stabilization
Slope is defined as the ratio of vertical rise over horizontal distance. Upon completion of grading
and replacement of topsoil, slopes shall be appropriately stabilized to prevent erosion. ExTown
of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 53.
cessively steep slopes shall not be permitted. An adequate slope stabilization plan shall be approved
by the Board. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 5.4.3 Guide for Slope Stabilization
The following guide for slope stabilization is recommended:
A. Slopes steeper than 1:2: Rip rap or terracing.
B. Slopes of 1:8 to 1:2 Sod or establish vegetation or seedlings in association with
webbing or an approved mulch placed over the soil.
C. Slopes of 1:20 to 1:8 Sod or plant seed in association with webbing or approved
mulch placed over the soil. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 5.4.4 Temporary Measures
Appropriate temporary measures should be taken to prevent erosion of bankings and slopes during
construction. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 5.5 Protection of Natural Resources
Due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as large trees, water courses, scenic
points, historic spots and similar community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness
and value to the site. Before approval the Board may require the staking out of all natural features
not to be disturbed in the process of construction. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 5.6 Fire Alarm System
A fire alarm system shall be installed in conformity with the specifications of the Winchendon
Fire Department. Details of the installed system shall be provided to the Department of Planning
and Development for filing with the records of the project. If no system is required, a letter to
that effect shall be filed. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 5.7 Fire Protection Water Supply Regulations
The following Fire Protection Water Supply Regulations shall apply to all new residential developments
that provide for more than six new residential units and all unsprinklered commercial
and industrial developments with buildings aggregating more than 15,000 square feet gross floor
area:
A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. In accordance with Winchendon's Site Plan Regulations, and Massachusetts General
Law Chapter 148, Section 28, the Winchendon Fire Department has adopted the
following regulations with regard to Water Supply for the purposes of fire protection.
2. Anyone fulfilling the enclosed regulations are to meet all requirements specified
by other boards and departments as they may relate to the work performed.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 54.
3. In those areas where the extension of the municipal water system is technically or
economically unfeasible, the developer shall be required to provide a water supply for
fire protection commensurate to the hazard, as approved by the fire department.
4. In the case that the developer is required to or wishes to install a fire protection
water supply and neither extending the hydrant system nor installing a cistern is feasible,
a dry hydrant system into an existing water supply or new water supply may be
installed for fire protection purposes. (See Section 5.7 D.)
5. The term Fire Chief in this section shall mean the Fire Chief or his designee.
B. HYDRANT REQUIREMENTS
1. GENERAL HYDRANT REQUIREMENTS
a. Fire hydrant type and installation will be in accordance with the requirements
of the Department of Public Works.
b. The fire chief shall review all fire hydrant locations.
2. TESTING AND INSPECTION
a. All public hydrants shall be tested and inspected by the Town of
Winchendon Water Department prior to acceptance.
b. All private hydrants shall be tested and inspected in accordance with
the Town of Winchendon Private Fire Hydrant Regulations.
C. FIRE CISTERN REQUIREMENTS
1. GENERAL FIRE CISTERN REQUIREMENTS
a. Fire cisterns shall be located no more than 1,200 feet road way/driveway
travel distance from the furthermost structure within a development.
b. The design of the fire cistern shall provide for a trouble-free life
expectation of 20 years.
c. The capacity of the cistern will be based on the size of the largest building
to be constructed within the development. However no fire cistern shall be
smaller than 30,000 gallon water capacity.
d. The design of the fire cistern shall be submitted to the Fire Chief for
approval prior to construction. All plans must be signed and stamped
by Structural or Fire Protection licensed/registered engineer in the State
of Massachusetts
e. The entire fire cistern shall be rated for H-20 highway loading unless
specifically exempted by the Fire Chief.
f. Each cistern shall be sited to the particular location by a Registered
Engineer and approved by the Fire Chief. All appropriate easements
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 55.
to the Town shall be in place at the time of Fire Department Acceptance.
g. Precast concrete shall achieve a 28-day strength of 4,000 PSIG. Poured
concrete should be placed with a minimum of 4" slump and vibrated in a
professional manner.
h. The concrete shall be mixed, placed and cured without the use of calcium
chloride. Winter placement and curing shall follow the accepted American
Concrete Institute (ACI) codes.
i. All piping shall be American Society for Testing and Material (ASTM)
D 2665 SCH 40 180 PSIPVC DWV with glued joints.
j. All connections shall be clean and the appropriate sealing material used
according to manufacturer's specifications so as to ensure all joints are
airtight. All connections must be anchored to the cistern to resist movement.
k. The entire cistern shall be completely piped and inspected prior to any
backfilling.
l. All backfill materials shall be screened gravel with no stone larger than
1.5" (inches) and shall be compacted to 95% ASTM 1557.
m. Bedding for the cistern shall consist of a minimum of 12" (inches) of .75"
to 1.5" (inch), crushed washed stone, compacted. No fill shall be used
under the stone.
n. The cistern shall be designed and installed so it will not float when empty.
o. The entire tank will be guaranteed to be watertight (leak proof) by the
installer for one year.
p. The design engineer for the cistern will inspect all steps of the installation
and provide a report of conformity with the specifications to the Fire
Department.
q. All cisterns shall be equipped with a raised 32" (inch) watertight manhole
with a blank cover and secured with a Knox exterior padlock Model 3753.
There is to be access to the manhole cover after backfilling and site work.
Access must be provided to all sections of the tank.
r. Perimeter of tank at floor/wall joint should be sealed with 8" PVC
Waterstop.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 56.
D. SUCTION CONNECTION
1. The suction connection shall be factory supplied painted aluminum, threaded male
connection 6" (inches) in diameter, with NH thread and provided with fixed strainer
and a suitable cap.
2. The suction piping system shall be 6" (inches) in diameter and capable of delivering
1,000 gallons per minute, for three quarters of the cistern’s rated capacity.
3. The suction pipe connection shall be 36 inches above the level of the grade where
the vehicle wheels will be located when the cistern is in use.
4. Suction piping shall be supported on top of the tank and to the bottom of the cistern
with a space of 8" from the floor of the tank to prevent vertical or horizontal movement,
using non-corrosive hardware. Supports at top of tank shall be located so as not
to be affected by frost.
5. The bottom of the suction pipe to the pumper connection shall not exceed 14 feet
vertical distance.
6. Suction piping should be designed to minimize whirlpooling.
7. The suction pipe connection shall terminate not more than 8 feet from the edge of
the pavement.
8. All above the tank suction piping shall be pitched slightly back towards the tank for
proper drainage.
E. VEHICLE PARKING AREA
1. The shoulder and vehicle pad should be of a sufficient length to permit convenient
access to the suction connection when the pumper is set at 45 degrees to the road.
2. The pitch of shoulder and vehicle pad from edge of pavement to pumper suction
connection shall be 1 % to 3% downgrade.
F. FILLER CONNECTION
1. The filler pipe shall be 6" in diameter.
2. The filler connection shall have one, Siamese fitting with two 2-1/2" (inch) connections,
with NH thread with two Knox FDC Cap Model 3012 - Matte Gray Stainless
locking covers attached to a 45 degree downward sweep elbow. The filler connection
shall be supported vertically to the cistern.
3. The filler pipe connection shall be 36 inches above the final grade.
4. Filler piping shall be supported on top of the tank to prevent vertical or horizontal
movement.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 57.
G. VENT PIPE
1. The vent pipe shall be 8 inches in diameter.
2. The vent pipe shall terminate not less than 36 inches above the final grade, with the
opening to the pipe facing downward.
3. Vent piping shall have screen covers installed to prevent access by wildlife.
H. BACKFILLING OF CISTERN
1. 4 feet of fill; or.
2. The top and highest 2 feet of the cistern shall be insulated with vermin resistant
foam insulation, and 2 feet of fill.
3. Backfill shall extend 10 feet beyond the edge of the cistern and then have a maximum
1:3 slope, loamed and seeded or sodded.
4. All construction, backfill, and grading material should be in accordance with proper
construction practices and acceptable to the Fire Chief.
I. SITE WORK
1. After backfilling, the cistern and piping shall be protected from potential vehicular
damage, by;
a. Steel, concrete filled, pipe bollards no less than 8" in diameter set in
the ground below the frost line, or
b. Large rocks, or
c. By fencing, or any combination of bollards, rocks, or fence.
2. The installer is responsible for completely filling the cistern prior to acceptance by
the authority having jurisdiction. The water level is not to drop more than 1 inch in 24
hours initially and not more than 1 inch additionally in 30 days.
3. The installer is responsible to supply and install identification signs as directed by
the fire chief. (See Appendix)
4. The installer is responsible to install a deep well and pump, in accordance with
Chapter 255-2A of the Winchendon Board of Health Water Supply Regulations that
will automatically maintain a full water level in the tank. The well/pump combination
must be capable of delivering a minimum of 5 gallons per minute. If the well is determined
capable of delivering higher volume, equipment will be installed to provide
the higher volume.
5. The installer is responsible to install a water fill notification light that will flash a
red light when the well pump is operating. The light will be mounted at least 5' above
the surface of the ground.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 58.
J. GENERAL CONDITIONS
a. NO OCCUPANCY PERMITS WILL BE ISSUED UNTIL CISTERN IS
INSTALLED, TESTED, AND ACCEPTED BY THE FIRE DEPARTMENT
b. The Installer shall be required to post a 1-year bond in the amount of $5,000 per
10,000 gallons for maintenance and repair prior to final acceptance. This bond is in
addition to any performance guarantee required by section 3.7.
c. The Installer is responsible to convey to the town a one-time sum in the amount of
$10,000 for perpetual maintenance and repair.
K. FIRE DEPARTMENT ACCEPTANCE SEQUENCE:
a. The Fire Department will review all cistern plans and engineering data prior start
of construction.
b. The Fire Department will be notified and provided the opportunity to inspect at the
following mid points of construction.
i. Site Preparation prior to tank installation
ii. Prior to backfill
c. The developer will notify the Fire Department when all site work is complete and
tank is operational and ready for operational acceptance, and provide evidence of
bond for one-year maintenance.
d. The Fire Department performs functional test including water recovery at minimum
of 5 gpm and validates operation of cistern.
e. Developer provides town with perpetual maintenance fee.
f. The Fire Department provides operational acceptance and turns off well pump to
start 30-day stability test.
g. Occupancy Permits can now be processed if being held for cistern completion.
h. 30 days after operational acceptance the Fire Department will inspect the cistern
to see that water level has been maintained, and if any functional issues exist the developer
will be notified to resolve issues.
i. Within 1-year the developer will convey any easements to the town with regard to
the cistern.
j. During the first 12 months the Fire Department will perform inspections and tests
of cistern and notify developer to resolve any issues.
k. Twelve months from the Fire Department's operational acceptance they will perform
one final inspection and test of cistern to validate operation and will notify the
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 59.
developer if any issues need to be resolved. If no issues exist the Fire Department will
notify the developer of final acceptance and release any claims against the bond.
L. DRY HYDRANT REQUIREMENTS GENERAL
1. The design of the dry hydrants shall be for trouble-free service that will last a lifetime.
2. The dry hydrant water supply capacity shall be based on the largest home/building
being protected. However no dry hydrant water supply shall be smaller than 30,000
gallons of water. The water supply capacity calculation shall be made by a professional
engineer utilizing 50 year drought records.
3. The design of the dry hydrants shall be submitted to the Fire Chief for approval
prior to construction.
4. Each dry hydrant shall be sited to the particular location and approved by the Fire
Chief.
5. All piping shall be American Society for Testing and Material (ASTM) D 2665
SCH 40 180 PSIPVC DWV with glued joints.
6. All connections shall be clean and the appropriate sealing material used according
to manufacturer's specifications so as to ensure all joints are airtight.
7. The suction connection shall be factory supplied painted aluminum, threaded male
connection 6" (inches) in diameter, with NH thread and provided with fixed strainer
and a suitable cap.
8. The entire dry hydrant shall be completely piped and inspected prior to any backfilling.
9. All backfill materials shall be screened gravel with no stone larger than 1.5 by 1
inches and shall be compacted to 95% ASTM 1557.
10. Bedding for the dry hydrant piping shall consist of a minimum of 12 inches of
screened gravel with no stone larger than 1.5" (inches.) and be fully compacted.
11. The suction pipe connection shall be between 20 and 24 inches above the level of
the grade when the hydrant is in use, and the 90-degree elbow in the ground is to be
supported by a large flat rock or concrete pad.
12. After backfilling, the piping shall be protected from potential vehicular damage,
by;
a. Steel, concrete filled, pipe bollards no less than 8" in diameter set in the
ground below the frost line, or
b. Large rocks, or
c. By fencing, or any combination of bollards, rocks, or fence.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 60.
13. The end of the suction pipe shall be protected by a screen equipped with a removable
cover.
14. The pitch of shoulder and vehicle pad from edge of pavement to pumper suction
connection shall be 1 % to 3% downgrade.
15. The shoulder and vehicle pad should be of a sufficient length to permit convenient
access to the suction connection when the pumper is set at 45 degrees to the
road.
16. The suction pipe connection shall terminate not more than 8' (feet) from the edge
of vehicle access.
The installer is responsible to supply and install signage as directed by the fire
chief. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 61.
Section 6. Construction, Compliance, Plan Modification, Completion
Section 6.1 Construction
Construction shall be carried out in compliance with the approved site plan and these rules and
regulations. All work shall be completed within the time limits specified in the conditions of the
plan and any extensions that may be granted by the Board. The Board may grant a time extension
for good cause shown without a formal hearing. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 6.2 Compliance Monitoring
Section 6.2.1 Monitoring During Construction
All site work done under site plans shall be monitored during construction to insure compliance
as required by section 6.1. A fee deposit under the provisions of M. G. L. chapter 44, section
53G will be required to cover the cost of monitoring. (See section 7.5.) [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 6.2.2 Monitoring Procedures
Monitoring to insure compliance shall be carried out at appropriate times during the development
of the site. The frequency and level of monitoring shall be determined by the monitor. Monitoring
will be done by a compliance official who may be a consultant engaged by the Board, the
building commissioner, or other town official as determined by the Board. The monitor shall report
to the Board if any serious problem arises and not less often than quarterly the status of the
site work and any compliance problems.
A. The town may take any or all of the enforcement actions prescribed in these regulations to
ensure compliance with, and/or remedy a violation of this regulation; and/or when immediate
danger exists to the public or adjacent property, as determined by the Building Commissioner or
compliance official. Securities described in Section 3.7.3 may be used by the town in carrying
out any necessary enforcement actions.
B. Any compliance official is authorized to halt all work or any part of the work by means of a
stop work order if such becomes necessary because the plan and standards are not being followed.
C. The compliance officer may post the site with a Stop Work order directing that all work not
authorized by the approved site plan, or, if necessary, all work at the site cease immediately. The
issuance of a Stop Work order may include remediation or other requirements which must be
met before the affected activities may resume.
D. The Board may, after written notice is provided to the applicant, or after the site has been
posted with a Stop Work order, suspend or revoke the site plan approval.
E. Any such order may be appealed to the Board. On receipt of a written appeal the Board shall
hold a hearing within ten town hall working days with notice to all parties involved at which all
the parties will be heard. The Board will then vacate the order or continue the order with or
without conditions. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 62.
Section 6.2.3 Stop Work Orders
Failure to comply with a stop work order shall be cause for revocation of approval for the site
plan and may result in legal action to secure compliance. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 6.3 Applicant’s Responsibility
The applicant has full and enforceable responsibility to insure that the approved construction
plans are implemented. The use of qualified persons by the applicant to furnish adequate and
timely engineering supervision during construction is required. Monitoring, surveillance, and
field supervision by Town officials will not be construed as fulfilling this responsibility. [Section
added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 6.4 Modification of the Approved Site Plan
Should the applicant or any other interested party desire a modification of the approved plan, he
shall make application therefore to the Board. The Board may also propose modification of a
plan on its own motion. Upon receipt of an application or on its own action, the Board shall hold
a public hearing thereon with notice as required in section 3.5.1. At the conclusion of the hearing,
the Board may modify the plan and shall cause the modification to be recorded as required
by Mass. General Laws, chapter 41 section 81W. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 6.5 Completion of the Site
Section 6.5.1 Notice of Completion
Upon completion of all work, the applicant shall submit to the board notice that the work has
been completed and therein shall state under the penalties of perjury that the site has been completed
according to the approved plan and any approved modifications thereto. [Section added Jan.
15, 2008]
Section 6.5.2 As-Built Plans
Unless the requirement for such plans has been waived by the Board, Upon completion of all
work, the applicant shall furnish the Board with two (2) prints of "as-built" plans, showing the
Error of Closure, location of all monuments, roadways, driveways, walkways, utilities and structures
and the location by "ties" of all important parts of buried utilities such as water or gas
valves, sewer ties, corporation cocks, building connection shut-offs, and any other special details
identifying any departures from the approved plan as to the location, depth, dimensions,
thickness, slope grade or materials, and certified as to correctness by a Registered Professional
Engineer (civil). It is recommended that a sepia print of the approved plans be appropriately
marked as "as-built plans" and be submitted with two (2) full size prints thereof. "As-built" plans
must be submitted before performance guarantees are released. This material shall also be submitted
in electronic format in the form required in section 3.3.2 B. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 6.5.3 Conveyance of Easements and Utilities
Before the Board will release all security held by the town , the applicant shall execute an instrument
transferring to the Town of Winchendon valid, unencumbered title to all underground
utilities and other property that are to become Town property under the conditions of the site
plan approval together with a perpetual easement allowing the town to enter upon the site to
maintain or repair such underground utilities and other property. Generally, utility installations
on private property will not be transferred to the Town. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 63.
Section 6.5.4 Release of Security
Upon receipt of the notice of completion, the as built plans and the conveyance of easements and
utilities, the Board will review these materials and the reports of the construction monitor to insure
that the site has been constructed according to the approved plan. Upon a satisfactory review,
the Board shall release all remaining security and covenants. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 64.
Section 7.00 Miscellaneous Provisions
Section 7.1 Forms
In the Appendix are sample forms and diagrams for the administration of these Rules and Regulations.
The administrative content of this appendix may be revised from time to time by administrative
action of the Board without hearing. Copies of these forms may be obtained at the
Building Department or Department of Planning and Development at Town Hall. [Section added
Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 7.2 Authority
The Board shall be the agency responsible for administration of these regulations and shall have
all the powers assigned to it by the General Laws, the Winchendon Home Rule Charter, and the
Town bylaws. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 7.3 Enforcement
These Rules and Regulations and the conditions and stipulations of permits and waivers issued
thereunder, shall be enforced by the Board’s compliance official, the building commissioner acting
as the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or other official so authorized. Any such officer may
take any or all action necessary to enforce full compliance, as prescribed by the rules and regulations
of the Planning Board, the bylaws of the town, the Massachusetts General Laws, and applicable
state regulations. This shall include notifications of non-compliance together with requests
for legal action through the Town Manager to the Town Counsel. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 7.4 Agents of the Board
The Board may assign as its agents appropriate town agencies or officials and may from time to
time engage professional assistance to review plans and inspect improvements all at the cost of
the applicant. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 7.5 Consultant fees
A fee under the provisions of Mass. General Laws chapter 44, section 53G will be required to
cover the cost of consultants performing review of preliminary plans, review of definitive plans,
review of plan modifications, and compliance monitoring of approved sites. The initial fee deposit
will be as specified in the fee schedule adopted by the Board. Payment of the initial fee will
be required with the application. An additional amount as determined by the Board will be required
before any on site work is started. In the case of a phased project, the deposit fee may be
phased as well with payment due prior to the start of each phase. Should the actual cost of consultants
exceed the amount on deposit with the town, the applicant shall pay an additional
amount as the Board or the Planning Agent may determine. Any excess, including accrued interest,
held by the Town at the end of the project will be returned.
[M. G. L chapter 44, Section 53G: Notwithstanding section 53, any city or town that provides by rules promulgated
under section 9 or 12 of chapter 40A, section 21 of chapter 40B, section 81Q of chapter 41 . . . for the
imposition of reasonable fees for the employment of outside consultants may deposit such fees in a special account.
Such rules shall provide for an administrative appeal from the selection of the outside consultant to the
city council or town board of selectmen. The grounds for such an appeal shall be limited to claims that the consultant
selected has a conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum, required qualifications. The minimum
qualifications shall consist either of an educational degree in or related to the field at issue or three or
more years of practice in the field at issue or a related field. The required time limits for action upon an application
by a municipal permit granting board shall be extended by the duration of the administrative appeal. In the
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Site Plan Regulations Adopted January 15, 2008
Page 65.
event that no decision is made by the city council or the town board of selectmen within one month following
the filing of the appeal, the selection made by the municipal permit granting authority shall stand. Such an administrative
appeal shall not preclude further judicial review, if otherwise permitted by law, on the grounds provided
for in this section. Any such account shall be established by the municipal treasurer in the municipal treasury
and shall be kept separate and apart from other monies. The special account, including accrued interest, if
any, shall be expended at the direction of the authorized board or authority without further appropriation; provided,
however, that such funds are to be expended by it only in connection with carrying out its responsibilities
under the law. Any excess amount in the account attributable to a specific project, including any accrued interest,
at the completion of said project shall be repaid to the applicant or to the applicant's successor in interest
and a final report of said account shall be made available to the applicant or to the applicant's successor in interest.
. . ] [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 7.6 Waiver of Compliance
Compliance with the requirements of these Rules and Regulations may be waived when, in the
judgment of the Board, such action is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the intent of
the Site Plan Rules and Regulations. In waiving strict compliance the Board may require such alternative
conditions as will serve substantially the same objectives as the standards or regulations
waived. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 7.7 Severability
If any section, paragraph, sentence clause or provision of these Rules and Regulations shall be
adjudged invalid or illegal the adjudication shall apply only to the material so adjudged and the
remainder of these Rules and Regulations shall be deemed to be valid and effective. [Section added
Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 7.8 Invalidation by State Law
Any part of these Rules and Regulations subsequently invalidated by a new state law or modification
of an existing law shall automatically be brought into conformity with the new or
amended law, and shall be deemed to be effective immediately, without recourse to a Public
Hearing and the customary procedures for amendment or repeal of such regulations. [Section added
Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 7.9 Amendments
These Rules and Regulations, or any portion thereof, may be amended, supplemented, or repealed
from time to time by the Board after a Public Hearing, on its own motion or by petition as
provided in Mass. General Laws, chapter 41, section 81Q. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Rules and Regulations
Governing the
Subdivision of Land
In
Winchendon, Massachusetts
Revision Adopted January 15, 2013
Winchendon Planning Board
John H. White, chairman
Fedor Berndt
Guy C. Corbosiero
James McCrohon
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 2.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 3.
Table of Contents
SECTION 1. SUBDIVISION CONTROL 7
Section 1.1. Authority 7
Section 1.2. Purpose 7
Section 1.3. Definitions 7
SECTION 2. IDENTIFICATION OF SUBDIVISIONS, STREETS AND LOTS 12
Section 2.1 Establishing names for new Subdivisions 12
Section 2.2 Establishing names for new streets 12
Section 2.3 Guidelines for street names. 12
Section 2.4 Assignment of Street Numbers 13
SECTION 3. SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF PLANS 15
Section 3.1. Approval not Required Plans 15
Section 3.2. Procedure for Submission of Residential Development Plans 20
Section 3.3. Procedure for Submission and Approval of Preliminary Subdivision Plans 24
Section 3.4. Procedure for Submission and Approval of a Definitive Plan 27
Section 3.5 Agency Review 38
Section 3.6 Public Hearing 40
Section 3.7 Conditions of Approval 44
Section 3.8 Legal Protection of the Open Space in Residential Developments 46
Section 3.9 Performance Guarantee 47
Section 3.10 Endorsement and Recording 49
SECTION 4. REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS FOR AN APPROVED SUBDIVISION 50
Section 4.1 Preserved Open Space 50
Section 4.2 Laying Out the Site 52
Section 4.3 Street and Roadway Design 53
Section 4.4. Common Driveways in Residential Zones 56
Section 4.5 Individual Driveways 56
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 4.
Section 4.6 Accessibility 56
Section 4.7 Curbs and Curb Cuts 56
Section 4.8 Sidewalks, Walkways and Bicycle Paths in a Subdivision 57
Section 4.9 Bikeways or Bike lanes 57
Section 4.10 Design Standards for Streets and Driveways 58
Section 4.11 Stormwater Disposal 60
Section 4.12 Utilities 61
Section 4.13 Other Site Requirements 62
Section 4.14 Dwelling Units in a Residential Subdivision 65
Section 4.15 Unusual Features 65
SECTION 5 SUBDIVISION CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 66
Section 5.1 Notice of Commencement of Construction 66
Section 5.2 Construction Standards: Land Clearing. 67
Section 5.3 Construction Standards: Streets and Ways 69
Section 5.4 Construction Standards: Utilities 70
Section 5.5 Construction Standards: Trees and Other Plantings 70
Section 5.6 Construction Standards: Loam 71
Section 5.7 Slopes Planting, Grading of Lots, Preservation of Vegetation 71
Section 5.8 Fire Protection Water Supply Regulations 72
6. CONSTRUCTION, COMPLIANCE, PLAN MODIFICATION, COMPLETION 80
Section 6.1 Construction 80
Section 6.2 Compliance Monitoring 80
Section 6.3 Developer’s Responsibility 80
Section 6.4 Modification of the Approved Subdivision Plan 81
Section 6.5 Completion of the Subdivision 81
Section 6.6 No Claim for Layout of Streets 82
Section 6.7 Developers Continuing Responsibility 82
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 5.
SECTION 7 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 83
Section 7.1 Forms 83
Section 7.2 Authority 83
Section 7.3 Enforcement 83
Section 7.4 Agents of the Board 84
Section 7.5 Consultant fees 84
Section 7.6 Waiver of Compliance 84
Section 7.7 Severability 84
Section 7.8 Invalidation by State Law 84
Section 7.9 Amendments 85
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 6.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 7.
Section 1. Subdivision Control
Section 1.1. Authority
The following rules and regulations governing the subdivision of land are hereby adopted
by the Planning Board of the Town of Winchendon under the authority of Section 81Q, of
Chapter 41, Massachusetts General Laws, as amended, to be effective on and after January
15, 2013.
Section 1.2. Purpose
The Winchendon Planning Board has authority under the General Laws of Massachusetts, the
Winchendon Home Rule Charter, and the zoning and other bylaws adopted thereunder to regulate
the location and development of lots and laying out and construction of ways in all subdivisions
providing access to the several lots therein, but which have not become public ways, to ensure
the safety, convenience and welfare of present and future inhabitants of Winchendon and for
other purposes described in M. G. L. Chapter 41, section 81M, the Winchendon Home Rule
Charter and the Winchendon bylaws such as the preservation of open space, ensuring convenient
access to and sanitary conditions in subdivisions and in proper cases parks and open areas. The
Board's powers shall be exercised with due regard for the provision of adequate access to all of
the lots in a subdivision by ways that will be safe and convenient for travel, for lessening congestion
in such ways and in adjacent public ways, for reducing danger to life and limb in the operation
of motor vehicles, for securing safety in the case of fire, flood, panic and other emergencies,
for ensuring compliance with the applicable zoning by-laws, for securing adequate provision for
water, sewerage, drainage, utility services, fire, police and other similar municipal equipment,
and street lighting and other requirements where necessary in a subdivision, and for coordinating
the ways in a subdivision with each other and with the public ways in the town and with the
ways in neighboring subdivisions. It is the intent of the subdivision control law that any subdivision
plan filed with the Planning Board shall receive the approval of such Board if said plan conforms
to the requirements of the Winchendon zoning bylaw, the recommendations of the Winchendon
Board of Health and the Winchendon Conservation Commission, the requirements of
the Winchendon Department of Public Works, and to the reasonable rules and regulations of the
Planning Board pertaining to subdivisions of land; provided, however, that such Board may,
when appropriate, waive, as provided for in Section 81R. such portions of the rules and regulations
as is deemed advisable. The Board exercises the said authority with due regard for the Subdivision
Control Law, the Winchendon Zoning Bylaw, and the Wetlands Protection Act, M. G.
L. Chapter 131, Section 40.
In considering a proposed subdivision the Planning Board solicits the opinions of other town
boards, committees and officials and technical professionals as they pertain to the activities of
subdivision control.
The Rules and Regulations provide procedures and standards for a developer or subdivider
to follow in order to secure the approval of the Planning Board for a proposed subdivision
or other approvals allowed under the Subdivision Control Law.
Section 1.3. Definitions In construing the meanings of these regulations, the definitions in
Section 81L, of Chapter 41 of the general laws and the Winchendon zoning bylaw shall apply
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 8.
unless a contrary intention clearly appears. Words and meanings subject to question but not addressed
herein, in the zoning bylaw, or in Section 81L of Chapter 41 of the MGL will be defined
by the Board.
Abutter Owner of property contiguous to lots being developed under the subdivision
control rules and regulations.
ANR Approval Not Required. Refers to plans submitted under the provisions of M. G.
L. chapter 81, section 81P.
Applicant The person who applies for approval or endorsement of a plan. The applicant
must be the owner of all the land in the plan for which approval by the Board is required.
By providing proof of designated authority, an agent, representative, or his or her assigns
may act for the owner.
Approval After receiving submitted plans, the Board may vote to approve them. Such
action by the Board requires a e majority vote of the Board, unless specified otherwise in
the general laws or the zoning bylaw. In the case of final approval on a definitive plan,
only those board members present at the public hearing or otherwise fully conversant
with the plan and the information gathered at the hearing may vote. [Note: Board members
who have missed one session of a hearing may vote on that matter pursuant to section 23D of chapter 39 of
the M. G. L. as voted by the town meeting May 22, 2007. As provided in the open meeting law and regulations
adopted by the Selectmen, members may participate in meetings by electronic communication.
B M P Best Management Practices as are determined by the Massachusetts Department
of Environmental Protection or other environmental groups.
Certified Mail Mail sent certified mail, return receipt requested, via the United States
Postal Service.
CMR Code of Massachusetts Regulations
Current Fee Schedule The schedule of Fees as most recently adopted by the Board.
Dbh (diameter breast high) The diameter of a tree at breast height, normally 4 feet
above the ground.
Determination A decision made by the Board [Added January 2013]
Definitive Plan The final version of an engineered plan of a proposed subdivision, prepared
in accordance with the provisions of these rules and regulations.
Developer or Subdivider The owner of the land being subdivided, acting directly or
through an authorized agent, representative or assignee.
Drainage The control of surface water within the tract of land to be subdivided.
Drawn Showing Scale When plans are to be drawn showing scale, each sheet shall
show a line marked at intervals to show the distance on the earth which the distance on
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 9.
the scale represents divided into appropriate units so that it will be possible to accurately
scale copies of plans that are reproduced electronically or optically. [Added January 2013]
Earth Sod, loam, clay, sand, gravel, stone, or peat. [Added January 2013]
Lot An area of land in one ownership, with definitive boundaries, used, or available for
use, as the site for one or more buildings or for any other purpose.
M. G. L. The General Laws of Massachusetts as are currently in force
Owner The owner of record as shown by the records of the Worcester South Registry of
Deeds or Land Court. An owner, other than a natural person or persons, must submit evidence
that the person actually signing the application is authorized to sign on behalf of
the owner.
Parties in Interest The petitioner(s), abutters, owners of land directly opposite on any
public or private street or way, and abutters to the abutters within 300' of the property line
of the petitioner as they appear on the most recent applicable tax list, notwithstanding that
the land of any such owner is located in another city or town, and the planning board of
every city or town abutting Winchendon.
Person A natural person, a partnership, a corporation, a trust or any other entity that has
a right to contract, convey land, sue or be sued under the laws of the Commonwealth.
[Added January 2013]
Planning Board or Board The Planning Board of the Town of Winchendon, established
under M. G. L. chapter 41, Section 81A. [Revised January 2013]
Preliminary Plan A map or plan of the initial version of a proposed subdivision prepared
in accordance with the provisions of these rules and regulations.
Receipt Receipt by the Planning Board of either a preliminary or definitive plan establishes
the date upon which the time limitation for processing begins.
Recorded A document, plan, deed, etc. which has been recorded in the Worcester South
Registry of Deeds in Worcester, Massachusetts, except that, as affecting registered land,
it shall mean filed with the recorder of the land court.
Register of Deeds The Register of Deeds of the County in which the land in question, or
the city or town in question, is situated, and, when appropriate, shall include the recorder
of the land court.
Registry of Deeds The Worcester South District Registry of Deeds located in Worcester,
Massachusetts, and, when appropriate, shall include the Land Court. [Revised January 2013]
Slope The ratio of vertical rise over horizontal distance. It may be expressed as a ratio,
1:2 or as a percentage, vertical rise / horizontal distance * 100.
Specimen tree a native, introduced or naturalized tree which is important because of its
impact on community character, its significance in the historic/cultural landscape or its
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 10.
value in enhancing the effects of wildlife habitat. Only trees with a diameter breast high
(dbh) of 6 inches or larger will be considered specimen trees except trees that have a
small height at maturity or are slow growing, such as flowering dogwood or American
holly with a dbh of 4 inches or larger will be considered specimen trees.
Street: Principal Street A street or portion thereof, which in the opinion of the Board, is
likely to carry a substantial volume of through vehicular traffic.
Street: Secondary Street A street or portion thereof, other than a principal street,
which, in the opinion of the Board, is likely to carry through traffic other than just to or
from lots on that street
Street: Minor Street A street or portion thereof which is likely to be used only by vehicles
traveling to or from lots on that street.
Subdivision The division of a tract of land into two or more lots, including resubdivision.
The division of a tract of land into two or more lots shall not be deemed to
constitute a subdivision within the meaning of the subdivision control law if, at the time it
is made, every lot within the tract so divided has frontage on (a) a public way or a way
which the Town Clerk certifies is maintained and used as a public way, or (b) a way
shown on a plan theretofore approved and endorsed in accordance with the subdivision
control law, or (c) a way in existence when the subdivision control law became effective
in the Town of Winchendon, having, in the opinion of the Board, sufficient width, suitable
grades, and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation
to the proposed use of the land abutting thereon and served thereby, and for the installation
of municipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be
erected thereon. Such frontage shall be of at least such distance as is then required by the
zoning bylaw of the Town of Winchendon for erection of a building on such lot. Conveyances
or other instruments adding to, taking away from or changing the size and shape of
lots in such manner as not to leave any lot so affected without the frontage above set
forth, or the division of a tract of land on which two or more buildings were standing
when the subdivision control law went into effect into separate lots, on each of which one
of such buildings remains standing, shall not constitute a subdivision. [From M. G. L. chapter
41, section 81L]
Subdivision Control Law The power regulating the subdivision of land granted by the
subdivision control law.
Tax Certified Certification by the Winchendon Collector-Treasurer that no debt is
owned to the Town by the applicant or the owner of record of the property for a period of
time greater than twelve months.
Turnaround A paved, partially paved, or unpaved circular area at the end of a dead end
street or cul-de-sac. See requirements in section 4.10 . [Revised January 2013]
Wetlands Those areas subject to the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws, chapter
131, section 40, the state regulations issued thereunder, or the Winchendon Wetlands Bylaw
whichever is the most restrictive. [Added January 2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 11.
Section 1.4. Unapproved Subdivision Prohibited No person shall make a subdivision of any
land or proceed with the improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision, or the construction of
ways, or the installation of municipal services therein, unless and until a definitive plan of such
subdivision has been submitted to and approved by the Planning Board as hereinafter provided.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 12.
Section 2. Identification of Subdivisions, Streets and Lots
Section 2.1 Establishing names for new Subdivisions
A. A proposal for the name of a new subdivision shall be submitted to the Department of
Planning and Development. The proposal shall be accompanied by a sketch showing the location
of the proposed subdivision and nearby streets. This may be part of the submittal of a
sketch plan submitted under section 11.11.1.1 of the zoning bylaw. [Added January 2013]
B. The department will review the proposal to determine that the proposed name is not the
same as or similar to that of a proposed or existing subdivision or other geographical designation
already in common use. [Added January 2013]
C. A proposed name should be reasonably descriptive of the proposal and its location.
Names which may connote inappropriate relationships will be rejected. [Added January 2013]
D. The name finally chosen must be acceptable to the Board. [Added January 2013]
Section 2.2 Establishing names for new streets
A. Proposals for names for new streets shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and
Development. The proposal shall be accompanied by a sketch showing the location of the
proposed street and other nearby streets.
B. The department may establish and maintain a list of possible new street names and such
list will be available to developers.
C. The department will review the proposal to determine that the proposed name is not the
same as or so similar to that of an existing street, including “paper” streets that it might be
confused with the existing street particularly in emergency communications. No new street
shall differ only in suffix from that of an existing street. Should the proposed name be found
the same or too similar, the department will notify the person submitting the proposal and
that person should submit another name.
D. If the department finds no problem with the proposed name, it will refer the proposed
street name (email is suggested) to the members of the Planning Board, the town clerk, the
assessors, the superintendent of public works, the police chief, the fire chief and the supervisor
of the emergency dispatch service (if that is a separate position). Recipients will be asked
to respond within five working days. If no adverse responses are received, the applicant will
be advised that the name is acceptable for the new street.
E. In all instances the department will endeavor to respond to the request within ten working
days.
Section 2.3 Guidelines for street names.
A. It is strongly suggested that street names be not longer than 20 letters to include spaces
and suffix. Names reflecting the history of the town or the section of town where the street is
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 13.
located will be most appropriate. Names memorializing a person are acceptable. Names that
suggest location in a different part of town from that proposed will not be acceptable.
B. Street name suffixes should be appropriate for the location or layout of the street; e.g.
“Brook” should be by a brook, “Heights” should be on high ground, “Circle” should have a
generally circular shape. “Passage” and “Way” would indicate short and perhaps pedestrian
only streets.
C. The following suffix names will be considered appropriate only for minor streets: Brook,
Circle, Court, Cove, Crescent, Drive, Estate, Field, Flat, Forest, Garden(s), Glen, Green, Haven,
Hill, Lane, Meadow(s), Passage, Place, Ridge, Run, Vista.
D. The following street name suffixes should be reserved for principal streets: Boulevard,
Highway.
E. Other acceptable street name suffixes are: Avenue, Bypass, Center, Common, Crossing,
Loop, Park, Road, Square, Street, Walk, Way.
Section 2.4 Assignment of Street Numbers
Section 2.4.1 Street Numbers for streets without numbers, including new streets. Numbers
will be assigned starting at the end of the street nearest Blair Square measured along the
most commonly traveled roads. Odd numbers will be assigned on the right hand side, even
numbers on the left. Numbers shall be assigned at intervals of 20 feet between successive odd
or even numbers. One number shall initially be assigned to each lot. The number assigned
shall be that for the center of the buildable portion of the lot projected perpendicularly to the
center line of the street (or by radius line if the street is laid out on a curve). In those cases
where the buildable portion of the lot is more than 100 feet from the front property line, the
center line of the driveway may be used instead. If no buildable portion of the lot is shown,
the center line of the lot frontage shall be used. If a plan shows multiple building entrances
on the lot each intended for a separate occupancy, multiple numbers may be assigned. Lots
having no street frontage shall be assigned the appropriate number with a “R” (for rear) designation
on the street which appears most appropriate.
Section 2.4.2 New street numbers on streets which are partially numbered. Generally,
the numbering scheme already in use for the street shall be applied if it is inconsistent with
the scheme laid out for newly numbered streets. Where numbered addresses exist on both
sides of the lot(s) to be numbered, the distance between successive numbers shall be adjusted
to assign numbers evenly along the street. If no separate number is available for a lot, letter
suffixes, e. g. “A” or “B”, to the next lower number may be used. If use of such suffixes becomes
necessary, the Planning Board will consider renumbering all or part of the street so as
to provide more usable numbers.
Section 2.4.3 Assigning numbers to lots. Each plan showing new lots shall be submitted in
duplicate to the Department of Planning and Development. This submission shall be for the
assignment of street numbers only and shall not be considered a submission of a subdivision
or a plan for approval not required lots. The plan shall show each lot, and, if any street numbered
properties exist on the street, the numbers of those properties and the exact relation of
those properties to the new lots so that numbers can be assigned in accordance with the above
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 14.
provisions. The department will, within fifteen working days, assign numbers to the lots and
return one copy of the plan to the person submitting the plan. The second copy will be similarly
marked and retained by the department.
Section 2.4.4 Street numbers required on plans. Every plan formally submitted to the
Planning Board as a proposed subdivision or for endorsement as an Approval Not Required
plan shall have each of the lots thereon prominently identified by the street number(s) assigned
to that lot under the provisions of the previous paragraph. No new designations by lot
number may be shown. The street numbers so assigned shall thereafter be used as identification
of the lots. No plan will be approved or endorsed on which the lots are not designated by
street number.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 15.
Section 3. Submission and Approval of Plans
Section 3.1. Approval not Required Plans
Section 3.1.1. Purpose A plan showing a division of land into two or more lots where vital access
is reasonably guaranteed to each of the lots shown on the plan may be entitled to recording
by the Register of Deeds without approval under the Subdivision Control Law. This regulation
provides the means by which the Planning Board will make that determination. ANR endorsement
does not convey the right to develop the lots created nor does it constitute compliance with
zoning for building purposes.
Section 3.1.2. Submission of Plan Any person wishing to record in the Registry of Deeds or to
file with the Land Court a plan of land or a plan showing a division of land and who believes that
such plan does not require Planning Board Approval under the Subdivision Control Law shall
prepare a plan that conforms to the requirements of section 3.1.3. of these Regulations; and
A. Deliver a properly completed tax certified form A, the original mylar of the proposed
plan and 2 or more paper copies full size (the exact number being determined by the Department
of Planning and Development) and an electronic copy in PDF or other acceptable format
of the plan to the department of planning and development and pay the fee as required by
the current fee schedule.
B. File notice of submission of the plan with the town clerk as required by M. G. L. Chapter
41, section 81T. [Section 81T: Every person submitting a definitive plan of land to the planning board of a
city or town for its approval or for a determination that approval is not required shall give written notice to the
clerk of such city or town by delivery or by registered mail, postage prepaid, that he has submitted such a plan.
If the notice is given by delivery the clerk shall, if requested, give a written receipt therefor to the person who
delivered such notice. Such notice shall describe the land to which the plan relates sufficiently for identification,
and shall state the date when such plan was submitted and the name and address of the owner of such land; and
the facts stated in such notice shall be taken by the city or town clerk as true, unless the contrary is made to appear..
. .]
C. If requested, accompany the Planning Board or the planning agent on site visit of the
property.
Section 3.1.2.1 Waiver of Exemption An owner of lots qualified for development as ANR
lots may waive the exemption and have the lots developed under the provisions of article 11
of the zoning bylaw. [Added January 2013]
Section 3.1.3. Form and Contents of the Plan
A. The plan shall be prepared in black India ink upon mylar of dimensions which will conform
to the requirements of the registry of deeds, to a scale not smaller than 1 inch = 40 feet
or other scale acceptable to the Board. The plan shall conform to the following: [Revised January
2013]
1. Title of the plan shall include the name of the landowner, name of applicant, name(s)
of surveyor and/or engineer, date of plan and an ID block of 1/2 inch by three inches,
blank, for Planning Board use.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 16.
2. Deed book and page number (from Registry of Deeds) and Assessor's map and parcel
number of the original parcel shall be shown on the plan.
3. The following statements shall appear on the plans: “Approval Under the Subdivision
Control Law Not Required” and “ANR endorsement does not signify compliance
with zoning for land use or building purposes nor does it convey the right to develop the
property.”
4. Sufficient space for the date and endorsement of the Board shall be provided. This
block shall be just below the required ID block and both shall be within 6 inches of the
right side of the plan
B. Parcel(s) and proposed lot(s) shall be shown on a locus plan at a scale of 1 inch = 1000
feet, or other suitable scale. The locus plan shall also show the intersection of at least two
public ways which shall be named on the locus plan. [Revised January 2013]
C. The zoning classification of any zoning district boundaries, which may lie within the locus
of the plan and the zoning district(s) in which the property is located shall be shown on
the plan.
D. The location and names of all abutters as determined from the most recent tax list or lists
shall be shown on the plan.
E. There shall be a north point shown on the plan.
F. A statement that permanent monuments are installed at all property corners.
G. The location of all existing structures, streets, ways, easements, the extent of any residual
land and any other information requested by the Planning Board in order that the Planning
Board may ascertain the status of the frontage and accessibility of the residual land shall be
shown on the plan.
H. A Registered Professional Surveyor's stamp and signature shall be shown on the plan.
I. The status of the access road and the means of access to each proposed lot shall be shown
on the plan.
J. All watercourses, bodies of water and wetlands shall be shown on the plan.
K. The sum total of frontage per lot shall be shown on the plan.
L. The area of each lot shall be shown.
M. An indication on the plan and on the ground of the general location of the buildable portion
of each lot.
N. The assigned street number of each lot shall be shown on the plan.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 17.
O. If the plan shows one or more parcels that do not qualify as buildable lots and appear intended
for conveyance to an abutter, the plan shall be accompanied by (a) pro-forma deed(s)
by which the parcel(s) will be conveyed to the abutter(s).
Section 3.1.4 Agency Review The Department will immediately forward an electronic copy
(or a paper copy if such is requested by the agency) of each plan to the Board of Health, the Conservation
Commission, the Land Use Department, and the Department of Public Works. [Added
January 2013]
A. The Department of Planning and Development and each agency receiving a plan is requested
to review the plan with regard to the requirements of the agency and to report any
problems or other comments both to the Planning Board and to the applicant or submit a
statement to the Board that it has no concerns. The object of this review is to identify possible
problems at the earliest possible date and inform the applicant as well as the Board.
B. The reports requested above should be received by the Planning Board not more than
fourteen days after the plan was submitted. If an agency fails to report, it will be assumed
that the agency has no concerns with the submitted plan. [Added January 2013]
Section 3.1.5 Review Period It will be the policy of the Board to review ANR plans at the last
meeting that will fall within the review period allowed by law so as to give the various agencies
the maximum time for review.
A. If the meeting is less than fourteen days after submission of the plan and all agencies
have not yet responded, the Board will review the plan and may make a tentative judgment
on its endorsability. At the end of the fourteen day period the board members may sign the
plan even if the signing takes place outside of a Board meeting..
Section 3.1.6 Determining ANR Endorsement. In determining whether a plan is entitled to be
endorsed “approval under the Subdivision Control Law not required”, the Planning Board will
consider the following questions: [Revised January 2013]
A. Do the proposed lots shown on the plan front on one of the following types of ways?
1 . A public way or a way, which the municipal clerk certifies, is maintained and used
as a public way.
2 . A way shown on a plan which has been previously approved in accordance with the
subdivision control law (provided the way has been built to standards or the town holds
adequate security to insure it will be so built.)
3 . A way in existence when the subdivision control law took effect in the municipality,
which in the opinion of the Planning Board is suitable for the proposed use of the
lots.
B. Do the proposed lots shown on the plan meet the minimum frontage requirements of the
zoning district in which they are located?
C. Can each lot access onto the way from the frontage shown on the plan?
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 18.
1. Limited access highways do not constitute frontage for ANR purposes.
2. Driveway safe sight distance.
D. Does the way on which the proposed lots front provide adequate access?
1. Paper street?
2. Pavement comparable to other ways in the area?
3. Way suitable to accommodate motor vehicles and public safety equipment?
4. Does the way provide year-round access?
E. Does each lot have practical access from the way to the buildable portion of the lot?
1. Pipestem access narrower than required frontage?
2. Guardrails present?
3. Wetlands?
4. Steep slopes: If, after the site visit, the Planning Board is concerned that steep slopes
may prevent “practical access” to the buildable portion of the lot, the Board may require
an engineering review of the plan, to be paid for by the applicant.
F. Unless the plan or documentation supplied with the plan clearly indicates that the purpose
of any lot which has less than the minimum frontage for the zoning district or otherwise
would be an unbuildable lot, whether newly created or not, the plan may be disapproved.
[Added January 2013]
G. The Planning Board will make a finding as to whether the proposed access to the proposed
lot shown on an ANR plan has safe sight distance in accordance with section 4.3.12 so
as to reduce the number of "blind driveways" in our town. Lots lacking safe access will not
qualify for ANR endorsement. Plans will be referred to the town's safety officer is there is a
need for safe sight distance confirmation following a site visit by the Board or its agent. See
the standards for safe site distance in section 4.3.12. [Revised January 2013]
H. Are the property boundaries shown on the plan adequately delineated so as to be clear to
future owners and others?
I. Are any required supporting documents provided?
Section 3.1.7 Incomplete Plan If the Board or its designated agent finds that the submitted
plan does not meet the requirements listed above, the Board will return the plan to the applicant
without endorsement as being an incomplete plan. The Town Clerk shall be so notified. If such a
plan is later resubmitted with corrections, the Board may waive all or part of a new filing fee.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 19.
Section 3.1.8 Plan entitled to be recorded under a surveyor's certificate It will be the policy
of the Board to decline to endorse a plan which shows only property lines dividing existing
ownerships, lines of streets and ways which are those of public or private ways already established,
has no new lines for division of existing ownerships or for new ways, and is thereby entitled
to a surveyor's certificate as provided in M. G. L. chapter 41, section 81X. The town clerk
will be notified in such cases.
[. . . Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, the register of deeds shall accept for recording
and the land court shall accept with a petition for registration or confirmation of title any plan bearing a certificate
by a registered land surveyor that the property lines shown are the lines dividing existing ownerships, and
the lines of streets and ways shown are those of public or private streets or ways already established, and that no
new lines for division of existing ownership or for new ways are shown. The recording of any such plan shall
not relieve any owner from compliance with the provisions of the subdivision control law or of any other applicable
provision of law . . . — from M. G. L. Chapter 41, section 81X.]
Section 3.1.9 Endorsement If the Board finds that the plan does not require approval, it shall
forthwith endorse the plan under the title, 'Approval Under the Subdivision Control Law Not Required'.
The Board may add to such endorsement a statement of the reason(s) approval is not required.
If the Board does not act within twenty-one (21) days after submission of the plan to the
Planning Board, (provided endorsement has not been declined under the provisions of section
3.1.6. or 3.1.7.) the plan is deemed to be approved and a certificate to that effect may be obtained
from the Town Clerk. However, if the Board determines that the plan does require approval as a
subdivision, it shall notify the Town Clerk and the applicant of its action forthwith in writing.
Section 3.1.10 Endorsing ANR Plans Showing Zoning Violations A plan showing proposed
lots with sufficient frontage and access, but shown as having insufficient size or non conforming
shape or some other zoning violation, may be entitled to an endorsement that “approval
under the Subdivision Control Law is not required.” Endorsement under this section may include
a statement of the reason approval is not required. The Planning Board will exercise its powers
in a way that protects persons who will rely on the ANR endorsement. A statement will be
placed on the plan indicating that the deficient lot(s) does (do) not conform with the present
Winchendon Zoning Bylaw. The Building Commissioner should also be alerted to these plans.
Section 3.1.11 Site Inspection Site or other work on any ANR lot herein created shall not
commence without a site inspection by the Conservation Commission or its agent. The applicant
is responsible for arranging the site inspection with the Conservation Agent.
Section 3.1.12 Plan Must Be Recorded Upon delivery of the endorsed plan to the applicant,
the applicant shall cause the plan to be recorded in the registry of deeds. The applicant shall then
bring the recording receipt to the Planning Agent who shall make a copy thereof and only then
may distribute copies of the plans to the assessors, building commissioner, the Conservation
Commission and the Board of Health. The building commissioner will issue no building permits
until he has received his copy of the plan.
Section 3.1.13. Use of Land When an ANR plan has been submitted to the Planning Board and
proper notice has been given to the Town Clerk, the use of the land shall have such protection
from future zoning changes as is provided by the Massachusetts General Laws.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 20.
Section 3.2. Procedure for Submission of Residential Development Plans
Section 3.2.1. Site Work Prohibited before approval of a plan No work, including but not
limited to, brush removal, tree cutting, and grading, shall be done on a development site until a
definitive subdivision plan has been approved by the Planning Board. Should a subdivision plan
not be required for the project, site plan review and approval is required. Cutting of vegetation
necessary for surveys and soil testing is permitted. [Added January 2013]
Section 3.2.2 Phased project It will not be necessary to complete a residential development as
a single project. A developer with substantial land who only wishes to develop part of the land
may submit only the required sketch plan showing the whole of the eventual development. The
wetlands should be flagged. The site visit will be required. The open space to be preserved must
be agreed upon. Thereafter the houses and lots may be tentatively located. When additional
phases are undertaken, these steps will not have to be repeated. Once these steps are accomplished,
the applicant may file a subdivision plan that shows only the part of the project he intends
to complete in the first phase. A suitable road must be located. If only three or fewer dwelling
units are proposed, this may be initially built as a driveway or common driveway. When additional
phase(s) are proposed, any road built as a driveway or common driveway must be upgraded
to regular subdivision standards. Similarly, underground utilities and stormwater controls
may initially be built only for the road and units being developed but must be upgraded, if necessary,
should additional phases extend the project. [Added January 2013]
Section 3.2.3. Required Steps in the Process This section is only an outline of the required
steps. More detailed requirements are provided in the sections that follow.
A. Prepare a plan to scale showing the whole site, boundaries, wetlands and other significant
features and submit it to the Planning Board. [Added January 2013]
B. The Board will arrange a site visit with the developer so that it may understand the site.
[Added January 2013]
C. The Board will meet with the developer at a Board meeting and decide on what portion
of the site is to preserved as open space. [Added January 2013]
D. The developer, with consideration for any suggestions from the Board, will decide on
house locations, road locations and lot lines. It is suggested the developer informally submit a
plan showing these features to the Board for its comments. [Added January 2013]
E The developer will prepare and submit a definitive subdivision plan, or a site plan if the
proposal does not constitute a subdivision. [Added January 2013]
F. The normal subdivision review process will be followed. [Added January 2013]
Section 3.2.4. Application Anyone who proposes to create a residential development must
submit a plan in accordance with section 11.11.1.1. Such person shall: [Added January 2013]
A. Prepare a sketch plan that conforms to the requirements of section 11.11.1.1.1. of the zoning
bylaw [Added January 2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 21.
1. The project shall be named. The provisions of section 2.1 regarding subdivision names
shall be followed. [Added January 2013]
2. The plan shall be drawn showing scale and shall include the whole tract or tracts
which will comprise the development or the tract on which the development will occur
even if only part of the tract is to be developed. The scale of the plan shall be sufficiently
large to adequately show the various details required to be shown on the plan. The scale
shall be clearly marked on the plan. A locus plan shall also be submitted showing the development
tract in relation to at least two intersecting public ways. A north arrow shall be
shown. No single sheet shall be larger than 36 X 48 inches. If necessary, multiple sheets
may be submitted. [Added January 2013]
3. This plan may be drawn on a topographic map, an assessors’ map or some other existing
map or plan. [Added January 2013]
4. The plan should show all the existing features of the development tract and the area to
a distance of at least 300 feet around the development tract. [Added January 2013]
5. Features that must be shown on the sketch plan shall include: streams, ponds, wetlands,
hills and steep slopes, the various types of vegetation or ground cover, rock outcrops,
specimen trees, stone walls, and existing structures. Other notable features of the
site should be shown. The exact placement of these objects is not necessary but they
should be located in a general manner. The plan need not be prepared by a registered land
surveyor or a professional engineer. [Added January 2013]
6. The Board will expect more precision on a plan covering a small area or on land located
in the PD or R10 zones than it will for a plan covering a larger area in the R80
zone. [Added January 2013]
B. The Department of Planning and Development will issue a receipt therefor showing the
Planning Board’s assigned ID number as all future submittals must include that number. This
same number will be used throughout the process including the definitive subdivision consideration
or the site plan review as may be applicable. [Added January 2013]
C. The application shall be filed with the Department of Planning and Development, by
hand delivery or by certified mail, postage prepaid. It shall include 2 or more paper copies
full size (the exact number being determined by the Department of Planning and Development)
and an electronic copy in PDF or other format acceptable to the department of planning
and development and pay the fee as required by the current fee schedule. [Added January
2013]
D. Should the application and sketch plan fail to show required information that is deemed
necessary for proper consideration of the proposal, it will be returned to the applicant for
completion. No further action will be taken until a complete plan is submitted. [Added January
2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 22.
Section 3.2.5. Agency Review The Department will immediately forward an electronic copy
(or a paper copy if such is requested by the agency) of each plan to the Board of Health, the Conservation
Commission, the Land Use Department, and the Department of Public Works. [Added
January 2013]
A. The Department of Planning and Development and each agency receiving a plan is requested
to review the plan with regard to the requirements of the agency and to report any
problems or other comments both to the Planning Board and to the applicant or submit a
statement to the Board that it has no concerns. The object of this review is to identify possible
problems at the earliest possible date and inform the applicant as well as the Board.
[Added January 2013]
B. The reports requested above should be received by the Planning Board not more than
thirty days after the plan was submitted. If an agency fails to report, it will be assumed that
the agency has no concerns with the submitted plan. [Added January 2013]
Section 3.2.6. Site Visit At its next regular meeting of the Board, the applicant is requested to
appear. At this time a site visit will be arranged. Ordinarily this visit will be by the Board members.
The applicant and any other persons familiar with the project shall be expected to attend.
The purpose of the site visit is to allow the Board to become familiar with the site and understand
how it may best be developed. The site visit may be posted as a special meeting of the Board
since questions and comments by Board members and others that may constitute deliberation are
likely. Consideration will be given to whether citizens that are legally allowed to observe public
meetings are allowed on the site. [Added January 2013]
Section 3.2.7. Board Discussion with the Developer The Board will then meet with the developer
at a regular or special meeting and discuss which land is most appropriately preserved as
open space, which are the locations most suitable for houses and other factors that may enter into
the choice of open space. This part of the development process should be very informal. The developer,
the Board, and any interested parties may offer information and argument as part of the
discussion. Should they elect to do so, representatives of the Conservation Commission, the
Board of Health, and/or any other town department shall be accorded full rights to participate in
the discussion. Any plan showing house lots or new roads that may be presented at this time will
be disregarded by the Board and will not enter into its determination. The discussion may be
continued through as many meetings as may be necessary to reach an agreement. [Added January
2013]
A. The Board shall give notice of this meeting
1. By advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in Winchendon at the expense
of the applicant, once in each of two successive weeks, the first publication being not less
than fourteen days before the day of such hearing, Prepayment of the advertising charge
will be required before such publication. [Added January 2013]
2. By posting a notice in a conspicuous place in the town hall for a period of not less
than fourteen days before the day of such hearing, [Added January 2013]
3. By mailing a copy of such advertisement to the applicant and to all owners of land
abutting upon the land included in such plan as appearing on the most recent tax list and
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 23.
to all other interested parties as is required by statute for a definitive subdivision plan.
[Added January 2013]
Section 3.2.8 Agreement on the Open Space Required An agreement between the Board and
the developer on the land to be preserved is required as a condition of moving forward. Its
agreement will be in the form of a finding by the Board (majority of those voting, a quorum being
present) that the proposed open space conforms to the requirements of the zoning bylaw.
This finding will not extend to the approval of the whole plan as the configuration of houses,
roads, and lots will not yet have been considered. [Added January 2013]
Section 3.2.9 Timelines for the Residential Development Process The zoning bylaw provides
no time frame for the residential development process. Since no subdivision plan has yet
been filed, neither do the statutory timelines apply. It will be the policy of the Board to consider
all applications in a timely fashion, it will schedule site visits and meetings as promptly as is
practicable, and will not unreasonably delay its consideration of the proposal. The need for additional
information may, however, necessitate delay in the process. [Added January 2013]
Section 3.2.10 Procedure upon failure to agree Should the developer and the Board be unable
to agree on a residential development plan, the following avenues may be pursued: [Added
January 2013]
A. The Board and the developer may submit the question to the Montachusett Regional
Planning Commission or some other agreed entity for mediation or arbitration. The costs of
such mediation or arbitration will be borne equally by the parties. [Added January 2013]
B. The developer may submit a plan for a conventional subdivision under the special permit
procedure in accordance with section 11.13.2 of the zoning bylaw. [Added January 2013]
Section 3.2.11 Layout of houses, roads, and lots It is suggested that the developer present a
plan at a Board meeting showing houses, road(s), and lots to the Board for further informal discussion
before submitting a formal definitive subdivision plan or a formal site plan. Any action
by the Board at this time will be considered advisory and shall not bind the Board to the material
presented or agreed upon. [Added January 2013]
Section 3.2.12 Filing of the Formal Plan When the developer and the Board have agreed on
the open space and the developer has located the houses, road(s) and lot lines, the developer shall
file a formal plan, either a definitive subdivision plan or a site plan, as is required for the project,
and a low impact development plan if required by bylaw. The entire record of the completed
residential development process shall be considered part of the application(s) and the material already
considered need not be repeated in the formal application(s). The fee for a subdivision plan
shall be as specified in the current fee schedule for definitive subdivision plans submitted as part
of a residential development plan. [Added January 2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 24.
Section 3.3. Procedure for Submission and Approval of Preliminary Subdivision Plans
Section 3.3.1. Application Anyone who proposes to create a non residential subdivision must
and anyone who proposes to create a residential subdivision may submit a preliminary plan for
review. An applicant who has complied with the development procedures of section 11.11 of the
zoning bylaw should not submit a preliminary plan. Other persons shall: [Revised January 2013]
A. Prepare a plan that conforms to the requirements of section 3.3.3. of these Rules and
Regulations.
B. File with the Department of Planning and Development, by hand delivery or by certified
mail, postage prepaid, a properly completed, tax certified Form B, 2 or more paper copies
full size (the exact number being determined by the Department of Planning and Development)
and an electronic copy in .PDF or other acceptable format of the plan to the department
of planning and development and pay the fee as required by the current fee schedule.
[Revised January 2013]
C. Attend next regular meeting of the Planning Board or another meeting if such is so arranged
to present plans.
D. Be held responsible for any engineering fees incurred by the Planning Board in its review
of the Plan.
1. The Board or the Planning Agent may require a deposit to the Town sufficient to pay
the projected cost of these charges.
Section 3.3.2 Agency Review The Department will immediately forward an electronic copy
(or a paper copy if such is requested by the agency) of each plan to the Board of Health, the Conservation
Commission, the Land Use Department, and the Department of Public Works. [Added
January 2013]
A. The Department of Planning and Development and each agency receiving a plan is requested
to review the plan with regard to the requirements of the agency and to report any
problems or other comments both to the Planning Board and to the applicant or submit a
statement to the Board that it has no concerns. The object of this review is to identify possible
problems at the earliest possible date and inform the applicant as well as the Board.
[Added January 2013]
B. The reports requested above should be received by the Planning Board not more than
thirty days after the plan was submitted. If an agency fails to report, it will be assumed that
the agency has no concerns with the submitted plan. [Added January 2013]
Section 3.3.3. Form and Contents of Preliminary Plan The "preliminary plan" shall be capital
drawn showing scale on paper showing:
A. The subdivision name, boundaries, north point, date, scale, legend, and title "Preliminary
Plan”;
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 25.
B. The names of the record owner and the applicant and the name of the designer, engineer
or surveyor;
C. The names of all abutters, as determined from the most recent local tax list;
D. The existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements, and any public areas within
the subdivision in a general manner;
E. The proposed system of drainage, including adjacent existing natural waterways, in a
general manner;
F. The approximate boundary lines of proposed lots, with approximate areas and dimensions;
G. The names, approximate location and widths of adjacent streets;
H. A full delineation of all wetlands on the property;
I. All existing buildings and other manmade structures; and
J. The topography of the land in a general manner.
K. The applicant is encouraged but not required to submit a preliminary Impact Statement
(see section 3.4.3) and a preliminary existing conditions statement (see section 3.4.4 ) covering
the various elements that are required in those statements both of which will be required
with a definitive plan. The filing of such statements will enable the Board to give the
applicant direction as to what will be required in the definitive plan and the proposed subdivision.
L. The applicant may apply for preliminary waivers from specific requirements of these
regulations and such preliminary waivers, if granted, will create a reasonable expectation that
equivalent formal waivers will be granted during the hearing on the definitive plan provided
the definitive plan reasonably conforms to the preliminary plan and is filed within six months
after the preliminary plan.
Section 3.3.4 Development Review Meeting The Department of Planning and Development
is requested to hold a Development Review Meeting which should be held prior to the Planning
Board's review of the subdivision for all commercial or mixed use subdivisions and those residential
subdivisions that consist of more than six units. [Revised January 2013]
A. The applicant and a representative of each listed agency are requested to attend this meeting.
B. The purpose of the meeting will be to discuss the proposed subdivision and for the various
agencies to offer suggestions and comments in regard to needed changes or other matters
that should be known to the applicant and the Planning Board or be addressed in a definitive
plan.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 26.
C. The Department of Planning and Development should present notes from the Development
Review Meeting to the members of the Planning Board prior to its review of the subdivision.
[Added January 2013]
Section 3.3.5 Preliminary Plan Review and Decision Should the application and plan fail
to provide the information required by these regulations and is deemed necessary for proper
consideration of the proposal, it will be returned to the applicant for completion. Unless a fully
completed plan is filed prior to its next meeting which is held more than fourteen days after such
return or such greater time as the Board has allowed, it will be the policy of the Board to disapprove
the plan as an incomplete plan. [Revised January 2013]
A. Within 45 days after submission, the Planning Board, with due consideration of the reports
submitted by the Board of Health, and the Conservation Commission, shall notify the
applicant and the town clerk, by certified mail, either
1. That the plan appears to meet the requirements of the zoning bylaw and the board’s
regulations and is otherwise acceptable to the Board, OR [Revised January 2013]
2. That the plan has been approved with modifications suggested by the Board or agreed
upon by the person submitting the plan, OR
3. That the plan has been disapproved, in which case, the Board shall state in detail its
reasons therefor.
Section 3.3.6 Preliminary Plans Not Recordable Except as otherwise provided, the provisions
of the subdivision control law relating to a plan shall not be applicable to a preliminary
plan, and no register of deeds will record a preliminary plan.
Section 3.3.7 Record of preliminary plan The Board shall cause one copy of the preliminary
plan as acted upon by the Board and with each page thereof signed by the board chair to be filed
in the Department of Planning and Development as part of its official record of the Board’s action
thereon. [Added January 2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 27.
Section 3.4. Procedure for Submission and Approval of a Definitive Plan
Section 3.4.1. Application Any person who desires, approval of a definitive plan for a subdivision
of land shall:
Section 3.4.1.1 The developer of a project submitted and approved under the residential zoning
bylaw (article 11) and section 3.2 of these regulations may omit from the application those materials
that have already been covered in the earlier stages of the development review. [Added January
2013]
Section 3.4.1.2 File with the Planning Board, at a regular meeting of the Board, a properly
completed, tax certified Form C, Application for Approval of a Definitive Subdivision Plan, and
pay the filing fee and consultant review deposit required by the current fee schedule. The Board
will issue a receipt therefor showing the Planning Board’s assigned ID number. All future submittals
must include that number. [Revised January 2013]
Section 3.4.1.3 If an application is signed other than by the property owner of record, the applicant’s
interest in the property and her/his authority to sign shall be clearly indicated. Supporting
documentation shall be provided if the Board so requires. If an applicant signs in more than
one capacity, each capacity shall be clearly indicated. If some person, other than the applicant, is
authorized to sign other documents related to the matter, that authority shall be clearly indicated
in the application or in a separate document. [Added January 2013]
Section 3.4.1.4 File notice of submission of the plan with the town clerk as required by M. G.
L. Chapter 41, section 81T. [Section 81T. Every person submitting a definitive plan of land to the planning
board of a city or town for its approval or for a determination that approval is not required shall give written notice
to the clerk of such city or town by delivery or by registered mail, postage prepaid, that he has submitted such a
plan. If the notice is given by delivery the clerk shall, if requested, give a written receipt therefor to the person who
delivered such notice. Such notice shall describe the land to which the plan relates sufficiently for identification, and
shall state the date when such plan was submitted and the name and address of the owner of such land; and the facts
stated in such notice shall be taken by the city or town clerk as true, unless the contrary is made to appear.. . ]
Section 3.4.1.5 Submit with the application a list prepared by the Assessors showing the Assessor's
parcel numbers, names and addresses of all owners of property abutting upon the land included
in the subdivision plan as they appear on the most recent tax assessors’ list. [Revised January
2013]
Section 3.4.1.6 Submit with the application in one or more documents:
A. The book and page number of the document filed in he Registry of Deeds which
shows the listed owner’s title to the property. [Added January 2013]
B. The names and full contact information for every person involved in developing the
plan and who may have to be contacted for clarifications or additions. Such information
must include mail address, land line phone number, fax number and email address. A cellular
phone number should be included, if available. [Added January 2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 28.
Section 3.4.2 In addition to the above information the application shall consist of a development
impact statement (See section 3.4.3), a narrative describing the existing conditions (See section
3.4.4), an existing conditions plan (See section 3.4.5), proposed improvements plan(s) (See
section 3.4.6), and a detailed description of the proposed improvements (See section 3.4.7).
[Added January 2013]
A. Planning Board ID Number Every sheet of every plan in the initial application shall
include a block for the Planning Board’s ID number. This shall be located within 6 inches of
the right side of the sheet. [Added January 2013]
B. Identification of Amended or Supplemental Information For all amended or supplemental
narratives and plans submitted after the initial application, the applicant shall include
the assigned ID number on each plan sheet and at the beginning of each narrative
submittal. Each such plan or statement shall also include a revision date so that no two submittals
will be identical. This date must be conspicuously shown in characters not smaller
than 12 point type. [Added January 2013]
C. Form of Required Plans Two paper copies of each sheet of each plan is required.
The plan shall also be provided in Portable Document Format (.PDF) or other acceptable
format for distribution to the board and various town agencies. Each plan sheet shall include
the name, address, seal, signature, and date of signing of the registered professional engineer
or registered land surveyor as appropriate to the data. The plan shall be size 36 X 48 inches.
The drawing shall be at a scale of one inch to forty feet (1"=40’) or such other scale as the
Board may approve. Where a plan is drawn on multiple sheets, it must be accompanied by an
index sheet showing the entire parcel involved and in such case for ease of reading, matching
lines and consecutive numbering shall be provided. Additional paper copies of the plans in
either full scale or reduced scale shall be provided at the request of the planning agent. [Added
January 2013]
D. Application in Electronic Format The above data . shall also be submitted on compact
disk in Portable Document Format (.PDF) Data should be related to state plane coordinates.
Data in AUTO CAD format will be an acceptable alternative. The Board may modify this requirement
for small projects prepared by firms that do not have electronic formatting capabilities.
Narrative and tables may be in WORD or EXCEL format. [Revised January 2013]
E. Other Information The application may contain such additional information the applicant
feels is necessary to inform the Board properly about the development including legal
opinions, copies of deeds, historical data, studies, and reports. [Added January 2013]
F. Possible Omissions The planning agent after consultation with the board chairman may
allow the applicant to omit from the application such of the listed materials that will not be
needed to adequately evaluate the proposal. If the board later finds that such materials are
needed, the applicant shall then supply them. [Added January 2013]
Section 3.4.3 A development impact statement shall be provided which clearly and methodically
assesses the relationship of the proposed development to the natural and man-made environment
of the Town. This shall be divided into elements as specified below: [Revised January
2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 29.
1. It is intended that the statement be a guide to the Planning Board in its judgment and
deliberation on the proposed subdivision and its compatibility with existing conditions
and planning efforts of the Town. While reviewing the Statement, the Board will consider
the degree to which the applicant has proposed to sustain the environmental health of the
community, minimize adverse effects on the natural resources, promote safety of the inhabitants
of the area, and preserve the character of the Town. Failure of the plans, narratives,
and impact statement for the proposed development to show such compatibility
may require revision of the proposal if so determined by the Planning Board. [Revised
January 2013]
2. Professional Preparation When required by the Board, the elements of the impact
statement shall be prepared by professionals registered in Massachusetts to practice in
their fields or by authorities recognized in their field who have reached a professional
status or its recognized equal. [Revised January 2013]
A. Soils Element The impact statement shall describe the compatibility of existing soils and
terrain with the proposed development. The results of any available soil testing shall be included.
[Revised January 2013]
B. Natural and Existing Features This element must discuss the preservation or promotion
of wildlife refuges, historic sites, unique geological, botanical and archeological features,
existing or potential trails and accesses to open space areas, and the health and safety
of the inhabitants of the area. [Revised January 2013]
1. Visual The impact statement shall give attention to views into the site and from the
site. Included shall be long-distance views as well as to and from adjacent properties.
Visual impact may be related to the other elements concerning the overall aesthetics of
the proposed development. [Revised January 2013]
C. Construction Element This element may reference the development plan provided as
part of the application and shall include the following:
1. Estimated Construction Schedule This shall including phasing (if phasing is proposed),
the clearing schedule, hours of operation, and exposure time
2. Estimates of the construction cost of the roadways, stormwater control, and utilities.
(This will be considered in determining the amount of any performance bond or cash
security that may be required.) [Revised January 2013]
D. Water Supply and Distribution - If water will be supplied to the subdivision by a public
or a common water supply system, the average daily and peak demand and its effects on the
source. Coordination with the Town Water Department, and if deemed advisable, appropriate
State agencies, is strongly recommended. [Revised January 2013]
E. Sewage Treatment The average daily and peak demand; and any unusual composition or
concentration of component flows into the proposed system(s), the method to serve the proposed
buildings. Coordination with the Board of Health, the Department of Public Works,
and if deemed advisable, appropriate State agencies, is strongly recommended. If sewage
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 30.
systems other than an on-site sewage disposal systems are proposed, adequate capacity of the
off-site system must be demonstrated. [Revised January 2013]
F. Waste Generation and Disposal Element The types and volumes of solid waste other
than normal household waste likely to be generated by the proposed subdivision shall be
listed. The means of handling these wastes shall be given in detail. If hazardous wastes will
be produced, full detail as to their nature and means of disposal shall be provided. [Revised
January 2013]
G. Sustainable Energy Element This element shall discuss the effects of the proposed development
on the production and consumption of energy; on the generation and absorption of
greenhouse gasses and other conditions which will affect the sustainability of our community
in the rapidly changing environment. The Board will welcome proposals that will reduce net
effects on global warming. [Added January 2013]
H. A Neighborhood and Community Element to consist of the following:
1. Schools Discuss the expected impact on the school system pre-kindergarten, elementary,
middle school, and secondary levels, by type of housing (single-family, garden
apartment, townhouse, high rise, etc.), and by bedroom (one-bedroom, two-bedroom,
etc.) the number of students; and school bus routing changes if found necessary. Coordination
with the Superintendent of Schools is recommended, particularly for large residential
developments.
2. Police - The expected impact on police service, time and manpower needed to protect
the proposed development; provision for special alarm or warning devices or agents and
other needs shall be presented. Coordination with the Police Department is recommended.
3. Fire - Expected fire protection needs, on-site fire fighting capabilities, on-site alarm
or other warning devices, water flow needs, source and delivery system and other needs
shall be presented. Coordination with the Fire Department is recommended.
4. Existing Neighborhood Land Use Discuss compatibility with adjacent or nearby existing
land uses, or approved private development plans, if known, for adjacent or nearby
land use changes to occur during the life of the proposed development. If the proposed
uses are not compatible, the reasons therefore shall be detailed. Consultation with the
Planning Agent is strongly recommended. [Revised January 2013]
I. Social-Economic Element to consist of the following:
1. Housing If housing is proposed, expected family size by housing type and bedroom
count; ranges in expected income and other relevant social data shall be estimated.
a. Low/Moderate Income Housing — In developments which include residential
units, any provisions for low and/or moderate income housing shall be identified as to
type of housing and bedroom count; State or Federal subsidies proposed to be applied
for; and indication, if any, from the appropriate agencies including the Winchendon
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 31.
Housing Authority as to its desirability and feasibility in regard to its location, financing,
and any operating subsidy.
2. Employment In all nonresidential developments and in large residential developments
the number and types of job skills to be employed shall be detailed. This shall include
both construction labor and full-time work force when the development is in operation;
employment by shift; estimates as to the amount of local labor which is intended to be
used.
J. Municipal Benefit/Cost Element A primary part of this element shall be an analysis of
the net benefit or cost to the Town in dollars, as complete as is practicable. This municipal
benefit/cost analysis should follow standard and usual procedures and parameters for measuring
both the benefits to be derived and costs to be incurred by the Town of Winchendon as a
result of the implementation of the proposed development. It will be helpful to provide one or
more benefit/cost analyses for alternative uses to provide for a basis for comparison. Except
in unusual cases, or when the construction of a proposed development is scheduled to take
place in distinct and separate phases and each phase may be functional and operable without
any or all of the others, the municipal benefit/cost analysis may assume full and complete development
and occupancy. In phased development or in other unusual cases, the Planning
Board may require more than one analysis (an analysis for each phase) and/or more than one
impact statement. This element may also estimate net benefit or costs of non-qualifiable environmental
impacts.
K. Master Plan Element - The statement shall detail the compatibility of the proposed development
and its alternatives to any established plans of the Planning Board, Conservation
Commission, Department of Public Works and other Town and State agencies as applicable.
If the proposal is not compatible, the reasons therefore shall be detailed.
Section 3.4.4 Existing Conditions Narrative The application shall include in narrative format
complete information on the following: [Added January 2013]
A. Existing Use A detailed description of the existing use. [Added January 2013]
B. General Ecology - Describe the relation of the proposed development to the major botanical,
zoological, geological and hydrological resources of the site. Consideration of those
resources adjacent to the site shall also be made where deemed appropriate by the Planning
Board. Describe any rare or endangered species of plants and wildlife that may be found on
the site. [Revised January 2013]
C. Surface Water and Wetlands Describe the location, extent and type of existing water
and wetlands, including existing surface drainage characteristics, both within and adjacent to,
the project including existing surface drainage characteristics. [Added January 2013]
D. Subsurface Conditions Describe any limitations on the proposed project caused by
subsurface soil and water conditions, and methods to be used to overcome them. Describe
the procedures and findings of test borings, test pits, and any percolation tests conducted on
the site. [Revised January 2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 32.
E. Easements Describe any existing flood control or wetland easements. If other easements
exist, show how such easements will or will not impact the proposed development.
[Revised January 2013]
F. Environmental Site Assessments Unless the property has never been previously developed,
a copy of all environmental site assessments that have been done on the property or
any part that is to be developed. If no previous environmental site assessment has been done
on property being redeveloped, the board may require a level I environmental site assessment.
If the level I assessment indicates the possibility of contamination, a level II assessment
will be required. [Added January 2013]
G. Special Site Characteristics Describe any unique site characteristics, including but not
limited to, features deemed important by the Massachusetts’s Historical Commission, Natural
Heritage, and FEMA.
H. Tanks If existing underground storage tanks are present at the site, their location, size,
capacities, type and date of installation shall be given. The Fire Chief will determine
whether the tanks may be reused or must be removed. [Added January 2013]
Section 3.4.5 Existing Conditions Plan The existing conditions plan shall be drawn showing
scale and show the following:
A. All bearings which shall be true, magnetic, or grid, and the needle shown on the plan
shall indicate this clearly; scale and legend; and date of the plan
B. The location and elevation of the starting bench mark as well as at least one other bench
mark. All elevations should preferably refer to US Coast and Geodetic Survey bench marks.
However, if no such bench mark is convenient to the site, an assumed bench mark may be
used. One such benchmark shall be outside of the area to be disturbed. [Revised January 2013]
C. Locus map A locus plan at an appropriate scale which may be one inch equals one
thousand feet (1’ =1000’) shall be submitted showing the development tract in relation to at
least two intersecting public ways. This must show the location of the site in relation to
roads, etc. This may be a copy of part of the zoning map or the assessors’ map. [Revised January
2013]
D. Existing streets The location, names and present widths of streets bounding, approaching
or within reasonable proximity to the subdivision including all streets through which
primary access to the subdivision will be obtained. [Added January 2013]
E. Site Boundaries as determined by a registered land surveyor. [Added January 2013]
F. Existing topography The existing conditions plan shall show the site topography with
contour lines at not greater than 10 foot intervals. Street and lot lines shall be shown to facilitate
orientation. The surface elevation of all water bodies and wetlands within the tract shall
be given, and ground surface shall be identified as to type, such as dense woods, open woods,
brush, swamp, flowages, etc. All wetlands should have been properly flagged and the locations
thereof shown. Brooks, ditches, walls and spot elevations of high and low points should
be shown and identified. If any of the site is within the 100 year flood plain, its limits shall
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 33.
be clearly indicated. Any additional information required by the Conservation Commission
or the Board of Health shall also be shown. [Added January 2013]
G. Existing Improvements Data showing the location of all existing improvements to
the site, including structures, underground infrastructure, roads, driveways, walks, parking
areas, existing signs and landscaping. [Added January 2013]
Section 3.4.6 Proposed Improvements Plan(s) The plan shall contain the following information:
A. Bearings All bearings shall be true, magnetic, or grid, and the needle as shown on the
plan shall indicate this clearly. [Added January 2013]
B. Proposed Topography The proposed finished topography with contour lines at two
foot (2') intervals. The surface elevation of all water bodies and wetlands within the tract
shall be given, All wetlands shall have been properly flagged and the locations thereof
clearly shown. Street and lot lines shall be shown to facilitate orientation. Benchmarks shall
be shown and designated. Sufficient data to determine readily the location, direction and
length of every street and way line, lot line, and boundary line; sufficient also to reproduce
the same on the ground. In addition, the centerline of the proposed streets, easements and major
boundaries of the tract being subdivided shall be staked out or otherwise marked on the
ground and the location of said stakes shall be shown. [Added January 2013]
C. Proposed Improvements The proposed improvement plan(s) shall duplicate material
shown on the existing condition plan(s) with sufficient additional data to determine readily
the location of [Added January 2013]
1. The location, areas and dimensions of all proposed lots, and open space, if any. After
approval of a definitive plan any change in lot lines or other details will require an
amendment to the plan, or may constitute a new subdivision. Such an amendment or new
plan will be subject to all procedural requirements and fees. [Revised January 2013]
2. All existing improvements to be retained and the proposed new improvements, including
dwelling units and other structures, roads, driveways, walks, loading areas, parking
areas and landscaping; sufficient also to reproduce the same on the ground. [Added
January 2013]
3. The plan must include typical sections of roadways showing widths and grades of
street lines, bicycle lanes, roadway pavement, sidewalks, grass strips and side slopes, location
and size of water, sewer, drain and gas lines. The depth of roadway pavement,
sidewalks, base courses and all underground or aboveground utilities must be shown.
4. All fire hydrants on the site and off the site but within 500 feet of the site shall be
shown. [Added January 2013]
5. If the site is to utilize on-site wells, the proposed locations must be shown in addition
to its setback from any buildings, structures, or sewage disposal systems. The location of
wells on abutting properties should be shown on the plan. [Added January 2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 34.
6. The Board may require that the proposed improvements be staked out or otherwise
appropriately marked on the ground. [Added January 2013]
7. The assigned street number of each lot shall be shown; lot numbers shall not be used;
8. The location of all permanent existing or proposed monuments, natural objects and
surfaces such as waterways, natural drainage courses, large boulders or ledge outcroppings,
stone walls and specimen trees.
D. Open Space Clear identification of each area intended to be used as OPEN SPACE on
the site with the square footage of each such area shown. A separate sheet may be necessary
to show these areas adequately. [Revised January 2013]
E. Profile Plan a profile plan at a horizontal scale of forty feet to the inch showing the
size and location of existing and proposed roadways, water mains, fire hydrants, sewer lines,
their appurtenances, stormwater management structures, and any other underground utilities
including but not limited to electric, gas, telephone, or cable television services within and
adjacent to the site. For all roadways, the proposed finished center line grades with elevations
at every fifty foot (50 ') station, location of vertical curves and gradient of even grades shall
be shown. [Revised January 2013]
F. Stormwater Management Facilities The location and types of stormwater drainage facilities
including notes on the construction materials of any pipes, culverts, catch basins or
any other system component. Sufficient information relating to placement of the drainage
system components (rim and invert elevations, pipe slopes, amount of cover, etc.) shall be
shown so that the operation of the system can be evaluated. Any detention basins, retention
basins, or drainage ponds intended to be constructed shall be shown, fully dimensioned. [Revised
January 2013]
1. Detail Drawings A typical detail of a proposed catch basin, diversion box, emergency
sluice gate, manhole, headwall, retaining wall, walkway, raingarden, subdrain, waterway,
leaching basin, drainage pond, or other similar structures, if any. Where a retaining
wall is required to be designed by a registered structural engineer, such design shall bear the
stamp and signature of the structural engineer. [Revised January 2013]
G. Limits of Work Any areas where existing conditions may reasonably be expected to be
disturbed during construction shall be shown and identified on the plan. [Added January 2013]
H. Perimeter of Trees The perimeter of any existing wooded areas on the site shall be
shown. Existing wooded areas intended for preservation shall be noted. The location, size,
and proposed fate of any existing trees larger than 16 inches Dbh within the area to be disturbed
shall be shown. [Added January 2013]
I. Sewage Disposal The perimeter outline of any existing or proposed on-site sewage disposal
systems including any required reserve areas. The type of sewage disposal system
shall be identified by a simple notation. Design and construction specifications for sewage
disposal system(s) must comply with Board of Health regulations. If the proposed development
includes the construction of a sewage treatment plant, then the location of the plant and
the sewer main to serve the facility in question must be shown. If a sewage system other than
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 35.
an on-site sewage disposal system is to be used, the location of any sewer mains to be installed
on site must be shown. If the development will require the installation of sewers off
the site, plans therefor shall be provided. [Revised January 2013]
J. Landscape Plans Required A landscape plan as required by section 4.13.11 must be
included. In the case of a residential development, a typical landscape plan for a home should
be provided. This may be on a separate plan sheet or sheets. Any separate plan shall include
general site features such as lot lines, structures, so that it may be easily related to the other
plans. Landscape plans for common areas in subdivisions shall be provided. [Revised January
2013]
1. Landscaping Details: A typical detail of a tree well, tree planting, and specialty
planting area, if applicable, shall be shown. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
K. Notes shall be included on the plan that: (1) forbid the use of fill containing hazardous
materials (2) require the marking of the limits of work in the field before the start of construction
or site clearing, (3) require the cleaning of catch basins, sumps and stormwater basins
following construction and annually thereafter, (4) restrict the hauling of earth materials
to or from the site to the hours between 7 a.m. and 5 p.m. on weekdays , (5) describe the
materials to be used in the construction of impermeable surfaces such as sidewalks and
driveways.
1. Additional Material Required The text of sections 5.2.1 through section 5.2.5 of these
regulations shall be included in the final plan so that all contractors will be aware of these requirements.
[Added January 2013]
L. Phased Projects If the project is to be built in phases, a plan or series of plans showing
specific limits of construction for each phase and detailing the work to be accomplished
in each phase shall be provided. Interim curbing and landscaping shall be shown as needed
between phases. [Added January 2013]
M Board Signatures Suitable space shall be provided to record the action of the Board
and the signatures of the members of the Board (or officially authorized person). Directly
above this space shall be the words, "Approval of this plan is granted on the conditions listed
in a separate Statement of Conditions which is part of the approval of this definitive subdivision.”
This block shall be just below the required ID block and both shall be within 6 inches
of the right side of the plan.
Section 3.4.7 Text Description of Proposed Improvements A narrative or tabular statement
or statements providing further information regarding the proposed development which shall include
the following:
A. Proposed Use A detailed description of the proposed use(s) of the subdivision. [Added January
2013]
B. If licenses, permits, orders of conditions and other approvals will be needed in connection
with the project, they shall be described fully. If such have already been issued by any
public authority, copies of such documents shall be furnished. The applicant shall also provide
copies of any such approvals issued during the pendency of the application. [Added January
2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 36.
C. Site Improvement Requirements and Proposal A table shall show the legal requirements
(minimums, maximums) of the zoning district (where applicable), existing conditions
(where applicable) and the proposed site conditions for the following characteristics: number
of residential lots, number of other lots, lot sizes, total lot coverage, total impervious area, total
area of disturbance, open space, area reserved for recreation, parks or other open land,
percent wetlands, percent flood plain, developable site area, area dedicated to stormwater
control and other utilities,. [Added January 2013]
D. Stormwater Management – There shall be a description of existing surface drainage
characteristics of the site and surrounding areas. This shall include the Methodology of postdeveloped
storm water management, a detailed explanation of how the proposed storm water
management system complies with Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook and the Winchendon
Low Impact Development bylaw and regulations. [Revised January 2013]
1. Impact of Runoff The Water quality impact from run-off on adjacent and downstream
land and surface water bodies and subsurface ground water and the water table
shall be detailed. Coordination with State and Town water quality agencies including that
Board of Health and Conservation Commission is recommended so that necessary
agreements and responsibilities can be included in the study of the proposed development
and its alternatives. The relationship of the proposed development to navigable streams,
flood plains, and municipal water supply impoundments and reservations shall be described
. [Added January 2013]
2. Storm drainage runoff calculations used for the drainage system design must be
prepared by and display the seal of a Registered Professional Engineer. These calculations
must be based on a recognized standard method (usually the Rational Formula or
Soil Conservation Service Method). The calculations must contain a written summary
explaining the rationale of the design so that a lay person can understand the basic design
approach and its validity for the site in question. Furthermore, the calculations should be
fully documented including a plan showing subcatchment areas, copies of charts or other
reference sources to make review possible. The pre- and post-development runoff rates
must be provided. The source of the software used for computer generated reports should
be identified. [Revised January 2013]
3. Water Balance Calculations for sites all or partly within a Groundwater Protection
Overlay District: The portion of the site in each Groundwater Protection Overlay District
shall be noted. A yearly hydrologic water balance calculation for pre- and postdevelopment
conditions based on annual precipitation that quantifies evapotranspiration,
runoff, recharge and septic flow shall be included. Compliance with applicable portions
of section 4.11 of the Bylaw shall be demonstrated.
4. The application must evaluate the impact of sewerage disposal methods to be used on
the quality of subsurface water. [Added January 2013]
5. In reviewing the stormwater management proposals, the Board will consider the degree
to which water is recycled back into the ground, the maintenance and improvement of the
flow and quality of surface waters, If the site lies within a known aquifer or potential area
the Board may require a hydrogeological study based on the most current groundwater
survey.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 37.
E. Temporary Erosion Control The application must describe the methods to be used
during construction to control erosion and sedimentation (i.e., use of sediment basins and
type of mulching, matting, or temporary vegetation), describe the size and location of land to
be cleared at any given time and length of time of exposure, covering of soil stockpiles, and
other control methods and their effect on the site and on the surrounding area.
F. Permanent Erosion Control The application must describe permanent methods to be
used to control erosion and sedimentation. Include description of:
1. any areas subject to flooding or ponding
2. proposed land grading and permanent vegetative cover
3. the relationship of the development to the topography
4. any proposed alterations of shorelines, marshes or seasonal wet areas
G. Earth Removal The volume of "earth" as defined in the Winchendon Zoning Bylaw to
be removed if applicable, or a statement indicating that "no earth is to be removed" An estimate
of proposed cut and fill volumes, Calculations for determining the amount of earth to
be removed and/or the amount of fill to be brought to the site shall be prepared by and show
the signature and seal of a Registered Professional Engineer. This is a critical parameter since
earth removal operations in Winchendon are severely constrained. [Revised January 2013]
H. Architecture - The style of architecture of the proposed buildings shall be described and
their compatibility with the function of and the architectural style of adjacent buildings.
Sketches, photos, elevations and renderings are encouraged to illustrate architectural appropriateness
as well as innovation. Consultation with the Building Commissioner is recommended.
I Typical House Plans In a residential subdivision, typical plans and elevation drawings
for proposed houses shall be provided. The sill height and peak height of each house shall be
shown referenced to the street pavement level in front of the house. [Added January 2013]
J. Roadways, Driveways and Parking Description of all proposed roadways and other
travel areas, including pavement width, right of way width, total length, means of egress, and
maximum grade shall be clearly shown on the plan or in the narrative. [Revised January 2013]
1. Traffic Generation – A comparison of the estimated pre-developed traffic to postdeveloped
traffic. Including: volume, overall average daily traffic generation, composition,
peak hour levels, directional flows and street capacities. The methodology used to
derive these predictions shall be included. A traffic study by a qualified traffic engineer
showing the likely effects of the development on the roads which will serve the site, either
directly or indirectly, may be required at the discretion of the Board. [Added January
2013]
K. Recreational Facilities and Open Space A statement shall be included as to any proposed
recreational facilities/open space, and indication of intended owner(s) and as to
whether the recreational facilities/open space will be available to the public. [Added January
2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 38.
L. Lighting - The type, design, location, function and intensity of all exterior lighting facilities,
existing and proposed shall be detailed. Fixture manufacturer specifications will be
helpful showing light output and direction. Attention must be given to safety, privacy, security,
avoidance of light pollution, and daytime and nighttime appearance.
M. Landscaping - Provisions being proposed for landscaping shall be described including
type, location and function.
1. Planting Table: A planting table must be provided. It shall include the botanical and
common name of each species, its height (at planting), its spread (at maturity) and the
quantity intended to be planted shall be listed in a table along with the symbols used to
represent the plants on the plan. [Adopted Nov. 19, 1998]
N. Mail Delivery A description of how mail is to distributed to the occupants of the subdivision.
The written approval of the postmaster must be included. If the method will require
structures (such as cluster mailboxes) the location of the same shall be shown on the proposed
improvements plan together with any safety measures that may be necessary. [Added
January 2013]
O. The application shall indicate all easements, covenants or restrictions applying to the
land including zoning setbacks, sideyards and rear yards. [Revised January 2013]
P. The Board is empowered by the Bylaw to require information in addition to that specifically
required by the Bylaw. The Board will require the applicant to supply additional information
if it finds that such information is necessary to act properly upon the application.
Section 3.5 Agency Review
Section 3.5.1. Board of Health Review The Board of Health shall, within forty-five (45)
days following receipt of a definitive plan, report to the Planning Board, in writing, its approval
or disapproval of said plan. In the event of disapproval, it shall make specific findings as to
which, if any, lots shown on such plan cannot be used for building sites without injury to the
public health, and it shall include such specific findings and the reasons therefor in its report.
Failure to so report shall be deemed approval by the Board of Health. Should the Board of Health
be unable to complete a full review of the project within the statutory 45 day window, is shall
file a preliminary statement indicating any problems found within the 45 days and a completed
statement as soon as possible thereafter. [See M. G. L. chapter 41, section 81U.]
A. Every acceptable lot so situated that it cannot be served by a connection to the municipal
sewer system shall undergo a percolation test carried out under the supervision of the Board
of Health's Septic Inspector, according to the procedures required by state law and Title V of
the regulations. Such lot shall be provided with a septic tank and drain field whose design
and placement are satisfactory to the Septic Inspector.
1. Extreme care shall be practiced in the layout of a subdivision in unsewered areas. The
extent of soil evaluation should be determined by the Winchendon Board of Health based
on the Town of Winchendon soils map and whatever other soil information is available.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 39.
2. Required testing should include deep test holes, percolation tests and test borings, and
the number of tests required shall be determined by the Board of Health investigator.
3. Notwithstanding the above, a permit to construct an individual subsurface absorption
area must be obtained from the Board of Health for each individual lot not served by the
Winchendon sewerage system, and a condition shall be inscribed on the plan as follows:
"No building or structure shall be built or placed on any lot without a permit from the
Board of Health."
B. Alternately, and with the approval of the Board of Health, a community wastewater disposal
system may be installed. If such a system is to be installed, appropriate conditions
which have been accepted by the Board of Health shall be added to the definitive plan approval.
Section 3.5.2. Conservation Commission and other Reviews The Conservation Commission,
Department of Public Works, Town Engineer and any other agency designated to receive
and review a definitive plan shall, within forty-five (45) days following receipt of such plan, report
their findings in writing to the Planning Board, and shall make recommendations thereon.
Should the agency be unable to complete a full review of the project within the statutory 45 day
window, is shall file a preliminary statement indicating any problems found within the 45 days
and a completed statement as soon as possible thereafter. Failure to so report shall be deemed a
favorable recommendation on said plan.
Section 3.5.3 Approval of Water Mains and Hydrants If water mains and hydrants are to be
installed, the written approval of the Department of Public Works and the Fire Department shall
be required before subdivision approval is granted.
Section 3.5.4. Report of the Consulting Engineer The plan will be reviewed by a consulting
engineer retained by the Board at the expense of the applicant. The cost and payments will be
handled in accordance with M. G. L. Chapter 44, section 53G. This review will include the following
items:
A. The proposed locations, sizes and grades of streets, right-of-ways, easements, water
mains, sanitary sewer mains and stormwater control system drainage facilities;
B. Any deviations from the design and work requirements specified in these Rules and
Regulations or the Town of Winchendon's Design Standards and Construction Specifications,
if any, issued by the Town Engineer or Department of Public Works, the applicant's detailed
specifications for performing the required work and all special construction requirements, if
any, applicable to the subdivision;
C. Comments as to the accuracy of the applicant’s estimates of the cost of performing the
various items of required work. (This is for consideration in determining the amount of performance
bond or cash security as required in Section 3.9)
D. Such other items as the board, in its sole judgment, shall deem necessary for the proper
evaluation of the plan and any changes or conditions which should be included in its decision.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 40.
Section 3.5.5 Review by the Planning Agent The Planning Agent shall review the plan to insure
its completeness and to highlight parts of the plan that particularly further the intent of the
Winchendon Master Plan, the Open Space and Recreation Plan, any other plans that have been
approved by the Planning Board, and any policies of other departments of the town government;
or which diverge from the provisions of those plans and policies. Specific attention is to be paid
to:
A. That copies of the plan have been properly submitted to the Board of Health, the Conservation
Commission, and that a consulting engineer has been engaged, and
B. That the applicant is the owner of record of all the property shown on the plan or has legal
authority from the owner to submit the plan, and
C. That the submitted abutters list is correct, that the abutters have been properly notified
and the hearing has been properly advertised, and
D. That the plan shows the entire lot or lots on which the plan is located, and
E. That street numbers have been properly assigned to the various lots, and
F. That each of the elements and sub elements of the impact statement have been addressed
unless waivers have been applied for to omit those elements as unnecessary, and
G. Provide comments to the Board on the effects and proposals that she/he has highlighted
in the impact statement and any other statements that have been required
Section 3.5.6 Site Visit It will be the policy of the Board to conduct a site visit, unless such a
site visit has already occurred. The applicant, his/her engineer or surveyor, and any other professionals
that have contributed to the plan will be expected to attend unless excused by the Board.
This visit will be arranged at the convenience of the Board either before or during the public
hearing process. The purpose of the visit is to acquaint the Board members with details of the
site, access to the site, and to envision the proposed development. This will enable the members
to more accurately assess the proposal. Site visits will not be scheduled or held when the site is
obscured by snow, ice or water. If necessary site visits will be rescheduled. The site visit may be
posted as a special meeting of the Board since questions and comments by Board members and
others that may constitute deliberation are likely. Consideration will be given to whether citizens
that are legally allowed to observe public meetings are allowed on the site. [Revised January 2013]
Section 3.6 Public Hearing
Section 3.6.1. Schedule for Hearing The Board shall set a date for the Public Hearing within
14 days after receipt of the application. Since the time limit for a public hearing is based on the
filing date, the hearing will be scheduled and advertised even if the application is believed to be
incomplete. [Revised January 2013]
A. The date of the hearing shall be not more than 45 days after the receipt of the application.
B. Notice of the time and place and the subject matter, sufficient for identification, of the
hearing shall be given:
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 41.
1. By the planning board, at the expense of the applicant, by advertisement in a newspaper
of general circulation in Winchendon once in each of two successive weeks, the first
publication being not less than fourteen days before the day of such hearing, Prepayment
of the advertising charge will be required with the application.
2. By posting a notice in a conspicuous place in the town hall for a period of not less
than fourteen days before the day of such hearing,
3. By mailing a copy of such advertisement to the applicant and to all owners of land
abutting upon the land included in such plan as appearing on the most recent tax list and
to all other interested parties as is required by statute.
4. By providing notice of the hearing to the conservation commission, the board of
health, the agricultural commission, the parks and recreation commission, the land use office,
the department of public works, the fire department and the police department.
[Added January 2013]
3.6.2 Delay Because Site Cannot be Viewed The time allowed for any review of the application
will be extended by the time during which the part of the site proposed for development is
covered with water, snow, ice, or excessive debris . Such time will be determined by the Board.
Until the site can be properly viewed, the application will be considered incomplete. [Added January
2013]
Section 3.6.3 Incomplete Application Should the application and plan(s), in the opinion of the
Board, fail to provide required information that is deemed necessary for proper consideration of
the proposal and the applicant so requests, the Board will continue the hearing to allow the applicant
time to complete his application for such number of days as the applicant may request provided
the applicant also agrees in writing to an extension of the time in which the Board must
take final action on the application by thirty days more than the requested continuance. The
Board will, however, require that the hearing be readvertised in accordance with the requirements
of section 3.6.1 B, all at the expense of the applicant. Additional submittals may also incur
additional submittal charges as provided in the current fee schedule. All these charges must be
prepaid. This requirement is to assure all interested parties are aware of the date and time of the
continued hearing. This process will be repeated as many times as is necessary to secure a complete
application. Should such a request and agreement not be made, it will be the policy of the
Board to deny the application as incomplete without further proceedings. Resubmission of the
application thereafter will require a new application fee and advertising charge. [Revised January
2013]
Section 3.6.4 Hearing Procedures An applicant may appear on his/her own behalf or be represented
by an agent or attorney. It is the responsibility of the applicant or the agent of the applicant
to present the application to the Board and to the public. If the applicant is not represented,
the Board may decide the matter using the information it has received. [Added January 2013]
A. Presentation of the application by the applicant should not exceed 20 minutes in duration
except for good reason. The applicant may be requested to answer questions raised by the
Board or the public. [Added January 2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 42.
B. At the beginning of the hearing, the Board will consider any requests by the applicant that
specific information be omitted from the application as unnecessary. A grant of such requests
shall not preclude the Board from requiring that such material be submitted at a later date if
the Board then finds such material essential to its consideration of the application. [Added
January 2013]
C. The applicant should also present at this time any requests for waivers from the design
standards and constructions standards required by these regulations. These requests will be
considered during the course of the hearing. Action on the requests will normally occur at the
end of the hearing. [Added January 2013]
D. The Board will retain any evidence that has been introduced at the hearing for reference
in its deliberations on the application and as is required by the open meeting law. [Added
January 2013]
E. In no case will the Board allow new information or evidence to be admitted after the
close of the public hearing unless this information or evidence was specifically requested by
the Board before the close of the public hearing. [Added January 2013]
F. Any application for subdivision approval submitted hereunder may be withdrawn without
prejudice by notice in writing to the Board before the notice of public hearing is posted or
mailed pursuant to Section 4.1 above. Withdrawal of any application thereafter requires
Board approval. No refund of fees will be provided if an application is withdrawn. [Added
January 2013]
Section 3.6.5 Continuation of Hearing The period within which final action shall be taken
may be extended for a defined period of time by written agreement between the Board and the
applicant. If the Board determines that the application is inadequate for the Board to make a decision,
the Board may, at its discretion, continue the hearing to a later date to permit the applicant
to submit a revised application provided the applicant agrees to a time extension. [Added January
2013]
A. If a hearing is continued to another date in order for the applicant to submit additional information,
that additional material must be submitted to the office of the Planning Agent not
less than ten days prior to the continuation date so that it may be reviewed by the Board’s
consultant(s) and by the Board prior to the actual continued hearing. Applicants should note
that additional submittals of material may incur an additional submittal fee. [Revised January
2013]
B. The Board’s consultant is instructed to submit copies of his reports directly to the applicant
at the same time they are provided to the Board through the planning agent. The applicant
and the consultant(s) are encouraged to consult directly so that all issues may be resolved
as quickly as possible. The Board, through the Planning Agent, must be informed of
the substance of such direct consultations. [Added January 2013]
Section 3.6.6 Board Evaluation of the Plan The Board’s consideration of a subdivision
application is intended to be a cooperative process, not an adjudicatory process. The Board
intends to work with the applicant to develop a final plan that will serve the interests of the applicant
and be beneficial or at least not unduly harmful to the environment and the citizens of
Winchendon. The Board will evaluate the plan based on its conformity to the requirements of the
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 43.
statutes, local bylaws, the zoning bylaw, the Board of Health report, the Conservation Commission
report, the findings of the Consulting Engineer, and the willingness of the applicant to address,
and if necessary to mitigate, the various impacts shown by the impact statement. The
Board will work with the applicant in an effort to achieve a project that will meet the needs of
the developer and those of the town. [Revised January 2013]
A. In its evaluation of a subdivision plan, the board will consider the past performance record
of the applicant and its principals. The board must be satisfied as to the ability of the
applicant to complete the subdivision in accordance with the plan and the regulations. Prior
instances of poor performance locally or elsewhere will weigh against the application. [Added
January 2013]
Section 3.6.7 Approval of the Plan
A. Residential Development Plans Plans originally filed under article 11 of the zoning bylaw
require a finding by the Board that the plan as it may have been amended or revised
meets the minimum requirements for preservation of open space and the location thereof,
contains no more than the maximum number of dwelling units, meets the requirements of its
subdivision regulations for a definitive residential subdivision (or of its site plan regulations
if it is not a subdivision), a Low Impact Development Plan for the site has been approved (if
such plan is required), the required open space has been fully protected by conveyance or
easement, an Order of Conditions has been issued by the Conservation Commission (if required),
and the Board of Health has approved the septic systems (if required). A preliminary
finding to this effect may be made at the conclusion of the hearing pending the completion of
the documents protecting the open space. A final finding of compliance will be made only after
the execution of the documents protecting the open space. The subdivision plan and accompanying
statement of conditions for recording will not be released to the developer until
this finding has been made. The subdivision plan, the statement of conditions, and the documents
protecting the open space must be filed concurrently at the registry of deeds. [Added
January 2013]
B. Other definitive subdivision plans After the reports from the Board of Health, the Conservation
Commission, and the Consulting Engineer have been received, or after the lapse of
forty-five days with no such report(s), and after the public hearing, the Board shall approve
or (if the plan does not comply with the Winchendon zoning and other bylaws, the Winchendon
Subdivision Control Rules and Regulations or with the recommendations of the Board of
Health or the Conservation Commission) shall modify and approve, or disapprove such plan,
shall file a certificate of its action with the Town Clerk, and shall send notice of its said action
by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the applicant at his/her address stated
on the application. Approval of a plan requires the approval of a majority of the total membership
of the Board.
Section 3.6.8 Approval will not constitute street acceptance Final approval of the definitive
plan will not constitute acceptance by the Town of streets within a subdivision. The developer
shall retain title to the ways shown on the definitive plan and shall deed same to the Town of
Winchendon after acceptance.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 44.
Section 3.7 Conditions of Approval
Section 3.7.1 Standard Conditions The following standard conditions will be applied to all
plans unless particular sections are waived by the Board:
A. Any officer, agent or employee of the Planning Board, Conservation Commission, Zoning
Board of Appeals or Board of Health may enter upon the site in pursuit of official duties,
such as examinations and surveys, and placement or maintenance or boundary monuments
and marks, at reasonable times prior to the final acceptance of the completed subdivision,
with or without prior notice to the applicant. (Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 41, Section
81CC; Chapter 131, Section 40; Chapter 111, Sections 31, 122 and 127A)
B. The time allowed for any inspection required under these conditions, the Planning
Board's regulations, or the town bylaws will be extended by the time during which the site is
covered with water, snow, or ice. Such time will be determined by the Board.
C. A performance guarantee in a form as provided for in the Massachusetts General Laws,
Chapter 40, Section 81U, is required to assure completion of the construction of ways and the
installation of municipal services. Such guarantee shall be filed with the town collector/
treasurer within thirty (30) days from the date of this definitive plan approval, unless an
extension of time is mutually agreed upon in writing by the developer and the Planning
Board. A copy of the receipt issued by the Town Treasurer for this guarantee shall be filed
with the Planning Board forthwith. The plan and the list of conditions to be recorded in the
registry of deeds will not be released by the Board until the required security is in place. [Revised
January 2013]
D. This definitive plan approval, together with this list of conditions and the performance
guarantee, or covenant must be filed at the Worcester South Registry of Deeds forthwith, but
not later than thirty days after the expiration of the appeals period plus such time as may be
consumed in any appeals process. A copy of the receipt from the Registry must be filed with
the Planning Board forthwith. No removal of vegetation, other site work, or construction may
be started until there has been such filing. If these required documents are not filed within the
required time, this definitive plan approval shall be void. [Revised January 2013]
E. Upon completion of the construction of ways and the installation of municipal services,
notice shall be given as provided for in Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 41, Section
81U and section 6.5.1 of these regulations.
F. The developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of the streets and roadways within
the subdivision until such time as those ways are accepted as public town ways. This shall
include snow and obstruction removal and ice control. [Added January 2013]
G. Construction shall be in full conformity with the "Rules and Regulations Governing the
Subdivision of Land" as issued by the Planning Board, unless an exemption is granted by the
Planning Board. Such exemption, if granted, is stated below as one of the conditions. (Massachusetts
General Laws, Chapter 41, Section 81R)
H. The clearing, excavation or removal of vegetation or the excavation or removal of sand,
soil, loam, sod, gravel, or other natural or quarried earth products is allowed only in accorTown
of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 45.
dance with section 10.6 of the Winchendon Zoning Bylaw and specific conditions for such
removal or redistribution are included in the special conditions appended to these general
conditions.
I. No sand, loam, sod, gravel, or other natural or quarried earth product may be removed
from the site, until the entire parcel has been graded and the stormwater control system is
completed in a manner acceptable to the Planning Board. The Permittee shall notify the Department
of Planning and Development by certified mail that the grading and drainage has
been completed and may be inspected. The Planning Board shall act within forty-five (45)
days of such notification. Failure of the Planning Board to act shall be construed as approval
of the stormwater controls construction. [Revised January 2013]
J. Loam must be stockpiled and covered so as to be protected from erosion. [Added January
2013]
K. Not less than four inches of loam as described in section 5.6 of the subdivision regulations,
seeded with a suitable crop cover such as a quick-growing grass mixture, shall be left
or placed on all lots, other than on areas covered by undisturbed natural vegetation, buildings,
parking areas, walkways, driveways and other paved areas, except as removal is specifically
required for reasons of public health or safety. This condition must be satisfied
within three (3) years from the date of this definitive plan approval, unless an extension of
time is mutually agreed upon in writing by the Permittee and the Planning Board. If this work
is not completed within the required time including approved extensions, this definitive plan
approval shall lapse and become void. [Revised January 2013]
L. All ways must be completed to the satisfaction of the Planning Board within two (2) years
from the date of this definitive plan approval, and prior to the sale of any lots, unless an extension
of time is mutually agreed upon in writing by the applicant and the Planning Board.
If this work is not completed within the required time including approved extensions, this definitive
plan approval shall lapse and become void.
M. If the site contains pond, lake, brook, stream, river, standing water, or any indication of
the presence of wetlands, the applicant must comply with all Wetlands Protection regulations,
including those found in Sections 4.3 and 4.4 of the Town of Winchendon Zoning Bylaw.
N. The applicant must comply with all orders of the Winchendon Conservation Commission.
O. Lots sold shall be deeded by the developer with a clear reservation of an easement for
highway purposes in the proposed ways. Failure to include such reservation in any deed shall
cause this definitive plan approval to become void. The developer shall execute an easement
deed to the town before the Board will recommend acceptance of such ways as public town
ways. Such easement shall be at no cost to the town.
P. Work under this definitive subdivision plan shall be commenced within six months of the
date of its approval increased by any time consumed by appeals of the approval and shall be
diligently pursued thereafter until the completion of the work. The Planning Board may extend
this period if so requested by the permittee without a formal hearing. If the work is not
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 46.
so commenced and pursued, this definitive plan approval shall lapse and become void. [Revised
January 2013]
Q. This approval and conditions are in addition to other permits and approvals. Nothing in
this decision shall be deemed to relieve the applicant from its obligation to obtain other permits
and approvals required by law or regulation.
R. Any substantive error or omission in the application or any subsequent filing by the applicant
or his successor shall be cause for revocation of the Board’s approval. Due notice and
hearing shall be required prior to any Board action.
S. The Board on its own motion or on the petition of any interested person reserves the
power to modify, amend or rescind its approval of this plan or to require a change in the plan
after due notice and opportunity to the applicant to be heard in accordance with M. G. L.
Chapter 41, Section 81W.
T. Failure by the applicant to file the plan, the statement of conditions, and all documents
required to protect open space in the registry of deeds (or properly file the same with the recorder
of the Land Court if the land is registered land) within thirty days after the Board endorses
its approval on the plan will render the subdivision approval null and void. [Added
January 2013]
Section 3.7.2. Special Conditions The Board may attach special conditions to the approval of
the definitive subdivision. Such special conditions may include such waivers as may be granted
from the design and construction standards of these regulations and inclusion of any other conditions
the Board may deem necessary. The special conditions will be appended to the general
conditions stated in section 3.7.1.
Section 3.8 Legal Protection of the Open Space in Residential Developments
A. All land dedicated as open space under article 11 shall be protected in a manner that will
afford it maximum protection under the law The dedicated open space shall be protected
from development by one of the following means [Added January 2013]
1. Fee ownership by the Winchendon Conservation Commission, by a state or federal
agency whose ownership will permanently legally protect the land as open space, or by
an incorporated land trust which is dedicated to the preservation of open space. Such
open space shall be conveyed free of any mortgage interest, security interest, liens or
other encumbrances. [Added January 2013]
a. It shall be the duty of the developer to arrange for such a transfer of ownership. A
transfer will require acceptance by the transferee which acceptance shall include responsibility
for the initial assessment and annual monitoring of the property as specified
in section 11.9.4 of the bylaw. Any conditions of such transfer must be approved
by the Board. All costs, e.g. document preparation or recording fees, involved in
such a transfer shall be paid by the developer. If the transfer is to the Town and will
require acceptance by the town meeting, the Board will waive the acceptance requirement
and undertake to have the acceptance placed on the warrant for the next
town meeting. [Added January 2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 47.
B. Open space may be owned by any other entity including owners of individual building
lots or other property within the subdivision provided it is protected by a suitable conservation
easement which will protect the land from development or uses, except uses provided for
in article 11 of the zoning bylaw, in perpetuity. All the conditions of such easement must be
acceptable to the Planning Board. [Added January 2013]
1. A single parcel may include both protected open space and land for other uses. The
subdivision plan to be recorded shall show the boundary line between the protected open
space and the unprotected area. An easement document to secure the protection of the
required open space which is acceptable to the Board and includes an adequate description
of the protected area must be recorded in the registry of deeds not later than the recording
of the subdivision plan. The Board will undertake to have a model easement form
drafted for use in these situations. [Added January 2013]
a. Generally the Board will not grant special permits for uses in the protected open
space of the lot which could reasonably be located in the unprotected area of such a
tract. [Added January 2013]
C. The title or easement holder other than a governmental unit of each parcel accepted as
protected open space under this bylaw shall and governmental units should, within six
months after its dedication as open space, complete an assessment of the property detailing
its location, boundaries, the condition of the vegetation, streams, wetlands walls, roads, improvements
and other features; and any restrictions or requirements for its future use or development.
Thereafter not less than annually the title or easement holder shall physically
view the property and prepare a detailed statement as to the present condition of the property
with particular reference to the features recorded in the initial assessment. Copies of each
such report shall be filed with the planning board. Any failure to file such reports shall be a
violation of the zoning bylaw and shall be subject to the penalties therefor. [Zoning bylaw
Section 11.9.4, adopted May 2011.] [Added January 2013]
Section 3.9 Performance Guarantee
A. Filing of the Performance Guarantee The required performance guarantee must be
filed with the Board within thirty days after the expiration of the appeal period of the approval
or the subdivision approval shall be void. [Added January 2013]
B. Form of Guarantee Before endorsement of its approval of a plan, a planning board
shall require that the construction of ways and the installation of municipal services in accordance
with the approved plan. be secured by one, or in part by one and in part by another, of
the methods described in the following subsections 1, 2, 3 and 4 which method or combination
of methods may be selected and from time to time varied by the applicant:
1. By a proper bond, sufficient in the opinion of the planning board to secure performance
of the construction of ways and the installation of municipal services in accordance
with the approved plan, and the planning board may require that the applicant specify a
time acceptable to the Board within which such construction shall be completed. Each
bond filed shall be approved as to form, manner of execution and sureties by the Town
Treasurer and all deposit agreements and securities shall be approved as to form and
manner of execution by the Town Treasurer.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 48.
2. By a deposit of money or negotiable securities, sufficient in the opinion of the planning
board to secure performance of the construction of ways and the installation of municipal
services required for the lots in the subdivision in accordance with the approved
plan, and the planning board may require that the applicant specify a time acceptable to
the Board within which such construction shall be completed. [Use Form G.]
If the Board shall decide at any time during the term of the performance that:
a. improvements have been installed in a satisfactory manner in sufficient amount
to warrant reductions in the security, or,
b. the character and extent of the subdivision require additional improvements,
previously waived,
then the Board may modify its requirements for any or all such performance bond, or
amount of deposit of money or value of securities, which may thereupon be reduced
or increased respectively by an appropriate amount after suitable notice to the applicant.
3. By a covenant, executed and duly recorded by the owner of record, running with the
land, whereby such ways and services shall be provided in accordance with the approved
plan to serve any lot before such lot may be built upon or conveyed, other than by mortgage
deed; provided, that a mortgagee who acquires title to the mortgaged premises by
foreclosure or otherwise and any succeeding owner of such premises or part thereof may
sell any such lot, subject to that portion of the covenant which provides that no lot shall
be built upon until such ways and services have been provided to serve such lot; and provided,
further, that nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit a conveyance by a single
deed, subject to such covenant, of either the entire parcel of land shown on the subdivision
plan or of all lots not previously released by the planning board. A deed of any part
of the subdivision in violation hereof shall be voidable by the grantee prior to the release
of the covenant but not later than three years from the date of such deed. The Board will
release from such covenants only those lots for which installation of ways and services
has been completed in accordance with the approved plan. [Form D should be used for the
covenant. Form F may be submitted when applying for release of a lot or lots. Use Form E for releases.]
4. By delivery to the planning board of an agreement executed after the recording of a
first mortgage covering the premises shown on the plan or a portion thereof given as security
for advances to be made to the applicant by the lender, which agreement shall be
executed by the applicant and the lender and shall provide for the retention by the lender
of funds sufficient in the opinion of the planning board and otherwise due the applicant,
to secure the construction of ways and the installation of municipal services in accordance
with the approved plan. The Planning Board should include a specified sum to
cover any costs that may occur due to inflation. Said agreement shall also provide for a
schedule of disbursements which may be made to the applicant upon completion of various
stages of the work, and shall further provide that in the event the work is not completed
within a time acceptable to the Board and specified in the agreement, any funds
remaining undisbursed shall be available for completion.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 49.
Section 3.10 Endorsement and Recording
A. Plan for Endorsement Upon approval of the plan by the Board, the applicant shall
submit a complete plan which includes any changes that were made during the approval
process drawn in India Ink on mylar, as meets the requirements of the Registry of Deeds, and
one paper copy of each sheet of each plan. The plan shall also be provided in Portable
Document Format (.PDF) for distribution to the board and various town agencies. Each plan
sheet shall include the name, address, seal, signature, and date of signing of the registered
professional engineer or registered land surveyor as appropriate to the data. The plan shall be
size 36 x 48 inches. The drawing shall be at a scale of one inch to forty feet (1"=40’) or such
other scale as the Board may approve. Where a plan is drawn on multiple sheets, it must be
accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire parcel involved and in such case for ease
of reading, matching lines and consecutive numbering shall be provided. Each sheet of these
plans together with supporting narratives and tables when signed by the chairman of the
Board shall be filed in the Department of Planning and Development as the official approved
plan. This submission may be made during the appeal period. [Revised January 2013]
Section 3.10.1. Endorsement of the Plan The plan having been approved by the Board and no
appeal having been taken within twenty (20) days after notice to the Town Clerk or after the entry
of a final decree sustaining approval of the plan, and after the applicant has met the requirements
of the performance guarantee and the documents necessary to secure the preservation of
the open space have been executed, if protected open space is shown on the plan, the Board shall
make upon the mylar plan submitted as required in section 3.10.A. its written endorsement of
approval and the plan and its appended statement of conditions shall be delivered to the applicant.
Section 3.10.2 Duties of the Applicant
A. The applicant shall submit the plan and the statement of conditions for recording together
with any documents protecting the open space in the Worcester South Registry of Deeds (or
properly file the same with the recorder of the Land Court if the land is registered land) and
shall obtain receipts therefor.
B. The applicant shall present the receipt(s) to the Department of Planning and Development
which will make a copy thereof and shall then distribute copies of the approved plans to the
various town departments according to the policy of the department.
C. Failure to make a complete filing in the registry of deeds as specified in this section
within thirty days after the Board endorses its approval on the plan will render the subdivision
approval null and void. [Added January 2013]
D. The Building Commissioner will not issue any permits until he has received these plans.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 50.
Section 4. Required Improvements for an Approved Subdivision
Section 4.1 Preserved Open Space
Section 4.1.1 As provided in section 11.4 of the zoning bylaw, open space must be preserved
as a condition for most residential developments. The zoning bylaw provides:
A. Open space in larger tracts will be preferred, as will open space contiguous with other already
preserved open space. Open space shall not have a width of less than 100 feet. Except
land reserved as public parkland or playgrounds in the PD and R10 zones, no parcel smaller
than two acres that is not contiguous with such other open space may be counted as part of
the required open space in projects larger than ten acres. [Section 11.4.1.1]
B. The open space should protect valuable natural and cultural elements including waterbodies,
streams, wetland buffers, unfragmented forest, wildlife habitat, open fields, scenic views,
trails, stone walls, archeological sites and to avoid development in hazardous areas such as
floodplains and on steep slopes. In areas where public sewage disposal is not available, consideration
shall be given to the suitability of soils for on site disposal systems both within and
outside the protected open space. Particular consideration for will be given to land that expands
land that is already protected or which is recommended for protection under the town
master plan or opens space and recreation plan, or will tend to expand or complete wildlife or
recreational corridors between such parcels [Section 11.4.1.2]
C. The Board considers the determination of the exact amount of open space to be preserved
as well as its location are matters for discussion and negotiation. The Board will endeavor to
understand the developer’s position in these matters. The Board, however, has no right to allow
a lesser amount of open space than required by the zoning bylaw and any proposal to do
so will be rejected. [Added January 2013]
Section 4.1.2 Area of Open Space The proportion of a tract that are to be preserved as stated in
the zoning bylaw and these regulations will be considered as the minimum open space which
must be protected. In some cases because of specific features of a site, it may be appropriate to
preserve more open space than the minimum. [Added January 2013]
Section 4.1.3 To conform to the requirements of section 11.1.1 of the zoning bylaw
A. In the R80 and C2 zones, not less than 17% of the total tract area that is not wetlands related
area shall be included in the open space.
B. In the R40 zone, not less than 8% of the total tract area that is not wetlands related area
shall be included in the open space.
C. In the R10 and PD zones, not less than 10% of the total tract area that is not wetlands related
area shall be included in the open space.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 51.
D. The term wetlands related area used in the preceding three subsections shall include
streams, ponds, vegetated wetlands as defined by law and vernal pools. [Added January 2013]
Section 4.1.4 Locating the Required Open Space
A. In its evaluation of which land in a proposed development should best be preserved, the
Board will also consider:
1. The land that will best be used as building sites because of its location, its accessibility,
the relative ease of development, and viewscapes both from and to the property.
2. Land that may return an economic benefit to its owner should probably be kept in private
hands subject to an appropriate easement rather than being transferred to the town or
a conservation entity for whom it will have little value.
3. Open space should be dedicated to its highest and best use within the confines of its
being kept undeveloped. This may be agriculture. Land well suited for agricultural purposes
should probably be included in the open space. Land that was once tillage or pasture
land but has been allowed to revert to woods should be considered for preservation.
The question of suitability of land for agricultural purposes may be referred to the Winchendon
Agricultural Commission for its opinion.
4. It may be advantageous to include protected open space and developable land in a single
parcel if such a combined parcel will have greater value for agricultural or commercial
recreational uses. A community center combined with protected open recreational
space to be owned by a homeowners association will be considered. The addition of protected
open space to an individual house lot simply to produce a larger lot for strictly
residential purposes will not be allowed.
5. The availability of access to open space will be a consideration in its selection.
6. Generally commercial forestry or woodlot uses should be allowed on conserved open
space. Such uses should be in accordance with best management practices for long term
open space preservation. Particular efforts shall be made to preserve rare plant species.
Winchendon is not particularly interested in preserving land as “wilderness.”
7. Hiking, hunting, fishing, and other similar outdoor activities should be encouraged in
land preserved for conservation purposes. A commitment not to restrict public access for
such uses will be viewed favorably.
8. In considering land for recreational uses, the Board will look at the whole proposal to
see that the proposal will ensure that development will not encroach on the space that
should remain open and undeveloped. In the case of land proposed for commercial recreation,
attention will be given to the economic viability of the proposal.
9. Land that is particularly steep, rough, has substantial ledge, or numerous large boulders
may better be included in the preserved open space. [Added January 2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 52.
Section 4.2 Laying Out the Site
Section 4.2.1 Preserve the Existing Conditions
A. Site/building design shall preserve natural topography outside of the development footprint
to reduce unnecessary land disturbance and to preserve natural drainage channels on the
site.
B. In the design of a development, priority shall be given to retention of existing stands of
trees, trees at the site perimeter, contiguous vegetation with adjacent sites (particularly existing
sites protected through conservation restrictions), and specimen trees.
C. Sites shall be designed in such a way as to avoid impacts to rare and endangered species
and wildlife habitat on a site, and to maintain contiguous forested areas.
D. Whenever possible forested areas shall be preserved if they are associated with:
1. significant forest communities;
2. wetlands, water bodies and their buffers;
3. critical wildlife habitat areas;
4. slopes over 15 percent.
E. Open space and specimen trees on the site shall be preserved insofar as possible.
F. Hilltops and/or scenic views within the town of Winchendon shall be protected.
Section 4.2.2 New Construction
A. Placement of buildings, structures, or parking facilities shall not detract from the site's
scenic qualities and shall blend with the natural landscape. Building sites shall be directed
away from the crest of hills, and foundations shall be constructed to reflect the natural terrain.
B. Development envelopes for structures, driveways, wastewater disposal, lawn areas and
utility work shall be designed to limit clearing and grading.
C. Cut and fill in site development shall be minimized. Finished grades in disturbed areas
should be limited to no greater than a 1:2 slope, while preserving, matching, or blending with
the natural contours and undulations of the land to the greatest extent possible.
Section 4.2.3 Other Considerations
A. Runoff from impervious surfaces shall be recharged on the site by stormwater by using
best management practices in accordance with the Winchendon Low Impact Development
bylaw. Runoff shall not be discharged directly to rivers, streams, or other surface water bodies.
All such basins and wells shall be preceded by oil, grease, and sediment traps as may be
required. [Added January 2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 53.
B. Impacts to archaeological resources shall be avoided.
C. The site and all buildings thereon should be designed so as to enhance the use of sustainable
energy principles including the use of renewable energy (including solar energy, wind
energy, and biofuels), the conservation of energy of all types, the limitation of carbon dioxide
and other greenhouse gas production, and enhancement of carbon absorption from the atmosphere.
The use of ‘green’ construction materials is encouraged. The Board will consider
tradeoffs in other areas when so doing will better accomplish these purposes. [Added January
2013]
D. Applicants shall submit a response from the Massachusetts Historical Commission
(MHC) regarding the potential for archaeological or historical resources on the site.
Section 4.2.4 Adequate Access from Public Way When the physical condition or width of the
public ways by which a subdivision will be accessed is inadequate for access to such subdivision
in the opinion of the Board, the Board may require the Applicant dedicate a strip of land for the
purpose of widening the abutting public way to a width at least as great as that required within
the subdivision, and to make physical improvements to and within such public way(s) to the
same standards required within the subdivision for streets likely to carry traffic similar to that of
the access road. This may include drainage improvements, utility improvements, improvement of
intersections, signage, signalization, or other amenities necessary for safety and orderly traffic
flow. Any such dedication of land for the purpose of such a way and any such work performed
within such public way(s) shall be made only with permission of the governmental agency having
jurisdiction over such way, and all costs of any such widening or construction shall be borne
by the developer.
A. As an alternative to the developer’s making the actual required improvements, the
board may require the developer pay to the town the estimated cost of such improvements
which money shall be used only toward the cost thereof. The timing of any such payment
shall be as the board directs. [Section added Jan. 15, 2008]
Section 4.3 Street and Roadway Design
Section 4.3.1 Basic Requirements: All streets The applicant shall observe all design standards
for land division as hereinafter provided. These standards shall be considered minimum standards
and may be varied from or waived only as provided in Section 7.6. The Town of Winchendon's
Design Standards and Construction Specifications must be followed.
A. The design speed for streets in commercial subdivisions and principal streets in residential
subdivisions shall be 25 miles per hour. [Added January 2013]
B. The design speed for secondary and minor streets in residential subdivisions shall be 20
miles per hour. [Added January 2013]
C. Interconnection of streets at both ends is preferred. Dead end streets with or without turnarounds
are discouraged unless no other arrangement will allow reasonable use of the land.
[Added January 2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 54.
Section 4.3.2 Streets to provide safe travel All streets in the subdivision shall be designed so
that, in the opinion of the Board, they will provide safe vehicular travel and be of sufficient design
and construction to adequately handle the traffic load anticipated.
Section 4.3.3 Subdivisions to have two exits Any new subdivision which will include more
than six dwelling units and any non residential subdivision which includes more than 500 feet of
roadway shall have two or more regular exits to public ways. The public way(s) used for such
access shall also provide two or more exits. This provision is to ensure access for emergency vehicles
in case an access is blocked.
A. The Board may consider waivers of this provision if adequate second access is provided
over roads other than public ways.
Section 4.3.4 Street Extensions Provision satisfactory to the Board such as an easement for
roadway purposes shall be granted to the town to provide for the proper extension of streets, or
other access to adjoining property which is not yet subdivided.
Section 4.3.5 Streets in Planned Development, Commercial or Industrial Zones The Board
will determine the design standards for new or improved streets in Planned Development, Commercial
and Industrial zones based on the prospective traffic load in number and types of vehicles
and pedestrian use. These may exceed the standards shown in section 4.10. These standards
may be based on recommendations of the Institute of Transportation Engineers. [Revised January
2013]
Section 4.3.6 New streets Providing Access to Commercial and Industrial Zones Traffic on
streets in residential zones that provide access to non residential zones should not create a nuisance
to the residences in the residential zone. To accomplish this, the following standards shall
apply:
A. No new street shall be built or access be allowed by way of existing streets in residential
areas unless no other means of access to the non residential zone is practicable.
B. If such a new street is required, the right of way shall be not less than 150' wide. There
shall be a buffer of at least 50' of dense vegetation on each side of the street within the right
of way. Such vegetation is not to obstruct views at intersections. If suitable vegetation does
not exist, fast growing native or non invasive species shall be planted before any other street
construction is started in order to create the required buffer. If, in the opinion of the Board,
noise or other nuisance from the street is likely to be a problem to residences, suitable barriers
may be required on the street side of the buffer. The board may require upgrade of existing
street(s) at the expense of the developer to, as nearly as possible, conform to these requirements.
C. If a new street is to be built in a residence zone that will connect two existing streets but,
in the opinion of the Board, is likely to carry some traffic to the commercial or industrial
zone, the street plan shall include such traffic calming or other measures that will minimize
the commercial/industrial use as the Board may require. The Board may also designate that
street as a principal street.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 55.
Section 4.3.7 No reserve strips Reserve strips prohibiting access to streets from adjoining
property shall not be permitted, except where, in the opinion of the Board, such strips will be in
the public interest.
Section 4.3.8 Street offsets and jogs If the centerline of a new street is not directly across the
intersection from the right-of-way of another street, it shall have a centerline offset of no less
than 125 feet.
A. Any new street shall be offset from any other street on the same side of the road by at
least 300 feet, measured at the centerline of the streets. [Revised January 2013]
Section 4.3.9 Intersections Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles.
A. A safe sight distance of 155 feet shall be maintained at all intersections on commercial
and principal residential streets. No structures or vegetation shall be permitted to interfere
with sight at this distance. [Added January 2013]
B. A safe sight distance of 115 feet shall be maintained at all intersections of secondary and
minor residential streets. No structures or vegetation shall be permitted to interfere with sight
at this distance. [Added January 2013]
Section 4.3.10 Cutbacks at Intersections Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded
or cut back to provide for a curb radius of not less than 25 feet. A greater radius may be required
in commercial and industrial areas where large vehicle access is more likely.
Section 4.3.11 Traffic Calming In residential subdivisions, curved streets, streets following
natural topography, offsets, roundabouts, and other traffic calming measures will be viewed favorably
by the Board.
Section 4.3.12 Safe Sight Distances
A. No curve shall have a centerline radius of less than 50 feet. Safe sight distances of 115
feet shall be maintained. [Added January 2013]
B. Generally, tree trunks under 18 inches, utility poles and traffic signs will not interfere
with safe sight lines. Other vegetation higher than 30 inches or tree branches within 7 feet of
the ground will be presumed to interfere with safe sight lines. [Added January 2013]
C. Required sight lines should be within the street right of way. It may be appropriate to
widen the right of way at sharp corners or where other obstacles interfere with the sight lines
so that the sight lines will remain within the rights of way. [Added January 2013]
D. If a safe sight line will be over private property, a recorded easement to assure this distance
remains unobstructed may be required. [Added January 2013]
Section 4.3.13 Driveway Connections The developer or property owner shall be responsible
for connecting each individual driveway to the travel surface of the street. All such connections
shall be built according to the requirements of the Department of Public Works. This may inTown
of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 56.
clude a requirement for paving and/or installation of a culvert under the driveway connection.
[Added January 2013]
Section 4.4. Common Driveways in Residential Zones
Section 4.4.1 Common Driveways Permitted The Board may, without any obligation to so do,
allow a common driveway in place of a minor street provided the common driveway is allowed
by the zoning bylaw [see zoning bylaw section 7.4.1 C] and will not serve as potential access to other
property, either property of the applicant or abutting property..
Section 4.4.2 Required Deed Language Before it allows a common driveway, the Board will
require that the applicant provide acceptable language that will be incorporated into the deeds for
the lots affected which will guarantee in perpetuity access to all of the lots and proper maintenance
of the common driveway(s). Further a special condition will be added to the definitive
plan to provide for guaranteed access to the lots and guaranteed maintenance of the common
driveway(s).
Section 4.4.3 Not Principal Access Commercial & Industrial zones Common driveways as
the principal access to lots will not be authorized in planned development, commercial or industrial
zones.
Section 4.4.4 Standards for Common Driveways The detailed standards for common driveways
are included in section 4.10. All common driveways shall also meet the standards established
by section 8.8 of the zoning bylaw.
Section 4.5 Individual Driveways No principal building on a lot shall be located so as to require
a driveway longer than 500 feet measured from the roadway to the nearest point on the
principal building except by a waiver granted by the Board upon a finding that a shorter access is
impracticable.
Section 4.6 Accessibility All streets, curb cuts, walkways, ramps, parking spaces, passenger
loading zones and other outdoor improvements shall be designed to conform to the requirements
of the Massachusetts Architectural Access Board as provided in 521 CMR. This includes making
provision for accessible parking spaces.
Section 4.7 Curbs and Curb Cuts
Section 4.7.1 Curb Specifications Where curbing is required, whether it be granite or berms it
shall be installed in accordance with the specifications of the Department of Public Works.
Where low impact disposal of stormwater is provided, appropriate curb cuts for drainage shall be
provided.
Section 4.7.2 Curb Cuts for single and two family residences Curb cuts for access to the
lots shall be located so as to provide safe sight distances as determined by the Board. The location
of curb cuts shall be shown on the subdivision plan. [Revised January 2013]
A. One 25 foot curb cut per lot is permitted. Additional curb cuts will be allowed only as
the Board may see fit . Generally no more than one curb cut will be allowed for each 200
feet of lot frontage. [Added January 2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revised January 15, 2013
Page 57.
Section 4.7.3 Other Curb Cuts . For other uses the Board will determine curb cuts as part of
the site plan approval process.
Section 4.8 Sidewalks, Walkways and Bicycle Paths in a Subdivision
A. Sidewalks which are constructed next to roadways should preferably be separated by a
grassed strip not less than 2 feet wide. This strip may include trees, utility poles (if allowed)
and signs. [Added January 2013]
B. All lots in areas requiring sidewalks must be served by sidewalks or walkways As an alternative
to sidewalks alongside roadways, Walkways may be constructed at different locations,
as the Board may allow. [Reviseded January 2013]
C. The inclusion of dedicated bicycle paths is encouraged and may be substituted for required
bike lanes. [Added January 2013]
D. The locations, design and construction of sidewalks, walkways and bicycle paths shall be
in conformity with the specifications of the Department of Public Works [Added January 2013]
E. Walkways and bicycle paths other than those in roadway rights of way shall require that
appropriate easements be established. [Added January 2013]
Section 4.9 Bikeways or Bike lanes On new or reconstructed commercial/industrial or
primary residential streets, bike lanes will be required. If on street parking areas are not provided,
the bike lane should be adjacent to the curb. If street parking is provided the bike lane shall be
between the parking area and the travel lanes. The bike lane must be 4 feet wide and must be
separated from the travel lane by a 6 inch wide white pavement stripe. The construction shall be
smooth with drains and manholes flush to the pavement and the same design and height as for
the adjacent roadway. Signage to meet state standards shall be provided on the pavement and on
the roadside. [Added January 2013]
.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Proposed Revision
November 2011
Page 58.
Section 4.10 Design Standards for Streets and Driveways
Commercial/
Industrial
Streets
A. Primary Residential
Streets
B. Secondary
Residential Streets
C. Minor Streets D. Common Driveways
1. Definition A street in the C1,
PD, or I zone which
is likely to regularly
handle large commercial
vehicles
A street which, in
the opinion of the
Board, is likely to
carry a substantial
volume of through
traffic
A street or portion
thereof other than a
through street which,
in the opinion of the
Board is likely to
carry through traffic
other than just to and
from the lots on that
street
A street or portion
thereof which is
likely to be used
only by vehicles
traveling to of from
lots on the street.
Driveways allowed by
special permit under
section 7.4.1 C of the
zoning bylaw
2. Minimum
Width of Right of
Way
80 feet 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet Not applicable
3. Minimum
Width of Paved
Way, if not ending
in a turnaround
Two 11 foot travel
lanes plus bike
lane widths
Two 11 foot travel
lanes plus bike
lane widths
20 feet plus bike
lane if provided
20 feet 20 feet; paving required
only if special
permit so requires
4. Minimum
Width of Paved
Way, if ending in
a turnaround
Two 11 foot travel
lanes plus bike
land width
Two 11 foot travel
lanes plus bike
land width
20 feet plus bike
lane if provided
20 feet 20 feet ; paving required
only if special
permit so requires
5. Shoulders or
parking lane, each
side
8 feet; outer edge
shall be not less
than 2” lower than
pavement
2 feet 2 feet 2 feet Not required
6. Maximum grade
of roadway
8% 8% 10% 10% 10%
7. Leveling area Maximum 2%
grade within 100’
of intersection
Maximum 2%
grade within 100’
of intersection
Maximum 2%
grade within 25’ of
intersection
Maximum 2%
grade within 25’
of intersection
Maximum 2% grade
within 25’ of intersection
8. Curbing Granite curb to
specifications of
Dept. Of Public
Works
Granite curb to
specifications of
Dept. Of Public
Works
Cape Cod berm (see
appendix)
Not required Not required
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Proposed Revision
November 2011
Page 59.
Commercial/ Industrial
Streets
A. Primary Residential
Streets
B. Secondary
Residential
Streets
C. Minor Streets D. Common
Driveways
9. Sidewalks 5’ wide, both sides
of street
4’ wide, both sides
of street
4’ wide, one side
of street
4’ wide, 1 side
unless street less
than 500’ long
4’ wide on one
side if driveway
length exceeds
500’
10. Bike Lane or
Bikeway
Required Required Optional Not required Not required
11. Abutting slope
in cut
1:2 1:2 1:2 1:2 1:2
12. Abutting slope
filled
1:3 1:3 1:3 1:3 1:3
13. Dead Ends in
commercial and
industrial zones
500’ or 3 times the
minimum lot
frontage, whichever
is less 1
Not applicable 1
Not applicable 2
Not applicable Not applicable
14. Maximum
length of dead end
street not ending in
a turnaround
Not applicable 1
Not applicable 1
Not applicable 2
300’ in all zones 500’ in all zones
15. Maximum
length of dead end
street ending in a
turnaround
500 feet 1
Not applicable 1
Not applicable 2
700’ in R80 zone
600’ in R40 zone
500’ in R10 zone
Not applicable
16. Minimum turnaround
radius, right
of way
150 feet Not applicable Not applicable 75 feet 3
Not applicable
17. Minimum turnaround
radius, outside
of pavement
60 feet pavement
12’ wide
Not applicable Not applicable 60 feet, pavement
12’ feet
wide 3
Not applicable
18 Center area of
turnaround
May be paved Not applicable Not applicable Vegetated Island
3
Not applicable
1 If, in the opinion of the Board, the street may be extended in the future, the requirements for a principal street
shall apply.
2 If, in the opinion of the Board, the street may be extended in the future, the requirements for a secondary
street shall apply
3 A Hammerhead turnaround may be substituted. [Table revised January 2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 60.
Section 4.11 Stormwater Disposal
Section 4.11.1 Roadway Drainage Insofar as possible stormwater disposal shall be accomplished
through the use of structures and facilities that return the stormwater to the soil as expeditiously
as possible such as grassed swales or bioretention basins. The requirements of the Winchendon
Low Impact Development bylaw must be met. Current state standards for low impact
development must be followed. It is expected that in many instances there will be adequate space
within the right of way for such structures. The construction of systems that will discharge storm
water into a stream or wetland may be permitted only when no other feasible option is available.
Section 4.11.2 Stormwater management, including methods of maintaining existing drainage
patterns, shall comply with the Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook.
Section 4.11.3. If catch basins and underground piping are to be installed for stormwater disposal,
catch basins shall be constructed in conformity with specifications of the Department of
Public Works and shall be located on both sides of the roadway on continuous grades at intervals
of not more than 400 feet, at low points and sags in the roadway and near the corners of the
roadway at intersecting streets. The developer shall reimburse the Town for the cost of repairs to
such pipes, manholes, and fittings that are required within five years after the street has been
paved. A guarantee bond may be required.
A. If a stormwater management plan includes detention basins or retention ponds, sedimentation
markers shall be installed in such areas and additionally in any forebays thereof which
will show the amount of accumulated sediment so that such basins will be cleaned when necessary.
[Added January 2013]
Section 4.11.4. All stormwater disposal systems shall be designed and built so as to prevent
the discharge of stormwater onto adjacent properties in greater amounts or at greater flow rates
than existed prior to the development. Stormwater from one lot or a roadway shall not be discharged
onto another lot so as to create a nuisance. Remediation of existing nuisances may be
required.
Section 4.11.5 Wetlands Protection The Wetlands Protection Act, MGL Chapter 131, Section
40, provides:
no person shall remove, fill dredge, or alter any bank, beach, flat, marsh, meadow, or swamp bordering …
on any … creek, river, stream, pond, or lake, or any land under said waters … without filing written notice
of his intention to so remove, fill, dredge, or alter, including such plans as may be necessary to describe
such proposed activity and its effect upon the environment, at least sixty days prior to any such removing,
filling, dredging, or altering. Said notice shall be sent by certified mail to the Conservation Commission.
No such notice shall be sent before all permits, variances, and approval required by local bylaw, with respect
to the proposed activity have been obtained.
The Board will condition its approval of the plan upon issuance of an “Order of Conditions” by
the Conservation Commission if such an order is required. Developers are reminded that the
Conservation Commission will not conduct site visits when the land is obscured by snow.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 61.
Section 4.12 Utilities
Section 4.12.1 Water Supply If a new subdivision is within 1500 feet of the existing town water
distribution system, the applicant shall connect all properties in the subdivision with the town
system. The distance shall be measured along town ways, public or not public and ways in any
authorized subdivision from a town water main of at least 6 inches in diameter to the centerline
of the nearest lot in the subdivision.
A. All pipes and fittings installed shall become town property from the time it is found free
of defects and is placed in normal service . The developer shall also install fire hydrants, provisions
to connect existing and authorized streets, and for connecting properties abutting
those streets in which the water main is laid. The developer shall reimburse the Town for the
cost of repairs to such pipes and fittings that are required within five years after being placed
in normal service. A guarantee bond may be required.
B. If water mains are installed in streets in another uncompleted subdivision, the installing
developer shall have a claim for the cost of that part of the installation against that other developer.
C. If the Department of Public Works determines that an existing water main to which connection
will be made is too small to serve its existing customer load, the load which will be
imposed by the new subdivision, and any likely future subdivision between the existing main
and the new subdivision, the developer shall replace those parts of the existing water mains
that are deemed inadequate with mains of adequate diameter.
E. Water pipes and related equipment such as hydrants and main shutoff valves shall be constructed
to serve all lots on each street in the subdivision in conformity with specifications of
the Department. of Public Works and Fire Department. Hydrants shall be provided and
placed at intervals of not more than four hundred (400’) feet along each street. Pipe and fitting
sizes and materials shall be as determined by the Department of Public Works. [Revised
January 2013]
F. In a subdivision of more than 12 lots which will not be served by the town water supply
under the preceding section, the developer may be required to install a common water supply
system. Such system shall consist of a water supply of adequate quantity and quality to meet
public water supply standards, a distributions system serving all lots in the subdivision with
pipes and fittings of sufficient size to meet Department of Public Works standards for the
town system. If the developer owns or controls other property contiguous with the proposed
subdivision, the number of possible lots in that parcel or parcels shall be added to the number
of lots in the proposed subdivision to determine whether the 12 lot threshold is meet.
Section 4.12.2 Sanitary sewer If a subdivision is located within 1500 feet of the town sanitary
sewer system, the developer shall connect to the town system. The distance shall be measured
along town ways, public or not public and ways in any authorized subdivision from the town
sewer system to the centerline of the nearest lot in the subdivision. The actual sewer need not follow
town ways. The design shall require approval by the Board of Health and the Department of
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 62.
Public Works. The Board will not waive this requirement simply because lift stations or individual
unit pumps will be required in order to discharge into the town system
A. All manholes, pipes, and fittings installed shall become town property from the time it is
found free of defects and is placed in normal service. The developer shall also install provisions
to connect existing and authorized streets, and for connecting all properties abutting the
streets in which the sewer is laid. The developer shall reimburse the Town for the cost of repairs
to such pipes, manholes, and fittings that are required within five years after being
placed in normal service. A guarantee bond may be required.
B. If sewers are installed in streets in another uncompleted subdivision, the installing developer
shall have a claim for the other developer's share of the proportional cost of the installation
against that other developer.
C. If the Department of Public Works determines that an existing sewer to which connection
will be made is too small to serve its existing customer load, that which will be imposed by
the new subdivision, and any likely future subdivision between the existing main and the new
subdivision, the developer shall replace those parts of the existing sewer that are deemed inadequate
to make the entire system adequate.
D. Sewer pipes, manholes, connecting Y s and related equipment shall conform to the specifications
of the Department of Public Works.
E. If the subdivision is not required to be connected to the municipal sewer system, the developer
may, with the approval of the Board of Health, install a system of common sewers
and disposal works. In such a system, all underground piping, manholes, connections, and
other appurtenances shall meet the standards of the Department of Public Works for the municipal
system. The system shall be designed so that it may be connected to the municipal
system should that become feasible. The Board will require adequate provisions for the operation
and maintenance of the system
Section 4.13 Other Site Requirements
Section 4.13.1 Open Spaces Before approval of a subdivision plan- the Board may also, in
proper cases, require the plan to show areas suitably located for playground or recreation purposes,
or for providing light and air. The area(s) shall not be unreasonable in area in relation to
the land in the site and to the prospective uses of such land. Such parks shall be conveniently located.
Such parks shall be provided with appropriate access to streets and pedestrian ways.
Section 4.13.2 Parking Requirements Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with
the zoning bylaw. [See zoning bylaw, article 8.]
Section 4.13.3 Other Utilities Gas, Electric, Telephone, etc. shall, if situated in a flood prone
area, be flood-proofed and approved by the Department of Public Works or the Board’s consulting
engineer. Developers will be encouraged and may be required to install utility services, including
electricity, telephone and cable antenna television services underground, and will be required
to follow an approved distribution plan.. Any associated overhead structures shall be in
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 63.
conformity with Town standards. Any related equipment, such as transformers, switching
mechanisms, or other vital components shall, if situated in a flood prone area, be flood-proofed
and approved by the Department of Public Works or the Board’s consulting engineer. [Revised
January 2013]
Section 4.13.4 Overlay Districts Land located within all overlay districts is subject to the provisions
of the Winchendon Zoning Bylaw, which in general restricts the use of land in such district.
The Board may modify these regulations as necessary for subdivisions in those districts.
Section 4.13.5 Protection of Town Property No natural feature within a road right of way or
other property of the Town, such as trees, stonewalls, etc. may be removed or disturbed until approval
is obtained by the Winchendon Tree Warden and the Department of Public Works.
Stonewalls which abut the public right-of-way are included in this section. If the road is designated
as a scenic road, the permit and other requirements for work on scenic roads shall be followed.
Section 4.13.6 Easements
A. Utility Easements Easements for utilities across lots or centered on road or side lot lines
shall be provided where necessary and shall be at least twenty feet wide.
B. Stormwater Easements Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage
way, channel or stream, the Board may require that a a storm water easement to the Town be
provided for a drainage right-of-way of adequate width that conforms substantially to the
lines of such water course, and the boundary of which shall be no closer than 12 feet from
the high water line, drainage way channel or stream, to provide for construction, repair, or
other necessary purposes.
Section 4.13.7 School Bus Stops In areas where transportation of school students will be required,
the developer shall consult with the school department as to likely school bus stop locations
and shall make sure such locations will provide safe access for students. Student shelter(s)
may be required. Appropriate markings will be required. The results of such consultation shall
be reported to the Board. [Revised January 2013]
Section 4.13.8 Fire Protection
A. Each new dwelling unit should be provided with a residential sprinkler system designed
and installed in accordance with the code promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association
as interpreted by the chief of the Winchendon Fire Department. This includes the
provision of an adequate water supply for dwellings not served by the town water system.
[Added January 2013]
B. New non residential or mixed use buildings shall be provided with fire protection systems
including automatic fire alarm systems as required by the Massachusetts Building Code or
the requirements of the Winchendon Fire Department. [Added January 2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 64.
C. Unless residential sprinkler systems are installed as suggested in subsection A. Supra
and/or suitable systems are installed as required in subsection B, A water supply for fire protection
shall be provided according to the provisions of section 5.8. [Added January 2013]
Section 4.13.9 Monuments Monuments shall be installed on both sides of the street at all street
intersections, at all points of change of direction or curvatures of streets at one thousand (1000')
foot intervals maximum on curves, on property corners of all new lots and at other points where,
in the opinion of the Board, permanent monuments are necessary. No permanent monuments
shall be installed until all construction which would destroy or disturb the monuments is completed.
Placement and location of bounds are to be certified by a registered professional engineer
or registered land surveyor after installation of the way, and shall be shown on the as-built drawings.
A. Monuments shall be a standard granite marker of not less than four feet in length and not
less than 6 inches in width and breadth and shall have a metal bar installed at the exact location
of the boundary point. In areas where a protruding marker may constitute a hazard,
Monuments shall be set flush with final grades. Otherwise the tops of monuments should be
6 to 12 inches above ground level so the can be more easily located. The metal bar is must be
installed so that the monument may be found with a metal detector.
Section 4.13.10 Street Signs
A. Signs at Intersections street signs shall be installed by the developer at all intersections
in conformity with the specifications of the Department of Public Works. [Revised January 2013]
B. Private way Signs Until such time as a street is accepted by the Town of Winchendon
as a public way, the sign posts at the intersection of such street with any other street shall
have affixed thereto by the developer a sign designating such street as not being a public
way.
Section 4.13.11 Landscaping
A. Landscape Plan Required The applicant, shall submit as part of the subdivision application
a landscape plan prepared by a registered landscape architect which shall specify the
number, location, and type of trees to be planted in the subdivision. .
B. Existing Trees Should suitable trees to meet the requirements of this section exist within
the right of way or within 20 feet thereof on the abutting lot, the retention of such trees, if
healthy, will be considered preferable to the planting of new trees. If such trees exist and are
identified on the landscape plan, the Board will waive the planting of new trees in that area.
[Added January 2013]
C. New Trees Trees shall be planted at the developer’s expense along or within the rightof-
way on both sides at intervals of approximately 50 feet, but no closer than 35 feet. along
roads within the entire tract being subdivided, unless specifically exempted by the Board. All
trees shall be of native or non invasive species and be the equivalent of well-rooted nurserygrown
stock not less than one inch dbh in good condition and free of injury, harmful insects
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 65.
and diseases. Large trees and shrubs within rain gardens may be counted toward meeting the
requirements of this section. [Revised January 2013]
Section 4.13.12 Retaining Walls Retaining walls with height measured from base ground level
to the top of the structure of greater than 5 feet shall be designed by a registered structural engineer.
A profile plan, soil analyses, and complete engineering calculations shall be provided.
[Added January 2013]
Section 4.14 Dwelling Units in a Residential Subdivision
Section 4.14.1 Article 11 of the zoning bylaw regulates the number of dwelling units in a residential
subdivision. Unless a lot is legally restricted for some other purpose, each lot will be considered
to have the potential for at least one dwelling unit. Lots which are restricted for other
purposes, except in the protected open space, will be allowed only at the discretion of the Board.
[Added January 2013]
Section 4.14.2 In general it is expected that the residences in a subdivision will be clustered.
This arrangement is facilitated by the reduced lot sizes, frontage requirements, and setbacks allowed.
Using the minimums allowed for area, setbacks, and frontage may not provide the best
and most marketable design; and developers may elect for greater spacing. It is understood by
the Board that developers will want to build easily marketable properties. The Board will generally
accede to the wishes of the developer in this regard. [Added January 2013]
Section 4.14.3 The construction of a cluster of homes around some interest point, either existing
or to be constructed, will be viewed favorably by the Board. [Added January 2013]
Section 4.14.4 While three family buildings are permitted in the R80, R40 and C2 zones, it is
expected that most buildings will be single or two family residences. [Added January 2013]
Section 4.14.5 In the R10 and PD zones the construction of multifamily buildings to provide
rental housing or condominium ownership are encouraged. More than one residential building
per lot is permitted. The inclusion of units restricted to occupants of low or moderate income is
strongly encouraged. [Added January 2013]
Section 4.14.6 When it is expected that a residential lot will be used in conjunction with agricultural
land in the protected open space as a farm, it may be located close to the agricultural
land and not as part of a residential cluster. It is expected that some such owners may supplement
their agricultural activities with non agricultural occupations. [Added January 2013]
Section 4.15 Unusual Features
Section 4.15.1 Features provided in the Site Plan Regulations If unusual features are proposed
in a subdivision that are covered by design standards in the Rules and Regulations for the
Review and Approval of Site Plans and Site Development but are not otherwise covered in these
regulations, the design standards included in the Site Plan Regulations shall apply. [Added January
2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 66.
Section 5 Subdivision Construction Standards
Section 5.1 Notice of Commencement of Construction
Section 5.1.1 Notice of Construction Any person intending to commence land clearing, excavations,
or construction in any uncompleted subdivision or in any way within a subdivision shall
give ten (10) days advance notice to the Board’s compliance official, if any, otherwise to the
building commissioner/zoning enforcement agent before commencing such activity..
A. If construction activity is suspended for a period longer than 6 months, the developer will
give the Board a notice of its intention to resume construction activities. [Added January 2013]
Section 5.1.2 No Nuisance The Board will require adequate measures including, without limitation,
barriers and restricted hours of operation to insure that the work does not become a nuisance
to abutters.
Section 5.1.3 Use of Existing Ways
A. Construction equipment including trucks which, because of its size or weight, may damage
public or other ways will not be allowed to use existing ways. Track type equipment or
other equipment which may damage pavements will not be allowed on paved ways. The developer
will be responsible to the town or the private way owner for any damage to such
ways or pavements caused by such use. [Added January 2013]
B. Measures that prevent construction vehicles from tracking dirt, mud, or dust from constructions
sites onto the public ways will be required at all access points. [Added January 2013]
C. The board may require a bond or security deposit to reimburse the town for any damage
that may occur from vehicles using town ways. [Added January 2013]
Section 5.1.4 Hours of Operation All construction work shall be performed within the hours
from 7 A. M. and 5 P. M. on Monday through Friday unless otherwise permitted by the Board.
This time restriction also includes heavy trucks traveling to and from the site other than on state
numbered routes outside the PD zones. The Board reserves the right to further restrict operating
hours should neighborhood considerations warrant such action. [Added January 2013]
A. All subcontractors must be notified of this requirement and must comply therewith.
[Added January 2013]
Section 5.1.5 Contact Information The developer shall provide full contact information about
the contractor actually doing the work to the police department/emergency dispatch center prior
to the start of work. This shall include the name of the contractor, address, phone numbers and
phone numbers of key personnel that may be reached at any time if needed in an emergency. Information
shall be updated when necessary. This provision is waived for sites where there are
ordinarily actual persons on the site 24 hours a day, seven days a week. [Added January 2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 67.
A. The developer shall also erect a sign on the site which is easily visible from the street
showing the name, address and telephone number of the developer, the general contractor,
and major subcontractors. [Added January 2013]
Section 5.2 Construction Standards: Land Clearing.
Section 5.2.1 Required Measures The applicant shall employ the following measures in development
of the site:
A. Protection of Natural Resources Due regard shall be shown for all natural features such
as large trees, water courses, scenic points, historic spots and similar community assets
which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the subdivision. Before approval the
Board may require the staking out of all natural features not to be disturbed in the process of
construction. [Added January 2013]
B. Must Minimize Site Alteration, Clearing and Grading BMPs and other efforts to
minimize the clearing and grading on a site associated with construction activities shall be
employed, such as parking of construction vehicles, offices/trailers, stockpiling of equipment/
materials, etc. in areas already planned for permanent structures. Earth materials shall
not be stockpiled in areas of protected trees, wetlands, and/or their vegetated buffers.
C. Unless an approved plan allows a greater area, clearing of vegetation and alteration of topography
shall be limited to 10% of the site with native vegetation planted in disturbed areas
as needed to maximize absorption of rainwater and reduce runoff, and enhance or restore
wildlife habitat.
D. Clearing for utility trenching shall be limited to the minimum area necessary to maneuver
trenching or other construction equipment. Roots should be cut cleanly rather than pulled or
ripped out during utility trenching. Tunneling or routing along driveways for utilities installation
should be utilized wherever feasible to protect root systems of trees.
E. Open space and specimen trees on the site shall be preserved insofar as possible.
F. Understory vegetation beneath the dripline of preserved trees shall also be retained in an
undisturbed state. During clearing and/or construction activities, all vegetation to be retained
shall be surrounded by temporary protective fencing or other measures before any clearing or
grading occurs, and such measures shall be maintained until all construction work is completed
and the site is cleaned up. Barriers shall be large enough to encompass the essential
root zone of all vegetation to be protected. All vegetation within the protective fencing shall
be retained in an undisturbed state.
Section 5.2.2 Site Management Techniques Proper site management techniques shall be employed
during construction:
A. The extent of a site exposed at any one time shall be limited through phasing of construction
operations. Effective sequencing shall occur within the boundaries of natural drainage
areas.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 68.
B. Trees, stumps, brush, and similar material may be left or burried on the site only with the
advance approval of the Board. This requirement is to prevent future erosion and sinkholes.
Section 5.2.3 Site Protection during Construction The developer must protect the site during
construction through adequate erosion and sedimentation controls:
A. Temporary or permanent diversions, berms, grassed waterways, special culverts, shoulder
dikes or such other mechanical measures as are necessary may be required by the Board to
intercept and divert surface water runoff. Runoff flow shall not be routed through areas of
protected vegetation or revegetated slopes and other areas. Temporary runoff from erosion
and sedimentation controls shall be directed to BMPs such as vegetated swales. Retaining
walls may be required where side slopes are steeper than a ratio of 1:2.
B. Erosion and sedimentation controls shall be constructed in accordance with the Massachusetts
Stormwater Handbook.
C. Erosion control measures shall include the use of erosion control matting, mulches and/or
temporary or permanent cover crops. Mulch areas damaged from heavy rainfalls, severe
storms and construction activity shall be repaired immediately.
D. Erosion control matting or mulch shall be anchored where plantings are on areas subject
to mulch removal by wind or water flows or where side slopes are steeper than 1:2 or exceed
10 feet in height. During the months of October through April when seeding and sodding
may be impractical, anchored mulch may be applied at the Board's discretion.
E. The mouths of all catch basins shall be fitted with filter fabric during the entire construction
process to minimize siltation or such basins shall be designed as temporary siltation basins
with provisions made for final cleaning.
F. The developer is required to conduct weekly inspections of all erosion and sedimentation
control measures on the site to ensure that they are properly functioning as well as to conduct
inspections after severe storm events.
Section 5.2.4 Revegitation The developer shall revegetate the site promptly after grading:
A. Stabilization of cleared sites shall occur within seven calendar days of final grading.
B. Proper revegetation techniques shall be employed using native plant species, proper seed
bed preparation, fertilizer and mulching to protect germinating plants. Grassed Areas shall be
sodded or loamed with not less than four (4") inches compacted depth of loam as specified in
section 5.6, and seeded with turf grass seed of a mixture approved by the Board. Plantings
shall be made during the season appropriate to the selected plant species.
C. Finished grade shall be no higher than the trunk flare(s) of trees to be retained. If a grade
change of 6" or more at the base of the tree is proposed, a retaining wall or tree well may be
required.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 69.
Section 5.2.5 Protection of Abutters An increase in the volume of surface drainage from the
properties under construction onto abutting properties is not permitted.
Section 5.2.6 Monitoring and Inspections
A. Prior to commencement of construction, the applicant, land owner, contractor and construction
crew, zoning enforcement officer, and site engineer shall conduct a meeting to review
the proposed construction phasing and number and timing of site inspections.
B. Initial site inspection of erosion and sedimentation controls and placement of tree protection
measures shall occur after installation of barriers around preserved areas and construction
of all structural erosion and sedimentation controls, but before any clearing or grading
has begun.
Section 5.2.7 Site Security in developed areas If any active part of a development site, is
within 300 feet of an occupied home, school, playground, street commonly used by school children
who walk to school, retail establishment, place of assembly or other location frequented by
members of the public and particularly by children, the developer shall protect such active work
areas with a suitable security fence and such other measures as the board may require for the protection
of the public. If an open excavation deeper than 2 feet or an uncapped foundation is allowed
to remain for more than 30 days, it shall be surrounded by a chain link fence until the hazard
has been removed. It will be a particular duty of the compliance monitor to enforce this provision.
[Added January 2013]
Section 5.2.8 Required Performance Security In addition to the security statutorily required
for the construction of roads, The Planning Board may require a performance guarantee in a form
acceptable to the Board to cover the costs associated with compliance with the regulations concerning
site construction. [Revised January 2013]
A. The required performance guarantee in the amount of 150% of the cost of site restoration
shall be posted prior to the issuance of a permit to start construction of the subdivision.
B. The performance guarantee shall be held for the duration of any prescribed maintenance
period required by the Planning Board to ensure establishment and rooting of all new plantings,
and may be reduced from time to time to reflect completed work. Plantings which die
within the prescribed maintenance period shall be replaced. Securities shall not be fully released
without a final inspection and approval of vegetation replacement by the town.
Section 5.3 Construction Standards: Streets and Ways
A. All areas of roadways and walkways, including areas not to be paved, shall be cleared
of all stumps, brush, roots, boulders, or like material and all trees not intended for preservation.
[Revised January 2013]
B. All loam and other yielding material shall be removed from the roadway area of each
street or way and replaced with suitable material.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 70.
C. All roadways shall be brought to finished grade as shown on the profiles of the Definitive
Plan. The roadway shall be surfaced with at least the top twelve inches consisting of two sixinch
layers of well-compacted binding gravel to the specified width and location.
D. Unless paving is not required, The completed gravel surface of the travel lanes of all
streets shall be treated for the full width of the roadway with a minimum of 1 1/2 inches of
bituminous concrete wearing course pavement, over a minimum 2 ½ inch binder course of
bituminous concrete. [Revised January 2013]
E. The workmanship of all street and municipal service installations shall be tested by exposure,
after installation, during the consecutive interval December 1 to the following April 30.
The compliance official shall inspect the installation after said exposure to determine if the
installation is adequate and completed.
F. Temporary access roads and storage areas for use during construction may be constructed
if necessary. Such road(s) shall be adequately safe for the purposes to which they may be put.
Such road(s) shall be shown on the plans. All such roads shall be removed and the land restored
to its original condition before the end of construction. Such temporary roads and storage
areas shall not be located in protected open space. [Revised January 2013]
G. All cleared areas of a right-of-way, not to be planted with groundcover plantings, including
all disturbed areas within public easements, shall be sodded or loamed as provided in section
5.6 and seeded with turf grass seed of a mixture approved by the Board. Plantings shall
be made during the season appropriate to the selected plant species. [Revised January 2013]
Section 5.4 Construction Standards: Utilities
Section 5.4.1 All materials used, including pipe and fittings, shall be manufactured by firms
and be models thereof approved by the Department of Public Works.
Section 5.4.2 All construction without limitation including trenches, excavations, the backfilling
thereof and subsurface masonry shall be performed according to standards approved by the
Department of Public Works.
Section 5.4.3 Any such subsurface work in a roadway shall be performed before the gravel surface
or pavement is laid.
Section 5.4.4 In the event that an open cut of pavement is required after binder is in place,
backfill with controlled density fill (CDF) is required.
Section 5.4.5 If television cables are to be installed in a subdivision, the developer shall give
the local television cable franchisee not less than 90 days notice before such installation will be
needed. [Added January 2013]
Section 5.5 Construction Standards: Trees and Other Plantings
The applicant shall plant trees as provided in the landscape plan submitted as part of the subdivision
application in accordance with any specific provisions included in the plan. The developer
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 71.
shall provide for the inspection of stock and planting operations shall be in accordance with good
horticultural practice. The developer shall provide a one year warranty on all stock.
Section 5.6 Construction Standards: Loam
Loam shall consist of fertile, friable, natural topsoil typical of the locality without admixture of
subsoil, refuse or other foreign materials and shall be obtained from a well-drained arable site. It
shall be of such a mixture of sand, silt and clay particles as to exhibit sandy and clayey properties
in about equal proportions. It shall be reasonably free of stumps, roots, heavy or stiff clay, stones
lager than ¾ inch diameter, lumps, coarse sand, noxious weeds, sticks, brush or other litter. Topsoil
as delivered to the site or stockpiled shall have pH between 6.0 and 7.0 and shall contain no
less than 5 percent or more than 8 percent organic matter as determined by loss of ignition of
moisture free samples dried at 100 degrees Celsius. The topsoil shall meet the following mechanical
analysis:
PERCENTAGE FINER THAN
¾ inch opening 100
No. 10 mesh 90 to 95
No. 270 mesh 35 to 75
0.002 mm.* 5 to 25
* Clay size fraction determined by pipette or hydrometer analysis.
A. A minimum of four inches of loam shall be required in all locations specifying topsoil.
[Added January 2013]
Section 5.7 Slopes Planting, Grading of Lots, Preservation of Vegetation
Section 5.7.1 Erosion Control All cut or fill slopes subject to erosion shall be planted with
suitable plant materials. Transplants shall be well-rooted, properly set and watered as necessary.
Perennial grasses shall be suited to the landscape and located to provide adequate cover as determined
by the Board on advice of its engineers. In areas subject to potential serious erosion, the
Board may require the planting of sod and the use of additional erosion control measures. A
wood chip or comparable mulch shall be used with ground cover plants to minimize erosion.
Any plantings which do not survive for one year shall be replanted.
Section 5.7.2 Slope Stabilization Slope is defined as the ratio of vertical rise over horizontal
distance. Upon completion of grading and replacement of topsoil, slopes shall be appropriately
stabilized to prevent erosion. Excessively steep slopes shall not be permitted. An adequate slope
stabilization plan shall be approved by the Board.
A. Slope Stabilization Effective stabilization of revegetated areas must be approved by the
compliance monitor before erosion and sedimentation controls are removed. The compliance
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 72.
monitor shall complete an inspection prior to removal of temporary erosion and sedimentation
controls. [Revised January 2013]
B. Guide for Slope Stabilization The following guide for slope stabilization is recommended:
1. Slopes steeper than 1:2: Rip rap or terracing.
2. Slopes of 1:8 to 1:2 Sod or establish vegetation or seedlings in association with
webbing or an approved mulch placed over the soil.
3. Slopes of 1:20 to 1:8 Sod or plant seed in association with webbing or approved
mulch placed over the soil.
Section 5.7.3 Temporary Measures Appropriate temporary measures shall be taken to prevent
erosion of bankings and slopes during construction.
Section 5.8 Fire Protection Water Supply Regulations
following Fire Protection Water Supply Regulations shall apply to all new unsprinklered residential
developments that provide for more than six new residential units and all unsprinklered
commercial and industrial developments with buildings aggregating more than 15,000 square
feet gross floor area: [Revised January 2013]
A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. In accordance with Winchendon's Subdivision Regulations, and Massachusetts General
Law Chapter 148, Section 28, the Winchendon Fire Department has adopted the following
regulations with regard to Water Supply for the purposes of fire protection.
2. Anyone fulfilling the enclosed regulations are to meet all requirements specified by
other boards and departments as they may relate to the work performed.
3. Any development under Winchendon's Subdivision Regulations, that is within 1500
feet of the current geographical area serviced by the municipal water system shall provide
municipal water supply for fire protection. (See Section 4.11.1.)
4. In those areas where the extension of the municipal water system is not required and is
technically unfeasible, the developer shall be required to install residential sprinkler systems
in each dwelling or provide a water supply for fire protection commensurate to the
hazard, as approved by the fire department.
5. In the case that the developer is required to or wishes to install a fire protection water
supply and neither extending the hydrant system nor installing a cistern is feasible, a dry
hydrant system into an existing water supply or new water supply may be installed for
fire protection purposes. (See Section 5.11 D.)
6. The term Fire Chief in this section shall mean the Fire Chief or his designee.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 73.
B HYDRANT REQUIREMENTS
1. GENERAL HYDRANT REQUIREMENTS
a. Any development occurring within 1500 feet of an existing water main shall extend
the system to provide fire hydrants for fire protection purposes.
b. Fire hydrant type and installation will be in accordance with the requirements of
the Department of Public Works.
c. The fire chief shall review all fire hydrant locations.
2. TESTING AND INSPECTION
a. All public hydrants shall be tested and inspected by the Town of Winchendon Water
Department prior to acceptance.
b. All private hydrants shall be tested and inspected in accordance with the Town of
Winchendon Private Fire Hydrant Regulations.
C. FIRE CISTERN REQUIREMENTS
1. GENERAL FIRE CISTERN REQUIREMENTS
a. Fire cisterns shall be located no more than 1,200 feet road way/driveway travel
distance from any structure on the furthermost lot within a development.
b. The design of the fire cistern shall provide for a trouble-free life expectation of 20
years.
c. The capacity of the cistern will be based on the size of the largest home/building to
be constructed within the development. However no fire cistern shall be smaller than
30,000 gallon water capacity.
d. The design of the fire cistern shall be submitted to the Fire Chief for approval prior
to construction. All plans must be signed and stamped by Structural or Fire Protection
licensed/registered engineer in the State of Massachusetts
e. The entire fire cistern shall be rated for H-20 highway loading unless specifically
exempted by the Fire Chief.
f. Each cistern shall be sited to the particular location by a Registered Engineer and
approved by the Fire Chief. All appropriate easements to the Town shall be in place at
the time of Fire Department Acceptance.
g. Precast concrete shall achieve a 28-day strength of 4,000 PSIG. Poured concrete
should be placed with a minimum of 4" slump and vibrated in a professional manner.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 74.
h. The concrete shall be mixed, placed and cured without the use of calcium chloride.
Winter placement and curing shall follow the accepted American Concrete Institute
(ACI) codes.
i. All piping shall be American Society for Testing and Material (ASTM) D 2665
SCH 40 180 PSIPVC DWV with glued joints.
j. All connections shall be clean and the appropriate sealing material used according
to manufacturer's specifications so as to ensure all joints are airtight. All connections
must be anchored to the cistern to resist movement.
k. The entire cistern shall be completely piped and inspected prior to any backfilling.
l. All backfill materials shall be screened gravel with no stone larger than 1.5"
(inches) and shall be compacted to 95% ASTM 1557.
m. Bedding for the cistern shall consist of a minimum of 12" (inches) of .75" to 1.5"
(inch), crushed washed stone, compacted. No fill shall be used under the stone.
n. The cistern shall be designed and installed so it will not float when empty.
o. The entire tank will be guaranteed to be watertight (leak proof) by the installer for
one year.
p. The design engineer for the cistern will inspect all steps of the installation and
provide a report of conformity with the specifications to the Fire Department.
q. All cisterns shall be equipped with a raised 32" (inch) watertight manhole with a
blank cover and secured with a Knox exterior padlock Model 3753. There is to be access
to the manhole cover after backfilling and site work. Access must be provided to
all sections of the tank.
r. Perimeter of tank at floor/wall joint should be sealed with 8" PVC Waterstop.
2. SUCTION CONNECTION
a. The suction connection shall be factory supplied painted aluminum, threaded male
connection 6" (inches) in diameter, with NH thread and provided with fixed strainer
and a suitable cap.
b. The suction piping system shall be 6" (inches) in diameter and capable of delivering
1,000 gallons per minute, for three quarters of the cistern’s rated capacity.
c. The suction pipe connection shall be 36 inches above the level of the grade where
the vehicle wheels will be located when the cistern is in use.
d. Suction piping shall be supported on top of the tank and to the bottom of the cistern
with a space of 8" from the floor of the tank to prevent vertical or horizontal
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 75.
movement, using non-corrosive hardware. Supports at top of tank shall be located so
as not to be affected by frost.
e. The bottom of the suction pipe to the pumper connection shall not exceed 14 feet
vertical distance.
f. Suction piping should be designed to minimize whirlpooling.
g. The suction pipe connection shall terminate not more than 8 feet from the edge of
the pavement.
h. All above the tank suction piping shall be pitched slightly back towards the tank
for proper drainage.
3. VEHICLE PARKING AREA
a. The shoulder and vehicle pad should be of a sufficient length to permit convenient
access to the suction connection when the pumper is set at 45 degrees to the road.
b. The pitch of shoulder and vehicle pad from edge of pavement to pumper suction
connection shall be 1 % to 3% downgrade.
4. FILLER CONNECTION
a. The filler pipe shall be 6" in diameter.
b. The filler connection shall have one, Siamese fitting with two 2-1/2" (inch) connections,
with NH thread with two Knox FDC Cap Model 3012 - Matte Gray
Stainless locking covers attached to a 45 degree downward sweep elbow. The filler
connection shall be supported vertically to the cistern.
c. The filler pipe connection shall be 36 inches above the final grade.
d. Filler piping shall be supported on top of the tank to prevent vertical or horizontal
movement.
5. VENT PIPE
a. The vent pipe shall be 8 inches in diameter.
b. The vent pipe shall terminate not less than 36 inches above the final grade, with
the opening to the pipe facing downward.
c. Vent piping shall have screen covers installed to prevent access by wildlife.
6. BACKFILLING OF CISTERN
a. 4 feet of fill; or.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 76.
b. The top and highest 2 feet of the cistern shall be insulated with vermin resistant
foam insulation, and 2 feet of fill.
c. Backfill shall extend 10 feet beyond the edge of the cistern and then have a maximum
1:3 slope, loamed and seeded or sodded.
d. All construction, backfill, and grading material should be in accordance with
proper construction practices and acceptable to the Fire Chief.
7. SITE WORK
a. After backfilling, the cistern and piping shall be protected from potential vehicular
damage, by;
i. Steel, concrete filled, pipe bollards no less than 8" in diameter set in the ground
below the frost line, or
ii. Large rocks, or
iii. By fencing, or any combination of bollards, rocks, or fence.
b. The installer is responsible for completely filling the cistern prior to acceptance by
the authority having jurisdiction. The water level is not to drop more than 1 inch in 24
hours initially and not more than 1 inch additionally in 30 days.
c. The installer is responsible to supply and install identification signs as directed by
the fire chief. (See Appendix)
d. The installer is responsible to install a deep well and pump, in accordance with
Chapter 255-2A of the Winchendon Board of Health Water Supply Regulations that
will automatically maintain a full water level in the tank. The well/pump combination
must be capable of delivering a minimum of 5 gallons per minute. If the well is determined
capable of delivering higher volume, equipment will be installed to provide
the higher volume.
e. The installer is responsible to install a water fill notification light that will flash a
red light when the well pump is operating. The light will be mounted at least 5' above
the surface of the ground.
8. GENERAL CONDITIONS
a. NO BUILDING PERMITS WILL BE ISSUED UNTIL CISTERN IS
INSTALLED, TESTED, AND ACCEPTED BY THE FIRE DEPARTMENT
b. The Installer shall be required to post a 1-year bond in the amount of $5,000 per
10,000 gallons for maintenance and repair prior to final acceptance.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 77.
c. The Installer is responsible to convey to the town a one-time sum in the amount of
$10,000 for perpetual maintenance and repair.
9. FIRE DEPARTMENT ACCEPTANCE SEQUENCE:
a. The Fire Department will review all cistern plans and engineering data prior start
of construction.
b. The Fire Department will be notified and provided the opportunity to inspect at the
following mid points of construction.
i. Site Preparation prior to tank installation
ii. Prior to backfill
c. The developer will notify the Fire Department when all site work is complete and
tank is operational and ready for operational acceptance, and provide evidence of
bond for one-year maintenance.
d. The Fire Department performs functional test including water recovery at minimum
of 5 gpm and validates operation of cistern.
e. Developer provides town with perpetual maintenance fee.
.f. The Fire Department provides operational acceptance and turns off well pump to
start 30-day stability test.
g. Building Permits can now be processed if being held for cistern completion.
h. 30 days after operational acceptance the Fire Department will inspect the cistern to
see that water level has been maintained, and if any functional issues exist the developer
will be notified to resolve issues.
i. Within 1-year the developer will convey any easements to the town with regard to
the cistern.
j. During the first 12 months the Fire Department will perform inspections and tests
of cistern and notify developer to resolve any issues.
k. Twelve months from the Fire Department's operational acceptance they will perform
one final inspection and test of cistern to validate operation and will notify the
developer if any issues need to be resolved. If no issues exist the Fire Department will
notify the developer of final acceptance and release any claims against the bond.
D. DRY HYDRANT REQUIREMENTS GENERAL
1. The design of the dry hydrants shall be for trouble-free service that will last a lifetime.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 78.
2. The dry hydrant water supply capacity shall be based on the largest home/building being
protected. However no dry hydrant water supply shall be smaller than 30,000 gallons
of water. The water supply capacity calculation shall be made by a professional engineer
utilizing 50 year drought records.
3. The design of the dry hydrants shall be submitted to the Fire Chief for approval prior
to construction.
4. Each dry hydrant shall be sited to the particular location and approved by the Fire
Chief.
5. All piping shall be American Society for Testing and Material (ASTM) D 2665 SCH
40 180 PSIPVC DWV with glued joints.
6. All connections shall be clean and the appropriate sealing material used according to
manufacturer's specifications so as to ensure all joints are airtight.
7. The suction connection shall be factory supplied painted aluminum, threaded male
connection 6" (inches) in diameter, with NH thread and provided with fixed strainer and a
suitable cap.
8. The entire dry hydrant shall be completely piped and inspected prior to any backfilling.
9, All backfill materials shall be screened gravel with no stone larger than 1.5 by 1
inches and shall be compacted to 95% ASTM 1557.
10. Bedding for the dry hydrant piping shall consist of a minimum of 12 inches of
screened gravel with no stone larger than 1.5" (inches.) and be fully compacted.
11. The suction pipe connection shall be between 20 and 24 inches above the level of the
grade when the hydrant is in use, and the 90-degree elbow in the ground is to be supported
by a large flat rock or concrete pad.
12. After backfilling, the piping shall be protected from potential vehicular damage, by;
a. Steel, concrete filled, pipe bollards no less than 8" in diameter set in the ground
below the frost line, or
b. Large rocks, or
c. By fencing, or any combination of bollards, rocks, or fence.
13. The end of the suction pipe shall be protected by a screen equipped with a removable
cover.
14. The pitch of shoulder and vehicle pad from edge of pavement to pumper suction
connection shall be 1 % to 3% downgrade.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 79.
15. The shoulder and vehicle pad should be of a sufficient length to permit convenient
access to the suction connection when the pumper is set at 45 degrees to the road.
16. The suction pipe connection shall terminate not more than 8' (feet) from the edge of
vehicle access.
E. The installer is responsible to supply and install signage as directed by the fire chief.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 80.
6. Construction, Compliance, Plan Modification, Completion
Section 6.1 Construction Construction shall be carried out in compliance with the approved
subdivision plan and these rules and regulations. All work shall be completed within the
time limits specified in the conditions of the plan and any extensions that may be granted by the
Board. The Board may grant a time extension for good cause shown without a formal hearing.
Section 6.2 Compliance Monitoring
A. Prior to commencement of construction, the applicant, land owner, contractor and construction
crew, zoning enforcement officer, and site engineer shall conduct a meeting to review
the proposed construction phasing and number and timing of site inspections. [Added
January 2013]
B. Initial site inspection of erosion and sedimentation controls and placement of tree protection
measures shall occur after installation of barriers around preserved areas and construction
of all structural erosion and sedimentation controls, but before any clearing or grading
has begun. [Added January 2013]
Section 6.2.1 Monitoring During Construction All subdivisions shall be monitored during
construction to insure compliance as required by section 6.1. A fee deposit under the provisions
of M. G. L. chapter 44, section 53G will be required to cover the cost of monitoring. (See section
7.5.) [Added January 2013]
Section 6.2.2 Monitoring Procedures Monitoring to insure compliance shall be carried out at
appropriate times during the development of the Subdivision. The frequency and level of monitoring
shall be determined by the monitor. Monitoring will be done by a compliance official who
may be a consultant engaged by the Board, the building commissioner, or other town official as
determined by the Board. The monitor shall report to the Board if any serious problem arises and
report not less often than quarterly the status of the subdivision and any compliance problems.
Any compliance official is authorized to halt all work or any part of the work by means of a stop
work order if such becomes necessary because the plan and standards are not being followed or
because of a significant public safety issue. [Revised January 2013]
A. If the board finds that the past performance of the developer in Winchendon or elsewhere
has been less than satisfactory, the board will impose a specific monitoring schedule to assure
that the work on the subdivision is done according to the approved plan and the regulations.
It will require frequent reports both as to the quantity and quality of the work accomplished
and will act promptly if such reports indicate less than satisfactory work. [Added January
2013]
Section 6.3 Developer’s Responsibility The developer has full and enforceable responsibility
to insure that the approved construction plans are implemented. The developer shall
use qualified persons to furnish adequate and timely engineering supervision during construction
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 81.
Monitoring, surveillance, and field supervision by Town officials will not be construed as fulfilling
this responsibility.
Section 6.4 Modification of the Approved Subdivision Plan Should the developer
or any other interested party desire a modification of the approved plan, he shall make application
therefore to the Board. The Board may also propose modification of a plan on its own motion.
Upon receipt of an application or on its own action, the Board shall hold a public hearing
thereon with notice as required in section 3.6.1. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board may
modify the plan and shall cause the modification to be recorded as required by Mass. General
Laws, chapter 41 section 81W.
A. Minor modifications to the project that will have no effect on abutting property may be
approved by the board without a public hearing. [Added January 2013]
Section 6.4.1 Failure to Diligently Pursue the Project Should a period of six months elapse in
which the developer has done no significant work at the site and has not obtained an extension
from the Board, he will have failed to diligently pursue the project as required in the conditions
of approval. The approval will have lapsed and become void. [Added January 2013]
A. If it appears to the Board or to its compliance monitor that work on the project has ceased
and no request for an extension has been received, the developer shall be notified and the
compliance monitor shall undertake site inspections at least monthly and report thereon to the
Board. [Added January 2013]
B. The Board will thereupon use such security as may be available to (first) secure the site
by removing safety hazards, unused construction materials, attractive nuisances and preventing
unauthorized access to the site and (second) to complete the construction of drainage,
roadways and other amenities as were required in the subdivision approval and these regulations.
[Added January 2013]
Section 6.5 Completion of the Subdivision
Section 6.5.1 Notice of Completion Upon completion of all work, the developer shall submit
to the board notice that the work has been completed and therein shall state under the penalties of
perjury that the subdivision has been completed according to the approved plan and any approved
modifications thereto.
Section 6.5.2 As-Built Plans Upon completion of all work, the developer shall furnish the
Board with two (2) prints of "as-built" plans, showing the Error of Closure, location of all
monuments, driveway aprons, walk-offs, utilities and structures and the location by "ties" of all
important parts of buried utilities such as water or gas valves, sewer ties, corporation cocks,
house connection shut-offs, and any other special details identifying any departures from the approved
plan as to the location, depth, dimensions, thickness, slope grade or materials, and certified
as to correctness by a Registered Professional Engineer (civil). It is recommended that a sepia
print of the approved plans be appropriately marked as "as-built plans" and be submitted with
two (2) full size prints thereof. "As-built" plans must be submitted before performance guarantees
are released.
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 82.
Section 6.5.3 Conveyance of Easements and Utilities Unless the subdivision approval was
granted with the express stipulation that the ways within the subdivision not become public
ways. Before the Board will release all security or all lots from the operation of a Covenant, the
developer shall execute an instrument (see Form F) transferring to the Town of Winchendon a
valid easement to use the ways in the subdivision as public town ways with unencumbered title
to all water mains, sanitary sewers, and all appurtenances thereto, any drainage facilities constructed
and installed in the subdivision; and conveying to the Town, without cost and free of all
liens and encumbrances, perpetual rights and easements to construct, inspect, repair, replace,
operate and forever maintain storm water drains, water mains, sanitary sewers, and all appurtenances
thereto, and do all acts incidental thereto, in, through, and under the whole of the streets
and easements in the subdivision as shown on the approved definitive plan and in any other areas
where work was done in pursuance of the plan. [Revised January 2013]
Section 6.5.4 Release of Security Upon receipt of the notice of completion, the as built plans
and the conveyance of easements and utilities, the Board will review these materials and the reports
of the construction monitor to insure that the subdivision has been constructed according to
the approved plan. If open space is being protected under the residential development provisions
of the zoning bylaw, the Board shall also ascertain that the open space has been protected as required
by these regulations. Upon a satisfactory review, the Board shall release all remaining security
and covenants and, unless the approved plan otherwise provides, recommend to the Selectmen
and town meeting that the streets within the subdivision be accepted as public town
ways.
Section 6.6 No Claim for Layout of Streets The developer and his successors shall
have no claim for damages when the town accepts the streets shown on the approved plan as
public ways.
Section 6.7 Developers Continuing Responsibility The above conveyances shall
not be construed to relieve the developer and his successors of responsibility to complete all construction,
as required by developer's covenants and agreements with the Town, to honor all required
guarantees, and to thereafter maintain all streets and utilities in a satisfactory condition
until they are formally accepted by the Town. The developer shall promptly execute a proper
easement to the newly accepted ways. [Revised January 2013]
A. Unless a different provision has been made in the approved plan, it shall be the developer’s
responsibility to repair and otherwise maintain the ways within the subdivision, including snow
removal and ice control, until such time as those ways are accepted as public town ways. [Revised
January 2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 83.
Section 7 Miscellaneous Provisions
Section 7.1 Forms In the Appendix are sample forms and diagrams for the administration
of these Rules and Regulations. The administrative content of this appendix may be revised
from time to time by administrative action of the Board without hearing. Copies of these forms
may be obtained at the Building Department or Department of Planning and Development at
Town Hall.
Section 7.2 Authority The Board shall be the agency responsible for administration of
these regulations and shall have all the powers assigned to it by Sections 81A to 81GG of Chapter
41 of the General Laws.
Section 7.3 Enforcement These Rules and Regulations and the conditions and stipulations
of permits and waivers issued thereunder, shall be enforced by the Board’s compliance official,
the building commissioner acting as the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or other official so authorized.
Any such officer may take any or all action necessary to enforce full compliance, as prescribed
by the rules and regulations of the Planning Board, the bylaws of the town, the Massachusetts
General Laws, and applicable state regulations. This shall include notifications of noncompliance
together with requests for legal action through the Town Manager to the Town
Counsel.
A. The town shall take enforcement action when immediate danger exists to the public or
adjacent property, as determined by the Building Commissioner or compliance official.
[Added January 2013]
B. The Building Commissioner or compliance officer may post the site with a Stop Work
order directing that work that is not authorized under the subdivision approval cease immediately.
The issuance of a Stop Work order may include remediation or other requirements
which must be met before development activities may resume. Any such order may be appealed
to the Board. On receipt of a written appeal the Board shall hold a hearing within ten
town hall working days with notice to all interested parties at which all the parties will be
heard. The Board will then vacate the order or continue the order with conditions. [Revised
January 2013]
C. The Board may, after written notice is provided to the developer , or after the site has
been posted with a Stop Work order, suspend or revoke the subdivision approval. A public
hearing will be required prior to such action. [Revised January 2013]
D. Securities described in Section 5.2.8 may be used by the town in carrying out any necessary
enforcement or remedial actions. [Added January 2013]
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 84.
Section 7.4 Agents of the Board The Board may assign as its agents appropriate town
agencies or officials and may from time to time engage professional assistance to review plans
and inspect improvements all at the cost of the applicant or developer. [Revised January 2013]
Section 7.5 Consultant fees A fee under the provisions of Mass. General Laws chapter
44, section 53G will be required to cover the cost of consultants performing review of preliminary
plans, review of definitive plans, review of plan modifications, and compliance monitoring
of approved subdivisions. The initial fee deposit will be as specified in the fee schedule as most
recently adopted by the Board. Payment of the initial fee will be required with the application.
An additional amount as determined by the Board will be required before any on site work is
started. In the case of a phased project, the deposit fee may be phased as well with payment due
prior to the start of each phase. Should the actual cost of consultants exceed the amount on deposit
with the town, the developer shall pay an additional amount as the Board or the Planning
Agent may determine. Any excess, including accrued interest, held by the Town at the end of the
project will be returned.
[M. G. L chapter 44, Section 53G: Notwithstanding section 53, any city or town that provides by rules promulgated
under section 9 or 12 of chapter 40A, section 21 of chapter 40B, section 81Q of chapter 41 . . . for the
imposition of reasonable fees for the employment of outside consultants may deposit such fees in a special account.
Such rules shall provide for an administrative appeal from the selection of the outside consultant to the
city council or town board of selectmen. The grounds for such an appeal shall be limited to claims that the consultant
selected has a conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum, required qualifications. The minimum
qualifications shall consist either of an educational degree in or related to the field at issue or three or
more years of practice in the field at issue or a related field. The required time limits for action upon an application
by a municipal permit granting board shall be extended by the duration of the administrative appeal. In the
event that no decision is made by the city council or the town board of selectmen within one month following
the filing of the appeal, the selection made by the municipal permit granting authority shall stand. Such an administrative
appeal shall not preclude further judicial review, if otherwise permitted by law, on the grounds provided
for in this section. Any such account shall be established by the municipal treasurer in the municipal
treasury and shall be kept separate and apart from other moneys. The special account, including accrued interest,
if any, shall be expended at the direction of the authorized board or authority without further appropriation;
provided, however, that such funds are to be expended by it only in connection with carrying out its responsibilities
under the law. Any excess amount in the account attributable to a specific project, including any accrued
interest, at the completion of said project shall be repaid to the applicant or to the applicant's successor in interest
and a final report of said account shall be made available to the applicant or to the applicant's successor in
interest. . . ]
Section 7.6 Waiver of Compliance Compliance with the requirements of these Rules
and Regulations may be waived when, in the judgment of the Board, such action is in the public
interest and not inconsistent with the intent of the Subdivision Control Rules and Regulations. In
waiving strict compliance the Board may require such alternative conditions as will serve substantially
the same objectives as the standards or regulations waived.
Section 7.7 Severability If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or provision of these
Rules and Regulations shall be adjudged invalid or illegal the adjudication shall apply only to the
material so adjudged and the remainder of these Rules and Regulations shall be deemed to be
valid and effective.
Section 7.8 Invalidation by State Law Any part of these Rules and Regulations subsequently
invalidated by a new state law or modification of an existing law shall automatically
Town of Winchendon, Massachusetts Subdivision Regulations Revision November 2012
Page 85.
be brought into conformity with the new or amended law, and shall be deemed to be effective
immediately, without recourse to a Public Hearing and the customary procedures for amendment
or repeal of such regulations.
Section 7.9 Amendments These Rules and Regulations, or any portion thereof, may be
amended, supplemented, or repealed from time to time by the Board after a Public Hearing, on
its own motion or by petition as provided in Mass. General Laws, chapter 41, section 81Q. All
such amendments shall be filed with the town clerk and the registry of deeds as is required by
law.