PART I: ADMINISTRATIVE LEGISLATION
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
General Rules
[Adopted STM 11-12-1974 by Art. 2 as Art. I of the 1975 Bylaws]
§ 1-1. Repealer.
The Town of Westminster Bylaws, as originally approved by the Attorney
General on September 21, 1964, with all subsequent amendments thereto,
are hereby repealed. Said repeal shall not become effective until these
bylaws have been approved by the Attorney General and posted, as required
by the General Laws.1
§ 1-2. Effect of adoption.
The adoption of these bylaws shall not affect any act done or begun, any
right accrued or established, any penalty or liability incurred or any suit,
prosecution or proceedings heretofore taken or instituted or that shall be
pending at the time these bylaws take effect.
§ 1-3. Amendments.
Any or all of these bylaws may be repealed or amended or other bylaws
may be adopted at any Town Meeting by a majority, an article or articles for
that purpose having been inserted in the warrant for such meeting by the
Selectmen.
§ 1-4. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of these bylaws, whereby any act or
thing is enjoined or prohibited, unless other provision is expressly made,
shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $20. for each offense. Each day that
a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any provision of the bylaws is declared unconstitutional or illegal by final
judgment, order or decree, the validity of the remaining provisions of this
bylaw shall not be affected thereby.
§ 1-6. Enforcement.
Except when otherwise provided by law, prosecutions for offenses under the
bylaws of the town may be made by any constable or police officer of the
town.
1. Editor's Note: "These bylaws" refers to the bylaws included in Division 1 of the Code of the
Town of Westminster. This Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, applies to Division 1
only. Legislation included in Divisions 2, 3 and 4 is legislation adopted by bodies other
than the Town Meeting. The Attorney General's approval was given 1-10-1975.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:3
§ 1-7. Editorial revisions. [Added STM 11-17-2015 by Art. 10]
The Town Clerk shall hereby be authorized to assign appropriate numbers
to bylaw sections, subsections, paragraphs and subparagraphs, where none
are approved by Town Meeting, and, if such are approved by Town Meeting,
after consultation with the Town Administrator, to make nonsubstantive
editorial revisions to ensure consistent and appropriate sequencing and
numbering, provided that such editorial revisions shall be identified by a
footnote or other convention.
§ 1-7 WESTMINSTER CODE § 1-7
1:4
Chapter 4
ADVISORY BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board and committee rules — See Ch. 9.
Elections and town meetings — See Ch. 25.
Finances — See Ch. 28.
Treasurer and Collector — See Ch. 58.
§ 4-1. Membership appointment. [Amended STM 9-29-1983 by Art.
10]
There shall be an Advisory Board2 consisting of seven (7) voters of the town
to be appointed by the Moderator. The Moderator shall appoint, not later
than November of each year, two (2) members of the Advisory Board for
terms of three (3) years, except that every third year he shall appoint three
(3) members. Each member of the Advisory Board shall be a registered
voter and domiciled in the town, provided that no person who shall have the
care, custody or disposal of town funds or the care, custody or disposal of
town property, either as a town officer or member of any town committee,
or an agent of such officer or town committee, shall be eligible to serve on
said committee. The Moderator shall notify the Town Clerk of the names
and addresses of the persons so selected, and thereupon the Town Clerk
shall notify each such person of such appointment and shall administer the
proper oath of office to each of them.
§ 4-2. Duties.
It shall be the duty of this Board to investigate the financial affairs of the
town, including receipts of or expenditures by the different departments, or
of any town officer; the methods in which the town business is conducted;
the general conduct of the town officers; and all articles in town warrants
for Town Meetings referred to it, and in the discharge of these duties shall
have free access to all books of accounts, books of record and all accounts,
bills and vouchers on which money has been or may be paid from the town
treasury. All articles that may hereafter be inserted in warrants for any town
matters, excepting articles for the choice of officers, are hereby referred to
the Advisory Board.
§ 4-3. Reports on Town Meeting articles.
The Board shall report, in writing, its recommendations on the articles in
the warrant for the Annual Town Meeting referred to it as herein provided
and to verbally report immediately after the Annual Town Meeting is called
to order, under the article calling for reports of committees, or under
each article as it is taken up. In addition, the Board shall make its
2. Editor's Note: See MGL C. 6, §§ 97 and 98.
§ 1-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3
1:5
recommendations known for articles in the warrant for Special Town
Meetings by making them available to one (1) or more local newspapers
prior to the Special Town Meeting.
Chapter 6
AGRICULTURAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Right to farm — See Ch. 102.
Wetlands — See Ch. 202.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 231.
§ 6-1. Establishment; purpose; membership.
There is hereby established an Agricultural Commission to represent the
Westminster farming community. Said Commission shall serve as facilitators
for encouraging the pursuit of agriculture in the Town of Westminster, and
shall promote agricultural-based economic opportunities in the Town. The
Commission will consist of five members from the active farming community
of Westminster, appointed by the Board of Selectmen. Two members for
a term of three years; two members for a term of two years, and three
thereafter; and one member for a one-year term, and three years thereafter.
Up to five alternates may also be appointed by the Board of Selectmen, each
for one-year terms.
§ 6-2. Duties.
The duties of the Commission shall include, but not be limited to:
Advising the Board of Selectmen, Planning Board, Zoning Board of
Appeals, Conservation Commission, Board of Health, Board of
Assessors, and other local organizations on projects and activities,
including acquisitions and other transactions involving agricultural
lands in Town.
A.
Engaging in projects and activities to promote farming activities and
traditions and farmland protection, including community programs and
events.
B.
Promoting the protection, preservation and economic use of farmland
and forest land.
C.
Acting as mediators, advocates, educators and/or negotiators on
farming issues.
D.
Pursuing initiatives appropriate to creating a sustainable agricultural
community and preserving the rural character of Westminster.
E.
§ 4-3 WESTMINSTER CODE § 6-2
1:6
Chapter 9
BOARD AND COMMITTEE RULES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advisory Board — See Ch. 4.
Board of Health — See Ch. 13.
Town Meetings — See Ch. 25.
Personnel Board — See Ch. 44.
Officers, boards, committees and
commissions — See Ch. A258.
Policies and procedures adopted by Board of
Selectmen — See Ch. A260.
Reporting on its projects and activities on an annual basis within the
Town Report.
F.
§ 6-2 BOARD AND COMMITTEE RULES § 6-2
9:7

ARTICLE I
General Rules
[Adopted STM 11-12-1974 by Art. 2 as Art. IV of the 1975 Bylaws]
§ 9-1. Qualifications for appointment.
No person shall be appointed to a committee or board who is not a
registered voter of the Town and domiciled in the Town.
§ 9-2. Residency required.
Anyone appointed or elected to a committee or board who subsequently
removes his domicile from the Town shall automatically cease to be a
member of said board or committee.
§ 9-3. Attendance at meetings.
When anyone appointed to an appointive committee or board is absent
repeatedly from three consecutive meetings without due cause from duly
called meetings, he may be reported to the authority making the original
appointment, who may declare that a vacancy exists.
§ 9-4. Vacancies.
Vacancies occurring on appointive committees and boards shall be filled by
the authority making the original appointment.
§ 9-5. Reports to Town.
All committees shall report to the Town unless otherwise specified by the
Town Meeting. If no report is made within a year of its appointment, a
committee shall be discharged, unless, in the meantime, the Town Meeting
shall vote otherwise. A vote to receive the report of a committee shall place
the report before the Meeting, but shall not discharge the committee. A vote
to accept or to adopt a report of a committee with or without amendment
shall discharge the committee.
§ 9-6. Time limits for appointments, organization and filling of
vacancies.
All committees authorized at any Annual or Special Town Meeting shall be
appointed within 45 days of such Town Meeting and shall meet to organize
within 15 days from the date of appointment. Any vacancy on existing
committees shall be filled within 30 days from the date such vacancy is
created. Any vacancy on existing committees shall be duly posted at Town
Hall at least 15 days prior to the vacancy being filled.
§ 9-7. Notification of organization and hours.
All officers, boards and committees shall notify the Town Clerk of their
organization and of their office hours or time of stated meetings.
§ 9-1 BOARD AND COMMITTEE RULES § 9-8
9:9
§ 9-8. Notification of appointments.
Whenever Town officials appoint individuals to serve on Town committees
or boards, such appointing officials shall immediately notify the Town Clerk,
in writing, of the names of such appointed individuals.
§ 9-9. Annual reports; budget.
§ 9-9.1. Meeting minutes. [Added ATM 5-4-2002 by Art. 45]
All boards, committees, and commissions of the Town, elected or appointed,
shall compile and maintain a record (minutes) of all posted and emergency
meetings and shall file the original copy of said minutes with the Town
Clerk’s Office within two weeks of approval. The minutes of said meetings
shall set forth the date, time, place, members present or absent and action
taken at each meeting. The Town Clerk shall note the date and time when
such minutes are received. Said minutes shall be made available to the
public at reasonable times at the office of the Town Clerk.
Each department and all appointed committees of the Town shall
annually, on or before the second day of January, transmit to the
Selectmen, in writing, a report in triplicate, containing a statement of
the acts and doings of the department for the past financial year, to be
printed in the Annual Report, as the Selectmen may deem expedient.
[Amended STM 6-25-1980 by Art. 2]
A.
Not less than 90 days before the Annual Town Meeting, each
department or officially appointed committee having authorized
expenditures shall submit to the Advisory Board and the Board of
Selectmen a copy of its annual budget, which shall contain a careful,
detailed estimate of the probable expenditures of the department or
committee for the ensuing year. Any department or committee failing to
submit its annual budget not less than 30 days before the Annual Town
Meeting may have its last previous annual budget included in the Table
of Estimates for action by the Town Meeting at the discretion of the
Advisory Board.
B.
§ 9-8 WESTMINSTER CODE § 9-9.1
9:10
ARTICLE II
Attendance of Representative at Town Meeting
[Adopted ATM 5-6-1978 as Art. 30]
§ 9-10. Duty of Chairman to attend Town Meeting.
It shall be the duty of the Chairman of each elected or appointed board or
committee to be present at each Town Meeting, regular or special. In the
event of his inability to attend the same, he shall designate some member of
said board or committee who shall attend the same in his place.
§ 9-10 BOARD AND COMMITTEE RULES § 9-10
9:11
Chapter 13
BOARD OF HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regulations promulgated by Board of
Health — See Division 4.
§ 9-10 WESTMINSTER CODE § 9-10
9:12
ARTICLE I
Applicability of Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 11-12-1974 STM by Art. 2 as Art. XI, Sec. A, of the 1975
Bylaws]
§ 13-1. Rules and regulations.
All persons in the Town of Westminster will be subject to the rules and
regulations adopted by the Westminster Board of Health.
§ 13-1 BOARD AND COMMITTEE RULES § 13-1
9:13

ARTICLE II
Enforcement of Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 5-2-2009 ATM by Art. 32]
§ 13-2. Noncriminal disposition.
The person or persons designated by the Board of Health to enforce any
rule or regulation of said Board who take cognizance of a violation of such
rule or regulation, as an alternative to initiating criminal proceedings, may
elect to utilize the noncriminal disposition procedure set forth in MGL c. 40,
§ 21D. The Board of Health shall designate the enforcing person or persons
for any rule or regulation to be enforced pursuant to the noncriminal
disposition procedure as authorized hereunder, and any rule or regulation
to be so enforced shall be subject to a specific penalty for violation thereof.
§ 13-2 BOARD AND COMMITTEE RULES § 13-2
9:15
Chapter 15
CAPITAL PLANNING COMMITTEE
§ 15-1. Establishment; membership; officers.
The Board of Selectmen shall establish and appoint a committee to be
known as the "Capital Planning Committee," composed of one member of
the Board of Selectmen, one member of the Advisory Board, and three
citizens at large. The Town Accountant, Treasurer/Collector, and Town
Coordinator3 shall be ex-officio, nonvoting members of the Committee. The
Committee shall choose its own officers.
§ 15-2. Study of capital projects and improvements.
The Committee shall study proposed capital projects and improvements
involving major tangible assets and projects which: (1) have a useful life of
at least three years; (2) have a dollar value of $15,000 or greater.
§ 15-3. Development of policies and procedures.
The Committee shall develop policies and procedures, as necessary, to
establish and maintain a capital improvements program.
§ 15-4. Submission of information concerning capital requests;
consideration of and recommendation by Committee.
All officers, boards and committees shall each year, on or before the date
specified by the Committee, give to the Committee, on the forms prepared
by it, information concerning all anticipated capital requests requiring Town
Meeting action during the ensuing five years. The Committee shall consider
the relative need, impact, timing and cost of these expenditures and the
effect each will have on the financial position of the Town. No appropriation
shall be voted for a capital improvement requested by a department, board
or commission at an Annual Town Meeting, or at any Special Town Meeting,
unless the Committee has first made a recommendation to such Annual
Town or Special Town Meeting with respect to such proposed capital
improvement.
§ 15-5. Annual report; submission of budget.
The Committee shall prepare an annual report recommending a Capital
Improvement Budget for the next fiscal year, and Capital Improvement
Program, including recommended capital improvements for the following
four fiscal years after that. The report shall be submitted to the Board of
Selectmen for its consideration and approval. The Board shall submit its
approved capital budget to the Town Meeting for adoption by the Town.
3. Editor’s Note: The Annual Town Meeting voted 5-1-2010 by Art 30 to authorize the Board
of Selectmen to appoint a Town Administrator to replace the position of Town Coordinator.
§ 13-2 WESTMINSTER CODE § 15-6
9:16
§ 15-6. Publication of report and budget.
The Committee's report and the Selectmen's recommended capital budget
shall be published and made available in a manner consistent with the
distribution of the Advisory Board report. The Committee shall file its
original report with the Town Clerk.
Chapter 16
CEMETERY COMMISSION
§ 16-1. Rules and regulations.
All residents of the Town of Westminster shall be subject to the rules and
regulations adopted by the Cemetery Commission.
Chapter 19
CLERK, TOWN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board and committee rules — See Ch. 9.
Elections and town meetings — See Ch. 25.
Finances — See Ch. 28.
Fees — See Ch. A259.
§ 19-1. Issuance of notices after election.
The Town Clerk,4 as soon as practicable after any election has been held by
the town, in addition to the notices which said Town Clerk is now required
to give officers who are required to take an oath of office, shall also issue a
written or printed notice to all persons who have been elected to any office
or chosen to serve on any other committee, stating the office to which such
person has been elected or the duties which such committee was chosen to
perform.
§ 19-2. Furnishing copies of monetary votes.
The Town Clerk shall furnish all boards, committees and officers with a copy
of all town monetary votes affecting them.
§ 19-3. Maintenance of town reports.
The Town Clerk shall keep and cause to be permanently bound one (1) or
more files of the town reports.
4. Editor's Note: See MGL C. 41.
§ 15-6 CEMETERY COMMISSION § 19-4
16:17
§ 19-4. Record of town highways.
The Town Clerk shall keep a record of all highways and town ways within
the town with an index thereto, including public rights-of-way and byways
of the town.
§ 19-5. Deeds and conveyances.
The Town Clerk shall see that every conveyance to the town of any interest
in land is properly recorded in the Registry of Deeds and shall cause a true
copy to be kept of all deeds or conveyances executed by the Selectmen and
shall keep on file all deeds delivered to the town.
§ 19-6. Committee reports.
The Town Clerk shall keep on record the reports made to the town by all
committees.
Chapter 21
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
§ 21-1. Establishment.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Conservation Commission
comprised of five members, pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 8C.
Members shall serve three-year terms, so arranged that the terms of
approximately 1/3 of the members shall expire each year.
Chapter 22
COUNSEL, TOWN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Selectmen — See Ch. 53. Officers, boards, committees and
commissions — See Ch. A258.
§ 22-1. Appointment; qualifications; term; compensation.
The Selectmen shall annually, in the month of May, appoint a Town Counsel5
who shall be an attorney and counselor-at-law and who shall hold office
for the term of one (1) year or until his successor is appointed. He shall
receive such compensation as the Selectmen shall determine, subject to the
appropriation of the town therefor.
5. Editor's Note: See MGL C. 40.
§ 19-4 WESTMINSTER CODE § 22-2
22:18
§ 22-2. Duties.
It shall be the duty of the Town Counsel to conduct the prosecution or
defense of claims, actions and proceedings to which the town is a party
and the prosecution of actions or proceedings by or on behalf of any
town officer, board, commission or committee as such when the Selectmen,
having determined that any rights or interests of the town are or may be
involved therein, shall so request; to conduct proceedings brought by or
against the Assessors before the Board of Tax Appeals; to assist in the
prosecution of complaints for violation of any bylaw of the town, when
requested to do so by the board or officer enforcing the same; to examine
and report upon titles to all land to be acquired by the town; to prepare or
approve contracts, bonds, deeds and other legal instruments in which the
town is a party or in which any right or interest of the town is involved; to
appear at any and all hearings on behalf of the town whenever his services
may be required; and generally to advise and act for the town officers,
boards, commissions and committees upon and in legal matters touching
the duties of the respective offices. Other legal services, as needed, may be
obtained with the approval of the Board of Selectmen.
Chapter 25
ELECTIONS AND TOWN MEETINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advisory Board — See Ch. 4.
Attendance by representatives of boards and
committees — See Ch. 9, Art. II.
Town Clerk — See Ch. 19.
Town Counsel — See Ch. 22.
Board of Selectmen — See Ch. 53.
§ 22-2 COUNSEL, TOWN § 22-2
22:19

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted STM 11-12-1974 by Art. 2 as Art. II of the 1975 Bylaws]
§ 25-1. Calling of Town Meeting. [Amended ATM 5-4-2013 by Art.
39]
Every Town Meeting shall be called by posting attested copies of the
warrant on the Town website and at not fewer than two public places
within the Town, which shall include the Town Hall and the Post Office; said
postings to be not less than seven days before the date of the Annual Town
Meeting and not less than 14 days before a Special Town Meeting.
§ 25-2. Date of Annual Election and Annual Town Meeting.
[Amended ATM 5-3-1980 by Art. 30; ATM 4-23-1988 by Art. 52; ATM
6-5-1993 by Art. 3; STM 10-26-2004 by Art. 19; STM 11-27-2007 by
Art. 16]
The Annual Town Election shall be held on the last Tuesday in April, and
the Annual Town Meeting shall be held on the first Saturday of May in each
year.
§ 25-3. Polling hours. [Amended STM 10-25-1993 by Art. 25; ATM
5-4-2002 by Art. 46]
The polls shall be open for the election of Town officers from 7:00 a.m. until
8:00 p.m. on Tuesday, and Special Town Elections on weekdays, from 7:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
§ 25-4. Convening and adjourning times of Annual Town Meeting.
[Amended STM 10-26-2004 by Art. 19; STM 11-27-2007 by Art. 16]
The business session of said Annual Town Meeting shall be convened at 1:00
p.m., and if there remain articles unacted upon at 6:00 p.m., the Meeting
shall be adjourned to the following Saturday at 1:00 p.m., unless otherwise
voted.
§ 25-5. Location of Town Meetings.
All Annual and Special Town Meetings shall be held in the auditorium of the
elementary school and/or gymnasium or Town Hall, if possible.
§ 25-6. Hours for Special Town Meetings.
Special Town Meetings may be held on any weekday, but not earlier than
7:30 p.m., except that on Saturday they shall not be held earlier than 1:00
p.m.
§ 25-1 COUNSEL, TOWN § 25-7
22:21
§ 25-7. Attendance limitations.
Attendance at Town Meetings shall be limited to registered voters of the
Town, except that other persons may be admitted to a separate section
reserved for nonvoters as determined by the Moderator.
§ 25-8. Speaking at meetings.
§ 25-9. Availability of Annual Report.
At least four days before the day fixed in the warrant for the Annual Town
Meeting, the Selectman shall make available to the voters copies of the
Annual Town Report at the Town Hall.
§ 25-10. Disclosure of interest required.
Any person who is employed as an attorney or agent by another interested
in any matter under discussion at a Town Meeting shall disclose the fact of
his employment before speaking thereon.
No person not a voter shall address the meeting without first obtaining
consent of a majority of the meeting.
A.
No person shall speak more than twice upon any question, except to
correct an error or make an explanation, until all others who have not
spoken upon the question and desire to do so shall have an opportunity.
No single speech or presentation shall exceed 15 minutes in length
unless consent is given by the Meeting.
B.
§ 25-7 WESTMINSTER CODE § 25-10
22:22
ARTICLE II
Government of Town Meetings
[Adopted STM 11-12-1974 by Art. 2 as Art. III of the 1975 Bylaws]
§ 25-11. Duties of Moderator.
The Moderator shall preserve decorum and order, may speak to points of
order, in reference to others, and decide all questions of order.
§ 25-12. Order of articles.
Articles in the warrant shall be acted upon in their order, unless otherwise
directed by vote of the Town.
§ 25-13. Motions involving expenditure of money.
All motions involving any expenditure of money shall be in writing when so
requested by any voter or at the discretion of the Moderator.
§ 25-14. Order of motions on debatable questions.
When a question is under debate, motions shall be received in the following
order of precedence:
§ 25-15. Motion to pass over.
A motion to pass over an article shall be debatable.
§ 25-16. Reconsideration of vote.
No vote shall be reconsidered except upon motion made within one hour of
such a vote. A two-thirds vote shall be required for such reconsideration.
When a motion for reconsideration shall have been decided, such decision
shall not be open to further reconsideration.
§ 25-17. Additional rules of conduct.
The conduct of the meeting, insofar as it is not specifically provided for by
law or by these bylaws,6 shall be determined by the rules of parliamentary
law contained in "Town Meeting Time."
A. To adjourn.
B. To table the question.
C. To postpone to a time certain.
D. To postpone indefinitely.
E. To amend.
F. For the previous question.
§ 25-11 COUNSEL, TOWN § 25-18
22:23
§ 25-18. Order for speaking on motion.
When an article comes before any session of the Town Meeting, the
proponent(s) shall be recognized first for the purpose of making a motion
under the article and then for making a presentation in support thereof, if
the motion is seconded. If the proponent is an elected or appointed board
or committee within which there is a minority position in opposition to the
article, a spokesman for that position will be recognized next. Thereafter,
the Advisory Board shall be recognized if it wishes to speak on the article,
followed by the Planning Board and/or any other board or committee which
is required by law to report on the article.
6. Editor's Note: "These bylaws" refers to the bylaws included in Division 1 of the Code of
Westminster.
§ 25-18 WESTMINSTER CODE § 25-18
22:24
Chapter 28
FINANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town Clerk — See Ch. 19.
Board of Selectmen — See Ch. 53.
Treasurer and Collector — See Ch. 58.
§ 28-1. Warrant required for payment.
No money shall be paid from the Town treasury without a warrant or
order therefor signed by the Town Accountant and approved, in writing,
by the Selectmen or a majority of them, which warrant shall state the
appropriation from which the money shall be paid.
§ 28-2. Approval of purchaser required.
No bill, draft, order, charge or account against the Town shall be paid
without being first approved, in writing, by the person, board, commission,
department or other Town officer incurring the same.
§ 28-3. Duty of Selectmen to require detailed accounts.
It shall be the duty of the Selectmen to require detailed accounts, showing
items and dates in all bills against the Town.
§ 28-4. Transmission of bills to Town Accountant.
The Selectmen and all boards, committees, heads of departments and
officers authorized to expend money shall approve, in writing, and transmit
to the Town Accountant as often as once each month and at such other time
or times as the Town Accountant shall request, in writing, all bills, drafts
and orders chargeable to the respective appropriations of which they have
the expenditure. The Town Accountant shall examine all such bills, drafts
and orders and, if found correct and approved as herein provided, shall
draw a warrant upon the Treasurer for the payment of the same, and the
Treasurer shall pay no money from the treasury except upon such warranty
approved by the Selectmen.
§ 28-5. Certification of appropriations.
The Town Clerk shall, as soon as an order or vote appropriating money
becomes effective, certify to the Selectmen, the Assessors and the Town
Accountant each appropriation in detail and the provision made for meeting
the same, if specified in the appropriation, order or vote.
§ 28-6. (Reserved).7
§ 25-18 COUNSEL, TOWN § 28-7
22:25
§ 28-7. Time limitations for specific appropriations. [Added ATM
5-4-2002 by Art. 42]
§ 28-8. Solicitation or award of contracts by procurement officers.
[Added STM 11-4-2003 by Art. 28]
Duly delegated procurement officers of the Town shall be authorized to
solicit and/or award contracts, leases, and other agreements for terms in
excess of three years, only if said contracts, leases or other agreements are
ratified by a majority vote of the Board of Selectmen.
As used in this section, a "specific appropriation" is a Town Meeting
authorization described in the vote of the Town Meeting article to be an
appropriation for a particular, identifiable purpose.
A.
Unless otherwise provided in a vote of the Town Meeting making a
specific appropriation, or unless a specific appropriation has been
encumbered by contractual obligations, the funds for a specific
appropriation shall remain available for a period of three years from the
commencement of the fiscal year in which the funds appropriated were
authorized. At the end of the third fiscal year, any funds remaining in
the specific appropriation shall revert to the General Fund of the Town.
B.
General appropriations for salaries and other ordinary recurring
departmental expenses shall continue to revert to the General Fund at
the close of the fiscal year for which they are made, as provided by law.
C.
Exceptions.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the right of
any creditor of the Town regardless of the reversion of any
appropriation to the General Fund.
(1)
An article appropriating funds utilized by an enterprise fund shall
be closed at the end of the above period to the retained earnings of
that enterprise fund.
(2)
Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect appropriations
that require borrowing.
(3)
Articles voted prior to the effective date of this section shall revert
to the General Fund at the end of the fiscal year in which this
section becomes effective.
(4)
D.
Extension of appropriation. The Board of Selectmen may, in its
discretion, upon receipt of valid and sufficient written explanation,
vote to extend for one fiscal year the date on which the specific
appropriation would otherwise terminate and revert to the General
Fund. Any further extension of the appropriation shall require Town
Meeting approval.
E.
7. Editor’s Note: Former § 28-6, Competitive bids required for certain work; exemptions, as
amended, was repealed ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 40.
§ 28-7 WESTMINSTER CODE § 28-9
22:26
§ 28-9. Revolving Funds. [Added ATM 5-6-2017 by Art. 4]
Chapter 44
PERSONNEL BOARD
Pursuant to MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2, as amended, there are hereby
established the following Revolving Funds for the departments listed
below which shall be credited with the receipts collected in connection
with the stated programs and activities and which shall be expended by
the authorized Town board, department or officer for the purposes of
such programs and activities listed below: [Amended 5-5-2018 ATM
by Art. 4]
Revolving
Fund
Authority to
Spend
Revenue
Source
Use of Fund
1 Hazardous
Materials
Recovery
Fire Chief Charges paid
by responsible
parties for
disposal of
hazardous
materials
Pay expenses
incurred for
recovery and
disposal of
hazardous
materials
2 Agricultural
Commission
Programs
Agricultural
Commission
Receipts
received as
payment for
participation in
programs and
activities
Pay expenses
reasonably
related to
programs and
activities
3 Public Health
Clinic and
Emergency
Response
Board of
Health
Payments
received for
the purchase
and
administering
of flu and other
vaccines and
medications
Pay expenses
reasonably
related to the
administering
of such
programs
4 Private Road
Maintenance
pursuant to
Chapter 173 of
Town Code
Director of
Public Works
Costs paid by
residents of
private roads
who have
asked the Town
to conduct
repairs and
maintenance to
their roads
Pay expenses
incurred for
private road
maintenance
projects
requested and
paid for by
residents of
private roads
A.
Expenditures from each revolving fund set forth herein shall be subject
to the limitation established annually by Town Meeting or any increase
therein as may be authorized in accordance with MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2.
B.
§ 28-9 COUNSEL, TOWN § 44-1
22:27
§ 44-1. Membership; terms.
There shall be a Personnel Board which shall consist of five members to
be appointed by the Town Moderator, with the Chairman of the Board of
Selectmen to serve as ex officio member. The terms of the members shall be
for three years, so arranged that the terms of as nearly 1/3 of the members
as possible shall expire each year.
§ 44-2. Qualifications for appointment.
In making appointments, the Moderator shall give consideration to the
personal qualifications of these citizens who will best meet the
responsibility of the Board to represent both town employees and taxpayers.
If possible, the appointees will include citizens who are familiar with the
principles of labor relations and personnel administration. No person, other
than the Chairman of the Board of Selectmen, who is in the paid employ of
the town shall serve on the Personnel Board; neither shall any person who
is employed by or otherwise represents, directly or indirectly, any collective
bargaining unit of public employees so served.
§ 44-3. Personnel policies; records.
§ 44-4. Grievances.
The Board shall act as a grievance committee to hear grievances not
covered by formal collective bargaining agreements. Before being
considered by the Board, each such grievance shall have been presented to
and considered by the employee's superior.
§ 44-5. Wage/salary rate ranges.
The Board shall establish wage/salary rate ranges for each job
classification. The range shall reflect reasonable compensation for the
complexities of the job in relation to other job classifications maintained
by the Board. The Board shall review these rate ranges at least annually
and shall adjust ranges to reflect both economic and competitive factors.
The Personnel Board shall be responsible for the development of
personnel policies that will be consistent for all town agencies. These
policies shall include, without limitation, job classification and salary/
benefit programs.
A.
The Board shall maintain a complete file of job descriptions and
supervise the maintenance of personnel records.
B.
The Board shall make recommendations to the Town Meeting and the
Board of Selectmen on changes necessary to implement and maintain
fair and consistent personnel policies at least annually.
C.
The Board has the authority to interpret the Personnel Bylaw and to
decide all questions relating to its application.
D.
§ 44-1 WESTMINSTER CODE § 44-5
22:28
Recommended rate ranges shall be established before the date for budgets
to be submitted for the next Annual Town Meeting.
§ 44-6. Job classifications; evaluations of performance.
The Board shall review all job classifications under its jurisdiction and shall
also make an evaluation of the performance of all persons coming within the
same at intervals of not more than one year. No new job classifications shall
be established without a report from the Board. The Board shall establish
new job classifications as conditions warrant.
§ 44-7. Day-to-day administration.
The Town Coordinator8 shall be responsible for the day-to-day
administration of the personnel system in accordance with the policies of
the Personnel Board.
Chapter 47
PUBLIC WORKS COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cemetery Commission — See Ch. 16.
Water Commission — See Ch. 61.
Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 65.
§ 47-1. Creation of Public Works Commission; membership; term;
vacancy.
The Town of Westminster hereby establishes a Public Works Commission,
hereinafter referred to as the "Commission," consisting of three members.
The initial members of the Commission shall be the duly elected members
of the former Water and Sewer Commission, whose terms as members of
the Commission shall be coterminus with their terms as members of the
former Water and Sewer Commission. Thereafter, Commission members
shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for staggered terms of three
years each and shall serve until the expiration of their respective terms
and thereafter until a new appointment shall be made by said Board of
Selectmen. Said Board of Selectmen shall fill any vacancy on the
Commission by appointment for the balance of the vacated three-year term.
§ 47-2. Powers and duties of Public Works Commission; quorum.
The Commission shall have and may exercise the powers and duties of
Water Commissioners and Sewer Commissioners pursuant to Sections 65
and 66 of Chapter 41 of the General Laws, as they may be amended from
8. Editor’s Note: The Annual Town Meeting voted 5-1-2010 by Art 30 to authorize the Board
of Selectmen to appoint a Town Administrator to replace the position of Town Coordinator.
§ 44-5 PUBLIC WORKS COMMISSION § 47-2
47:29
time to time; the Board of Selectmen as to all matters relating to public
works and highways and said Board's authority as the Road Commissioners
of the town; surveyors of highways; and superintendents of streets. Said
Commission shall have the powers and duties heretofore held by said Water
and Sewer Commission and, as to the matters relating to the powers and
duties conferred hereby, by said Board of Selectmen, arising under any
general or special law. A majority of the Commissioners shall constitute
a quorum for the transaction of Commission business. In addition to the
foregoing, said Commission shall have the power to provide engineering
services to maintain and repair public buildings and property.
§ 47-3. Director of Public Works; tenure; authority.
The Commission shall appoint a Director of Public Works who shall be
responsible to the Commissioners, and whose appointment shall be not less
than three nor more than five years, subject to removal as may be otherwise
provided in the Charter and bylaws of the town. The authority and duties of
the Director shall be as established by the Commission. The Director shall
appoint and hire all personnel under his direction and control subject to the
approval of the Commission.
§ 47-4. Rules and regulations of Public Works Commission.
The Commission shall adopt regulations not inconsistent with this bylaw
and its enabling legislation to implement the powers and duties herein
conferred.
Chapter 53
SELECTMEN, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town Counsel — See Ch. 22.
Town meetings — See Ch. 25.
Regulations promulgated by the Board of
Selectmen — See Division 2.
Policies and procedures adopted by the Board
of Selectmen — See Ch. A260.
§ 53-1. Authority.
The Selectmen9 shall have authority to prosecute, defend or compromise
all claims, actions, suits and controversies to which the town shall be a
party and to employ counsel therefor unless otherwise specifically ordered
by vote of the town.
9. Editor's Note: See MGL C. 41.
§ 47-2 WESTMINSTER CODE § 53-2
53:30
§ 53-2. Protection of town's interests.
The Selectmen may appear (either personally or by representative) before
any committee of the legislature or board or commission to protect the
interest of the town, but are not authorized by this chapter to commit the
town to any course of action.
§ 53-3. Execution of deeds and other instruments.
All deeds or other instruments required to carry into effect any vote of the
town shall be executed by the Selectmen, unless the town shall otherwise
direct.
§ 53-4. Town property.
§ 53-5. General direction and management of affairs.
The Selectmen shall have the general direction and management of the
property and affairs of the town in all matters not otherwise provided by law
or these bylaws.10
Chapter 58
TREASURER AND COLLECTOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Finances — See Ch. 28.
The disposal of any personal property of the town must have the
approval of the Board of Selectmen. Any and all proceeds resulting
therefrom shall be paid in to the town treasury. The department head
shall file a written report of the sale with the Town Clerk.
A.
The Selectmen shall cause each town officer and department head
under its control having custody of town property to keep a true
inventory thereof on file, and each officer and department head shall
deliver a copy of said inventory to the Selectmen at least annually.
B.
No town officer or salaried employee of the town shall sell materials
or supplies or rent equipment of the town without the permission of
the Board of Selectmen expressed in a vote which shall appear on their
records with the reasons therefor.
C.
10.Editor's Note: "These bylaws" refers to the bylaws included in Division 1 of the Code of the
Town of Westminster.
§ 53-2 TREASURER AND COLLECTOR § 58-1
58:31
§ 58-1. Accounts due.
The Town Collector and the Town Treasurer11 shall collect all accounts due
the town. All departments having bills due the town shall commit the same
to the Town Collector, who shall proceed to collect the same and pay over,
once in each week or more often, to the Town Treasurer all money received
by said officer during the preceding week or lesser period.
§ 58-2. Custody of receipts, notes and bonds; exception.
The Treasurer shall have the custody of all receipted bills and receipts of all
notes, bonds and coupons which have been paid and of all bonds running to
the town, except said Treasurer's official bond, which shall be in the custody
of the Town Clerk.
Chapter 61
WATER COMMISSION
§ 61-1. Rules and regulations.
All persons in the Town of Westminster will be subject to the rules and
regulations adopted by the Westminster Water Commissioners.
Chapter 65
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 205. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 231.
§ 65-1. To serve as Board of Appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall serve as a Board of Appeals under the
provisions of General Laws, Chapter 41, Section 81Z.
PART II: GENERAL LEGISLATION
Chapter 67
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rapid entry system — See Ch. 148.
11.Editor's Note: See MGL C. 41.
§ 58-1 WESTMINSTER CODE § 65-1
61:32
ARTICLE I
Police Alarms
[Adopted STM 9-29-1983 as Art. 8]
§ 67-1. Intent; applicability.
§ 67-2. Promulgation of rules.
The Chief of Police may promulgate such rules as may be necessary for the
implementation of this article.
§ 67-3. Direct connection to Police Department.
§ 67-4. Automatic dial devices.
Automatic dialing services will not be interconnected to any telephone lines
at the Police Department. Any person using an automatic dialing service
may have the device interconnected to a telephone line transmitting directly
to:
This article is intended to regulate the activities and responsibilities
of those persons or companies who purchase, lease or rent alarm
systems, devices or services. It is further intended to encourage the
improvement in reliability of these alarm systems, devices or services
and to ensure that Police Department personnel will not be unduly
diverted from responding to actual criminal activity as a result of
responding to false alarms.
A.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to alarm systems owned
and/or operated by municipal, county or state agencies within the Town
of Westminster.
B.
Alarm systems may be connected to the Communications Center in the
Police Department by obtaining prior written approval from the Chief
of Police.
A.
Any alarm user may contract with any alarm company of his choice for
the sale, installation and/or servicing of the alarm system to be installed
on his premises.
B.
The Chief of Police or his agent shall retain the right of inspection of
the user's alarm system before connection to the Police Department's
control board. The user shall pay for all inspection charges. Connection
to the Police Department shall be made only by an authorized person to
be chosen by the Chief of Police. Connection fees shall be paid by the
user.
C.
The annual fee for use of the control board connection shall be
determined by the Board of Selectmen. The annual fee must be paid by
the last day of February of that year.
D.
A. A private central station.
§ 67-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 67-4
67:33
§ 67-5. Responsibility of user.
§ 67-6. False alarms assessment schedule.
Any alarm system which had five or more false alarms within a calendar
year shall be subject to assessment as provided herein:
B. A private answering service.
C. Any privately owned or operated facility or terminal.
Every alarm user shall submit to the Chief of Police the name and
telephone number of a least two other persons who can be reached
at any time, day or night, and who are authorized to respond to an
emergency signal transmitted by an alarm system and who can open
the premises in which the alarm system is located.
A.
All alarm users must notify the Police Department in advance of any
testing of equipment. Failure to notify the Police Department in advance
of a testing of equipment shall constitute a false alarm and be subject
to the assessment schedule contained herein.
B.
All alarm systems which use an audible bell or horn shall be equipped
with an automatic shutoff device which will deactivate the alarm system
within 15 minutes. All alarm users with an audible bell or horn must
comply with this section within 90 days of the effective date of this
article.
C.
After the Police Department has recorded five separate false alarms
from an alarm user within a calendar year, the Police Chief shall notify
the alarm user, in writing and by certified mail, of such facts and
require the user to submit within 10 working days of receipt of such
notice a report describing the user's efforts to discover and eliminate
the cause or causes of the false alarms. This notice, by certified mail
from the Chief of Police or his designee, shall contain the dates and
times of each alleged false alarm.
A.
In the event that the Chief of Police or his designee determines that
a report submitted in accordance with Subsection A of this section is
unsatisfactory or that the alarm user has failed to show, by the report,
that he has taken or will take reasonable steps to eliminate or reduce
false alarms, then the Chief of Police or his designee shall order that
the use of the alarm system be discontinued for a period of 30 days.
B.
Fines.
Any user of an alarm system which transmits a false alarm signal
shall be assessed a fine of:
Twenty dollars each for the fifth to seventh false alarm in a
calendar year.
(a)
(1)
C.
§ 67-4 WESTMINSTER CODE § 67-6
67:34
§ 67-7. Appeals.
Thirty dollars each for the eighth to 11th false alarm in a
calendar year.
(b)
Fifty dollars each for 12 or more false alarms in a calendar
year.
(c)
All fines assessed herein shall be made payable to the Town of
Westminster for deposit in the general fund.
(2)
If the alarm user submits a report as required by Subsection A of this
section, the Chief of Police or his designee shall determine whether
the action taken or to be taken will substantially reduce the likelihood
of false alarms, then the Chief of Police shall notify the alarm user,
in writing, that no assessment is made at that time. If no assessment
is made at that time, the alarm user will be subject to assessment
procedures on the next false alarm signal transmitted.
D.
Upon failure of the user of an alarm system to pay two consecutive fines
assessed herein within 60 days of the assessment, the Chief of Police
shall order that the user discontinue the use of the alarm system for not
more than six months.
E.
Proof that a false alarm was caused by an act of God or by the actions
of the telephone company shall constitute affirmative defense to
assessment of the particular false alarm.
F.
The provisions of this section concerning false alarms pertain to all
alarm users, except municipal, county and state agencies.
G.
All reports to the police of an alarm that has been activated, whether
from a private person, answering service or central station, shall be
recorded against the alarm user.
H.
Any alarm user who is aggrieved by a decision of the Chief of Police
pursuant to § 67-6 of this article may, within five working days of notice
of the Chief's decision, appeal his case, in writing, to the Chief for
further consideration.
A.
All decisions made by the Chief of Police after the appeals procedure
are final. The only grounds for appealing a decision of the Chief of
Police are:
Proof of a false alarm assessment under § 67-6F assessment
schedule.
(1)
Written verification from the alarm user and the alarm company
that all necessary steps have been taken to upgrade, improve and
ensure the accuracy of the alarm system.
(2)
B.
§ 67-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 67-8
67:35
§ 67-8. Violations and penalties.
The following acts and omissions shall constitute violations of this article
punishable by a fine up to $50.
Failure to obey an order of the Chief of Police to discontinue use of an
alarm system, after exhaustion of the right of the appeal.
A.
Failure to disconnect an automatic dialing device from any Police
Department telephone lines within 90 days of the effective date of this
article.
B.
Interconnection of an automatic dialing device to any Police
Department telephone line after the effective date of this article.
C.
Failure to pay two or more consecutive fines assessed under § 67-6C of
this article within 60 days from the date of assessment.
D.
Failure to comply with the requirements set forth in § 67-5 of this
article.
E.
§ 67-8 WESTMINSTER CODE § 67-8
67:36
ARTICLE II
Fire Alarms
[Adopted STM 9-30-1992 as Art. 1]
§ 67-9. Purpose.
While early fire detection through the use of various detection systems is a
valuable tool in the protection of life and property, it has been determined
that the substantial number of false alarms hinders the efficiency of the Fire
Department by the unnecessary deployment of apparatus and personnel to
these false alarms. This article is intended to penalize the alarm user whose
property or premises generate false alarms due to improperly designed,
installed or maintained systems. It is further intended to reduce the number
of false alarms and to promote the responsible use of reliable, properly
maintained detector systems for the protection of life and property and the
saving of taxpayer dollars in the Town of Westminster.
§ 67-10. Compliance required.
§ 67-11. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM SYSTEM —
ALARM USER — The occupant of the premises containing the alarm system.
In cases where there is no occupant, the owner of the premises shall be
deemed to be the "alarm user."
All buildings subject to MGL c. 148 shall be in compliance with said
statute, including all requirements to have approved fire alarm systems.
A.
All required fire alarm systems shall be in compliance with 527 CMR
24.00, Board of Fire Prevention Regulations, and the bylaws of the
Town of Westminster. All buildings and structures located in the Town
of Westminster shall be in compliance with applicable laws of the
commonwealth and local bylaws.
B.
Any device or system which, when activated by a criminal act, fire or
other emergency, calls for Fire Department response by:
(1) Transmitting a signal to Fire Department headquarters;
Transmitting a signal to a person who relays information to Police
or Fire Department headquarters; or
(2)
Producing an audible or visible signal to which the Fire Department
is expected to respond.
(3)
A.
Excluded from this definition and the scope of this article are devices
which are designed to alert or signal only persons within the premises
in which the device is installed and devices which are activated by the
release of water from a sprinkler system.
B.
§ 67-9 ALARM SYSTEMS § 67-11
67:37
AUTOMATIC DIAL ALARM — A telephone device or attachment that
mechanically or electronically selects a telephone line to report a fire
or other emergency calling for Fire Department response. Excluded from
this definition are devices which relay a digitally coded signal to Fire
Department headquarters.
FALSE ALARM — An alarm raised without genuine cause or an alarm
transmitted to the Fire Department that does not require the saving of
human life, extinguishment of fire, control of hazardous situations, service,
rescue, salvage or other related duties; or an automated device that
transmits an alarm without genuine cause due to said device's malfunction,
improper installation, mechanical failure, negligence of the alarm user, his
agents or employees or other similar occurrences.
§ 67-12. False alarm charges.
When the Chief of the Fire Department determines that the Fire
Department has responded to a false alarm, the Chief shall have the option
to impose a charge on the responsible alarm user according to the following
schedule:
§ 67-13. Violations and penalties.
§ 67-14. Noncriminal penalties.
As an alternative to criminal prosecution, the Fire Chief may elect to
utilize the noncriminal disposition procedure set forth in MGL c. 40, § 21D,
which is accepted by the Town of Westminster by this article, or by filing
a complaint in the Superior Court requesting an injunction and civil or
criminal penalties.
§ 67-15. Enforcement.
A. First false alarm in any one calendar year: no charge.
B. Second false alarm in any one calendar year: no charge.
C. Third false alarm in any one calendar year: no charge.
D. Fourth false alarm in any one calendar year: $50.
For any and all subsequent alarms, an increase of the last charge
assessed by $25.
E.
Any person who violates any provision of this article may be penalized
by indictment or on complaint brought in District Court or the Housing
Court and may be subject to a fine as set forth in § 67-12 of this article
for each separate offense.
A.
Each day or portion thereof in which the alarm user is in violation of
any section of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
B.
§ 67-11 WESTMINSTER CODE § 67-15
67:38
§ 67-16. Liability of Town.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, the Town, its Fire
Department, officers, agents and employees shall be under no obligation
whatsoever concerning the adequacy, operation or maintenance of any
alarm system or of the alarm monitoring facilities at Fire Department
headquarters. No liability whatsoever is assumed for the failure of such
alarm systems or monitoring facilities or for failure to respond to alarms
or for any other act or omission in connection with such alarm systems.
Each alarm user shall be deemed to hold and save harmless the Town, its
Fire Department, officers, agents and employees from liability in connection
with the alarm user's alarm system.
§ 67-17. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to alarm systems on premises
owned or controlled by the Town, nor to alarm systems installed in a motor
vehicle.
§ 67-18. Severability.
The invalidity of any part or parts of this article shall not affect the validity
of the remaining parts.
§ 67-19. Contact information for responders. [Added ATM 5-4-2002
by Art. 41]
The alarm user is responsible for providing and maintaining the names and
contact information of at least two people who can be reached at any time
of day or night, and who are authorized to respond to an emergency signal
transmitted by an alarm system, or ensure someone responds. The alarm
user shall ensure that anyone who responds can open the premises in which
the alarm system is located, has the necessary knowledge of the alarm to
effectively operate it, and is authorized to take any action necessary to
correct any problems.
Authority. The Fire Chief or a legal designee shall have the authority to
enforce this article through the use of violation notices, administrative
orders or civil and criminal court actions as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21,
and other applicable laws.
A.
Notification and appeal.
The Fire Chief or a legal designee shall notify the responsible alarm
user of any false alarm charges by certified mail or by service in
hand.
(1)
Within 15 days after actual or constructive receipt of such notice,
the alarm user shall pay the charge to the Town Treasurer for
deposit in the Town's general funds.
(2)
B.
§ 67-15 ALARM SYSTEMS § 67-19
67:39
Chapter 71
ANIMALS
§ 71-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context shall otherwise require, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DOG — All animals of canine species, regardless of sex.
OWNER — Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning,
keeping or harboring a dog, as herein defined.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any dog shall be deemed a "public nuisance" when
attacking persons or domestic animals or deer while said dog is on property
other than that of the dog owner and when destroying property; and, after
a hearing by the Selectmen, said dog may be deemed a "public nuisance"
when it is persistently and prolongedly barking or howling between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. for more than two consecutive days. Each
twenty-four-hour period thereafter shall constitute a separate violation.
Further, any unspayed female dog, while in season, shall be deemed a
"public nuisance" when not confined indoors by the owner thereof or housed
in a veterinary hospital or registered kennel.
§ 71-2. Public nuisances prohibited.
No owner or keeper or any dog shall permit such dog, whether licensed or
unlicensed, to become a public nuisance within the Town of Westminster.
§ 71-3. Impoundment; reclamation; disposal of unreclaimed dogs.
It shall be the duty of the Dog Officer to apprehend any dog found to be
a public nuisance or running at large within the Town and to impound
such dog in a suitable place or to order the owner thereof to restrain
said dog. [Amended ATM 5-4-2002 by Art. 44]
A.
If such dog is so impounded and has upon it the name or address of the
owner thereof, or if the name of said owner is otherwise known, then
the Dog Officer shall immediately notify the owner of such impounding.
The owner of any dog so impounded may reclaim such dog upon the
payment of an impoundment fee of $25 in addition to the sum of $5,
or such greater sum as may be permitted by law, for each day or part
thereof that the dog is impounded; provided, however, that if the dog is
not licensed, before release to any person, a license as required by law
shall be secured. [Amended ATM 5-4-2002 by Art. 44]
B.
Any dog which has been impounded and has not been redeemed by the
owner within 10 days shall be disposed of as provided by MGL c. 140,
§ 152, and any amendments thereto; or released to any state-licensed
school of medicine, dentistry or veterinary medicine or research
C.
§ 67-19 WESTMINSTER CODE § 71-3
71:40
§ 71-4. Licensing of dogs. [Amended ATM 4-4-1981 by Art. 25; ATM
6-5-1993 by Art. 28; STM 10-12-1999 by Art. 26; ATM 5-4-2002 by
Art. 44]
§ 71-5. Trained attack dogs.
Any person having a trained attack dog on his property shall post at least
one sign, in public view, attesting to this fact, and such animal shall be kept
in a 10-gauge wire enclosure, roofed and floored, with padlocked gate.
§ 71-6. Operation of kennels.
No person shall operate a kennel for the keeping of four or more dogs
without the approval of the Dog Officer and a permit from the Board of
Health.
§ 71-7. Wild or dangerous pets.
Any person, before procuring a wild or dangerous pet, must first obtain a
permit from the Board of Selectmen and the Board of Health.
§ 71-8. Restraining orders on dogs.
The Selectmen shall, at such time as they may deem necessary, impose a
restraining order on all dogs within the Town of Westminster.
foundation for such use as deemed useful or necessary for advancement
of biological sciences.
The owner or keeper of any dog shall license such animal in accordance
with the provisions of MGL c. 140, §§ 137 through 139, inclusive, except
that fees for such licenses shall be as follows:
(1) Male/female: $15.
(2) Neutered/spayed: $10.
(3) Kennels, four dogs or less: $40.
(4) Kennels, 10 dogs or less: $50.
(5) Kennels, 11 dogs or more: $75.
(6) Transfer of license: $2.
A.
All owners or keepers of dogs kept in the Town of Westminster who
by the 15th of April of each year have not licensed any dog or dogs
who have attained the age of three months shall be required to pay an
additional fee of $15.
B.
§ 71-3 ANIMALS § 71-9
71:41
§ 71-9. Dogs on school property.
No dog shall be allowed to travel unleashed and unrestrained on any school
property. Any owner of any dog violating any provisions of this section shall
be fined not more than $20 for each offense.
§ 71-10. Pasturing of animals.
No person shall pasture any animal upon any street or way in the Town,
with or without a keeper, except within the limits of such way adjoining his
own premises, and on the same side of the street therewith.
§ 71-11. Animals at large.
§ 71-12. License required to keep stables; regulations for size and
character.
§ 71-13. Suitability of keeper of animals.
Continued or repeated reports of animals causing a disturbance, improper
fencing, hazardous and unsanitary conditions, mishandling and violation of
other laws and regulations relating to animals create questions as to the
suitability of the keeper of such animals. After a joint hearing by Selectmen
and the Board of Health giving due consideration to the situation and the
recommendations of those concerned, including all Town officials involved,
the Selectmen and or the Board of Health may decide the keeping of such
an animal or animals to be a public nuisance to be abated by the owner as
provided in the General Laws.
No person shall permit any swine, horse, cow or other cattle to go at
large in any street in this Town.
A.
Any person owning, keeping or being responsible for a dog shall not
allow or permit said dog to run at large on any of the streets or
public places in the Town of Westminster or upon any private property,
unless the owner or lawful occupant of such property grants permission
therefor. No dog shall be allowed or permitted in any public place or
street within the Town unless it is effectively restrained and controlled
by a chain or other form of leash that is sufficient to hold the dog (or
unless it is under the immediate and effective voice control of its owner
or other handler) or unless it is within and confined to a motor vehicle.
[Added ATM 5-1-2004 by Art. 43]
B.
Massachusetts General Law Chapter 111 provides for the licensing of
suitable persons to keep a stable and are designed to protect the health
and comfort of the community.
A.
The Board of Health may make regulations as to the size and character
of stalls, cages or pens, bedding, number of animals feeding and the
storage and handling of feed and manure in any stable or place in
Westminster.
B.
§ 71-9 WESTMINSTER CODE § 71-14
71:42
§ 71-14. Violations and penalties. [Added ATM 4-4-1981 by Art. 25]
Chapter 75
BOATS AND BOATING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreational vehicles — See Ch. 196.
§ 75-1. Required safety equipment.
§ 75-2. Operation under influence of alcohol or drugs.
No person shall operate any motorboat or sailboat while he is under the
influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotics or harmful drugs, as defined by
statute.
§ 75-3. Negligence; operation at night.
No person shall operate any motorboat or use any water skis, surfboards or
similar devices negligently or willfully so as to endanger the lives or safety
Penalties. Notwithstanding any provisions of the General Laws to the
contrary, any dog officer who takes cognizance of a violation of § 71-8
above; failure to license dogs pursuant to MGL c. 140, § 137, and § 71-4
of this chapter; failure to acquire kennel license pursuant to MGL c.
140, § 137A; and/or failure to vaccinate against rabies pursuant to MGL
c. 140, § 145B, may issue or mail a notice of complaint of violation of
the Municipal Dog Control Law to the owner or keeper of such dog or
dogs, and if the owner or keeper of such dog or dogs is a minor, the
parent or guardian of such minor shall be liable for any violation of this
chapter.
A.
Any owner or keeper found in violation of the above-mentioned
procedure shall be subject to a fine of $10. If the owner or keeper of a
dog or dogs is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be
held liable for any violation of this chapter.
B.
The procedure set forth above shall also include the provisions of
Paragraphs 2 through 4 of MGL c. 140, § 173A, as amended.
C.
All boats in use must be equipped with a Coast Guard-approved life
preserver for each person aboard, and all motorboats in use must be
equipped with an efficient whistle or horn.
A.
All motorboats with enclosed decks, bilges or other spaces where
explosive gasses may accumulate must carry a Coast Guard-approved
fire extinguisher.
B.
§ 71-14 BOATS AND BOATING § 75-3
75:43
of the public or use water skis, surfboards or similar devices thereon in the
nighttime.
§ 75-4. Towing of persons.
No person shall operate any motorboat towing a person or persons on water
skis, a surfboard or other similar device, unless there is in such motorboat
a competent person, in addition to the operator, in a position to observe the
person or persons being towed and unless such motorboat is equipped with
a ladder, steps or similar means by which any person being towed can be
taken from the water and a Coast Guard-approved lifesaving device for each
person.
§ 75-5. Operation at safe distance required.
All motorboats must be operated at a safe distance to prevent their wash
from being thrown into or causing excessive rocking to other boats, rafts,
floats or bathing beaches. When passing within one hundred (100) feet
of any raft, float, dock, bathing beach or other boat, motorboats shall
be operated at a reduced and reasonable speed so as not to cause
inconvenience or danger to others.
§ 75-6. Operation when vision is obscured.
Where the operator's vision is obscured or under bridges or on bends and
curves, motorboats shall be operated at not more than headway speed [six
(6) miles per hour].
§ 75-7. Use of underpass.
All boats must use the underpass on their starboard or right-hand side when
negotiating the Leino Park bridge, Wyman Lake.
§ 75-8. Running lights required at dark.
All boats operating between sunset to sunrise must be equipped with proper
running lights as prescribed by the state boating laws.
§ 75-9. Right-of-way.
In crossing situations, the boat to starboard (right) shall have the rightof-
way.
A.
In meeting situations, each boat shall turn to starboard (right) and pass
port-to-port.
B.
C. In passing situations, the vessel being overtaken has the right-of-way.
Sailing craft and unpowered boats shall have the right-of-way over
motorboats.
D.
§ 75-3 WESTMINSTER CODE § 75-10
75:44
§ 75-10. Cases not covered.
In all cases not covered by this chapter, the Coast Guard Regulations will
apply.
Chapter 81
BUILDINGS AND LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 67.
Gas, plumbing and wiring — See Ch. 113.
Permits to delinquent taxpayers — See Ch.
131, Art. I.
Low-impact development — See Ch. 136.
Rapid entry systems — See Ch. 148.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 173.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 231.
§ 81-1. Permit required; application; posting.
No building construction, moving or material alteration costing more
than $500 shall be made to any building or structure without a permit
from the Board of Selectmen or Building Inspector. No such permit
shall be issued until the Board of Health shall have certified, in writing,
that all health regulations have been fully complied with and the
Planning Board shall have likewise certified that it conforms to any
pertinent provisions of the Subdivision Rules and Regulations.12 Notice
of all building permits granted by the Board of Selectmen or Building
Inspector shall be promptly transmitted to the Board of Assessors.
A.
The applicant shall submit plans and specifications of such work or
buildings for examination and approval. A plan of the lot on which any
proposed building is to be erected, listing the abutters' names, is to be
filed with the application. The location of the structure is to be drawn
on the lot. All drawings are to be submitted in duplicate, and one copy
is to remain on file, the other copy to be stamped with the Selectmen's
or Building Inspector's seal of approval. If the Selectmen or Building
Inspector are of the opinion that the requirements of this chapter have
been complied with, they shall thereupon issue said stamped permits to
the applicants.
B.
The permit signed by the Board of Selectmen or Building Inspector and
the Board of Assessors shall be posted in public view.
C.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 231, Subdivision of Land.
§ 75-10 BOATS AND BOATING § 81-2
75:45
§ 81-2. Occupation of basement.
No basement of a building under construction shall be occupied for
residential purposes for a period of more than two years without approval
of the Board of Health.
§ 81-3. Alteration of drainage.
Permits will not be granted for the construction or alteration of any
structure that will cause a change in existing grades and contours which
interfere with drainage of water to or from the public highways unless
provision is made at the owner's expense for the proper disposal of such
water by gutters, ditches, pipes or other necessary drainage structures.
The owner will be required to grant the town any necessary drainage
easements.
§ 81-4. Connection to public road.
No person may build or construct any connection between any private
driveway in the Town of Westminster and any public town road in the Town
of Westminster without first obtaining a permit from the Board of Selectmen
or Building Inspector.
§ 81-5. Construction of driveways.
§ 81-6. (Reserved)13
§ 81-7. Storage and use of trailers. [Amended ATM 5-1-2010 by Art.
33]
Camping trailers, utility trailers, horse trailers, boats or pickup campers
used by the resident for his own use may be stored on a residential lot. No
such trailers, campers or boats may be used for a dwelling on a residential
lot. The Selectmen may issue, consistent with the Zoning Bylaw,14
Prior to final construction of a driveway, a sketch must be submitted
on the reverse side of application entitled "Construction of Driveway
Permit Required," showing lot lines, any inlets or culverts and the
exact location of the proposed driveway. The sketch must show the
approximate width of the driveway after grading and/or surfacing.
A.
The Highway Department is concerned with width and flare of
driveways where they meet the road, since the road surface is not to be
disturbed and the gutter line maintained.
B.
The application shall be submitted to the Highway Superintendent and,
on his approval, a permit shall be issued by the Board of Selectmen or
Building Inspector.
C.
13.Editor’s Note: Former § 81-6, Filling of land, was repealed STM 11-19-2013 by Art. 14.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Zoning.
§ 81-2 WESTMINSTER CODE § 81-7
75:46
temporary permits for residential uses of a camper or trailer, if the user is
in the process of building a house.
§ 81-8. Street numbers.
§ 81-9. Building labels for alternative energy sources. [Added ATM
5-7-2011 by Art. 37]
It shall be the responsibility of the Board of Assessors to assign a street
number to each building permit before it is issued.
A.
Street numbers shall be attached to each dwelling, business, industry
and other building in the Town of Westminster. [Added STM
9-14-1987 by Art. 10]
The number shall be made of permanent, weatherproof materials,
at least three inches in height, in a contrasting color and clearly
visible from the street or roadway upon which the structure fronts.
(1)
Any structure that is not visible from the street or roadway shall
have the assigned number posted on a suitable support at the
entrance to the driveway that services such structure.
(2)
The numbers posted shall be those assigned to each structure by
the Board of Assessors and filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
Said Board shall advise the owners of property of the assigned or
reassigned number, in writing, at the property's tax address.
(3)
It shall be the responsibility of each property owner in the town to
obtain, display and maintain the assigned street number within 90
days of passage of this chapter.
(4)
This subsection shall be enforced by either the Police Department
or Fire Department. Failure to comply with this subsection shall
subject property owners to a fine of not more than $20 for each
offense.
(5)
B.
Purpose: In order to ensure the safe handling of electricity, owners of
buildings with alternative energy installations shall be responsible for
providing notification of alternative electrical sources on any type of
structure supplying electricity from a power company.
A.
Label requirements: Owners of buildings with alternative energy
installations shall label all disconnects and main electrical panels with
an approved decal provided by the Westminster Fire Department.
Alternative electrical sources shall include, but are not limited to,
solar panels, wind power, backup generators and any new technology
that would produce power other than power supplied by an electrical
company.
B.
Type of labels and location: Decal(s) supplied by the Westminster Fire
Department shall be placed in a readily visible location on the meter
C.
§ 81-7 BOATS AND BOATING § 81-9
75:47
Chapter 88
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water Commission — See Ch. 61.
Buildings and land — See Ch. 81.
Gas, plumbing and wiring — See Ch. 113.
Sewers — See Ch. 161.
Wells — See Ch. 200.
Groundwater monitoring and soil
testing — See Ch. 241.
Sewage disposal — See Ch. 245.
Toxic and hazardous wastes — See Ch. 251.
Water supplies — See Ch. 254.
§ 88-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
§ 88-2. Statutory authority.
The statutory authority for this chapter shall be:
socket on the outside of a building and inside on the main electrical
panel door.
New installations: Labels shall be installed prior to the issuance of a
certificate of completion.
D.
Existing locations: The Westminster Fire Department shall issue decals
to owners of buildings with existing alternative energy sources as these
buildings become known to Fire Department personnel.
E.
Protect the public potable water supply served by the Westminster
Water and Sewer Commission from the possibility of contamination
or pollution by isolating such contaminants or pollutants which could
backflow or backsiphon into the public water system.
A.
Promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual
or potential, between its customers in-plant potable system and
nonpotable systems.
B.
Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of crossconnection
control which will effectively prevent the contamination or
pollution of all potable water systems by cross-connection.
C.
As provided in the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, (Public
Law 93-523), and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Drinking Water
Regulations, 310 CMR 22.22, the water purveyor has the primary
responsibility for preventing water from unapproved sources or any
other substances from entering the public potable water system.
A.
§ 81-9 WESTMINSTER CODE § 88-2
88:48
§ 88-3. Responsibility for protection of water supply.
The Water Commission shall be responsible for the protection of the public
potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to
the backflow or backsiphonage of contaminants or pollutants. If, as a result
of a survey of the premises, the Commission determines that an approved
backflow prevention device is required at the town's water service
connection or as in-plant protection on any customer's premises, the
Commission or its delegated agent shall issue a cross-connection violation
form to said customer to install approved backflow prevention devices.
The customer shall, within a time frame determined by the Commission,
install such approved device or devices at his own expense, and failure
or refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install said device
or devices within the specified time frame shall constitute a ground for
discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices
have been properly installed.
§ 88-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIR GAP SEPARATION — The method of preventing backflow through
the use of an unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere
between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to
a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
APPROVED — Accepted by the reviewing authority as meeting an applicable
specification stated or cited in this chapter or as suitable for the proposed
use.
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE orEVICES — A method to
prevent backflow approved by the Department for use in Massachusetts.
ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER — An approved backflow device used
to prevent back siphonage which is not designed for use under static line
pressure.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY — Any water supply of unknown or
questionable quality on or available to the premises other than the
supplier's approved public potable water supply.
BACK PRESSURE — Pressure created by mechanical means or other means
which causes water or other liquids or substances to flow or move in a
direction opposite to that which is intended.
BACK SIPHONAGE — A form of backflow due to reduced or subatmospheric
pressure within a water system.
Westminster Water and Sewer Commission Rules and Regulations,
adopted March 13, 1995.
B.
§ 88-2 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL § 88-4
88:49
BACKFLOW — The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
into the distribution pipes or a potable water supply from any source other
than the intended source.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER WITH INTERMEDIATE ATMOSPHERIC VENT —
A device having two independently operating check valves separated by
an intermediate chamber with a means for automatically venting it to the
atmosphere, in which the check valves are force loaded to a normally closed
position and the venting means is force loaded to a normally open position.
BAROMETRIC LOOP — A loop of pipe rising at least 35 feet, at its topmost
point, above the highest fixture it supplies.
COMMISSION — The Town of Westminster Water Commission.
CONTAMINANT — Any physical, chemical, biological or radiological
substance or matter in water.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any actual or potential connection between a
distribution pipe of potable water from a public water system and any waste
pipe, soil pipe, sewer, drain or other unapproved source.
CROSS-CONNECTION VIOLATION FORM — A violation form, designated
by the Department, which is sent to the owner by the water supplier, with
copies sent to the Department, plumbing inspectors and Board of Health,
delineating cross-connection violations found on the owner's premises and
a procedure for corrective action.
DEPARTMENT — The Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY — A backflow prevention device which
incorporates an assembly of check valves, with shut-off valves at each end
and appurtenances for testing.
IN-PLANT PROTECTION — The location of approved backflow prevention
devices in a manner which provides simultaneous protection of the public
water system and the potable water system within the premises.
OWNER — Any person maintaining a cross-connection installation or
owning or occupying premises on which cross-connections can or do exist.
PERMIT — A document issued by the Department which allows a crossconnection
installation.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, association, trust,
partnership, the commonwealth, a municipality, district or other subdivision
or instrumentality of the United States, except that nothing herein shall be
constructed to refer to or to include any American Indian tribe or the United
States Secretary of the Interior in his capacity as trustee of Indian lands.
PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER — An approved backflow prevention device
designed to prevent only back siphonage and which is designed for use
under static line pressure and which has necessary appurtenances for
testing.
§ 88-4 WESTMINSTER CODE § 88-4
88:50
REDUCED PRESSURE BACKFLOW PREVENTER — An approved backflow
prevention device incorporating two more check valves, an automatically
operating differential relief valve located between the two checks, two shutoff
valves and necessary appurtenances for testing.
RESIDENTIAL DUAL CHECK — An assembly of two spring-loaded,
independently operating check valves without tightly closing shut-off valves
and test cocks; generally employed immediately downstream of the water
meter to act as a containment device.
REVIEWING AUTHORITY — The Department, its designee or the local
plumbing inspector, authorized by MGL C. 142 and licensed by the Board
of State Examiners of Plumbers and Gas Fitters, whichever is responsible
for the review and approval of the installation of an approved backflow
prevention device.
§ 88-5. Program to be approved; right of entry.
§ 88-6. Requirements for Commission and owners.
The Commission will operate an active cross-connection control
program, to include the keeping of necessary records, which fulfills
the requirements of the state's DEP Cross-Connection Regulations and
which is approved by the Department.
A.
The owner or his agent shall allow his property to be inspected for
possible cross-connections and follow the provisions of the Water
Division's program and DEP regulations. Right of entry is authorized
pursuant to 310 CMR 22.22, Section 11.
B.
Commission.
On new installations, the Commission will provide on-site
evaluation and/or inspection of plans in order to determine the type
of backflow preventer, if any, that will be required, and notify the
owner of plan approval requirements by the appropriate reviewing
authority.
(1)
For premises existing prior to the start of this program, the
Commission will perform surveys of the premises and reviews of asbuilt
plans and issue a cross-connection violation form to the owner
detailing any corrective action required, the method of achieving
the correction and the time allowed for the correction to be made.
The time period allowed shall depend upon the degree of hazard
involved.
(2)
The Commission will not allow any cross-connection to remain
unless it is protected by an approved backflow preventer for which
a permit has been issued and which will be regularly tested to
ensure satisfactory operation.
(3)
A.
§ 88-4 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL § 88-6
88:51
If the Commission determines at any time that a serious threat
to the public health exists, the water service will be terminated
immediately.
(4)
The Commission shall have on its staff, or shall have a delegated
representative, who is a backflow prevention device tester certified
by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(5)
The Commission will begin initial premise inspections to determine
the nature of existing or potential hazards, following the approval
of this program by the Department, during calendar year 1995.
Initial focus will be on high-hazard industries and commercial
premises.
(6)
Owner.
The owner shall be responsible for the elimination or protection of
all cross-connections on his premises.
(1)
The owner shall be responsible for applying for and obtaining all
necessary approvals and permits for the maintenance of crossconnections
and installation of backflow prevention devices and for
applying annually for the renewal of each permit.
(2)
The owner shall have any device that fails an inspection or test
repaired by a licensed plumber.
(3)
The owner shall inform the Commission of any proposed or
modified cross-connection and also any existing cross-connections
of which the owner is aware but which have not been found by the
Commission.
(4)
The owner shall not install a bypass around any backflow preventer
unless there is a backflow preventer of the same type on the
bypass. Owners who cannot shut down operation for testing of the
device(s) must supply additional devices necessary to allow testing
to take place.
(5)
The owner shall install backflow preventers in a manner approved
by the Department and by the Commission.
(6)
The owner shall install only reduced pressure backflow preventers
and double check valve assemblies approved by the Department.
(7)
Any owner of industrial, commercial or institutional premises
having a private well or other private water source must have a
permit if the well or source is cross connected to the Commission's
system. Permission to cross connect may be denied by the
Commission. The owner may be required to install a backflow
preventer at the service entrance if a private water source is
maintained even if it is not cross connected to the Commission's
system.
(8)
B.
§ 88-6 WESTMINSTER CODE § 88-6
88:52
§ 88-7. Degree of hazard.
The Commission recognizes the threat to the public water system arising
from cross-connections. As such, the Commission, whereas it is responsible
for the quality of the public water supply, may require a containment
device on the water service entrance to any customer who, as a result of
unprotected cross-connections, could contaminate the public water supply
system.
§ 88-8. Cross-connections limited.
The Commission shall not allow a cross-connection to exist within the public
water supply system unless it is considered necessary and all appropriate
approvals and permits have been issued.
§ 88-9. Existing backflow prevention devices.
Any existing backflow preventer shall be allowed by the Commission to
continue in service unless the degree of hazard is such as to supersede the
effectiveness of the present backflow preventer or result in an unreasonable
risk to the public health. Where the degree of hazard has increased, as in
the case of a residential installation converting to a business establishment,
any existing backflow preventer must be upgraded to a reduced pressure
backflow preventer, or a reduced pressure backflow preventer must be
installed in the event that no backflow device was present.
§ 88-10. Periodic testing required.
The owner of any residential premises having a private well or
other private water source will not be allowed a physical
connection with the public water supply system.
(9)
The owner shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for
permits, device testings, retesting in the case that the device fails
to operate correctly and second reinspections for noncompliance
with Commission or Department requirements.
(10)
Reduced pressure backflow preventers and double check valve
assemblies shall be tested and inspected at least semiannually by the
Commission.
A.
Periodic testing shall be performed by the Commission's certified tester
or his delegated representative, who shall be a certified tester.
B.
The testing shall be conducted during the Commission's regular
business hours. Exceptions to this, when at the request of the owner,
may require additional charges to cover the increased costs to the
Commission.
C.
Reduced pressure backflow preventers and double check valve
assemblies must be tested annually by the owner, independent of the
D.
§ 88-6 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL § 88-10
88:53
§ 88-11. Records and reports.
§ 88-12. Residential dual check.
semiannual test by the water supplier, and said test must be conducted
by a certified tester.
Any backflow preventer which fails during a periodic test must be
repaired or replaced by a licensed plumber. When repairs are
necessary, upon completion of the repair, the device will be retested at
the owner's expense to ensure proper operation. High-hazard situations
will not be allowed to continue unprotected if the backflow preventer
fails the test and cannot be repaired immediately. In other situations,
a compliance date of not more than 14 days after the test date will be
established. The owner is responsible for spare parts, repair tools or a
replacement device. Parallel installation of two devices is an effective
means of the owner ensuring that uninterrupted water service remains
during testing or repair of devices and is strongly recommended when
the owner desires such continuity.
E.
Backflow prevention devices will be tested more frequently than
specified above in Subsection A in cases where there is a history of
test failures and the Commission feels that due to the degree of hazard
involved, additional testing is warranted. Cost of the additional tests
will be borne by the owner.
F.
Records. The Commission will initiate and maintain the following:
(1) Master files on customer cross-connection tests and/or inspections.
(2) Master files on approved cross-connection installations.
Copies of lists and summaries supplied to the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection.
(3)
A.
Reports. The Commission will submit the following to the DEP:
(1) Initial listing of high-hazard cross-connections.
(2) Initial listing of low-hazard cross-connections.
(3) Annual update lists of Subsection B(1) and (2) above.
(4) Annual summary of cross-connection inspections and surveys.
B.
Effective the date of the acceptance of the Cross-Connection Control
Program for the Town of Westminster, Massachusetts, all new
residential buildings will be required to install a residential dual check
device immediately downstream of the water meter. This device will
be provided by the Water and Sewer Commission at a scheduled cost
to the homeowner. Installation of this residential dual check device on
a retrofit basis on existing service lines will be instituted at a time
A.
§ 88-10 WESTMINSTER CODE § 88-12
88:54
§ 88-13. Strainers.
The Commission strongly recommends that all new and retrofit installations
of reduced pressure backflow preventers and double check valve assemblies
include the installation of strainers located immediately upstream of the
backflow device. The installation of strainers will preclude the fouling of
backflow devices due to both foreseen and unforeseen circumstances
occurring to the water supply system such as water main repairs, water
main breaks, fires, periodic cleaning and flushing of mains, etc. These
occurrences may stir up debris within the water main that will cause fouling
of backflow devices installed without the benefit of strainers.
§ 88-14. Fee structure.
The initial backflow prevention device test is $50. All repeat tests are $75.
Chapter 92
DANCES; PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY
§ 92-1. Hours of operation.
No person shall conduct a public dance, bowling alley or other public place
of amusement between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 92-2. Presence of police required; costs; exception.
No public dance shall be conducted, except if there is present a police
officer in uniform, who shall be designated by the Chief of Police and
whose services shall be paid for by the person conducting the dance. This
requirement may be waived by the Chief of Police.
§ 92-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than twenty dollars ($20.) for each offense.
and at a potential cost to the homeowner as deemed necessary by the
Commission.
The owner must be aware that installation of a residential dual check
valve results in a potential closed plumbing system within his
residence. As such, provisions may have to be made by the owner to
provide for thermal expansion within his closed loop system, i.e., the
installation of thermal expansion devices and/or pressure relief valves.
B.
§ 88-12 DANCES; PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY § 92-3
92:55
Chapter 97
EARTH REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 173.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 231.
§ 92-3 WESTMINSTER CODE § 92-3
92:56
ARTICLE I
Barriers at Excavations
[Adopted STM 11-12-1974 by Art. 2 as Art. XIV, Sec. 3, of the 1975
Bylaws]
§ 97-1. Erection of barriers required.
Every owner of land which has been excavated shall erect barriers or
take other suitable measures within five days after such owner has been
notified, in writing, by the Selectmen that, in their opinion, such excavation
constitutes a hazard to public safety.
§ 97-2. Scope.
This article shall be meant to include any open pit, foundation or cellar hole.
§ 97-1 DANCES; PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY § 97-2
92:57

ARTICLE II
Proposed Subdivisions
[Adopted ATM 6-8-1991 as Art. 25]
§ 97-3. Removal to follow regular procedures.
The removal of earth materials from any parcel of land for which a
preliminary or definitive subdivision plan has been prepared shall be
allowed only in the same manner as removal from other parcels of land in
the Town. Tentative or final approval of a subdivision plan by the Planning
Board shall not be construed as authorizing the removal of material from
the premises, unless it may be in connection with the construction of streets
shown on the plan.
§ 97-3 DANCES; PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY § 97-3
92:59

ARTICLE III
Earth Removal and Placement of Fill
[Adopted STM 11-19-2013 by Art. 1315]
§ 97-4. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted under the authority contained in Massachusetts
General Laws, Chapter 40, Section 21, Paragraph 17.
§ 97-5. Purpose.
The purpose of this article and associated regulations is to regulate earth
removal operations and land filling operations for the protection of human
health, public safety, welfare, and the Town's natural resources in the Town
of Westminster. Further, the provisions of this article are intended to protect
abutting property owners from drainage problems that could potentially be
created by poorly managed earth removal and/or filling operations.
§ 97-6. Definitions.
ABUTTERS — The owners of property within 300 feet of the perimeter of
the subject property.
APPLICANT — The owner of land from which earth will be removed or fill to
be placed, or the person of lawful standing in the stead of such owner. Any
person, company, or agent standing instead of the actual property owner
must have the owner's written permission to do so.
BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of Westminster, which shall act
as the permit granting authority (PGA).
EARTH — This term shall include soil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, peat, rock,
or other earth material in solid form.
EARTH REMOVAL OPERATION — Any commercial mining, stripping,
quarrying, filling, digging or blasting of earth originating from the Town of
Westminster and its transportation into or out of the Town of Westminster.
EROSION — The process by which the ground surface is worn by forces
such as wind, running water, ice, abrasion, gravity, transportation or by
artificial means.
FILLING OF LAND — The import and use of earth materials on any parcel
of land within the Town of Westminster.
GRAVEL — Loose fragments of rock or coarse aggregate resulting from
natural disintegration and abrasion of rock or processing of weakly bound
conglomerate.
LOAM OR TOPSOIL — A soil consisting of a friable mixture of varying
proportions of clay, sand, silt, and organic matter.
15.Editor’s Note: This bylaw superseded former Art. III, Procedure for Removal of Earth
Materials, adopted STM 10-26-2004 by Art. 21.
§ 97-4 DANCES; PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY § 97-6
92:61
PGA — The permit granting authority, which will be the Planning Board for
the purposes of this article.
PROCESSING — The sorting or separation of earth materials into distinct
categories based on particle size or type usually through the use of a
screening process, not including stone crushing.
PROPOSED FILL MATERIAL — Any geologic, man-made, recycled or
processed material including in its entirety or as a proportion containing
clay, rock, sand, gravel, peat and sediment. Material meeting the federal
and/or state definition of solid or hazardous waste or as toxic, infectious,
radioactive, corrosive, or reactive material is specifically excluded.
SILT — Loose sedimentary material with rock particles usually less than 1/
16 mm or less in diameter based on the Wentworth scale of measurement.
SITE — A distinct portion of one to three contiguous lots, under the same
or different ownerships, on which an earth removal and/or fill operation is
conducted, or is proposed to be conducted, under the permit.
SLOPE — An area that is more or less steep, as measured by the vertical
rise over the horizontal distance, expressed as a percentage or ratio. For
example, a rise of one foot over three horizontal feet is a slope of 33% and
is expressed as a ratio of 3:1 slope.
STONE CRUSHING — The mechanical operation which creates smallersized
stones or stone products from larger-sized stones, boulders or
particles typically using a crushing plant or similar machinery.
§ 97-7. Applicability.
All earth removal and earth filling operations in the Town shall provide
the following information, in writing, to the Building Inspector within
six months of the effective date of this article:
(1) The map and parcel number of the subject property;
An estimate of the amount of material left to be removed (if earth
removal);
(2)
An estimate of the amount of fill material remaining to be placed (if
fill);
(3)
(4) An estimate of the anticipated annual volume of activity;
A description of completed and planned reclamation of the
property;
(5)
(6) The date the operation began; and
(7) The anticipated date of completion or cessation of the operations.
A.
Except as provided in § 97-8 or 97-14, a permit shall be required for any
of the following activities:
B.
§ 97-6 WESTMINSTER CODE § 97-7
92:62
§ 97-8. Exemptions from permit requirements.
The following earth removal or fill operations are exempted from the
requirement to obtain a permit under this article, provided that i) the earth
removal and/or fill operation is limited to no more than three contiguous
lots and does not exceed a total area of six acres, and ii) the operation is not
conducted, maintained, and/or left in a condition so as to alter the natural
drainage flow beyond the property; or to cause dust, silt, soil, or other
materials to be deposited on adjacent properties; or to otherwise cause
nuisances, hazards, or other objectionable conditions detrimental to health,
safety, or property values in adjacent areas. The PGA shall, upon petition by
an abutter or by any Town Official or Town Board, review an operation that
would be exempt from the permit requirement pursuant to this § 97-8 and
may determine that, because of the nature and scope of the earth removal
or fill operation, a permit is nonetheless required.
Earth removal that involves 2,000 cubic yards or more of material
per calendar year (January through December).
(1)
The filling of land that involves 2,000 cubic yards or more of
material per calendar year (January through December), provided
that it involves either:
(a) The disturbance of two or more acres of land; or
The filling of land in excess of 18 inches in depth above the
existing grade.
(b)
(2)
An earth removal or filling operation that does not exceed any of
the above thresholds shall not require a permit but is subject to the
following requirements (unless otherwise agreed to, in writing, by the
abutting property owner):
The operation shall not encroach closer than 10 feet to a property
line; and
(1)
No greater than a 1:1 slope shall exist between the operation and
the ten-foot buffer.
(2)
C.
Earth removal or the placement of fill associated with the installation
of septic systems, which shall be governed by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts Environmental Code (Title 5, 310 CMR 15.000).
A.
Earth removal or the placement of fill associated with the installation
of foundations for new buildings and/or building additions, which shall
be governed by MGL c. 143 and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Building Code (780 CMR).
B.
Earth removal or the placement of fill proposed for land falling within
the Town's Floodplain Protection District, which shall be governed by
§§ 205-9 and 205-46 of the Westminster Zoning Bylaw and require a
special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
C.
§ 97-7 DANCES; PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY § 97-8
92:63
§ 97-9. Permit criteria for earth removal and fill operations.
§ 97-10. General limitations.
Earth removal or the placement of fill proposed for land falling within
the Town's Wetland Protection District and associated buffer zones,
which shall be governed by the Wetlands Chapter within the Town's
General Bylaws (Chapter 202), which is administered by the
Conservation Commission, and the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection
Act.
D.
Earth removal or the placement of fill that involves less than 2,000
cubic yards on a single lot.
E.
Earth removal or the placement of fill, where the operation occurs
entirely within an individual parcel and where a Town-accepted public
way is not used for the transportation of the material.
F.
Earth removal or the placement of fill within the right-of-way for a
new subdivision road that has been approved by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board where there is already a bond in place with the Town to
ensure performance.
G.
Permits for earth removal and/or fill operations shall be granted by
the PGA only upon its written determination that the proposed use
shall not cause substantial detriment to the neighborhood, or the Town,
taking into account the characteristics of the site and the proposal in
relation to the site and surrounding environment. In addition to any
specific factors that may be set forth elsewhere in this article and its
associated regulations adopted pursuant to § 97-11, such determination
shall include consideration of each of the following:
Social, economic, or community needs which are served by the
proposal;
(1)
(2) Traffic flow and safety, including loading and unloading;
(3) Neighborhood character;
(4) Impacts on the natural environment; and
Potential fiscal impact, including impact on Town services, tax base
and property values.
(5)
A.
Determination for each of the five criteria shall be set forth in the
permit decision as findings of fact.
B.
No permit shall be issued for the removal of earth or the placement of
fill in any location if such an operation:
Will endanger the public safety, public health or constitute a
nuisance.
(1)
A.
§ 97-8 WESTMINSTER CODE § 97-10
92:64
§ 97-11. Regulations.
The PGA may adopt and periodically amend rules and regulations for the
implementation of this article, by majority vote. Such rules and regulations
may set forth performance standards for earth removal and fill operations,
impose filing and consultant fees, define additional terms not inconsistent
with the article, and establish administrative procedures. Failure by the
PGA to adopt such rules and regulations or a legal declaration of their
invalidity by a court of law shall not act to suspend or invalidate the effect
of this article.
§ 97-12. Permit procedures.
Will produce noise, dust, or other noxious effects observable at the
lot lines of the property in amounts objectionable or detrimental to
the normal use of adjacent properties.
(2)
Will result in the transportation of materials in such manner as to
cause traffic congestion, dust, spillage, noise, or other nuisances or
hazards, particularly on residential streets.
(3)
Will result in the transportation over ways which will be unduly
injured thereby.
(4)
Will result in a change of topography and cover which will be
disadvantageous to the most appropriate final use of the land or to
the use of lands adjacent to the site.
(5)
Will cause irreparable harm to or loss of important wildlife, wildlife
habitat or rare plant species indigenous to the area.
(6)
(7) Will result in stormwater damaging abutting properties.
Applicants are encouraged to submit a written statement regarding
how each of the previous items will be addressed and/or mitigated.
B.
Any person wishing to obtain a permit to remove from or place earth
material on a property in the Town, or to use any public way within the
Town for transporting such material, shall file a completed application
for a permit together with any required supporting data and maps with
the PGA and the filing fee, as established in the regulations of the PGA.
A.
Any permit issued is nontransferable and shall automatically expire
upon completion of the earth removal or fill project for which it was
issued or at such time as may be specified in said permit. In no case
shall a permit be issued initially for a period longer than three years. A
permit may be renewed for up to two years or lesser time as determined
by the PGA after evidence is presented that all conditions of the
expiring permit have been complied with and the work has been
performed in good faith. There is no limit on the number of permit
renewals an applicant can apply for. A public hearing may be required
by the PGA, at its discretion, for renewal of permits.
B.
§ 97-10 DANCES; PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY § 97-13
92:65
§ 97-13. Public hearing.
Once a complete permit application is filed with the PGA, the PGA shall set
a date for a public hearing and so notify the applicant. Notice of the hearing
shall be published by the PGA, at the applicant's expense, in a newspaper
of general circulation in each of two successive weeks, the first publication
being not less than 14 days before the day of said hearing. Notice of the
hearing shall be given to all owners of real estate abutting upon the land
specified in the permit application or lying within 300 feet of the subject
parcel, all as appearing on the most recent tax list. The PGA will arrange for
the publication and transmission of the notice of the hearing to the abutters,
and the costs will be billed to the applicant. Final approval for the permit
shall not be made until all hearing fees have been paid in full.
§ 97-14. Continuance of existing operations.
§ 97-15. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
An existing operation that had been issued a permit by the Board of
Selectmen under the Earth Removal Bylaw (§§ 97-4 through 97-11) or
the Earth Filling Bylaw (§ 81-6) that were in effect prior to the effective
date of this article may continue to operate according to the terms of
such permit, which shall hereafter be enforceable by the PGA pursuant
to this article.
A.
An existing earth removal and/or fill operation that was not required
to obtain a permit under the prior Earth Removal Bylaw, but which
exceeds the thresholds specified in § 97-7B of this article, may continue
to operate without being required to apply for or obtain a permit for
a period of three years from the effective date of this article, provided
that the owner or operator of said operation submits to the Building
Inspector the information required in § 97-7A within six months of the
effective date of this article.
B.
The right of an existing operation to operate pursuant to § 97-14A
under a permit previously issued by the Board of Selectmen, or to
operate without a permit pursuant to § 97-14B, shall expire if the
operation is discontinued. An operation shall be deemed to have been
discontinued if no earth removal or fill activity occurs at the site for a
period of 12 consecutive months.
C.
The PGA or its authorized agent shall enforce this article, its
regulations, and the requirements and conditions of permits issued
thereunder and may pursue civil and criminal remedies for violations of
the same.
A.
The Building Inspector is authorized to conduct inspections on behalf of
the PGA. To the extent permitted by law, or if authorized by the owner,
operator, or other person in control of the site, the Building Inspector
or other agent of the PGA may enter on the site to conduct inspections.
B.
§ 97-13 WESTMINSTER CODE § 97-15
92:66
§ 97-16. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and the invalidity of any section,
subdivision, paragraph, or other part of this article shall not affect the
validity or effectiveness of the remainder of the article.
The Building Inspector or other authorized agent of the PGA may issue
such orders as are deemed necessary to stop violations and ensure
compliance with this article, its regulations, and permits, including an
order to cease and desist operations. Such orders may be issued by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or by delivery, to the property
owner, permit holder, or person responsible for operations at the site.
C.
The PGA may seek injunctive relief to restrain violations or to compel
abatement or remediation of violations.
D.
Any person who violates any provision of this article or regulations,
permits, and orders issued thereunder may be punished by a fine of
not more than $300 per offense. Each day that such violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
E.
As an alternative to a criminal fine, the Town may utilize the
noncriminal disposition procedures of MGL c. 40, § 21D, in which case
the Building Inspector shall be the enforcing person. The penalty for
the first offense shall be $100. The penalty for the second offense shall
be $200. The penalty for the third and subsequent offenses shall be
$300.
F.
If the violator holds a permit issued under this article, the PGA may
revoke the permit after a public hearing, at which point all operations
shall cease until such time as the necessary measures are taken to
assure compliance with this article and a new permit is issued.
G.
§ 97-15 DANCES; PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY § 97-16
92:67
Chapter 100
EMERGENCY RADIO COMMUNICATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 67.
Buildings and land — See Ch. 81.
Rapid entry systems — See Ch. 148.
§ 100-1. Purpose.
To provide adequate radio communications for the safety of firefighters
who enter buildings greater than 12,000 square feet during emergency
situations.
§ 100-2. Emergency communications ability required.
No building permit shall be issued for a) construction of a new building or
structure containing a floor area equal to or greater than 12,000 square
feet, b) substantial renovation or alteration of an existing building
containing 12,000 square feet or more, or which, after such renovation
or alteration, will contain 12,000 square feet or more, unless such
construction, renovation, or alteration shall provide for "public emergency
radio communication" as required hereunder. For purposes of this bylaw,
"public emergency radio communication" shall provide the unimpeded
ability for emergency responders to communicate with each other over
public emergency radio frequencies from any point within the building to
any other point within the building, and from any point within the building
to any exterior area of the building within 200 feet of the building.
§ 100-3. Building permit review.
As a part of and in addition to any existing Fire Department building
permit application review, all building permit applications for structures
that are or will be required to comply with the obligation to provide "public
emergency radio communication" in accordance with § 100-2, above shall
undergo a review by the Fire Department to determine whether the design
and construction materials, as proposed, are consistent with the obligation
to provide unimpeded communications between and among emergency
responders in accordance with § 100-2, above. Should the Fire Department
have cause to believe that there is a likelihood that such design or
construction materials may be inconsistent with the obligation to provide
such unimpeded communications between and among emergency
responders, the applicant shall be required to engage an independent radio
engineer, acceptable to the Fire Department, at the applicant's sole and
exclusive expense, to provide a written evaluation addressed to the Fire
Department, based upon commonly accepted engineering standards, of the
likelihood that the building design and construction materials, as proposed,
§ 97-16 WESTMINSTER CODE § 100-3
92:68
will provide unimpeded communication between and among emergency
responders, in accordance with § 100-2, above. In addition, such report
shall contain recommendations for changes or modifications to the building
design or construction materials in order to ensure such unimpeded
communications. Prior to Fire Department approval of any such building
permit application, the application shall incorporate any and all changes
or modifications to the building design and/or construction materials as
recommended by such independent radio engineer.
§ 100-4. Existing buildings.
Existing buildings shall be required to comply with this bylaw if they
undergo substantial renovations or alterations as defined in the State
Building Code.
§ 100-5. New construction.
All new construction, regardless of use or occupancy, over 12,000 square
feet shall comply with this bylaw.
§ 100-6. Equipment.
Any "public emergency radio communication system" installed in
accordance with this bylaw shall comply with all applicable rules and
regulations, as amended from time to time, issued by the Federal
Communication Commission, or of any other local, state, or federal
agency having jurisdiction over such communication systems. The
design of such system must be occupancy-based, and must be
engineered and designed taking into account the machinery and
equipment to be used by the occupant(s) of such building.
A.
Any such communications system that requires a power source shall
have a battery backup power source that provides power for no less
than two hours without an external power source. All "public
emergency radio communication systems" must be powered from
circuits that are separate and distinct and not subject to being tripped
by other equipment. All power cords to devices in the system must be
restrained in a manner acceptable to the Fire Department to prevent
accidental or easy removal. All equipment must be installed by licensed
vendors who have secured the necessary permits and all such
installation shall meet applicable sections of the National Electrical
Code, as amended from time to time.
B.
All power-sourced equipment shall be protected from access thereto
and shall contain such safeguards as are acceptable to the Fire
Department to prevent such equipment from being accidentally turned
off. Any cabinet used for emergency radio equipment must be locked,
and such cabinets or equipment used for emergency radio
communication shall be marked "Authorized Personnel Only." The
applicant shall supply a copy of the key to any such equipment cabinet
C.
§ 100-3 DANCES; PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY § 100-6
92:69
§ 100-7. Compliance testing.
Prior to the Fire Department approval of a request for an occupancy permit
for any building requiring a "public emergency radio communication
system" in accordance with § 100-2, above, the Fire Department shall test
the system for compliance with the requirements of this bylaw. Such
compliance testing shall be done upon completion of construction and
prior to occupancy using then-existing equipment in use by the Town. No
occupancy certificate shall be issued until and unless the system is tested
and determined to be in compliance with the requirements of this bylaw.
§ 100-8. Annual testing.
The Fire Department shall conduct annual compliance testing of all "public
emergency radio communication systems" installed in accordance with this
bylaw. Any system requiring battery backup shall be tested for no less
than one hour to verify that it will operate during an actual power outage.
The Fire Department shall provide written notice to the building owner of
any noncompliance of such system with the requirements of this bylaw, as
amended from time to time. Any such noncompliance shall be fully remedied
to the satisfaction of the Fire Department within 30 days of such notice.
Upon request of the Fire Department, the building owner shall provide a
written report from an independent radio engineer, acceptable to the Fire
Department, at the applicant's sole and exclusive expense, to provide a
and a key to any room where equipment is stored. Such keys shall be
kept in the building's lock box.
Any system installed in accordance with this bylaw shall provide an
audible device and white strobe light, both of which shall be activated
by the failure of the system. Any amplifier equipment powering the
audible device shall have a monitoring system that monitors amplifier
operation and primary power. The system may permit the audible signal
to be silenced during a failure, but such system shall not permit the
strobe light to be turned off during a failure and it shall remain
illuminated at all times until the fault has been corrected. The strobe
light shall be located in an accessible location authorized by the Fire
Department. The applicant shall cause a sign to be located at the
strobe light with the name and telephone number of the equipment
maintenance contractor. The Fire Department must be notified of any
failures that extend past the two-hour time limit.
D.
No secondary usage of any emergency radio equipment shall be
permitted without written approval of the Fire Department. Such
secondary usage shall not interfere with or degrade the operational
ability of the system. To the extent that such secondary use interferes
with or degrades the operation of the system for the public safety
purposes set forth in this bylaw, such use shall cease immediately
regardless of any approval that may have been granted by the Fire
Department.
E.
§ 100-6 WESTMINSTER CODE § 100-8
92:70
written evaluation addressed to the Fire Department, based upon commonly
accepted engineering standards, that the proposed remedy will bring the
system into compliance with the requirements of this bylaw.
§ 100-9. Modifications.
No modifications to "public emergency radio communication systems" shall
be made without the prior written authorization of the Fire Department.
Upon completion of any such approved modifications, a performance test
shall be conducted by the Fire Department in addition to any yearly
performance test.
§ 100-10. Change of service contract.
The owner of the building must notify the Fire Department with regard to
any change to its emergency radio equipment maintenance contract.
§ 100-11. Emergency radio system operation.
All engineer emergency radio system operation requirements must work
based on occupancy. Any designed system for communication must take into
consideration potential occupant machinery, equipment, storage, etc.
§ 100-12. Responsibility for maintenance.
§ 100-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended ATM 5-3-2008 by Art.
36]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more
than $300 for each offense.
The building owner shall be solely responsible for maintaining the
"public emergency radio communication system" and assuring its
compliance with the requirements of this bylaw. The owner shall
maintain a contract with a qualified radio service contractor for all
systems that require power, which contract shall provide for next-day
service for such systems.
A.
To the extent that the owner fails to maintain such systems and/or
to ensure compliance of such systems with this bylaw, the Town may,
after due notice, undertake such repairs to bring such system into
compliance with the requirements of this bylaw. Any costs incurred by
the Town in bringing such systems into compliance with this bylaw shall
constitute a municipal lien against such real property.
B.
§ 100-8 DANCES; PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY § 100-13
92:71
Chapter 102
FARMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Agricultural Commission — See Ch. 6.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 231.
§ 102-1. Legislative purpose and intent; scope.
§ 102-2. Definitions.
The purpose and intent of this bylaw is to state with emphasis the
right to farm accorded to all citizens of the Commonwealth under
Article 97 of the Constitution, and all state statutes and regulations
thereunder, including but not limited to MGL c. 40A, § 3, Paragraph 1;
MGL c. 90, § 9; c. 111, § 125A; and MGL c. 128, § 1A. We the citizens of
Westminster restate and republish these rights pursuant to the Town's
authority conferred by Article 89 of the Articles of Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution, ("Home Rule Amendment").
A.
This General Bylaw encourages the pursuit of agriculture, promotes
agriculture-based economic opportunities, and protects farmlands
within the Town of Westminster by allowing agricultural uses and
related activities to function with minimal conflict with abutters and
Town agencies. This bylaw shall apply to all jurisdictional areas within
the Town.
B.
The word "farm" shall include any parcel or contiguous parcels of
land, or water bodies used for the primary purpose of commercial
agriculture, or accessory thereto.
A.
The words "farming" or "agriculture" or their derivatives shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
Farming in all its branches and the cultivation and tillage of the
soil;
(1)
(2) Dairying;
Production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any
agricultural, aquacultural, floricultural, viticultural, or
horticultural commodities;
(3)
Growing and harvesting of forest products upon forest land, and
any other forestry or lumbering operations;
(4)
(5) Raising of livestock, including horses;
B.
§ 100-13 WESTMINSTER CODE § 102-2
92:72
§ 102-3. Right to farm declaration.
The right to farm is hereby recognized to exist within the Town of
Westminster. The above-described agricultural activities may occur on
holidays, weekdays, and weekends by night or day and shall include the
attendant incidental noise, odors, dust, and fumes associated with normally
accepted agricultural practices. It is hereby determined that whatever
impact may be caused to others through the normal practice of agriculture
is more than offset by the benefits of farming to the neighborhood,
community, and society in general. The benefits and protections of this
bylaw are intended to apply exclusively to those commercial agricultural
and farming operations and activities conducted in accordance with
generally accepted agricultural practices. Moreover, nothing in this Right
to Farm Bylaw shall be deemed as acquiring any interest in land, or as
imposing any land use regulation, which is properly the subject of state
statute, regulation, or local zoning law.
(6) Keeping of horses as a commercial enterprise; and
Keeping and raising of poultry, swine, cattle, ratites (such as emus,
ostriches and rheas) and camelids (such as llamas and camels),
and other domesticated animals for food and other agricultural
purposes, including bees and fur-bearing animals.
(7)
"Farming" shall encompass activities including, but not limited to, the
following:
Operation and transportation of slow-moving farm equipment over
roads within the Town;
(1)
Control of pests, including, but not limited to, insects, weeds,
predators and disease organism of plants and animals;
(2)
(3) Application of manure, fertilizers and pesticides;
Conducting agriculture-related educational and farm-based
recreational activities, including agri-tourism, provided that the
activities are related to marketing the agricultural output or
services of the farm;
(4)
Processing and packaging of the agricultural output of the farm
and the operation of a farmer's market or farm stand, including
signage thereto;
(5)
Maintenance, repair, or storage of seasonal equipment, or
apparatus owned or leased by the farm owner or manager used
expressly for the purpose of propagation, processing, management,
or sale of the agricultural products; and
(6)
On-farm relocation of earth and the clearing of ground for farming
operations.
(7)
C.
§ 102-2 DANCES; PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY § 102-4
92:73
§ 102-4. Disclosure notification.
§ 102-5. Resolution of disputes.
§ 102-6. Severability.
If any part of this bylaw is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this bylaw. The Town
of Westminster hereby declares the provisions of this bylaw to be severable.
In order to promote harmony between farmers and their new
neighbors, the Town of Westminster requests selling landholders and/or
their agents (and assigns) to provide notice to prospective purchasers
as follows:
"It is the policy of this community to conserve, protect and encourage
the maintenance and improvement of agricultural land for the
production of food, and other agricultural products, and also for its
natural and ecological value. This disclosure notification is to inform
buyers that the property they are about to acquire lies within a town
where farming activities occur. Such farming activities (which may
occur on holidays, weekdays, and weekends by night or day) may
include, but are not limited to, activities that cause noise, dust and
odors. Occupying land within Westminster means that one should
expect and accept such conditions as a normal and necessary aspect of
living in such an area."
A.
A copy of this disclosure notification shall be provided by the Town
to landowners from time to time by mail. A copy of the disclosure
notification shall be posted in Town Hall and be available for
distribution from the Planning Board or its designee and may be
published on brochures or Town websites.
B.
Any person who seeks to complain about the operation of a farm may,
notwithstanding pursuing any other available remedy, file a grievance
with the Select Board, the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or the Board
of Health, depending upon the nature of the grievance. The filing of
the grievance does not suspend the time within which to pursue any
other available remedies that the aggrieved may have. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer or Select Board shall forward a copy of the
grievance to the Agricultural Commission or its agent, which shall
review and facilitate the resolution of the grievance, and report its
recommendations to the referring Town authority within an agreedupon
time frame.
A.
The Board of Health, except in cases of imminent danger or public
health risk, shall forward a copy of the grievance to the Agricultural
Commission or its agent, which shall review and facilitate the resolution
of the grievance, and report its recommendations to the Board of
Health within an agreed-upon time frame.
B.
§ 102-4 WESTMINSTER CODE § 102-7
92:74
§ 102-7. Precedence.
In the event of conflict between this bylaw and all other Town regulations,
this bylaw shall take precedence. In the event of conflict between the
bylaw and federal or state law, federal or state law shall take precedence
respectively.
Chapter 104
FIREARMS
§ 104-1. Discharge restricted; exceptions.
No person shall fire or discharge any firearm, air rifle, bow and arrow or
slingshot within 500 feet of any occupied dwelling or 100 feet of any street,
across a public way or on any private posted grounds, except with the
consent of the occupant thereof; provided, however, that this chapter shall
not apply to the use of such weapons at any military exercise or in the lawful
defense of the person, family or property of any citizen, nor to any act or
duty required or justified by law.
§ 104-2. Use in parks. [Amended ATM 5-2-2015 by Art. 42]
Hunting and firearms are prohibited in Hager Park, the Rambler Recreation
Area, and the Crocker Pond Recreation Area.
Chapter 110
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Permits to delinquent taxpayers — See Ch.
131, Art. I.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 141.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 157.
Roadway stands — See Ch. 173, Art. III.
§ 110-1. Permit required.
No person shall conduct any garage, yard or other public sale without first
obtaining a permit from the Board of Selectmen.
§ 110-2. Number of sales per year limited.
In accordance with state law, only two (2) yard, garage or other public sales
may be held per year without a suitable license.
Chapter 113
§ 102-7 GARAGE SALES § 110-2
110:75
GAS, PLUMBING AND WIRING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Buildings and land — See Ch. 81.
§ 113-1. Appointment of officers; terms; qualifications; duties.
In May of each year, the following officers shall be appointed:
§ 113-2. Permits required.
As required by Massachusetts State law, permits are necessary for all new
construction and renovations, which must be inspected.
§ 113-3. Modular homes.
Modular homes shall be in the same category as new construction.
Chapter 116
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Trees — See Ch. 190.
§ 116-1. Marking or placement of signs prohibited.
No person, unless required by law to do so, shall make any marks, letters
or figures of any kind or place any sign, advertisement or placard upon or
An Inspector of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances, who shall hold office
one (1) year or until his successor is appointed. Said Inspector shall
be a licensed plumber or a licensed gas fitter and shall enforce the
rules and regulations adopted by the Board of Health and the State Gas
Installation Code, MGL C. 737.
A.
An Inspector of Plumbing, who shall hold office one (1) year or until his
successor is appointed. Said Inspector shall be a licensed plumber and
shall enforce the rules and regulations adopted by the Board of Health
and the State Plumbing Code, MGL C. 142.
B.
An Inspector of Wiring, who shall hold office one (1) year or until his
successor is appointed. Said Inspector shall be a licensed electrician
and shall enforce the rules and regulations adopted by the Board of
Selectmen and the State Wiring Code, MGL C. 143.
C.
§ 110-2 WESTMINSTER CODE § 116-1
116:76
against any wall, fence, post, ledge, stone, tree, building or structure or
upon any street in this town without the permission of the owner thereof.
§ 116-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than twenty dollars ($20.) for each offense.
Chapter 122
ICE-COVERED SURFACES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 134. Motor and recreational vehicles — See Ch.
196.
§ 122-1. Permit required for operation of motor vehicle.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle of any kind on the ice-covered
surface of any body of water to which the public has a right of access
without having first obtained a permit from the Chief of Police or his
designee.
§ 122-2. Deposit of rubbish and debris.
No person shall deposit or allow to remain any rubbish, debris or other
substance, whether natural or artificial, on the ice-covered surface of any
body of water to which the public has a right of access.
Chapter 123
ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cross-connection control — See Ch. 88.
Gas, plumbing and wiring — See Ch. 113.
Sewers — See Ch. 161.
Wells — See Ch. 200.
Groundwater monitoring and soil
testing — See Ch. 241.
Sewage disposal — See Ch. 245.
Toxic and hazardous wastes — See Ch. 251.
Water supplies — See Ch. 254.
Wells, private and semipublic — See Ch. 255.
§ 116-1 ICE-COVERED SURFACES § 123-1
122:77
§ 123-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of Westminster through the regulation of
nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum
extent practicable, as required by federal and state law. This bylaw
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with
requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this chapter are:
§ 123-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following shall mean:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — Employees or designees of the
director of the municipal agency designated to enforce this bylaw.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES construction
permits. Currently these include construction projects resulting in land
disturbance of five acres or more. Beginning in March 2003, NPDES Storm
Water Phase II permits will be required for construction projects resulting
in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include but are not
limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user;
A.
To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate
storm sewer system; and
B.
To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter.
C.
§ 123-1 WESTMINSTER CODE § 123-2
123:78
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge
to the storm drain system, except as exempted in § 123-7 of this bylaw.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including
but not limited to any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and washwater to enter
the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency or, any drain or conveyance connected from a
commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not
been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an
authorized enforcement agency.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as
defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORM WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by EPA [or by
a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)] that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,
whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide
basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded
or abandoned objects, bylaws, and accumulations, so that same may cause
or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
§ 123-2 ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS § 123-2
123:79
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN — A document which
describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented
by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination
at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the
maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
§ 123-3. Applicability.
This bylaw shall apply to all flows entering the municipally owned storm
drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless
explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.
§ 123-4. Authority.
This bylaw is adopted under the authority granted by the Home Rule
Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule
Procedures Act, and pursuant to the regulations of the federal Clean Water
Act found at 40 CFR 122.34.
§ 123-5. Responsibility for administration.
The Public Works Commission (PWC) shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this bylaw. Any powers granted or duties imposed
upon the PWC may be delegated in writing by the PWC to employees or
agents of the PWC. The PWC may adopt rules and regulations to effectuate
the purposes of this bylaw, however, failure to adopt such rules and
regulations shall not have the effect of suspending or invalidating this
bylaw.
§ 123-6. Discharge prohibitions.
Illicit discharges. No person shall dump, discharge, cause or allow
to be discharged any pollutant or nonstormwater discharge into the
municipal storm drain system (MS4), into a watercourse, or into the
waters of the commonwealth.
A.
Prohibition of illicit connections. No person shall construct, use, allow,
maintain or continue any illicit connection to the municipal storm drain
system, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under
applicable law, regulation or custom at the time of connection.
B.
Obstruction of municipal storm drain system. No person shall obstruct
or interfere with the normal flow of stormwater into or out of the
C.
§ 123-2 WESTMINSTER CODE § 123-6
123:80
§ 123-7. Exemptions.
municipal storm drain system without prior written approval from the
PWC.
A. Discharge or flow resulting from fire-fighting activities.
The following non-stormwater discharges or flow are exempt from the
prohibition of nonstormwaters provided that the source is not a
significant contributor of a pollutant to the municipal storm drain
system:
(1) Waterline flushing;
(2) Flow from potable water sources;
(3) Springs;
(4) Natural flow from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(5) Diverted stream flow;
(6) Rising groundwater;
Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR
35.2005(20), or uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
(7)
Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains (not including
active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, or
air-conditioning condensation;
(8)
(9) Discharge from landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
(10)Water from individual residential car washing;
Discharge from dechlorinated swimming pool water (less than one
ppm chlorine), provided that water is allowed to stand for one week
prior to draining and the pool is drained in such a way as not to
cause a nuisance;
(11)
(12)Discharge from street sweeping;
Dye testing, provided verbal notification is given to the PWC prior
to the time of the test;
(13)
Non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or a
surface water discharge permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
administered under the authority or the United States
Environmental Protection Agency or the Department of
Environmental Protection, provided that the discharge is in full
compliance with the requirements of the permit, waiver, or order
and applicable laws and regulations; and
(14)
B.
§ 123-6 ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS § 123-7
123:81
§ 123-8. Suspension of storm drainage system access.
The PWC may suspend municipal storm drain system access to any person
or property without prior written notice when such suspension is necessary
to stop an actual or threatened discharge of pollutants that presents
imminent risk of harm to the public health, safety, welfare or the
environment. In the event any person fails to comply with an emergency
suspension order, the authorized enforcement agency may take all
reasonable steps to prevent or minimize harm to public health, safety,
welfare or the environment.
§ 123-9. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of local, state or federal law, as soon
as a person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for
emergency response for a facility or operation has information or suspects
a release of materials at that facility or operation resulting in or which may
result in discharge of pollutants to the municipal drainage system or waters
of the commonwealth, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure
containment, and cleanup of the release. In the event of a release of oil or
hazardous materials, the person shall immediately notify the municipal Fire
and Police Departments. In the event of a release of nonhazardous material,
the reporting person shall provide to the authorized enforcement agency
written confirmation of all telephone, facsimile, or in-person notifications
within three business days thereafter. If the discharge of prohibited
materials is from a commercial or industrial facility, the facility owner or
operator shall retain on-site a written record of the discharge and the
actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for
at least three years.
§ 123-10. Enforcement.
Discharge for which advanced written approval is received from
the PWC as necessary to protect public health, safety, welfare or
the environment.
(15)
The PWC or authorized agent of the PWC shall enforce this bylaw,
regulations, orders, violation notices, and enforcement orders, and may
pursue all civil and criminal remedies for such violations.
A.
Civil relief. If a person violates the provisions of this bylaw, regulations,
permit, notice or order issued thereunder, the PWC may seek injunctive
relief in a court of competent jurisdiction restraining the person from
activities which would create further violations or compelling the
person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
B.
Orders. The PWC or an authorized agent of the PWC may issue a
written order to enforce the provisions of this bylaw or the regulations
thereunder, which may include:
(1) Elimination of illicit connections or discharges to the MS4;
C.
§ 123-7 WESTMINSTER CODE § 123-10
123:82
§ 123-11. Severability.
The provisions of this bylaw are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this Bylaw or the application
(2) Performance of monitoring and analyses, and reporting;
That unlawful discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist; and
(3)
(4) Remediation of contamination in connection therewith.
If the enforcement agent determines that abatement of remediation of
contamination is required, the order shall set forth a deadline by which
such abatement or remediation must be completed. Said order shall
further advise that, should the violator or property owner fail to abate
or perform remediation within the specified deadline, the Town may, at
is option, undertake such work, and expenses thereof shall be charged
to the violator.
D.
Within 30 days after completing all measures necessary to abate the
violation or to perform remediation, the violator and the property
owner will be notified of the costs incurred by the Town, including
administrative costs. The violator or property owner may file a written
protest objecting to the amount or basis of cost with the PWC within 30
days of receipt of the notification of the costs incurred. If the amount
due is not received by the expiration of the time in which to file a
protest or within 30 days following a decision of the PWC affirming or
reducing the costs, or from a final decision of a court of competent
jurisdiction, the costs shall constitute a lien on the owner's property for
the amount of said costs. Interest shall begin to accrue on any unpaid
costs at the statutory rate provided in MGL c. 59, § 57, after the 31st
day at which the costs first become due.
E.
Criminal penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw,
regulation, order or permit issued thereunder, shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $100. Each day or part thereof that such violation
occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
F.
Entry to perform duties under this chapter. To the extent permitted
by state law, or if authorized by the owner or other party in control
of the property, the PWC or its agents, performing their duties under
this bylaw and regulations and may make or cause to be made such
examinations, surveys or sampling as the PWC deems reasonably
necessary.
G.
Appeals. The decision or orders of the PWC shall be final. Further relief
shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction.
H.
Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this bylaw are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal,
state or local law.
I.
§ 123-10 ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS § 123-11
123:83
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
bylaw.
Chapter 125
JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 157. Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 193.
§ 125-1. Fence required; permit.
No person shall be permitted to maintain a dump or accumulation of used
metal, glass or rubber or of junk or rubbish of any sort, except brush,
grass or garden material, or maintain an automotive graveyard or place
for the storage of junked automobiles or automotive parts in the open
air within view of a public way or of an adjoining lot unless the area so
used is surrounded by a six-foot-high opaque fence or wall and unless a
permit therefor, to be renewed annually, is first obtained from the Board of
Selectmen. For the purposes of this chapter, the open-air storage of three
(3) or more junked vehicles shall constitute an automobile graveyard or
place for the storage of junked automobiles or parts.
§ 125-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than fifty dollars ($50.) for each offense.
Chapter 131
LICENSES AND PERMITS
§ 123-11 WESTMINSTER CODE § 125-2
125:84
ARTICLE I
Delinquent Taxpayers
[Adopted ATM 6-25-1994 by Art. 32]
§ 131-1. Denial, revocation or suspension for failure to pay tax, fee
or charge. [Amended ATM 5-3-1997 by Art. 38]
Any board, officer or department shall deny any application or revoke
or suspend any local license or permit, including renewals and transfers,
for any persons, corporation or business enterprise who has neglected or
refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other
municipal charges or with respect to any activity, event or other matter
which is the subject of such license or permit and which event or matter is
carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real
estate whose owner had neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees,
assessments, betterments or any other municipal charges.
§ 131-2. List of delinquent taxpayers. [Amended ATM 5-6-2017 by
Art. 28]
The Town Collector or other municipal official responsible for records of
all municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges,
hereinafter referred to as "the Town Collector," shall annually, and may
periodically, furnish to each department, board, commission or division,
hereinafter referred to as "the licensing authority," that issues licenses or
permits, including renewals and transfers, a list of any person, corporation
or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as "the party," that has
neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments
or other municipal charges and that such party has not filed, in good faith,
a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending petition
before the Appellate Tax Board.
§ 131-3. Written notice and hearing; use of findings limited.
The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or
permit, including renewals and transfers of any party whose name
appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the Town
Collector or with respect to any activity, event or other matter which
is the subject of such license or permit and which activity, event or
matter is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised
on or about real estate owned by any party whose name appears on
said list furnished to the licensing authority from the Town Collector;
provided, however, that written notice is given to the party and the
Town Collector, as required by applicable provisions of law, and the
party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier than 14 days after said
notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or
suspension of said license or permit to any party. The Town Collector
shall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect
to such license denial, revocation or suspension. [Amended ATM
5-3-1997 by Art. 38; ATM 5-4-2013 by Art. 38]
A.
§ 131-1 JUNKYARDS § 131-3
125:85
§ 131-4. Reissuance or renewal.
Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this article shall
not be reissued or renewed until the license authority receives a certificate
issued by the Town Collector that the party is in good standing with respect
to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal
charges, payable to the municipality as of the date of issuance of said
certificate.
§ 131-5. Payment agreements.
Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement,
thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating
said limitations to the license or permit, and the validity of said license
shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement.
Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension
or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder
be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
§ 131-6. Waiver of denial, suspension or revocation.
The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation
if it finds there is not direct or indirect business interest by the property
owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate
family, as defined in Section 1 of Chapter 268A in the business or activity
conducted in or on said property.
§ 131-7. Nonapplicability. [Amended ATM 5-4-2013 by Art. 38]
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any of the licenses and
permits exempted by MGL c. 40, § 57, which includes licenses or permits for
open burning (MGL c. 48, § 13); bicycles (MGL c. 85, § 11A); sales of articles
for charitable purposes (MGL c. 101, § 33); children work permits (MGL c.
149, § 69); clubs or associations dispensing food or beverage licenses (MGL
c. 140, § 21E); dog licenses (MGL c. 140, § 137); fishing, hunting, trapping
licenses (MGL c. 131, § 12); marriage licenses (MGL c. 207, § 28); theatrical
events and public exhibition permits (MGL c. 140, § 181); and any other
local license or permit which the Town chooses to exclude from this article
by further amendment to the article.
Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to such
license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the
purposes of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced
in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license
denial, revocation or suspension.
B.
§ 131-3 WESTMINSTER CODE § 131-7
125:86
Chapter 134
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ice-covered surfaces — See Ch. 122.
Junkyards — See Ch. 125.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 173.
§ 134-1. Binding of load on truck required.
The person having control of any truck or vehicle carrying wastepaper or
other material to the public dump or any other destination shall bind or
secure the load against being scattered in any street or public place or on
the property of another.
§ 134-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than twenty dollars ($20.) for each offense and shall be responsible to
clean up any such material so scattered and repair any damage thereby.
Chapter 136
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Agricultural Commission — See Ch. 6.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 231.
§ 136-1. Findings and intent.
Land uses in Town affect our streams, lakes and water supplies. Careful
planning of new development and redevelopment will protect the quality
and health of these important water resources. Therefore, the Town of
Westminster enacts this Low-Impact Development (LID) Bylaw to provide
guidance that will prevent harmful impacts from land development
activities.
§ 136-2. Purposes.
The purpose of this bylaw is to protect, maintain and enhance the
public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing
requirements and procedures to manage stormwater runoff, promote
groundwater recharge and to prevent water pollution from new
A.
§ 131-7 LITTERING § 136-2
134:87
§ 136-3. Authority.
This bylaw is adopted under authority granted by the Home Rule
Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution, and pursuant to the
regulations of the federal Clean Water Act, and as authorized by the
residents of the Town of Westminster at Town Meeting, dated November 14,
2006.
§ 136-4. Scope and applicability.
development and redevelopment. This bylaw seeks to meet that
purpose through the following objectives:
Establish regulations for land development activities that preserve
the health of water resources;
(1)
Require that the amount and quality of stormwater from new
development is equal to or better than predevelopment conditions
in order to reduce flooding, stream erosion, pollution, property
damage and harm to aquatic life;
(2)
Establish LID management standards and design criteria to control
the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff;
(3)
Encourage the use of "low-impact development practices," such as
reducing impervious cover and preserving greenspace and other
natural areas;
(4)
Establish maintenance provisions to ensure that stormwater
treatment practices will continue to function as designed and pose
no threat to public safety;
(5)
Establish procedures for the Town's review of low-impact
development plans and for the Town's inspection of approved
stormwater treatment practices.
(6)
Nothing in this bylaw is intended to replace the requirements of either
the Town of Westminster General Wetlands Protection Bylaw,16 or any
other bylaw that may be adopted by the Town of Westminster. Any
activity subject to the provisions of the above-cited bylaws must comply
with the specifications of each.
B.
This bylaw shall be applicable to all new development and
redevelopment, including site plan applications and subdivision
applications. The bylaw shall apply to any activities that will result in an
increased amount of stormwater runoff or pollutants from a parcel of
land, or that will alter the drainage characteristics of a parcel of land,
unless exempt under § 136-4B of this bylaw. All new development and
redevelopment, under the jurisdiction of this bylaw, shall be required to
A.
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 202, Wetlands.
§ 136-2 WESTMINSTER CODE § 136-4
134:88
obtain a LID Permit. The LID permit process shall be coordinated with
existing permitting, where applicable.
An alteration, redevelopment, or conversion of land use or
activities to those with higher potential pollutant loadings, such
as auto salvage yards, auto fueling facilities, fleet storage yards,
commercial parking lots, road salt storage areas, commercial
nurseries and landscaping, outdoor storage and loading areas of
hazardous substances, or marinas, shall require a LID permit.
(1)
Redevelopment projects are presumed to meet the specified LID
requirements described in this bylaw if the total impervious cover
is reduced by 40% from existing conditions.
(2)
Exemptions. No person shall alter land within the Town of Westminster
without having obtained a LID permit for the property, with the
following exceptions:
Any activity that will disturb an area less than 10,000 square feet
or less than 25% of a contiguous property, whichever is less;
(1)
Normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural use
as defined by the Wetlands Protection Act, 310 CMR 10.04, and
MGL c. 131, § 40.
(2)
(3) Conversion of land to agricultural use for crops and/or pasture;
Timber harvesting conducted under the terms of an approved
forest cutting plan as defined by the Forest Cutting Practices Act
regulation, 304 CMR 11.00, and MGL c. 132, §§ 40 through 46;
(4)
Maintenance of existing landscaping, gardens or lawn areas
associated with a single-family dwelling;
(5)
Construction of a single-family dwelling, where approval is not
required, as defined under the Subdivision Control Law. Prior to
land-disturbing activities, persons constructing a single-family
dwelling are strongly encouraged to consult with the Town Building
Inspector and/or Director of Public Works about actions to reduce
stormwater impacts during and after construction. Persons
constructing single-family dwellings are strongly encouraged to
use stormwater control and site planning methods described in the
Town of Westminster Best Development Practices Guidebook;
(6)
(7) Repair or replacement of an existing septic system;
Repair or replacement of an existing roof of a single-family
dwelling;
(8)
The construction of any fence that will not alter existing terrain or
drainage patterns;
(9)
B.
§ 136-4 LITTERING § 136-4
134:89
§ 136-5. Definitions.
The definitions are in Appendix A of this bylaw17 and shall apply in the
interpretation and implementation of the bylaw. Terms not defined in this
Appendix shall be understood according to their customary and usual
meaning. Additional definitions may be adopted by separate regulation.
§ 136-6. Administration.
Construction of a deck, patio, retaining wall, driveway expansion,
shed, swimming pool, tennis or basketball court associated with a
single-family dwelling;
(10)
Construction of utilities (gas, water, electric, telephone, etc.) other
than drainage, which will not alter terrain, ground cover, or
drainage patterns;
(11)
Emergency repairs to any stormwater management facility or
practice that poses a threat to public health or safety, or as deemed
necessary by the LID Authority;
(12)
Any work or projects for which all necessary approvals and permits
have been issued before the effective date of this bylaw;
(13)
The Planning Board is hereby designated as the LID Authority. The
Planning Board shall administer, implement and enforce this bylaw. Any
powers granted or duties imposed upon the Planning Board may be
delegated in writing by the Planning Board to its employees or agents.
A.
LID regulations. The Planning Board may adopt, and periodically
amend, rules and regulations relating to the terms, conditions,
definitions, enforcement, fees (including application, inspection, and/or
consultant fees), procedures and administration of this LID Bylaw by
majority vote of the Planning Board, after conducting a public hearing
to receive comments on any proposed revisions. Such hearing dates
shall be advertised in a newspaper of general local circulation, at
least 14 days prior to the hearing date. After public notice and public
hearing, the Planning Board may issue rules and regulations to fulfill
the purposes of this bylaw. Failure by the Planning Board to issue such
rules and regulations or a legal declaration of their invalidity by a court
shall not suspend or invalidate the effect of this bylaw.
B.
The Planning Board may, with the concurrence of the applicant,
designate another Town Board, including the Conservation Commission
and Board of Health, as its authorized agent for the purposes of
reviewing all LID submittals and approving LID permits for any project
within that particular Board's jurisdiction.
C.
Stormwater management handbooks. The Planning Board will use the
policy, criteria and information, including specifications and standards,
D.
17.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 136-4 WESTMINSTER CODE § 136-6
134:90
§ 136-7. Procedures.
Permit procedures and requirements shall be defined and included as part
of any rules and regulations issued as permitted under § 136-6 of this bylaw.
§ 136-8. Enforcement.
The Planning Board or an authorized agent of the Planning Board shall
enforce this bylaw, regulations, orders, violation notices, and enforcement
orders, and may pursue all civil and criminal remedies for such violations.
Enforcement shall be further defined and included as part of any LID
regulations issued as permitted under § 136-6 of this bylaw.
§ 136-9. Severability.
The invalidity of any section, provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of
this bylaw shall not invalidate any section, provision, paragraph, sentence,
or clause thereof, nor shall it invalidate any permit or determination that
previously has been issued.
of the latest edition of the Massachusetts Stormwater Management
Policy to execute the provisions of this bylaw. This policy includes a list
of acceptable stormwater treatment practices, including specific design
criteria for each. The policy may be updated and expanded periodically,
based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring, and local
maintenance experience. Unless specifically altered in the LID
regulations, stormwater management practices that are designed,
constructed, and maintained in accordance with these design and sizing
criteria will be presumed to be protective of Massachusetts water
quality standards.
Actions by the Planning Board. The Planning Board may take any of
the following actions as a result of an application for a LID permit:
approval, approval with conditions, disapproval, or disapproval without
prejudice.
E.
Appeals of action by the Planning Board. A decision of the Planning
Board shall be final. Further relief of a decision by the Planning Board
made under this bylaw shall be reviewable in the Superior Court in an
action filed within 60 days thereof, in accordance with MGL c. 249, § 4.
F.
LID credit system. The Planning Board may adopt a LID credit system
through the regulations authorized by this LID Bylaw. This credit
system will allow applicants the option, if approved by the Planning
Board, to take credit for the use of stormwater better site design
practices to reduce some of the requirements specified in the criteria
section of the regulations. Failure by the Planning Board to issue such
a credit system through its regulations or a legal declaration of its
invalidity by a court shall not act to suspend or invalidate the effect of
this bylaw.
G.
§ 136-6 LITTERING § 136-9
134:91
Chapter 141
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garage sales — See Ch. 110.
Permits to delinquent taxpayers — See Ch.
131, Art. I.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 157.
Roadway stands — See Ch. 173, Art. III.
§ 141-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
BONA FIDE RELIGIOUS, CHARITABLE, EDUCATIONAL OR POLITICAL
ORGANIZATION — Any organization that is qualified under state or federal
law as a tax exempt, nonprofit organization or any organization or group
that espouses or advocates a position or belief on any subject of public
interest or on behalf of any candidate for public office.
CANVASS — To call upon persons to elicit or determine opinions, feelings,
sentiments or information of any nature.
SOLICITING AND CANVASSING — Whenever used in the written bylaw,
includes all activities outlined in the permit required section of this
chapter.18
§ 141-2. Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation shall canvass, solicit, distribute circulars or
other matter or call from house to house in the Town of Westminster to sell,
promote the sale of or attempt to sell goods by sample or to take or attempt
to take orders for the future delivery of goods, merchandise, wares or any
property, personal or real, of any nature whatsoever, or take or attempt to
take orders for services to be furnished or performed presently or in the
future or collect or attempt to collect contributions for any purpose without
first having obtained a written permit from the Chief of Police of the Town
of Westminster.
§ 141-3. Exemptions.
Any person, firm or corporation soliciting or canvassing on behalf of a
bona fide religious, charitable or political organization shall be exempt
from the requirements of this chapter, except for the hours of
solicitation and the requirements hereinafter provided in § 141-13,
below.
A.
18.Editor's Note: See § 141-2, Permit required.
§ 136-9 WESTMINSTER CODE § 141-3
141:92
§ 141-4. Applications.
Any person, firm or corporation delivering goods or performing services
which have previously been ordered by the person owning, leasing
or occupying the property where such delivery is made or service
performed shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
B.
Any person, firm or corporation calling upon or soliciting from
commercial establishments located in the Town of Westminster shall be
exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
C.
Any minor employed by a newspaper as a carrier, or who has been
previously registered with the Chief of Police by employing newspaper,
shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
D.
Any person seeking a permit to engage in any activity set forth in
§ 141-2, except those exempt under § 141-3, shall file an application
with the Chief of Police on a form issued by him no less than seven
working days prior to the request start date for such canvassing or
solicitation.
A.
The application form shall require the following information:
(1) The name of the applicant.
(2) The address of the applicant (local and permanent address).
(3) The applicant's date of birth.
(4) The applicant's height, weight, eye and hair color.
(5) The applicant's social security number.
(6) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold.
(7)
The name and home office address of the applicant's employer; if
self-employed, it shall so state.
(8)
If operating a motor vehicle, the year, make, color, model,
registration number, registered state, vehicle owner and address.
(9)
Whether the applicant has been convicted of a crime or offense or
violation of any bylaw relating to canvassing or soliciting and, if so,
when, where and the nature of the offense.
(10)
The names of other municipalities in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts where the applicant has been issued a permit to
solicit in the past two years.
(11)
B.
All applicants under this section shall be fingerprinted and
photographed by the Westminster Chief of Police.
C.
§ 141-3 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 141-5
141:93
§ 141-5. Denial or revocation of permit.
§ 141-6. Hours and days of solicitation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle or solicit before the hour of
8:30 a.m. of any day or after the hour of 8:30 p.m. of any day, except by
appointment.
§ 141-7. Issuance of permit.
The Chief of Police shall issue all permits within 48 hours of the time
when an applicant has completed the requisites set forth in the applications
section.19 In computing the forty-eight-hour period, Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays shall be excluded.
§ 141-8. Permit fee; term.
Each applicant for a permit shall pay a fee of $10. The permit shall expire
as set forth on each permit but in no case shall it exceed one year from the
date of its issue, unless earlier revoked.
§ 141-9. Permit not transferable.
No permit shall be transferable. In the case of a firm or corporation, each
person representing such firm or corporation shall be issued a separate
permit.
§ 141-10. Certain representations are prohibited.
No person, firm or organization having received a permit to canvass or
solicit within the Town of Westminster shall use or exploit the fact of the
permit so as to lead the public to believe that such permit in any manner
constitutes an endorsement or approval by the town or any of its officials.
Any applicant who fails to fully comply with the requisites established
for issuance of a permit shall be denied a permit.
A.
Any falsification of information required to be provided in the
application process shall result in denial or immediate revocation of the
applicant's permit.
B.
Any failure to comply with the other provisions of this chapter shall
result in immediate revocation of the permittee's permit.
C.
Any failure of a permittee to prominently display his permit upon
his person when soliciting shall result in immediate revocation of the
permit.
D.
19.Editor's Note: See § 141-4, Applications.
§ 141-5 WESTMINSTER CODE § 141-11
141:94
§ 141-11. Authority of Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police of the Town of Westminster shall have the power and
authority to grant, deny or revoke permits, as provided for and in
accordance with the terms of this chapter.
§ 141-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation charged with violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable for a fine not
exceeding $300 for each violation. Each day on which a violation exists shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 141-13. Religious, charitable, educational or political solicitors
and canvassers.
Any person, firm or corporation soliciting or canvassing on behalf of a
bona fide religious, charitable, educational or political organization, as
defined in this chapter, shall, prior to such solicitation or canvassing,
file with the Chief of Police a completed application in the form
provided.
A.
The application shall contain the following information:
The name and address of the firm, corporation or organization
represented by the individual solicitor, when applicable.
(1)
The name, address and telephone number of the person in charge
of such organization to be contacted in case of emergency.
(2)
The name, address (both temporary and permanent), telephone
number, social security number and date of birth of all individual
solicitors who will be soliciting or canvassing within the Town of
Westminster.
(3)
Whether the applicant has been convicted of a crime or offense
or violation of any bylaw relating to canvassing or soliciting and,
if so, when, where and the nature of the offense; names of other
municipalities in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts where the
applicant has been issued a permit to solicit in the past two years.
(4)
Whether any motor vehicles will be used in connection with the
canvassing or soliciting and, if so, the make, year, color, type and
license plate number.
(5)
Nature of any goods or services to be sold for the purpose of the
solicitations or canvassing.
(6)
B.
Such application shall be filed with the Chief of Police at least seven
days prior to the time when such soliciting or canvassing shall take
place.
C.
§ 141-11 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 141-13
141:95
§ 141-14. Action by Chief of Police regarding revocation, denial or
suspension of permit.
The Chief of Police is hereby vested with jurisdiction over the revocation or
suspension of licenses which he may exercise for cause. Any person whose
license has been revoked shall have the right of appeal to the Board of
Selectmen.
§ 141-15. Candidates for political office exempt.
Any candidate for public office or person campaigning on behalf of such a
candidate, where such candidate is seeking election to an office to be voted
upon by the residents of the Town of Westminster who are duly registered
to vote in elections in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
Chapter 148
RAPID ENTRY SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 67.
§ 148-1. Key box required; contents. [Amended ATM 5-4-2002 by
Art. 40]
Any building other than a residential building of fewer than six units, which
has a fire alarm system or other fire protection system, shall provide a
secure key box installed in a location accessible to the Fire Department in
case of emergency. This key box shall contain keys, keycards, and/or codes
to gain access to the building, to fire alarm control panels, elevators, or any
other key or key-type device necessary to operate or service fire protection
systems.
Upon completion of the requirements set forth in Subsections A, B and
C above, the Chief of Police shall issue a permit to the applicant.
D.
Each solicitor or canvasser shall be issued a permit by the Chief of
Police. The permit shall be available to be picked up from the Chief of
Police of the Town of Westminster. Each permittee shall prominently
display the permit upon his person whenever such permittee is engaged
in canvassing or soliciting. No permit shall be transferable.
E.
Failure to comply with the requisites established for issuance of a
permit, falsification of any information required to be provided, failure
to properly display the permit issued or soliciting or canvassing during
the prohibited hours shall result in denial or immediate revocation of
the applicant's permit.
F.
§ 141-13 WESTMINSTER CODE § 148-2
148:96
§ 148-2. Type of key box; location and installation.
The key box shall be a type approved by the Chief of the Westminster Fire
Department and shall be located and installed as approved by the Chief.
§ 148-3. Existing buildings.
All existing buildings shall be required to comply within 36 months of
the effective date of this chapter in all commercial buildings not normally
occupied 24 hours.
§ 148-4. New construction.
All newly constructed buildings regardless of use of occupancy, except
residential dwellings under six units, shall have installed an approved key
box system.
§ 148-5. Buildings with elevators.
All buildings equipped with elevators shall be provided with a master key
security box so as to have an elevator key on hand.
§ 148-6. Responsibilities. [Added ATM 5-1-1999 by Art. 30;
amended ATM 5-4-2002 by Art. 40]
The owner of the building is responsible for obtaining and mounting the key
box on the building at a location approved by the Fire Chief or his designee.
The occupant of the building is responsible for providing the initial keys,
keycards, and/or codes and updated keys, keycards, and/or codes to the Fire
Department at time of occupancy or within one week of any changes.
§ 148-7. Violations and penalties. [Added ATM 5-1-1999 by Art. 30]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more
than $300 for each offense.
Chapter 157
SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garage sales — See Ch. 110.
Junkyards — See Ch. 125.
Licenses to delinquent taxpayers — See Ch.
131, Art. I.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 141.
Roadway stands — See Ch. 173, Art. III.
§ 148-2 SECONDHAND DEALERS § 157-1
157:97
§ 157-1. Licensing by Selectmen; badges; rules, regulations and
restrictions.
The Selectmen may license suitable persons to be dealers or keepers of
shops for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metals or secondhand
articles in the town. They may also license suitable persons as junk
collectors to carry, by purchase or otherwise, junk, old metals and
secondhand articles from place to place in the town, and they may provide
that such collectors shall display badges upon their persons or upon their
vehicles, or upon both, when engaged in collecting, transferring or dealing
in junk, old metals or secondhand articles; and may prescribe the design
thereof and may make rules, regulations and restrictions, in addition and
not inconsistent with those herein provided, relative to their business and
may provide for the supervision thereof.
§ 157-2. Maintenance of records; signs; inspection of premises;
minors.
Every keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metals
or secondhand articles within the limits of the town shall keep a book in
which shall be written, at the time of every purchase of any such articles,
the description thereof and the name, age and residence of the person from
whom and the day and hour when such purchase was made; such book shall
at all times be open to the inspection of the Selectmen or any person by
them authorized to make such inspection; and every keeper of such shop
shall put, in a suitable and conspicuous place in his shop, a sign having his
name and occupation legibly inscribed thereon in large letters; and such
shop and all articles of merchandise therein may be at all times examined by
the Selectmen or any person by them authorized to make such examination;
and no keeper of such shop and no junk collector shall, directly or indirectly,
either purchase or receive, by way of barter or exchange, any of the articles
aforesaid of a minor, knowing or having reason to believe him to be such.
Chapter 161
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewage disposal — See Ch. 245.
Toxic and hazardous wastes — See Ch. 251.
Water supplies — See Ch. 254.
§ 157-1 WESTMINSTER CODE § 157-2
161:98
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 161-1. Terms defined.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows:
APPLICANT — Any person requesting approval to discharge wastewaters
into the municipal facilities or a new connection to the wastewater works.
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20° C.),
expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five (5) feet [one and five-tenths (1.5) meters] outside the inner
face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both wastewater and surface
runoff.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER OR SEWAGE — The wastewater derived
principally from dwellings, business buildings, institutions and the like. It
may or may not contain ground-, surface or storm water.
DRAIN LAYER — Individuals, partnerships, organizations or corporations
authorized by the Sewer Commission to install sewer connections. Such
authorization shall take the form of a permit issued by the Sewer
Commission and shall only be valid for a single installation or group of
installations under a contract or agreement.
EPA — The Environmental Protection Agency of the United States
Government.
EXCESSIVE — Amounts or concentrations of a constituent of a wastewater
which, in the judgment of the Commission, will cause damage to any town
facility; will be harmful to a wastewater treatment process; cannot be
removed in the town treatment works to the degree required to meet the
limiting stream classification standards of the Nashua River and/or EPA
and state effluent standards; can otherwise endanger life, limb or public
property; and can constitute a nuisance.
FACILITIES — Includes structures and conduits for the purpose of
collecting, treating, neutralizing, stabilizing or disposing of domestic
wastewater and/or industrial or other wastewaters as are disposed of by
means of such structures and conduits, including treatment and disposal
works, necessary intercepting, outfall and outlet sewers, equipment and
furnishings thereof and other appurtenances connected therewith.
§ 161-1 SEWERS § 161-1
161:99
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of food. It is composed largely of
putrescible organic matter and its natural moisture content.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER — The wastewater in which the liquid wastes
from industrial manufacturing process, laboratory, trade or business
predominates, as distinct from domestic wastewater.
INDUSTRY — An establishment with facilities for mechanical, testing, trade
or manufacturing purposes.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
group or municipality.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter (gm/l) of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — Garbage that has been shredded
to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater
than one-half (1/2) inch [one and twenty-seven-hundredths (1.27)
centimeters] in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
RECEIVING WATERS — Any watercourse, river, pond, ditch, lake, aquifer or
other body of surface or ground water receiving discharge of wastewaters.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries wastewater and to which
storm-, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater.
SEWER COMMISSION — The Sewer Commissioners as elected by vote of
the registered voters of the Town of Westminster or their authorized agents
or representatives.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which
in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds,
for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than (5)
times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flow during normal
operation.
STATE — The Massachusetts Division of Water Pollution Control.
STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and
drainage, but excludes wastewater and industrial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling water.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of the Sewer Department of the
Town of Westminster or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and which are removable
§ 161-1 WESTMINSTER CODE § 161-1
161:100
by laboratory filtering and are referred to as "nonfilterable residue" in
the laboratory test prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater.
WASTES — Substances in liquid, solid or gaseous form that can be carried
in water.
WASTEWATER OR SEWAGE — The spent water of a community and may
be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any
ground-, surface and storm water that may be present.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating wastewater.
WASTEWATER WORKS — All structures, equipment and processes for
collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, whether
continuously or intermittently.
§ 161-2. Word usage.
" Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 161-1 SEWERS § 161-2
161:101

ARTICLE II
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 161-3. Permit required for connection.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
§ 161-4. Notification of new or changed discharge required.
Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial
change in the volume of character of pollutants that are being discharged
into the system shall notify the Sewer Commission at least forty-five (45)
days prior to the proposed change or connection.
§ 161-5. Classes of permits.
There shall be three (3) classes of building sewer permits:
§ 161-6. Application for permit; fees; required approvals.
§ 161-7. Use of old building sewers.
An old building sewer may be used in connection with a new building only
when it is found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to meet all
requirements of this chapter. Any costs involved in examinations and tests
shall be paid by the person making the application for a permit.
A. Residential.
B. Commercial.
C. Industrial.
In all classes, the owner or his agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the town. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent.
A.
A permit and inspection fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.) shall be paid
to the town at the time the application is filed. Any amount not used
is to be reimbursed, and any amount in excess of seventy-five dollars
($75.) is to be paid within thirty (30) days.
B.
Approval of commercial and industrial permits must be obtained from
the Superintendent after review and recommendation by the Sewer
Commission before a permit can be issued.
C.
§ 161-3 SEWERS § 161-8
161:103
§ 161-8. Low building drains.
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow
to the public sewer, wastewater carried by such building drain shall be lifted
by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
§ 161-9. Costs and expenses to be borne by owner; town to be held
harmless.
§ 161-10. Each building to have separate sewer; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except, where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer.
§ 161-11. Installation requirements.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations
of the town. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society for Testing and Materials and Water Pollution Control
Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
§ 161-12. Connection of sources of runoff or groundwater
prohibited.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to
a building sewer or building drain which, in turn, is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sewer.
§ 161-13. Connection standards.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform
to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable
rules and regulations of the town. All such connections shall be made
gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the Superintendent before installation.
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
A.
The owner shall indemnify the town from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building
sewer.
B.
§ 161-8 WESTMINSTER CODE § 161-14
161:104
§ 161-14. Inspection required.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The sewer connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Superintendent or his representative.
§ 161-15. Guarding of excavations; restoration of streets.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
by the applicant with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed
in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
town.
§ 161-14 SEWERS § 161-15
161:105

ARTICLE III
Use of Public Sewers
§ 161-16. Discharge of unpolluted drainage.
§ 161-17. Hazardous discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause or allow to be discharged into any
sewer under the control of the Superintendent the hereinafter described
substance, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of
the Sewer Commission, that such wastes in quantity or quality exceeding
limitations established by the Sewer Commission can harm either the
sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect
on the receiving waters or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public
property or constitute a nuisance.
§ 161-18. Permission required to discharge industrial wastewaters.
Persons, including industries, who desire to discharge industrial
wastewaters into town facilities or facilities appurtenant thereto shall make
their requests in writing to the Sewer Commission. In forming its opinion as
to the limitations on the acceptability of any wastes, the Sewer Commission
will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes
in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction
of the sewers, nature of the wastewater treatment process, capacity of
the wastewater treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The Sewer
Commission may require the applicant to furnish such analyses of the
proposed wastewater discharge as may be needed to determine its
acceptability into the sewer system and as required by state and federal
regulations.
§ 161-19. Costs for additional treatment or damages.
Costs for unauthorized additional treatment in or for repairing damages to
town facilities resulting due to violations of the Sewer Commission's Rules
and Regulations is to be reimbursed to the town by the person or industry
from which the wastewaters originated that cause of the adverse effect.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm-, surface
or ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary
sewer.
A.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or
storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged, on approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer,
combined sewer or natural outlet.
B.
§ 161-16 SEWERS § 161-20
161:107
§ 161-20. Prohibited wastes.
Limiting acceptable amounts and concentrations of the constituents of
wastewater to be discharged to town facilities are summarized herein.
The amounts and concentrations given in Article III are for guidance and
may be modified by the Sewer Commission if circumstances justify such
modification. Wastewaters and wastes prohibited include:
Any wastewaters containing toxic pollutants or poisonous liquids, gases
or solids (including heavy metals) in sufficient quantity, which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, injure or interfere with
any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the waters
receiving treated effluent from wastewater works.
A.
Any wastewater, liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one
hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150° F.) [sixty-five degrees Celsius
(65° C.)].
B.
Any wastewaters containing caustic alkalinity, calculated as CaCO3
(calcium carbonate), in excess of seventy-five (75) milligrams per liter
(mg/l), or in volumes which may be determined by the Sewer
Commission to be excessive.
C.
Any wastewaters having pH lower than five point five (5.5) or higher
than nine point five (9.5) or having any other corrosive property capable
of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, process or
personnel at the wastewater works.
D.
Any wastewaters containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) milligrams per liter
or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty-two degrees Fahrenheit (32° F.) [zero
degrees Celsius (0° C.)] and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°
F.) [sixty-five degrees Celsius (65° C.)].
E.
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
F.
Any solid or viscous substances in quantities of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater works, such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails, grease, paper dishes, cups, milk containers,
etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
G.
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of threefourths
(3/4) horsepower [seventy-six-hundredths (0.76) horsepower
metric] or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the
H.
§ 161-20 WESTMINSTER CODE § 161-20
161:108
§ 161-21. Action by Sewer Commission.
Superintendent. (See Article I, § 16-1, definition of "properly shredded
garbage.")
Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material
received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment
works exceeds the limits established by the Sewer Commission for such
materials.
I.
Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Sewer Commission as necessary and after
treatment of the composite wastewater to meet the requirements of the
state, federal or other public agencies or jurisdiction for such discharge
to the receiving waters.
J.
Any radioactive wastes or isotopes in excessive amounts or of such
half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established in applicable
state or federal regulations or by the Sewer Commission.
K.
Any wastewater containing:
Excessive concentrations of suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
excessive dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate). Average concentrations of suspended
solids greater than three hundred (300) milligrams per liter will be
considered excessive.
(1)
Materials which may cause excessive discoloration (such as, but
not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
(2)
Materials which cause unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or
chlorine requirements in excessive amounts. Average
concentrations of BOD greater than two hundred fifty (250)
milligrams per liter will be considered excessive.
(3)
Materials in such concentration as to constitute slugs as defined
herein.
(4)
Materials which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by
the wastewater treatment process employed or are amenable to
treatment only to such a limited degree that the wastewater
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters
or wastewater containing constituents whose removal requires
increased cost of operation of the wastewater treatment plant.
(5)
L.
§ 161-20 SEWERS § 161-21
161:109
§ 161-22. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the Sewer Commission, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes,
sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall be of
a type and capacity approved by the Sewer Commission and shall be located
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
§ 161-23. Preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for
any wastewaters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner, at his expense.
§ 161-24. Installation of control structures.
When required by the Sewer Commission, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control structure together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastewater or wastes. Such structure, when required,
shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the Sewer Commission. The structure
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 161-20 of this Article
and which, in the judgment of the Sewer Commission, may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or
receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute
a public nuisance, the Sewer Commission may:
(1) Reject the wastewaters or the wastes.
Require pretreatment of wastewaters or wastes to modify them to
an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; and/or
(2)
Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge of the
wastewaters or wastes; and/or
(3)
Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastewaters or wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer
charges under the provisions of § 161-2 of this Article.
(4)
A.
If the Sewer Commission permits the pretreatment or equalization of
wastewater or waste flows, the design and installation of the plants
and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Sewer Commission, and subject to the requirements of all applicable
codes, bylaws and laws and the rules and regulations of the Sewer
Commission. Any costs involved with such reviews shall be paid by the
person requesting the permit.
B.
§ 161-21 WESTMINSTER CODE § 161-24
161:110
shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by
him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 161-25. Sampling standards.
All measurements, test and analyses of the characteristics of wastewaters to
which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance
with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control structure provided or upon suitable
samples taken at said control structure. In the event that no special
structure has been required by the Sewer Commission, samples shall be
taken at suitable locations within the establishment from which the
wastewaters are being discharged. Sampling shall be carried out by
accepted methods specifically designed to obtain representative samples of
the total wastewater discharge and of slugs if any occur. [The particular
analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite
of all outfalls from a premises is appropriate or whether a separate sample
or samples should be taken.] Frequency of sampling shall be established
by the Superintendent on an individual basis. Any costs involved in
examination and tests shall be paid by the individual industry. The Sewer
Commission may check these tests as necessary.
§ 161-26. Monitoring of industrial discharges.
All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such monitoring
of their discharges as the Sewer Commission and/or other duly authorized
employees of the town may reasonably require, including installation, use
and maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping records and reporting
the results of such monitoring to the Sewer Commission. Such records shall
be made available upon the request by the Sewer Commission to other
agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving waters.
§ 161-27. Future connections.
Future connections to facilities constructed by the town shall be designed
in criteria established by the Superintendent and constructed by the person
desiring the additional connection after review and approval of the plans
and specifications by the Sewer Commission and the Superintendent.
§ 161-28. Adoption or amendment of rules and regulations.
Any rules and regulations consistent with this chapter may be adopted and/
or amended by the Sewer Commission in conformance with MGL C. 83, § 10,
after due notice published once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks in a
newspaper available to inhabitants of the Town.
§ 161-29. Individual septic systems.
Regulations for and supervision of individual septic systems are not
included under this chapter.
§ 161-24 SEWERS § 161-29
161:111

ARTICLE IV
Protection From Damage
§ 161-30. Damage prohibited.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently, break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is part of the wastewater works. Any
person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under
charge of disorderly conduct.
§ 161-30 SEWERS § 161-30
161:113

ARTICLE V
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
§ 161-31. Entrance permitted; inquiries limited.
The Commission, Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of
the town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted
to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. The Commission, Superintendent or other representatives
shall have no authority to inquire into any process, including metallurgical,
chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point
having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers
or waterways of facilities for wastes treatment.
§ 161-32. Observance of safety rules; liability.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in § 161-31 above, the Commission, Superintendent or duly authorized
employees of the town shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the company, and the company shall be held
harmless for injury or death to the town employees, and the town shall
indemnify the company against loss or damage for personal injury or
property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the
gauging and sampling operation, except such as may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required
in Article III, § 161-24.
§ 161-33. Use of easements.
The Commission, Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of
the town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the town holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the
wastewater works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent
work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the
terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the
town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter the building on private property to prevent any illegal discharge to
the sewers.
§ 161-31 SEWERS § 161-33
161:115

ARTICLE VI
Industrial Pretreatment Program
§ 161-34. Authorized agent.
The Fitchburg Wastewater Treatment Facility, through its general manager,
shall constitute the town's authorized agent for its industrial pretreatment
program, and for this purpose, the Commissioners may enter into a contract
to provide for such service, which shall include sewer connection permit
approval, discharge permitting and monitoring authority. Said agent shall
also have all legal remedies which would be available to the Commission,
including recourse against collection system violators, which remedies shall
include, but not be limited to, injunctive relief and suit for punitive
damages.
§ 161-34 SEWERS § 161-34
161:117

ARTICLE VII
Violations and Penalties
§ 161-35. Service of notice.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter and/or rules
and regulations established by the Superintendent shall be served by the
town with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing
a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations.
§ 161-36. Failure to act.
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided
for in § 161-35 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof,
shall be fined in the amount not exceeding twenty dollars ($20.) for each
violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate violation.
§ 161-37. Liability for damages.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the town for any expenses, loss or damage occasioned the town by
reason of such violation.
§ 161-35 SEWERS § 161-37
161:119

ARTICLE VIII
General Provisions
§ 161-38. Repealer.
All bylaws or parts of bylaws in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 161-39. Severability.
The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of this chapter
shall not affect the validity of any other part of this chapter which can be
given effect without such invalid part or parts.
§ 161-40. Effect on City of Fitchburg ordinance.
These Sewer Use Rules and Regulations shall not contravene, nor render
ineffective any of the lawfully established ordinances of the City of
Fitchburg titled "Ordinance Governing the Discharge of Waters and Wastes
Into the Public Sewer System."
§ 161-41. When effective.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, recording and publication as provided by law.
§ 161-38 SEWERS § 161-41
161:121
Chapter 173
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Earth removal — See Ch. 97.
Licenses and permits to delinquent
taxpayers — See Ch. 131, Art. I.
Littering — See Ch. 134.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 141.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 182.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 193.
Motor and recreational vehicles — See Ch.
196.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 219.
§ 161-41 WESTMINSTER CODE § 161-41
161:122
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted STM 11-12-1974 by Art. 2 as Art. X of the 1975 Bylaws]
§ 173-1. Deposit of ice and snow.
No person shall deposit any ice or snow on any public way in the town.
§ 173-2. Permit required for excavation; request for permit.
§ 173-3. Construction or repair by Highway Superintendent.
Whenever the Highway Superintendent is about to construct or repair
any street or way, he shall before beginning the work, give reasonable
notice of such intention to other departments and corporations affected
thereby and to all abutting owners. After such notice has been given, no
department, corporation or person shall for a space of one (1) year break up
or disturb the surface of said street or way within the area so constructed
and repaired, except in the case of reasonable necessity.
§ 173-4. Moving of buildings and other large objects.
Any person moving a building, structure or anything liable to obstruct
passage along the highway must apply for a permit to the Selectmen, in the
same manner as provided in § 173-2 above, and no permit shall be granted
No person, including employees of the town, except the Highway
Department or the Water Department, may make an excavation, break
or dig up the ground, dig a trench, lay a pipe or in any way disturb
the earth or materials thereon in or along or under any sidewalk, street
and/or public way of the town without a permit, except in case of
emergency.
A.
Request for permit.
The request for said permit shall be filed with the Selectmen on a
form prepared for the purpose and in triplicate.
(1)
The request shall specify the place of the proposed excavation,
the time when the excavation will be made, the length of time
necessary to make the excavation and the barriers and lighting
necessary for the protection of the public during the period of
excavation. The conditions of the permit shall include dates for
beginning and expiration of actual work and a terminal date for
expiration of the maintenance.
(2)
Any request for such a permit shall include an agreement, in
writing, to restore the place of excavation to its original condition,
at the expense of the applicant. The Selectmen may require a
bond or policeman or other security for the performance of such
agreement.
(3)
B.
§ 173-1 SEWERS § 173-4
161:123
by the Selectmen if said operation is likely to cause destruction or serious
injury to any trees within the highway limits or belonging to an abutter
without the written consent of the abutter.
§ 173-5. Permit holders to be liable.
Any person who secures a permit under regulation in §§ 173-2 and 173-4
herein shall execute a written agreement to save harmless the town against
all damage, costs or claims or by reason of any process or obstruction and
shall conform to all requirements imposed by the Selectmen.
§ 173-6. Interference with snow removal; removal of vehicles.
§ 173-7. Rules for traffic regulation.
The Selectmen shall, from time to time, as they may deem necessary, make
such regulations and rules for parking vehicles and for traffic as they may
deem essential for the public safety and convenience.
§ 173-8. Use of vehicles which damage road.
No person shall travel upon any public way in any vehicle or equipment
having wheels, treads or runners which cause unusual damage to the roads.
§ 173-9. Interference with streetlights and warning lights.
No person shall remove, extinguish, injure or destroy any streetlight or any
light placed to warn the public against an obstruction or defect in any public
street or way without authorization from those having charge thereof.
§ 173-10. Erection of barriers.
No person shall obstruct or erect any barrier to prohibit the free and
convenient use for travel of any public way or sidewalk without a written
permit therefor from the Selectmen.
No person shall park or leave unattended any motor vehicle on any
public way during the months of November 15 through April 15
inclusive between 10:00 p.m. and sunrise or at such other times as may
interfere with the removal of snow.
A.
For the purpose of removing or plowing snow or removing ice from any
public way in the town, the Highway Superintendent may remove or
cause to be removed to some convenient place or public garage any
vehicle parked in such a manner as to interfere with such work referred
to in the preceding subsection, the cost of such removal and the storage
charges, if any, to be borne by the owner.
B.
§ 173-4 WESTMINSTER CODE § 173-11
161:124
§ 173-11. Discharge from septic systems and wells.
No person shall knowingly permit any water or other liquid substance to
run or be discharged from any building, septic system or well owned by him
or under his control onto or across any sidewalk or street in the town which
would endanger the public health and/or safety.
§ 173-12. Obstruction by doors or gates.
No person shall allow any gate or door belonging to the premises under his
legal control and adjoining any public way to swing on, over or into said
public way.
§ 173-13. Litter and rubbish.
No person shall place or cause to be placed any wood, lumber, coal, box,
crate, barrel, wastepaper, refuse or other obstruction upon any public way
or sidewalk nor allow it to remain after being notified by a police officer
to remove the same. No person shall sweep rubbish onto any sidewalk or
street in the town. Rubbish placed in containers for the sole purpose of
collection will be allowed.
§ 173-14. Coasting and sliding.
No person shall coast or slide down, across or over any street or highway
upon any hand-sled, board or otherwise, except at such places and under
such restrictions as the Selectmen shall designate and require.
§ 173-15. Trimming of trees and shrubs.
In order to preserve and promote the safety of the public, any fence, hedge,
shrub or other growth or enclosure wall on a corner lot obstructing the view
of motorists and situated within 15 feet of a public street or sideline thereof
shall not be permitted by the owner or occupant of the premises to exceed
the height of three feet above road grade; and any and all trees within said
fifteen-foot area (shade trees to be subject to the provisions of MGL C. 87,
§ 3) shall have limbs trimmed to the height of six feet above road grade.
§ 173-16. Throwing objects; games.
No person shall, in any street or way, throw stones, snowballs, sticks or
other missiles, nor play ball or kick a football, nor play any of games which
interferes with the free, safe and convenient use of said street or way by any
person traveling or passing along on the same, except in areas designated
by the Selectmen.
§ 173-17. Posters.
No person shall distribute, display, place or cause to be distributed,
displayed or placed any posters, including political posters, handbills,
placards, signs, notices or similar material in or upon any sidewalk, site,
§ 173-11 SEWERS § 173-17
161:125
public building or other public property in the town without first obtaining
a permit from the Selectmen or from the Chief of Police acting under
authority delegated by the Selectmen.
§ 173-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
STREET or STREETS or PUBLIC WAY — All alleys, lanes, courts, public
squares and public places, including sidewalks and gutters, unless the
contrary is expressed or the construction will be inconsistent with the
manifest intent of this article.
§ 173-17 WESTMINSTER CODE § 173-18
161:126
ARTICLE II
Obstructions
[Adopted STM 10-4-1979 by Art. 8]
§ 173-19. Obstruction or impediment of traffic.
No person or group of persons shall obstruct or impede the movement of
traffic on any sidewalk, street or road or interfere with access to any public
or private building adjacent to said sidewalk, street or road.
§ 173-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined not more
than $50 for each offense.
A.
Any person who shall obstruct or impede the movement of traffic or
interfere with access to any building, as provided in § 173-19, or who
refuses to move at the direction of a police officer shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $50.
B.
§ 173-19 SEWERS § 173-20
161:127

ARTICLE III
Roadway Stands
[Adopted STM 9-29-1983 by Art. 16]
§ 173-21. Erection of stands prohibited.
No person shall erect, maintain or use a stand or otherwise display or sell
any articles within the limits of any public way or highway.
§ 173-22. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to deliveries nor to mobile vendors of dairy
products who stop momentarily at the request of customers and then
move on.
A.
Duly constituted charitable and/or nonprofit organizations may, with
permission from the Board of Selectmen, be exempted from the
restrictions of this article.
B.
This article shall not apply to those persons or companies or
organizations, public or charitable, that have obtained proper licenses
or permits from the Board of Selectmen and/or other licensing bodies.
C.
§ 173-21 SEWERS § 173-22
161:129

ARTICLE IV
Curb Cuts
[Adopted ATM 4-25-1987 by Art. 42]
§ 173-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER — A person or entity owning property on a
way.
DRIVEWAY — Privately owned access to and from a way.
PUBLIC WAY — A way laid out by a public agency or dedicated to public use
or laid out for public use or used and maintained as a "public way."
WAY — Any public way which is not subject to MGL C. 81, § 21 (state curb
cut permit).
§ 173-24. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to:
§ 173-25. Permit required; application; inspections.
§ 173-26. Design requirements.
Provide maximum protection to the public through the orderly control
of traffic moving onto and from a way.
A.
Provide a uniform practice in the design and construction of entrances
and exits.
B.
C. Provide necessary drainage.
Any abutting property owner desiring to gain access to a way shall do
so only in accordance with the provisions of a permit issued by the Town
Highway Department.
A.
Procedures. Before beginning construction, the abutting property
owner shall make written application to the Highway Department,
including a plan showing:
(1) Any driveway that is to be created, altered or closed.
(2) Details on drainage.
B.
All work shall be inspected during and after construction. The Highway
Department may halt any work not done in accordance with the permit.
C.
The Town Highway Department shall consider the requirements of the
State Department of Public Works' Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, but shall modify these to accord with:
A.
§ 173-23 SEWERS § 173-26
161:131
§ 173-27. Exceptions.
No permit shall be required for:
(1) Local conditions.
(2) Compatibility with local road design.
(3) Size of the proposed project.
Driveways should be located to the best advantage with regard to
alignment with the way, profile, sight distance conditions and the like.
Unless conditions require it, a driveway should not be located at the
extreme edge of a property.
B.
No more than two driveways shall normally be allowed for any one
property, unless there is clear necessity for more. Leasing of a portion
of the property does not affect this requirement. If a number of
establishments will be constructed on one parcel, a service road may be
required to connect with allowable exit and entrance.
C.
A channelizing island may be required for an entrance to a highvolume
traffic generator, such as a shopping center. Acceleration and
deceleration lanes may also be required for driveways to such projects.
(The Highway Department may require a bond to guarantee the
satisfactory construction of such driveways, in an amount not to exceed
the estimated cost.)
D.
Driveways shall not normally be approved at intersections, particularly
signalized intersections, because of the potential safety hazard which
arises when a driver enters a road from a corner driveway and is not
faced with a direct signal indication. Access directly into a rotary is also
discouraged.
E.
A. Driveways already in existence, except for significant alterations.
Driveways reviewed by Town Boards under other existing bylaws, such
as scenic roads bylaws, subdivision approval and site plan review.
B.
§ 173-26 WESTMINSTER CODE § 173-27
161:132
ARTICLE V
Temporary Repairs to Private Ways
[Adopted ATM 5-4-2013 by Art. 40]
§ 173-28. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a policy by which the Town can
provide assistance to abutters of private ways who wish to maintain and
make improvements in order to provide continued safe access for public
safety services and to extend the useful lives of their private ways. Such
maintenance and improvements, including engineering and permitting
costs, if any, would be at the expense of the abutters or beneficiaries of said
private ways.
§ 173-29. Authority.
Pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 6N, the Westminster Department
of Public Works is authorized hereunder to make necessary temporary
repairs to private ways in accordance with the procedures set forth in this
article. This article shall not be deemed to mandate the Town to make
repairs to any private way.
§ 173-30. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PETITION — The document to be submitted to the Westminster Department
of Public Works, signed by at least 51% of property owners abutting a
private way, requesting temporary repairs to the private way specified. The
petition includes language indemnifying the Town of Westminster from any
and all liability related to temporary repairs to private ways.
PRIVATE WAY — Any way existing in the Town for at least five years which
has not been legally laid out by the Public Works Commission as a public
way, or has not been accepted as a public way by Town Meeting, and has
been open to public use and for access by public safety services.
TEMPORARY REPAIRS — May include, but are not limited to, maintenance
or repairs to drainage systems, road base improvements, grading, filling
with like material of potholes, depressions or ruts, and application of
calcium chloride for dust control.
§ 173-31. General requirements.
Upon petition of at least 51% of the abutters and/or beneficiaries of
a private way, the Public Works Commission, by a majority vote, may
declare that the temporary repairs to said private way are necessary or
advisable for public safety or convenience. Such petitions may request
continuing annual temporary repairs, such as grading of gravel roads,
for a period up to five years without the need for submission of annual
petitions.
A.
§ 173-28 SEWERS § 173-31
161:133
§ 173-32. Liability.
The Town of Westminster shall not be liable on account of any damages
caused by temporary repairs made pursuant to this article in accordance
with the terms of the petition.
The Public Works Commission shall estimate the cost of individual
requests for temporary repairs to private roads, and the Town shall be
paid in advance of the work by the residents of the private way seeking
assistance.
B.
An annually updated list of all private ways to which this section applies
shall be maintained by the Department of Public Works.
C.
§ 173-31 WESTMINSTER CODE § 173-32
161:134
Chapter 182
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses to delinquent taxpayers — See Ch.
131, Art. I.
§ 182-1. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall operate any taxicab upon any public
way in the Town of Westminster unless such taxicab is licensed by the Board
of Selectmen.
§ 182-2. Out-of-town taxicabs.
§ 182-3. Application; term; fee; display.
Applications for taxicab licenses shall be made to the Selectmen in such
form and in such manner as the Selectmen may require. The Selectmen
shall furnish the licenses, which shall be issued, not for over a year, at ten
dollars ($10.) each, and the same shall be prominently displayed in each
taxicab.
§ 182-4. Taxicab stands.
No taxicab shall be allowed to stand or to wait for passengers in any street,
square or public place, except on such portions thereof and during such
hours as may be designated therefor by the Selectmen. The Selectmen may,
from time to time, designate locations in streets, squares and public places
where and the hours during which taxicabs may so stand and may cancel or
change such locations or hours as and whenever the public interests seem
to them to require such change.
§ 182-5. Compliance with rules required.
All owners and drivers of taxicabs shall comply with such rules, orders and
regulations as may be, from time to time, made by the Selectmen.
Nothing herein shall prohibit a taxicab, lawfully licensed and operated
in some other city or town, from delivering or transporting passengers
from an out-of-town location to or through the Town of Westminster.
A.
Nothing shall prohibit the picking up of passengers by an out-of-town
taxicab upon call or other prior arrangement.
B.
§ 173-32 TAXICABS § 182-6
182:135
§ 182-6. Revocation or suspension of license.
Any taxicab license issued under the terms of this chapter may be revoked
or suspended for cause by the Selectmen.
§ 182-7. Filing and posting of rates.
A schedule of proposed rates to be charged shall be filed to the Selectmen;
and a copy of rates charged by taxicabs shall be posted at all times in each
taxicab in full view of the passengers.
Chapter 190
TREES
§ 182-6 WESTMINSTER CODE § 182-7
190:136
ARTICLE I
Trimming
[Adopted STM 11-12-1974 by Art. 2 as Art. IX, Sec. 3, of the 1975
Bylaws]
§ 190-1. Permission required.
No person shall cut, prune or trim any trees, shrubs or plants within the
limits of any public way, park or other public property, whether for the
purpose of erecting poles and wires thereon or otherwise, without the
consent in each instance of the Tree Warden, or on any private property
without the consent of the owner thereof.
§ 190-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be fined not
more than twenty dollars ($20.) for each offense.
§ 190-1 TREES § 190-2
190:137

ARTICLE II
Fastening of Items to Trees
[Adopted STM 11-12-1974 by Art. 2 as Art. XVII of the 1975 Bylaws]
§ 190-3. Permit required.
No person shall tie or fasten any horse, cattle or team to any of the trees
in the public ways of the town, nor drive into the same any nails, spikes,
hooks or clasps, nor affix any billboards or other signs thereto without first
obtaining a permit from the Selectmen or the Chief of Police acting under
authority given by the Selectmen.
§ 190-3 TREES § 190-3
190:139
Chapter 193
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 125.
§ 193-1. Storage restricted.
No unregistered motor vehicle which has been abandoned or is partially
dismantled or is otherwise unusable shall be stored, other than in a garage
or other building, within one hundred (100) feet of a public way or within
fifty (50) feet of a property line.
§ 193-2. Exceptions.
§ 193-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than twenty dollars ($20.) for each offense.
Chapter 196
VEHICLES, MOTOR AND RECREATIONAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boats and boating — See Ch. 75.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 173.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 219.
§ 196-1. Driving or parking on sidewalks; violations and penalties.
This provision shall not apply to any vehicle which the Board of
Selectmen, after hearing, shall determine is in the process of repair or
that the owner thereof intends in good faith to register the same within
a period of no more than sixty (60) days.
A.
Exempt from this chapter are vehicles used for agricultural and
construction purposes.
B.
No person shall drive or park any motor vehicle or animal on a
sidewalk, except emergency vehicles.
A.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined
not more than twenty dollars ($20.) for each offense.
B.
§ 190-3 WESTMINSTER CODE § 196-2
193:140
§ 196-2. Parking near driveways or intersections; violations and
penalties.
§ 196-3. Tagging of vehicles.
In accordance with MGL C. 90, § 20C, any police officer employed by the
Town of Westminster may tag motor vehicles in violation of any provision of
any rule, regulation, order or bylaw regulating the parking of motor vehicles
and for disposition of such violation by the payment of a fine through the
District Court, proceedings under this section not being deemed criminal.
§ 196-4. Snowmobiles and recreational vehicles.
The Town of Westminster adopts the rules and regulations of the Registry of
Motor Vehicles pertaining to snowmobiles and recreational vehicles.
Chapter 198
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public Works Commission — See Ch. 47.
Water Commission — See Ch. 61.
Cross-connection control — 88.
Sewers — See Ch. 161.
Wells — See Ch. 200.
Groundwater monitoring and soil
testing — See Ch. 241.
Water supplies — See Ch. 254.
Private and semipublic wells — See Ch. 255.
There shall be no parking of any vehicle, animal or animal-drawn
vehicle within five (5) feet of any driveway or within ten (10) feet of any
intersection.
A.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined
not more than twenty dollars ($20.) for each offense.
B.
§ 196-2 WATER § 196-4
198:141

ARTICLE I
Water Use Restrictions
[Adopted ATM 5-6-2000 by Art. 2920]
§ 198-1. Purpose; statutory authority.
This article is intended to protect, preserve and maintain the public health,
safety and welfare whenever there is in force a state of water supply
conservation or a state of water supply emergency by providing for
enforcement of any duly imposed restrictions, requirements, provisions or
conditions imposed by the Town, or by the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP). The Town's authority is pursuant to MGL
c. 40, § 21 et seq. and MGL c. 41, § 69B. The DEP's authority is pursuant to
MGL c. 40, § 41A.
§ 198-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context shall otherwise require, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, trust, partnership or association, or
other entity.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY CONSERVATION — That which is declared by
the Town, pursuant to its authority granted herein.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY — That which is declared by the
DEP under MGL c. 21G, §§ 15-17.
WATER USERS OR WATER CONSUMERS — All public and private users of
the Town's public water system, irrespective of any person's responsibility
for billing purposes for water used at any particular location.
§ 198-3. Declaration of state of water supply conservation.
The Town, through its Public Works Commission (Commission), may declare
a state of water supply conservation upon a determination that a shortage
of water exists and conservation measures are appropriate to ensure an
adequate supply of water to all water consumers. Public notice of such a
state of water supply conservation shall be given as set forth in § 198-5
below before it may be enforced.
§ 198-4. Restricted water uses.
A declaration of a state of water supply conservation shall include one or
more of the following restrictions, conditions, or requirements limiting the
use of water as the Commission determines is necessary to protect the
water supply. The applicable restrictions, conditions, or requirements shall
be included in the public notice required in § 198-5 below.
20.Editor's Note: This article was originally adopted as Ch. 48, but was redesignated as Art. I
of Ch. 198 to maintain the organizational style of the Code.
§ 198-1 WATER § 198-4
198:143
§ 198-5. Public notification of state of water supply conservation;
notification of DEP.
The Commission shall notify the public of any provision, restriction,
requirement or condition imposed by the Town pursuant to a state of water
supply conservation by publication in a newspaper of general circulation
within the Town, or by such other means reasonably calculated to reach
and inform all users of water of said state of water supply conservation.
Any restriction imposed above in § 198-4 shall not be effective until such
notification is provided. The Commission shall simultaneously notify the
DEP of said state of water supply conservation.
§ 198-6. Termination of state of water supply conservation; notice.
A state of water supply conservation may be terminated by the
Commissioners upon a determination that the water supply shortage no
longer exists. Public notification of the termination of a state of water supply
conservation shall be given in the same manner required in § 198-5 above.
§ 198-7. Compliance with DEP orders.
Upon notification to the public that a declaration of a state of water supply
emergency has been issued by the DEP, no person shall violate any
provision, restriction, requirement, condition of any order approved or
issued by the DEP that it has imposed to bring about an end to the state of
water emergency.
§ 198-8. Penalties.
Any person violating this article shall be subject to the Town in the amount
of $50 for the first violation and $100 for each subsequent violation.
Amounts recovered from this section shall inure to the Town. Fines shall
be recovered by indictment, or on complaint before the District or Superior
Court. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. The
Commission or its agent or the Westminster Chief of Police or his designee
shall investigate violations of the article and may take such actions as it
deems necessary.
Outdoor watering by water users with odd numbered addresses is
restricted to odd numbered days. Outdoor watering by water users with
even numbered addresses is restricted to even numbered days.
A.
B. Outdoor watering is prohibited.
Outdoor watering is permitted only during daily periods of low demand,
to be specified in the declaration of a state of water supply conservation
and public notice thereof.
C.
D. Filling of swimming pools is prohibited.
E. The use of automatic sprinkler systems is prohibited.
§ 198-4 WESTMINSTER CODE § 198-9
198:144
§ 198-9. Severability.
The invalidity of any portion or provision of this article shall not invalidate
any other portion or provision thereof.
§ 198-9 WATER § 198-9
198:145
Chapter 200
WELLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Earth removal — See Ch. 97. Water supplies — See Ch. 254.
§ 200-1. Wells to be covered or filled.
Owners of land on which is located an abandoned well or a well in use shall
provide a covering for such well, capable of sustaining a weight of three
hundred (300) pounds per square foot, or shall fill the same to the level of
the ground.
§ 200-2. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for a violation of this section shall be a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.).
Chapter 202
WETLANDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Earth removal — See Ch. 97.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 231.
Groundwater monitoring and soil
testing — See Ch. 241.
§ 202-1. Purpose; administration; terms; exemptions.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide protection in addition to the
Massachusetts Wetlands Act and to preserve and protect the wetland
resource areas of the Town of Westminster by regulation of, and control
of activities deemed by the Westminster Conservation Commission to
have significant or cumulatively detrimental effect upon the following
interests and values, including: public or private water supply;
groundwater; the prevention and control of flooding, erosion,
sedimentation, storm damage, and/or pollution; protection of fisheries,
wildlife, wildlife habitat and recreation.
A.
It shall be the responsibility of the Conservation Commission to
administer the protection of all wetlands within the geographical
boundaries of the Town of Westminster, as defined in the Massachusetts
Wetlands Act, Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 131, § 40, and
B.
§ 198-9 WESTMINSTER CODE § 202-1
200:146
§ 202-2. Alteration of resource areas.
§ 202-3. Vernal pools.
enforce all provisions of this chapter as described below and adopt
regulations for administrating this chapter.
Throughout this chapter, the words "wetland" and "resource areas"
hold the same meaning.
C.
Throughout this chapter, exemptions as referenced in the
Massachusetts Wetlands Act shall apply.
D.
A resource area is an area specified in 310 CMR 10.25 through 10.35
and 310 CMR 10.54 through 10.58, and vernal pools as defined within
this chapter.
A.
No alterations shall be allowed within 25 feet of any resource area on a
lot that was created after the date of the acceptance by Town Meeting
vote of this regulation.
B.
Alterations will be allowed within 25 feet of any resource area on any
preexisting lot when the alteration is required to protect public health
and safety, or the lot would become unbuildable without the alteration
and that reasonable alternatives are presented to the Commission, in
which the resource area will be enhanced or enlarged and protected
permanently through a conservation restriction or other means
acceptable to the Commission.
C.
Any permanent alteration or change of habitat of the resource area on
a preexisting lot will require 150% replication of that area within that
resource area.
D.
The two-hundred-foot riverfront area and land subject to flooding are
exempt from the twenty-five-foot requirement of this chapter.
E.
A vernal pool is an isolated wetland which has been certified by the
Division of Fisheries and Wildlife and/or meets the requirements for
certification as established by the Massachusetts Natural Heritage
Endangered Species Program for vernal pool certification and is larger
than 500 square feet in area.
A.
The vernal pool does not have to be located within another resource
area to be considered jurisdictional.
B.
No alteration shall be allowed within 25 feet of any vernal pool on a lot
that was created after the date of the acceptance by Town Meeting vote
of this regulation.
C.
Alterations of the upland area adjacent to a vernal pool are allowed
within 25 feet of a vernal pool's seasonal high-water mark, when the
alteration is required to protect public health and safety, or the lot
would become unbuildable without the alteration and that reasonable
D.
§ 202-1 WETLANDS § 202-3
202:147
§ 202-4. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
alternatives are presented to the Commission in which the vernal pool
will be enhanced or enlarged and protected permanently through a
conservation restriction or other means acceptable to the Commission.
In accordance with applicable law, including but not limited to the
provisions of MGL c. 40, §§ 21D and 31, the Commission and or Town
may enforce the provisions of this chapter and the Massachusetts
Wetlands Protection Act, restrain violations thereof and seek
injunctions and judgments to secure compliance with its orders of
conditions.
A.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any order
of conditions, or any permit, with or without conditions issued
pursuant to it, may be punished by a fine in the amount of $100
per day, per violation. Each day or portion thereof during which a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense; if there is
more than one, each condition violated shall constitute a separate
offense. The Conservation Commission Administrator, agent or
appointed designee or any police officer shall be empowered to
enforce this chapter.
(1)
The penalties for violations of this chapter or regulations
promulgated hereunder may be assessed as follows:
Violation
Penalty per
Violation per Day
Alteration of any wetland resource area $100
Violation of any order of conditions $100
Depositing any material in a wetland or
water body unless otherwise exempt from
this chapter
$100
Alteration of any stream or water body $100
Any violation of any section of this chapter
that occurs in the Westminster/Fitchburg
Watershed
$100
Any and all other violations of this chapter $100
(2)
In the event of a violation of this chapter or of any order issued
there under, the Commission or its agents may issue a stop work
order to the owner, the applicant or applicant's agent by certified
mail, return receipt requested, or by posting the same in a
conspicuous location on said site. Any person who violates the
provisions of a stop work order shall be deemed in violation of
the chapter; however, the failure of the Commission to issue a
stop work order shall not prevent the Town from pursuing any
(3)
B.
§ 202-3 WESTMINSTER CODE § 202-4
202:148
Chapter 205
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 65.
Buildings and land — See Ch. 81.
Earth removal — See Ch. 97.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 131.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 231.
other legal remedy at law or in equity to restrain violations of
this chapter, any orders issued hereunder, or rules and regulations
promulgated applicable hereto and to secure full compliance.
§ 202-4 WETLANDS § 202-4
202:149

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 205-1. Purpose.
For the purposes set forth in MGL c. 40A and all acts in amendment thereof
and in addition thereto and under the authority thereof, the height, area,
location and use of buildings and structures and the use of land throughout
the Town of Westminster is hereby regulated as provided herein, and the
Town is hereby divided into districts as hereinafter designated, defined and
described and shown on an official copy of the Zoning Map, dated March 27,
1974, as amended, on file with the Town Clerk, which map is hereby made
a part of this chapter.
§ 205-2. Stricter provisions to prevail.
In general, this chapter is supplementary to other Town bylaws affecting the
use, height, area and location of buildings and use of premises, but where
this chapter imposes a greater restriction in any respect than is imposed by
other Town bylaws, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
§ 205-3. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
§ 205-1 WETLANDS § 205-3
202:151

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 205-4. Terms defined.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings or limitations of meanings herein defined. All present
tenses shall include past and future tenses and all past tense the present.
All singular terms shall include the plural and the plural the singular.
ACCESSORY —
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having a substantial or significant
portion of its stock-in-trade printed matter, books, magazines, picture
periodicals, motion-picture films, video cassettes, or coin-operated motionpicture
machines for sale, barter or rental which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to sexual conduct as that term is defined in MGL c. 272, § 31; or an
establishment having for sale sexual devices, which shall mean any device
primarily designed, promoted or marketed to physically stimulate or
manipulate the human genitals, pubic area or anal area, or an establishment
with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such
materials.[Added ATM 5-6-2000 by Art. 30]
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS (CABARET) —
Establishments which feature live entertainment which consists of
entertainers engaging in sexual conduct or nudity, or topless and/or
bottomless wait persons or employees or any other form of nude or partially
nude service or entertainment as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.[Added ATM
5-6-2000 by Art. 30]
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished
or characterized by emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
sexual conduct as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31, for observation by patrons
therein.[Added ATM 5-6-2000 by Art. 30]
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT — An accessory dwelling unit shall
mean a self-contained, separate housekeeping unit, complete with its
own sleeping, cooking and sanitary facilities and a separate means of
egress that is substantially contained within a single-family structure
and is clearly subordinate to the primary single-family dwelling unit.21
[Added ATM 5-6-2017 by Art. 31]
A.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building devoted exclusively to a use
accessory to the principal use of the lot on which it is located.
B.
ACCESSORY USE — A use incident and subordinate to and on the same
lot as a principal use.
C.
21.Editor's Note: Former Subsections A and B were redesignated as Subsections B and C,
respectively, to accommodate the addition of this new Subsection A.
§ 205-4 WETLANDS § 205-4
202:153
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to sexual conduct as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31, for observation by patrons
therein.[Added ATM 5-6-2000 by Art. 30]
ADULT PARAPHERNALIA STORE — An establishment having as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock devices, objects, tools or toys
which are distinguished or characterized by their association with sexual
activity, including sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in MGL c.
272, § 31.[Added ATM 5-6-2000 by Art. 30]
ADULT RETAIL USE — An establishment having 35% or more of its stock-intrade
devoted to books, magazines, publications, tapes, films and/or other
items that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing, or relating to sexual activities or anatomical genital
areas.[Added ATM 5-6-2000 by Art. 30]
ADULT VIDEO STORE — An establishment having a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade, videos, movies or other film,
material which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis depicting,
describing or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined by
MGL c.272, § 31.[Added ATM 5-6-2000 by Art. 30]
APARTMENT —
ARTISANAL MANUFACTURING — A workshop for the production, in whole
or in part, of custom-made goods by a skilled craft-worker or artisan which
are to be sold on site.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
ASSISTED LIVING HOUSING — Housing units and associated facilities
designed for the elderly who require daily assistance but who do not require
nursing home care. An assisted living housing unit consists of the same
characteristics as a congregate living housing unit. Associated facilities
typically provide additional services beyond congregate housing, including
daily meals and personal services, medical monitoring and supervision.
Assisted living shall refer to certified assisted living residences only, as
regulated under EOEA 651 CMR 12.02.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
BIOTECHNOLOGY — Any technology that uses living organisms or parts of
organisms to make or modify products, to improve plants or animals, or to
develop micro-organisms for specific uses as defined by the United States
Office of Technology Assessment.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
UNIT — Any room or suite of rooms forming a habitable unit for one
family with its own cooking and food storage equipment and its own
bathing and toilet facilities and its own living, sleeping and eating areas
wholly within such room or suite of rooms.
A.
APARTMENT BUILDING — A building containing four or more
apartment units, with no portion of the building below the first story or
above the second story used for dwelling purposes.
B.
§ 205-4 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-4
202:154
BUILD — Includes the words "erect," "construct," "alter," "enlarge," "move,"
"modify," "excavate," "fill" and any others of like significance.
BUILDABLE LOT — With the exception of the Village Center District, each
lot shall have at least half of its minimum lot size required by zoning
consisting of contiguous upland. The upland area shall be exclusive of
any resource area as defined by Massachusetts Wetland Protection Act
Regulations 310 CMR 10.00 or Chapter 202 of the Westminster General
Bylaws.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
BUILDING — Includes the word "structure," unless the context
unequivocally indicates otherwise. "Building" shall also mean any threedimensional
enclosure by any building materials of any space for use or
occupancy, temporary or permanent, and shall include foundations in the
ground; also, all parts of any kind of structure above the ground, except
fences and field or garden walls or embankment retaining walls.
BUILDING SUPPLY STORE — A retail store where building materials such
as lumber, bricks, plywood, drywall, paneling, cement blocks and other
cement products, and other building supplies are stored and sold. Such
merchandise may be stored in the open, provided that all merchandise
so stored is screened from ground level view from any abutting street
or abutting property at the property line where such materials are
stored.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
BUSINESS OFFICES — Establishments primarily engaged in the rendering
of services to other businesses, such as photocopying, printing, blueprinting
shops, advertising firms, mail and packaging services, data processing and
office support services, janitorial and building maintenance, employment
agencies, protective services, office equipment repair and leasing, and
other similar services.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
BUSINESS SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in rendering
services to other businesses, such as photocopying, printing, and
blueprinting shops, advertising firms, mail and packaging services, data
processing and office support services, janitorial and building maintenance,
employment agencies, protective services, office equipment repair and
leasing, and other similar services.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
COMMERCIAL BOARDING OR TRAINING KENNEL — An establishment
used for boarding, holding, day care, overnight stays or training of animals
that are not the property of the owner of the establishment at which such
services are rendered in exchange for consideration and in the absence
of the owner of any animal; provided, however, that "commercial boarding
or training kennel" shall not include an animal shelter or animal control
facility, a pet shop licensed under MGL c. 129, § 39A, a grooming facility
operated solely for the purpose of grooming and not for overnight boarding
or an individual who temporarily, and not in the normal course of business,
boards or cares for animals owned by others.[Added STM 11-18-2014 by
Art. 15]
COMMERCIAL BREEDER KENNEL — An establishment, other than a
personal kennel, engaged in the business of breeding animals for sale
§ 205-4 WETLANDS § 205-4
202:155
or exchange to wholesalers, brokers or pet shops in return for
consideration.[Added STM 11-18-2014 by Art. 15]
CONGREGATE LIVING HOUSING — As defined by the Massachusetts
Office of Elderly Affairs, congregate housing is a shared living environment
designed to integrate the housing and services needs of elders and younger
disabled individuals. The goal of congregate housing is to increase selfsufficiency
through the provision of supportive services in a residential
setting. Congregate housing is neither a nursing home nor a medical care
facility. It does not offer twenty-four-hour care and supervision. Services
are made available to aid residents in managing activities of daily living in
a supportive, but not custodial environment. Each resident has a private
bedroom, but shares one or more of the following: kitchen facilities, dining
facilities, and/or bathing facilities.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
DAY-CARE CENTER — Any facility operated on a regular basis whether
known as a day nursery, nursery school, kindergarten, child play school,
progressive school, child development center, or preschool, or known under
any other name, which receives children under seven years of age, or under
16 years of age if such children have special needs, for nonresidential
custody and care during part or all of the day separate from their
parents.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
DOMESTIC CHARITABLE CORPORATION KENNEL — A facility operated,
owned or maintained by a domestic charitable corporation registered with
the Department of Agricultural Resources or an animal welfare society or
other nonprofit organization incorporated for the purpose of providing for
and promoting the welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals,
including a veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a licensed veterinarian,
which operates consistent with such purposes while providing veterinary
treatment and care.[Added STM 11-18-2014 by Art. 15]
DWELLING —
DWELLING, ATTACHED — A building designed for or occupied as a
one-family residence and separated from another attached dwelling on
one or both sides by a vertical party wall.
A.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A building designed for or occupied as a
one-family residence and separated from any other building except
accessory buildings by side yards.
B.
C. UNIT — Same as "apartment unit."
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building designed for or occupied by one
family.
D.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A freestanding building, designed or
intended exclusively for residential use containing two dwelling units.
(This can be two attached dwelling units.)
E.
EXISTING DWELLING — A dwelling existing at the time of adoption of
this chapter.
F.
§ 205-4 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-4
202:156
ENTERTAINMENT AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — Buildings used
for public recreation, including but not limited to bowling alley, gyms,
dance and yoga studios, skating rink, theater or sport arena or concert
hall, provided that such use is housed indoors in sound-insulated
structures.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
FAMILY — Any number of individuals, including domestic employees, living
together in a dwelling unit and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping
unit, provided that a group of five or more persons who are not within the
second degree of kinship to each other, as defined by civil law, shall not be
deemed to constitute a "family."
FAMILY CHILD-CARE HOME — A private residence which, on a regular
basis, receives for temporary custody and care during part or all of the day
children under seven years of age, or children under 16 years of age if those
children have special needs, and receives for temporary custody and care
for a limited number of hours children of school age. The total number of
children under 16 in a family child-care home shall not exceed six, including
participating children living in the residence. Family child-care home shall
not mean a private residence used for an informal cooperative arrangement
among neighbors or relatives, or the occasional care of children with or
without compensation as defined and regulated under MGL c. 15D, § 1A,
provided that any outdoor play area is screened by fence, wall or planting
line from any neighboring residential structure.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by
Art. 37]
FARMS — Agriculture, orchard, horticulture, or silviculture, whether or not
the farm is exempted under MGL c. 40A, § 3, provided that any building
housing farm animals be not less than 50 feet from the property boundary,
unless the building was in existence at the time of adoption of this
chapter.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
FINANCIAL OFFICES — A bank, savings and loan, credit union, mortgage
office, lending institution, investment company, with or without drivethrough
services and/or automated teller machine.[Added ATM 5-7-2016
by Art. 37]
FRONTAGE — The continuous portion of the line separating a lot from a
street to which the owner of the lot has a legal right of access and to which
the owner could provide for vehicular access from a principal building or
a required parking space. Frontage may be measured at the front yard
setback line if the street is an arc of a curve with a radius of 300 feet or less,
provided that there is, in any event, not less than a fifty-foot width of such
frontage at the street.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — Measured as the vertical distance between the
highest point of the roof and the mean finished grade of the ground
adjoining the building.
HOME OCCUPATION — An activity customarily carried on by the
permanent residents of a dwelling unit, inside the dwelling unit, requiring
only customary home equipment. "Home occupations" do not include
barbershops, beauty shops, commercial offices such as real estate or
§ 205-4 WETLANDS § 205-4
202:157
insurance, nor do they involve the sale of articles produced outside the
dwelling unit nor the raising or production of products involving odor,
vibration, smoke, dust, heat or other objectionable effects.
HOTEL and MOTEL — A structure containing sleeping rooms with or
without a common eating facility, each room having its own private toilet
facilities and each room let for compensation.
INDEPENDENT LIVING HOUSING — Housing units and associated
facilities designed for the elderly who are self-sufficient and require no onsite
personal or health care services. An independent living housing unit
consists of a room or group of rooms designed or intended to provide
a habitable unit for one or more persons with provisions for cooking,
living, sanitation and sleeping for the exclusive use of the household unit.
Associated facilities may include substantial common and socializing areas
and other amenities as regulated under HHS 107 CMR 10:00.[Added ATM
5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
KENNEL — A pack or collection of dogs on a single premises, including
a commercial boarding or training kennel, commercial breeder kennel,
domestic charitable corporation kennel, personal kennel or veterinary
kennel.[Added STM 11-18-2014 by Art. 15]
LARGE FAMILY CHILD-CARE HOME — A private residence which, on a
regular basis, receives for temporary custody and care during part, or all
of the day, children under seven years of age, or children under 16 years of
age if such children have special needs, and receives for temporary custody
and care for a limited number of hours children of school age, but the
number of children under the age of 16 in a large family child-care home
shall not exceed 10, including participating children living in the residence.
A large family child-care home shall have at least one approved assistant
when the total number of children participating in child care exceeds six.
Large family child-care home shall not mean a private residence used for
an informal cooperative arrangement among neighbors or relatives, or the
occasional care of children with or without compensation as defined and
regulated under MGL c. 15D, § 1A, provided that any outdoor play area is
screened by fence, wall or planting line from any neighboring residential
structure.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
LARGE-SCALE SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION — A solar
photovoltaic system that has a minimum nameplate capacity of 250 kW
DC. Such installations may be either ground-mounted or installed upon a
rooftop.[Added STM 11-27-2018 by Art. 12]
LIFE SCIENCES — Advanced and applied sciences that expand the
understanding of human physiology and have the potential to lead to
medical advances or therapeutic applications, including, but not limited
to, agricultural biotechnology, biogenetics, bioinformatics, biomedical
engineering, biopharmaceuticals, biotechnology, chemical synthesis,
chemistry technology, diagnostics, genomics, image analysis, marine
biology, marine technology, medical devices, nanotechnology, natural
product pharmaceuticals, proteomics, regenerative medicine, RNA
interference, stem cell research and veterinary science (MGL, Chapter 130
§ 205-4 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-4
202:158
of the Acts of 2008). Facilities that utilize animal testing of products are not
included in this definition.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — Place of manufacturing, assembly or
packaging of goods, provided that all resulting cinders, dust, flashing,
fumes, gases, odors, refuse matter, smoke and vapor are effectively confined
to the premises or are disposed of in a manner that does not create a
nuisance or hazard to safety or health.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
LIVESTOCK FARMS — Livestock or poultry, provided that any building
housing livestock or poultry be not less than 50 feet from the property
boundary unless the building was in existence at the time of adoption of this
chapter. The raising of swine is permitted on parcels that are at least five
acres in size.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
LOADING AREA — An off-street area for the loading and unloading of goods
and materials from a vehicle.[Added ATM 5-2-2015 by Art. 41]
LOT — The whole area of a single parcel of land undivided by a street
under one ownership, with ascertainable boundaries established by deed or
deeds of record or a segment of land ownership defined by lot boundary
lines on a land division plan duly approved by the Planning Board under the
Subdivision Control Statute.22, 23
LOT COVERAGE — The amount of area on a lot covered by the horizontal
cross section of structures, exclusive of recreational facilities, such as
swimming pools, tennis courts, etc., for the use of the residents.[Amended
ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
LOT FRONTAGE — The distance measured along the boundary of a lot
coinciding with the street line, being an unbroken distance along a way
currently maintained by a town, county, or state, or along ways shown on
the definitive plans of approved subdivisions which have been secured or
constructed, through which actual access to the potential building site shall
be required.[Amended ATM 5-3-2005 by Art. 41]
LOT LINE, FRONT — A line dividing a lot from a street. On any lot bounded
on more than one side by a street, the street boundary that is to be the lot
front shall be so designated in any application for a permit to build on such
lot.
LOT LINE, REAR — Except for a triangular lot, the lot line opposite the front
lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line not a front or rear lot line.
LOT WIDTH — As measured wholly within such lot, the shortest distance
between side lot lines at the required front yard depth.
MARINA — A commercial enterprise having an area for the storage,
mooring or service of boats with frontage on a navigable body of water and
22.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, § 81K et seq.
23.Editor's Note: The former definition of "lot area," as amended, which immediately
followed, was repealed ATM 5-5-2012 by Art. 45.
§ 205-4 WETLANDS § 205-4
202:159
with facilities for the landing of boats. If storage is to be on land and of
a transient nature requiring frequent launchings and landings, it shall be
inside a building.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTER/REGISTERED MARIJUANA
DISPENSARY — A registered marijuana dispensary (RMD) as defined in
the regulations promulgated by the Massachusetts Department of Public
Health (DPH), 105 CMR 725.000. Such facilities shall be registered with the
state that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes, transfers, transports,
sells, distributes, dispenses or administers medical marijuana, products
containing marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials to
qualifying patients and/or their personal caregivers.[Added ATM 5-3-2014
by Art. 35; amended 5-5-2018 ATM by Art. 29]
MOBILE HOME and/or TRAILER —
MOBILE HOME OR TRAILER PARK — A parcel of land which has been
planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes or trailers for
transient or nontransient use and is designed to accommodate two or more
mobile homes or trailers.
NONCONFORMING —
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling unit built
on a chassis for year-round occupancy and containing the same water
supply, waste disposal and electrical conveniences as immobile
housing.
A.
TRAILER — The following shall be considered a trailer.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicular portable structure built on a
chassis, designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation
and vacation and having body width not exceeding eight feet and a
body length not exceeding 32 feet.
(1)
PICK UP COACH — A structure to be mounted on a truck chassis
for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation.
(2)
MOTOR HOME — A portable temporary dwelling to be used for
travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a
self-propelled vehicle.
(3)
CAMPING TRAILER — A folding structure mounted on wheels and
designed for travel, recreation and vacation use.
(4)
B.
LOT — A lot that does not conform to a dimensional regulation
prescribed by this chapter for the district in which it is located but was
in existence at the time of adoption of this chapter and was lawful at
the time it was established and conforms to the requirements of MGL
c. 40A.
A.
USE — A use of a building or lot that does not conform to a use
regularly permitted by this chapter for the district in which it is located,
B.
§ 205-4 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-4
202:160
OCCUPIED — Includes the words "designed, arranged or intended to be
occupied."
PARKING SPACE — An area containing adequate space, as determined by
the Planning Board, to be used exclusively as a parking stall for one motor
vehicle.[Amended STM 11-27-2007 by Art. 13]
PERSONAL KENNEL — A pack or collection of more than four dogs, three
months or older, owned or kept under single ownership for private personal
use; provided, however, that breeding of personally owned dogs may take
place for the purpose of improving, exhibiting or showing the breed for use
in legal sporting activity or for other personal reasons; provided further that
selling, trading, bartering or distributing such breeding from a personal
kennel shall be to other breeders or individuals by private sale only and
not to wholesalers, brokers or pet shops; provided further that a personal
kennel shall not sell, trade, barter or distribute a dog not bred from its
personally owned dog; and provided further that dogs temporarily housed
at a personal kennel, in conjunction with an animal shelter or rescue
registered with the Department of Agricultural Resources, may be sold,
traded, bartered or distributed if the transfer is not for profit.[Added STM
11-18-2014 by Art. 15]
PERSONAL SERVICES — Businesses where the primary occupation is the
repair, care of, maintenance, or customizing of personal properties that
are worn or carried about the person or are a physical component of the
person. Personal service establishments shall include but not be limited to:
barbershops, beauty salons, manicurists, laundry, dry-cleaning and other
garment servicing establishments, tailors, dressmaking shops, shoe repair
shops, watch repair shops, opticians, tanning salons, and other similar
places of business, but not including offices for physicians, dentists, and
veterinarians.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
PRIVATE NONPROFIT SOCIAL CLUB OR LODGE — Buildings and facilities
owned by a corporation, association, person or persons for a social,
educational, or recreational purpose, to which membership is required for
participation and not primarily operated for profit nor to render a service
that is customarily carried on as a business.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art.
37]
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES — An office or offices of recognized professions,
such as doctors, lawyers, licensed massage/muscular therapists, engineers,
artists, musicians, designers and others who through training are qualified
to perform services of a professional nature.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art.
37]
PUBLIC SERVICE CORPORATIONS — Those corporations located within
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts that provide a public service or
services, regulated by the Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities
or the Massachusetts Department of Telecommunications and Cable, and
which may be exempted from local zoning after a public hearing held by
but was in existence at the time of the adoption of this chapter and was
lawful at the time it was established.
§ 205-4 WETLANDS § 205-4
202:161
either department to determine the applicability of MGL c. 40A, § 3, where
the Town is notified as an interested party.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art.
37]
PUBLIC UTILITIES — Investor-owned electric power, natural gas, and
water utilities in the commonwealth.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
RECYCLING FACILITY — The use of land and/or structures for the
collection and/or processing of used materials, excluding motor vehicles
and excluding bottle and can redemption, whereby the resultant product
is to be reused in the same or different form or matter, provided that
all resulting cinders, dust, flashing, fumes, gases, odors, refuse matter,
smoke and vapor are effectively confined to the premises or are disposed
of in a manner that does not create a nuisance or hazard to safety or
health.[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
RESIDENTIAL-SCALE SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION — A solar
photovoltaic system that has a maximum nameplate capacity of 25 kW
DC. Such installations may be either ground-mounted or installed upon a
rooftop.[Added STM 11-27-2018 by Art. 12]
RETAIL STORE — A business that sells consumer products directly to
consumers and may include, but is not limited to, department stores and
stores that sell the following: furniture, clothing, hardware, household
furnishing, sporting goods, electronics, and appliances, provided that all
storage and sales of materials are conducted within a building and such
building is no greater than 25,000 square feet of gross floor area.[Added
ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE (MINI-WAREHOUSE) FACILITY — An
establishment consisting of a structure or group of structures containing
separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented for dead storage
as individual leases. Individual storage spaces shall be leased or rented to
tenants who are to have access to said space for the purpose of storing
or removing personal property. No individual storage space shall exceed
900 square feet of gross floor area. Trucking terminals are specifically
excluded from this definition and the intent is to limit the definition to that
use set forth in Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 105A, Self-Storage
Facilities.[Added ATM 5-6-2000 by Art. 31]
SHARED PARKING — Parking spaces that may be shared by different
uses to be counted towards the parking requirement. Parking spaces to
be shared should serve uses that have different hours of operation.[Added
ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
SIGNS — Includes any permanent or temporary structure, device, letter,
word, model, banner, pennant, insignia, trade flag or representation used as
or which is in the nature of an advertisement, announcement or direction
or is designed to attract the eye by intermittent or rapid motions or
illumination.
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION — An active solar energy
collection device that converts solar energy directly into electricity whose
primary purpose is to harvest energy by transforming solar energy into
§ 205-4 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-4
202:162
another form of energy or transferring heat from a collector to another
medium using mechanical, electrical, or chemical means.[Added STM
11-27-2018 by Art. 12]
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT — Any activity, together with associated
buildings, structures and facilities, concerning the handling, movement,
transfer, composting, reuse, sorting, storage, gas-to- energy conversion, and
disposal of solid waste as regulated or permitted by the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to 310 CMR 19,
including any such activities and associated facilities as they may be
regulated or permitted by amendments of such regulations or by successor
state agencies.[Added STM 11-28-2017 by Art. 12]
SPACE, HABITABLE — Those areas within the exterior walls of a dwelling
which have headroom of not less than seven feet measured vertically
upward from the top of the finished floor, but excluding basement areas and
excluding areas in any accessory structure attached to any dwelling.
STORY — That portion of a building contained between any floor and the
floor or roof next above it, but not including any portion so contained if more
than one-half (1/2) of such portion vertically is below the average natural
grade of the ground adjoining such building.
STREET — A public way or private way on record at the Registry of Deeds
which affords a principal means of adequate access to abutting property
and open to travel by the general public or a way shown on a subdivision
plan duly approved by the Planning Board under the Subdivision Control
Statute.24
STRUCTURE — A combination of material assembled at a fixed location to
give support or shelter, such as a building, tower, framework, platform, bin,
sign or the like.
TRADE, PROFESSIONAL OR OTHER SCHOOL — A specialized instructional
establishment that provides on-site training of business, commercial and/
or trade skills (such as accounting, data processing, and computer
repair).[Added ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
UPPER STORY RESIDENTIAL — Dwelling units located above first-floor
commercial or institutional uses in the Village Center District.[Added ATM
5-7-2016 by Art. 37]
USE — The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or
intended or for which either land or a building is or may be occupied or
maintained.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main or primary purpose for which a structure or
lot is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is permitted to be used,
occupied or maintained under this chapter.[Added ATM 5-3-2005 by Art.
42]
VETERINARY KENNEL — A veterinary hospital or clinic that boards dogs
for reasons in addition to medical treatment or care; provided, however,
24.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, § 81K et seq.
§ 205-4 WETLANDS § 205-4
202:163
that "veterinary kennel" shall not include a hospital or clinic used solely to
house dogs that have undergone veterinary treatment or observation or will
do so only for the period of time necessary to accomplish that veterinary
care.[Added STM 11-18-2014 by Art. 15]
YARD —
FRONT YARD — An open space extending the entire width of a lot from
lot side line to lot side line between the front lot line or lines and the
nearest point of a building.
A.
REAR YARD — An open space extending the entire width of a lot line
from side line to side line between the rear lot line or the corner of a
triangular lot farthest from the front lot line and the nearest point of
the building.
B.
SIDE YARD — An open space extending along a side line of a lot
(between the front yard and the rear yard on such lot) and extending
between the side line of such lot to the nearest point of the building.
C.
§ 205-4 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-4
202:164
ARTICLE III
Zoning Districts
§ 205-5. Zoning districts designated.
The Town of Westminster is hereby divided into zoning districts designated
as follows:
Residential Districts
R-I (50,000) [Amended STM 11-2-1978 by Art. 4]
R-II (60,000) [Amended STM 10-12-1999 by Art. 14]
R-III (86,000)
Commercial Districts
C-I (Highway)
C-II (Neighborhood)
VC (Village Center) [Amended 5-7-2016 by Art. 36]
Industrial Districts
I-I
I-II [Added STM 10-10-1995 by Art. 17]
Floodplain and/or Wetland Protection Districts
F
Solid Waste Management District
SWMD [Added STM 11-28-2017 by Art. 10]
§ 205-6. Zoning Map.
§ 205-7. Determination of district boundaries.
Except for Floodplain Districts, the location and boundaries of these
districts are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "Zoning
Map of the Town of Westminster," dated March 27, 1974, bearing
the signatures of the members of the Planning Board and on file in
the office of the Town Clerk, which map, with all explanatory matter
thereon is declared to be a part of this chapter.25
A.
Any changes or amendments made at a Town meeting in accordance
with the provisions of Article XIII of this chapter shall be indicated by
the alteration of said map, and the map thus altered is declared to be a
part of the bylaws; thus amended alterations shall be made to the map
by the Planning Board and shall be signed and dated by said Board.
B.
25.Editor’s Note: A copy of the Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter. The
Zoning Map, entitled “Westminster, MA: Zoning Map,” prepared by the Montachusett
Regional Planning Commission, dated November 27, 2018, and replacing the existing
Zoning Map, was adopted STM 11-27-2018 by Art. 11.
§ 205-5 WETLANDS § 205-7
202:165
§ 205-8. Solid Waste Management District (SWMD).26 [Added STM
11-28-2017 by Art. 11]
Where a district boundary is indicated as within or parallel to a street,
highway, railroad right-of-way, watercourse or Town municipal
boundary such district boundary shall be construed as the center line or
being parallel to the center line of such street, highway, railroad rightof-
way, watercourse or Town municipal boundary. If a watercourse, the
center line shall be defined as the center line of the natural channel.
A.
Whenever any uncertainty exists as to the exact location of a boundary
line, the location of such line shall be determined from the scale of the
map by the Building Inspector or enforcing officer of this chapter.
B.
Purpose. The purpose of the SWMD is to provide a suitable location for
solid waste management and recycling facility uses within the Town of
Westminster that will protect the health and safety of the residents of
the Town while allowing the Town to meet its solid waste management
and recycling facility needs.
A.
Permitted uses. The following uses shall be allowed as of right within
the SWMD:
(1) Solid waste management;
(2) Recycling facility;
Federal, state and municipal park, playground or recreational
facility; and
(3)
(4) All uses or structures accessory to permitted uses listed above.
B.
Prohibited uses.
Solid waste management and recycling facility uses which are
subject to Board of Health site assignment, and which are not in
compliance with the terms and conditions of said site assignment.
(1)
Solid waste management and recycling facility uses which are
subject to permitting by the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection, and which are not in compliance with
the terms and conditions of said permits.
(2)
(3) All uses not expressly permitted in Subsection B above.
C.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Lots within the SWMD shall be at least five acres in size.
(2) No waste disposal shall take place within 1,000 feet of a dwelling.
D.
26.Editor's Note: Former § 205-8, Wetland Protection District, added STM 12-13-1982 by Art.
2, was repealed ATM 5-2-2006 by Art. 51.
§ 205-7 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-8
202:166
§ 205-9. Floodplain District. [Amended STM 12-13-1982 by Art. 2]
No waste disposal shall take place within 50 feet of a front, rear or
side lot line.
(3)
Purpose. The purposes of the Floodplain District are to protect the
public health, safety and general welfare, to protect human life and
property from the hazards of periodic flooding, to preserve the natural
flood control characteristics and the flood storage capacity of the
floodplain and to preserve and maintain the groundwater table and
water recharge areas within the floodplain.
A.
District delineation.
The general boundaries of the Floodplain District are shown on
the Westminster Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated July 19,
1982, as Zones A, A1-30 to indicate the one-hundred-year
floodplain. The exact boundaries of the district are defined by
the one-hundred-year-water-surface elevations shown on the FIRM
and further defined by the flood profiles contained in the Flood
Insurance Study dated January 1982. The floodway boundaries are
delineated on the Westminster Flood Boundary Floodway Map Map
(FBFH) dated July 19, 1982, and further defined by the floodway
data tables contained in the Flood Insurance Study. These two
maps, as well as the accompanying study, are incorporated herein
by reference and are on file with the Town Clerk, the Planning
Board and the Building Inspector.
(1)
Within Zone A, where the one-hundred-year flood elevation is not
provided on the FIRM, the developer/applicant shall obtain any
existing flood elevation data and it shall be reviewed by the
Planning Board. If the data is sufficiently detailed and accurate, it
shall be relied upon to require compliance with this chapter and
the State Building Code.
(2)
B.
Use regulations. The Floodplain District is established as an overlay
district to all other districts. All development, including structural and
nonstructural activities, whether permitted by right or by special
permit, must be in compliance with MGL c. 131, § 40, and with the
requirements of the Massachusetts State Building Code pertaining to
construction in the floodplains (currently Section 744).
Permitted uses. The following uses of low flood-damage potential
and causing no obstructions to flood flows shall be allowed,
provided that they are permitted in the underlying district and they
do not require structures, fill or storage of materials or equipment:
Agricultural uses such as farming, grazing, truck farming,
horticulture, etc.
(a)
(b) Forestry and nursery uses.
(1)
C.
§ 205-8 WETLANDS § 205-9
202:167
Outdoor recreational uses, including fishing, boating, play
areas, etc.
(c)
(d) Conservation of water, plants wildlife.
(e) Wildlife management areas, foot, bicycle and/or horse paths.
Temporary nonresidential structures used in connection with
fishing, growing, harvesting storage or sale of crops raised on
the premises.
(f)
Buildings lawfully existing prior to the adoption of these
provisions.
(g)
Special permits. No structure or building shall be erected, constructed,
substantially improved or otherwise created or moved; no earth or
other materials dumped, filled, excavated or transferred, unless a
special permit is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Said Board
may issue a special permit hereunder (subject to other applicable
provisions of this chapter) if the application is compliant with the
following provisions:
The proposed use shall comply in all respects with the provisions of
the underlying district;
(1)
Within 10 days of receipt of the application, the Board shall
transmit one copy of the development plan to the Conservation
Commission, the Planning Board, Board of Health, Town
Coordinator27 and the Building Inspector. Final action shall not be
taken until reports have been received from the above Boards or
until 35 days have elapsed;
(2)
All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements to existing structures and other development are
prohibited, unless certification by a registered professional
engineer is provided by the applicant demonstrating that such
encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during
the occurrence of the one-hundred-year flood; and
(3)
The Board may specify such additional requirements and
conditions it finds necessary to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the public and the occupants of the proposed use.
(4)
D.
27.Editor’s Note: The Annual Town Meeting voted 5-1-2010 by Art 30 to authorize the Board
of Selectmen to appoint a Town Administrator to replace the position of Town Coordinator.
§ 205-9 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-9
202:168
ARTICLE IV
Application of Regulations, Modifications and Exceptions
§ 205-10. Conformity required.
No buildings shall be erected or used and no land shall be used or divided
unless in conformity with the regulations of this chapter. All other buildings
and all other uses of land or of buildings are hereby expressly prohibited,
except those already lawfully existing which by the provisions of this
chapter become lawfully nonconforming.
§ 205-11. Lots situated partially in Town.
When a lot is situated in part in the Town of Westminster and in part in the
adjacent municipality, the provisions of this chapter shall be applied to the
portion of such lot in the Town of Westminster in the same manner as if the
entire lot were situated in Westminster.
§ 205-12. Lots in more than one district.
When a lot is transected by a zoning district boundary, the regulations of
this chapter applicable to the larger part by area of such lot may also, at
the option of the lot owner, be deemed to govern in the smaller part beyond
such zoning district boundary, but only to an extent not more than 30 linear
feet in depth beyond such zoning district boundary.
§ 205-13. Minimum building requirements. [Amended STM
4-16-1983 by Art. 32]
No building shall be erected, except on a lot fronting on a street, and
there shall be not more than one principal building on any lot, except
as allowed under this chapter. [Amended ATM 5-3-2005 by Art. 40]
A.
Flag lots. In addition, any parcel larger than five acres may be further
divided without process through the Subdivision Control Law,28
provided that each created lot either conforms with the appropriate
land space requirements for that zoning district or the following:
[Amended STM 11-3-1994 by Art. 12; ATM 5-6-2017 by Art. 35]
Each parcel shall have a minimum of 54 feet of frontage for an
access to a Town road, this width to be maintained to the
circumference of the radius described in Subsection C(1) below;
(1)
Each parcel shall contain a minimum of two and one-half (2 1/
2) times the land area it would normally require in each zoning
district; and
(2)
There shall be no more than two such accesses adjacent to each
other.
(3)
B.
28.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, § 81K et seq.
§ 205-10 WETLANDS § 205-13
202:169
§ 205-14. Land within lines of a street.
Land within the lines of a street on which a lot abuts shall not be counted
as part of such lot for the purpose of meeting the area requirements of this
chapter, even though the fee to such land may be in the owners of abutting
lots.
§ 205-15. Land taken by eminent domain.
Any land taken by eminent domain or conveyed for public purpose for which
the land could have been taken or was taken by eminent domain shall not
be deemed to be transferred in violation of the land area, width and space
provisions of this chapter.
Design standards for newly created lots: whether created through the
subdivision process or approval not required (ANR) process, all lots
created after March 13, 2017 shall be designed as follows: [Added
ATM 5-6-2017 by Art. 35]
There shall be a point on each lot from which a circle having
a radius of 50 feet can be drawn without touching any of the
opposing lot lines.
(1)
At no point shall the width of a lot from side lot line to side lot line
be less than 54 feet.
(2)
C.
§ 205-13 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-15
202:170
ARTICLE V
Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
§ 205-16. Continuation, alteration or enlargement. [Amended STM
10-2-1978 by Art. 1]
§ 205-17. Change to conforming use.
If any nonconforming use of any structure or land, or both, is changed to a
conforming use, it shall not thereafter be put into any nonconforming use.
§ 205-18. Abandonment.
If any nonconforming development or use of land or of a building be
discontinued for a period not less than 24 consecutive months, which, in the
terms of this chapter, shall be evidence of abandonment of a nonconforming
usage, such land or building shall thereafter be used or developed only in
accordance with the terms of this chapter for the zoning district in which
such property is located.
§ 205-19. Destruction or damage. [Amended STM 10-2-1978 by Art.
1]
Any nonconforming building or structure destroyed or damaged by fire,
flood, lightning, wind or other natural cause may be restored only to the
extent of its former nonconforming use and status, provided that, before a
building permit shall be issued, plans of the restored building and the site
shall be reviewed within 45 days of initial application for a building permit
Any lawful use of any structure or land or both may be continued,
although not conforming with the provisions of this chapter. A
nonconforming business may be sold for a similar nonconforming
purpose if not governed by the conditions of § 205-18.
A.
Existing nonconforming structures or uses may be extended or altered,
provided that such extension or alteration conforms to the applicable
land space and use requirements for that zoning district. No
nonconforming extension or alteration is permitted unless there is a
finding by the Zoning Board of Appeals that such a change, extension or
alteration shall not be substantially more detrimental that the existing
nonconforming structure or use to the neighborhood. Such action by
the Board of Appeals shall be in accordance with Article XII of this
chapter and MGL C. 40A. [Amended STM 11-3-1994 by Art. 13]
B.
Nothing herein contained, however, shall prevent the alteration or
enlargement of a sanitary disposal system which may be
nonconforming, provided that such alteration or enlargement shall
comply with all requirements of the State Department of Public Health
or, if such system is not subject to state approval, with the requirements
of the local Board of Health. No special permit or other action by the
Board of Appeals shall be required in such event.
C.
§ 205-16 WETLANDS § 205-19
202:171
with the Planning Board, and failure to act by the Planning Board within
45 days of application shall constitute approval. Work of restoration must
commence within two years from the date of such destruction or damage.
§ 205-20. Amendments during construction. [Added STM 10-2-1978
by Art. 1]
Construction or operation under a building permit or special permit shall
conform to any subsequent amendment of this chapter, unless the use or
construction is commenced within a period of six months after the issuance
of the permit and, in cases involving construction, unless such construction
is continued through to its completion, as continuously and expeditiously as
is reasonable.
§ 205-19 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-20
202:172
ARTICLE VI
Use Regulations
§ 205-21. Explanation of Table of Use Regulations.
§ 205-22. Table of Use Regulations.
The Table of Use Regulations is included at the end of this chapter.
Except as provided by law or in this chapter in each district no building,
structure, or land shall be used or occupied except for the purposes
permitted as set forth in the accompanying Table of Use Regulations,
§ 205-22.
A.
A use listed in § 205-22 is permitted as of right in any district under
which it is denoted by the letter "Y" subject to such requirements as
may be specified elsewhere in this chapter. If designated in the Table by
the letters "SP" the use may be permitted as a special exception only if
the Board of Appeals so determines and grants a special permit therefor
as provided in Article XII of this chapter and MGL c. 40A subject to
such restrictions as set forth elsewhere in this chapter and such further
restrictions as said Board may establish. If designated by the letter "N"
the use is not permitted. The designation of "SP" in the Table of Uses,
§ 205-22, in a given district does not constitute an authorization or an
assurance that such use will be permitted. Rather, each special permit
application shall be evaluated as to its probable effect on the adjacent
property and the community welfare and may be approved or denied as
the findings indicate appropriate. [Amended STM 10-2-1978 by Art.
1; STM 11-18-2014 by Art. 13]
B.
§ 205-21 WETLANDS § 205-22
202:173

ARTICLE VII
Land Space Requirements
§ 205-23. Conformance required.
No building or structure shall be built nor shall any existing building or
structure be enlarged or altered except in conformance with the regulations
of this chapter as to lot coverage, lot area, land area per dwelling unit, lot
width, front, side and rear yards and maximum height of structures in the
several districts as set forth below, except as may otherwise be provided
elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 205-24. Use of land for more than one requirement.
The land and yard spaces required for any new building or use shall not
include any land or area required by any other building or use to fulfill
zoning requirements.
§ 205-25. Distance between buildings.
If more than one building (other than a one-, two- or three-car garage, a
toolshed, a greenhouse or a cabana) may lawfully be placed on any lot in
a single or common ownership, the distance between the nearest parts of
such buildings shall be not less than 20 feet.
§ 205-26. Accessory structures: dimensional requirements for
residential lots.29 [Added ATM 5-6-2017 by Art. 34]
§ 205-27. Conversion of single-family structures to multi-family
structures. [Added ATM 5-6-2017 by Art. 32]
Small accessory structures (120 square feet in size or less) can be
located no closer than five feet from a side or rear lot line in all zoning
districts that allow residential development. Accessory structures that
are larger than 120 square feet but smaller than the principal structure
(building used as a dwelling or domicile) can be located no closer than
15 feet from a side or rear lot line in all zoning districts that allow
residential development.
A.
In no cases shall an accessory structure of any size be located within
the minimum required front yard setback.
B.
Accessory structures that are used to house livestock shall not be
located closer than 50 feet from any lot line.
C.
Conversion of a dwelling existing at the time of adoption of this chapter
to accommodate not more than two families is allowed by right in all
A.
29.Editor's Note: Former §§ 205-26 through 205-45 were renumbered as §§ 205-29 through
205-44.6 as authorized by the Town Clerk pursuant to STM 11-17-2015, Art. 10. See § 1-7.
Former § 205-39.1, Developmental rate guidelines, added ATM 5-2-1998 by Art. 31, as
amended, expired 7-1-2015.
§ 205-23 WETLANDS § 205-27
202:175
§ 205-28. Temporary residential structures. [Added ATM 5-6-2017
by Art. 33]
§ 205-29. Land Space Requirements Table.
The Land Space Requirements Table is included at the end of this chapter.
zoning districts, provided that there is no external structural evidence
of occupancy by more than one family other than a second exit for fire
purposes for each unit, and further provided that each dwelling unit
resulting from such conversion shall have not less than 450 square feet
of habitable floor space.
Conversion of a dwelling existing at the time of adoption of this chapter
to accommodate more than two families is allowed by special permit
from the Zoning Board.
B.
Residential use of a camper or trailer properly connected to an
approved on-site water and sewerage system for a period of not more
than 24 months is allowed by right in all zoning districts if the user
is in the continuing process of building a home after the issuance of
a temporary building permit from the Building Inspector. Nothing in
this subsection shall be interpreted to allow the residential use of a lot
where forbidden by other sections of this chapter.
A.
Mobile homes, camping trailers, utility trailers, horse trailers, trailers,
boats or pickup campers not connected to permanent sewage and
water installation may be occupied for occasional short-term use not
to exceed 28 days in a calendar year, excluding designated camping
grounds.
B.
§ 205-27 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-29
202:176
ARTICLE VIII
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
[Amended ATM 5-3-2005 by Art. 44; STM 11-27-2007 by Art. 13;
ATM 5-3-2008 by Art. 37; ATM 5-2-2015 by Art. 41]
§ 205-30.1. Requirements to be met.
Parking and loading standards for the Village Center District shall be
determined by the appropriate permitting authority on a case-by-case basis.
For all other zoning districts, the following parking and loading standards
shall apply.
No land shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected,
enlarged or used unless the off-street parking and loading space
requirements are provided as specified in this section. For the purpose of
this section, an enlargement of any building shall require the provision of
off-street parking and loading for the existing building as if it were newly
constructed if the floor area of any building existing upon adoption of this
chapter is increased by more than 5%.
§ 205-30.2. Computation of required spaces.
Where the computation of required parking space results in a fractional
number, only the fraction of 1/2 or more shall be counted as one.
§ 205-30.3. Location of spaces. [Amended STM 11-27-2018 by Art.
10]
Required off-street parking facilities for residential uses shall be provided
on the same lot as the principal use they are designed to serve.
Parking areas for commercial uses shall be located in the rear of the
primary building, unless the owner can demonstrate that this is not
reasonably feasible owing to the shape of the building, shape of the lot or
other factors approved by the Planning Board.
For commercial zoning districts, shared parking areas may be permitted
by the Planning Board subject to Site Plan Approval, for the purpose of
servicing two or more principal uses on separate lots provided that:
Evidence is submitted that parking is available within 400 feet of the
premises if the lot satisfies the parking requirements of this bylaw and
has excess capacity during all or part of the day.
A.
A proposed contract, agreement or suitable legal instrument acceptable
to the Planning Board shall be filed specifying the location of all spaces
to be jointly used, the number of such spaces, the hours during the day
that such parking is available, and the duration of limit, if any on such
parking.
B.
Any reduction in area required for parking because of these joint use
provisions may be required to be reserved for landscaped open space.
C.
§ 205-30.1 WETLANDS § 205-30.3
202:177
§ 205-30.4. Abutting commercial districts; access to parking.
For two commercial uses that abut each other within a commercial zoning
district, the Planning Board may require that the parking lots for both uses
be linked by a paved strip of land 20 feet wide located between each lot's
parking area and shared lot line that will enable customers to enter the
abutting commercial property without having to use the road providing
frontage to the two lots.
§ 205-30.5. Size of spaces; paving.
§ 205-30.6. Buildings containing multiple uses.
Where one building is used for more than one use, parking requirements
shall be computed for each use (a motel with a restaurant would be required
to provide parking for both rental units and for seating capacity of the
restaurant; a professional office in a residence must provide the space
for the office use in addition to the residential requirement) unless the
applicant provides adequate information through the site plan review
process showing that the peak demand for the proposed uses is not at the
same time and, therefore, additional parking is not necessary.
§ 205-30.7. Number of required spaces. [Amended ATM 5-7-2016 by
Art. 36]
Nothing in this section shall relieve the owner from providing parking
facilities in accordance with this bylaw if subsequently the joint use of
parking facilities shall terminate.
D.
Each required car space shall be not less than nine feet in width and 18
feet in length, exclusive of drives and maneuvering space.
A.
Handicapped parking: Parking spaces for the exclusive use of
handicapped individuals shall be provided in accordance with the most
recent rules and regulations of the Architectural Access Board, 521
CMR 23.00.
B.
The minimum number of required parking spaces shall be as follows:
Principal Use Minimum Number of Spaces
1- and 2-family dwellings 2 per dwelling unit
Apartments 2 per dwelling unit
Apartments built under
housing for the elderly
1 per dwelling unit
Rooming houses and lodging
houses
4, plus 1 for each rental unit over 2
Nursing homes 1 for each 2 beds
A.
§ 205-30.3 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-30.7
202:178
§ 205-30.8. Location of parking and loading spaces.
No parking or loading space shall be located within 10 feet of any property
line or road right-of-way.
§ 205-30.9. Screening of parking and loading areas.
Parking and loading areas for non-residential uses (excluding customary
home occupations) shall be effectively screened on each side which adjoins
or faces the side or rear lot line of a lot located in a residential zoning
district or a residentially used property, through the use of landscaping and/
or fencing. Fencing shall consist of a solid fence or wall not less than three
feet, or more than six feet in height at the time of occupancy of such lot.
Principal Use Minimum Number of Spaces
Motels, hotels and inns 2, plus 1 1/4 for each rental unit, plus
1 for each 20 square feet of floor area
available for meetings or functions
Permitted offices in
residences
3, plus 1 for each nonresident
employee
Retail stores and services In districts other than the Village
Center District, 1 for each 250 square
feet of gross floor area
Restaurants, theaters and
other places of assembly
exclusive of churches
In districts other than the Village
Center District, 1 for each 4 seats
Bowling alleys 4 for each alley
Offices In districts other than the Village
Center District, 1 space for each 500
square feet of gross floor area
Warehouses and other
commercial or industrial
buildings
1 for each 900 square feet of gross
floor area
For accessory uses not listed above there shall be provided adequate
off-street parking as determined by the Planning Board.
B.
Parking and loading areas for nonresidential uses (excluding customary
home occupations) shall be set back 25 feet from any property line
when the property abuts a residential district or residentially used
property, and the Planning Board may require landscaping and/or
fencing to be installed within the setback areas.
A.
Parking and loading areas for nonresidential uses (excluding customary
home occupations) that are supported by retaining walls shall have an
additional setback requirement equal to the height of the retaining wall
and applied to the nearest lot line abutting said retaining wall.
B.
§ 205-30.7 WETLANDS § 205-30.10
202:179
§ 205-30.10. Loading requirements.30
General: Off-street loading spaces or loading areas shall be provided
and maintained by the owner of the property for each nonresidential
building or use which is erected, enlarged or altered after the effective
date of this bylaw, according to the following provisions.
A.
Same lot: All loading spaces or loading areas required by this bylaw
shall be located on the same lot as the building or use which they are
intended to serve, and in no case shall any required loading area be
part of an area used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of
this bylaw.
B.
No queues or backing onto street: No loading facility shall be designed
to require trucks to queue on a public way while waiting to be offloaded.
No loading facility shall be designed to require vehicles to back
onto a public way; all turning maneuvers shall be accommodated on the
premises.
C.
30.Editor’s Note: This section was originally adopted as § 205-36; however, since a section
numbered § 205-36 already existed, the Town Clerk was authorized by STM 11-17-2015,
Art. 10, to correct the duplicate numbering by renumbering this section as § 205-34.2.
§ 205-30.10 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-30.10
202:180
ARTICLE IX
Special Provisions
§ 205-31. Certain uses permitted.
The following uses may be permitted as designated in § 205-22, Table of Use
Regulations, provided that they meet the following requirements in addition
to any other requirements.
§ 205-32. Motels.
§ 205-33. Apartments and attached dwellings.
No motel shall be constructed on a lot having less than 200 feet of
frontage, nor less than 40,000 square feet of lot area.
A.
On each lot used for motel purposes there shall be provided front, rear
and side yards each not less than 50 feet in depth.
B.
A space not less than 20 feet shall be maintained open with grass,
bushes, flowers or trees all along each side lot, rear lot and front lot,
except for entrance and exit driveways, and such open space shall not
be built on, nor paved nor used for parking.
C.
No space within the required front yard depth shall be used for parking,
except as a temporary nature such as for registering.
D.
Each motel site shall be provided with not more than two motor vehicle
driveways for each abutting street which shall intersect the abutting
street or streets at 90°.
E.
Each rental unit shall contain not less then 210 square feet of habitable
floor area.
F.
Subject to the Board of Appeals, uses such as, but not limited to,
restaurants, convention facilities, health clubs, retail shops and beauty
and barber shops are permitted within motels containing 100 or more
units.
G.
Site plans.
In considering the granting of a special permit for the construction
of apartments and attached dwellings, the Board of Appeals shall
take into consideration the needs of the community, the effect
of the development upon the neighborhood and the community
in terms of traffic, utilities, drainage, municipal facilities and the
health and welfare of the inhabitants. If after consideration the
Board determines that the development is not in the best interest
of the community for any of the aforementioned reasons, the
application for said permit shall be denied. For each apartment
development, a site plan shall be submitted, in duplicate, and shall
comply with the following standards:
(1)
A.
§ 205-31 WETLANDS § 205-33
202:181
R-I Zoning District:
[1] Minimum frontage: 400 feet.
[2] Minimum setback: 50 feet.
[3] Minimum side and rear yards: 50 feet.
[4] Minimum lot: five acres.
Maximum building and parking coverage: 40%, exclusive
of recreational buildings and facilities.
[5]
Maximum building coverage: 20%, exclusive of
recreational buildings and facilities.
[6]
(a)
The following lot area (see definitions) shall be provided:
[Amended ATM 5-2-2006 by Art. 48]
For each unit containing one bedroom or less: 4,000
square feet.
[1]
[2] For each two-bedroom unit: 8,000 square feet.
For each unit containing three or more bedrooms: 12,500
square feet.
[3]
(b)
No parking shall be allowed within 35 feet of any lot line, and
parking areas shall be attractively landscaped.
(c)
No building shall be located within 100 feet of any existing
single- or two-family dwelling, and adequate landscaping in the
form of trees shall be planted between the building and the
single- or two-family dwelling.
(d)
One copy of said site plan shall be submitted by the Board of
Appeals to the Planning Board for its review and comments. Where
action by the Board of Appeals differs from the recommendations
of the Planning Board, the reasons for such action by the Board of
Appeals shall be put in writing.
(2)
Minimum habitable floor space. For each unit constructed or resulting
from conversion, the minimum habitable floor space shall be as follows:
(1) Efficiency units: 450 square feet.
(2) One-bedroom units: 550 square feet.
(3) Two-bedrooms or more: 750 square feet.
Westminster Housing Authority's housing for the elderly: 400
square feet.
(4)
B.
A minimum of 25% of the units constructed under this section shall
be set aside as deed restricted affordable housing units or affordable
C.
§ 205-33 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-33
202:182
§ 205-34. Accessory dwelling unit. [Added ATM 5-3-2005 by Art. 48;
amended ATM 5-6-2017 by Art. 39]
Accessory dwelling units are allowed by right in accordance with this
section.
rental units in perpetuity as defined by the Department of Housing and
Community Development (DHCD). [Added ATM 5-2-2006 by Art. 48]
Purpose. The purposes of the accessory dwelling unit section are to:
Provide an opportunity for older homeowners who can no longer
physically or financially maintain their single-family home to
remain in the homes they might otherwise be forced to leave;
(1)
Make housing units available to moderate-income households who
might otherwise have difficulty finding homes within the Town;
(2)
Provide a variety of types of housing to meet the needs of its
residents; and
(3)
Protect stability, property values, and the single-family character of
a neighborhood.
(4)
A.
Performance standards. The Building Commissioner shall issue a
building permit and certificate of occupancy for an accessory dwelling
unit upon verification that the following standards and criteria are met:
The accessory dwelling unit will be a complete, separate
housekeeping unit that functions as a separate unit from the
principal single-family unit.
(1)
The owners of the principal structure shall occupy, as their primary
residence, either the principal dwelling unit or the accessory
dwelling unit.
(2)
Only one accessory dwelling unit shall be created within a singlefamily
structure.
(3)
The lot in which the single-family unit is created must have a
determination from the Board of Health that there is adequate
septic capacity or that the system may be expanded to provide
adequate capacity. No such verification is required if the lot is
served by municipal sewer.
(4)
The accessory dwelling unit shall be designed so that the
appearance of the building remains that of a one-family residence
as much as feasibly possible.
(5)
The accessory dwelling unit shall be clearly a subordinate part of
the single-family dwelling. It shall be no greater than 700 square
feet nor have more than two bedrooms.
(6)
B.
§ 205-33 WETLANDS § 205-34
202:183
§ 205-35. Adult entertainment facilities and activities. [Added ATM
5-6-2000 by Art. 30]
At least three off-street parking spaces must be available for use by
the owner occupants and tenants.
(7)
The construction of the accessory dwelling unit shall be in
conformity with the State Building Code.
(8)
Purpose.
The purpose of these adult entertainment regulations of the Town
of Westminster Zoning Bylaw is to address and mitigate the
secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments.
Secondary effects have been shown to include increased crime,
adverse impacts on public health, adverse impacts on the business
climate, adverse impacts on the property values of residential and
commercial property and adverse impacts on the quality of life. All
of said secondary impacts are adverse to the health, safety and
general welfare of the Town of Westminster and its inhabitants.
(1)
The provisions of these regulations have neither the purpose nor
intent of imposing a limitation on the content of any communicative
matter or materials, including sexually oriented matter or
materials. Similarly, it is not the purpose or intent of these
regulations to restrict or deny access by adults to adult
entertainment establishments or to sexually oriented matter or
materials that is protected by the Constitutions of the United States
or of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, nor to restrict or deny
rights that distributors or exhibitors of such matter or materials
may have to sell, rent, distribute or exhibit such matter or
materials. Neither is it the purpose or intent of these regulations
to legalize the sale, rental, distribution or exhibition of obscene or
other illegal matter or materials.
(2)
A.
For the purposes of this section, the term "adult entertainment facility"
shall mean adult bookstores, adult live entertainment establishments,
adult motion-picture theaters, adult mini-motion-picture theaters, adult
video store, and adult paraphernalia store.
B.
No special permit for an adult entertainment facility (as listed in the
Table of Use Regulations31) shall be granted except in accordance with
the following conditions and requirements:
Shall not be located within a radius of 1,400 feet of any type of
residential zoning district. [Amended STM 11-29-2016 by Art.
9]
(1)
Shall not be located within a radius of 1,400 feet of any school,
library, or teaching facility, whether public or private,
(2)
C.
31.Editor's Note: The Table of Use Regulations is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 205-34 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-35
202:184
governmental or commercial, which school, library, or teaching
facility is attended by persons under 18 years of age. [Amended
STM 11-29-2016 by Art. 9]
Shall not be located within a radius of 1,400 feet of any church,
synagogue, or permanently established place of religious services,
which is attended by persons under 18 years of age, or day-care
center. [Amended STM 11-29-2016 by Art. 9]
(3)
Shall not be located within a radius of 2,000 feet of any other adult
entertainment facility. [Amended STM 11-29-2016 by Art. 9]
(4)
Signs. Adult entertainment facilities shall be limited to one sign
(freestanding or attached) with a total display area of no more
than 10 square feet. The sign shall have no moving parts, shall be
illuminated only by a direct, external lighting source, and shall be
set back a minimum of 50 feet from all street or property lines.
(5)
Structures associated with the proposed use shall be located a
minimum of 150 feet from any street line.
(6)
Application for a special permit submitted to the special permit
granting authority (Westminster Planning Board) must include the
following information:
Name and address of the legal owner of the adult entertainment
facility.
(1)
Name and address of all persons having a fee, equity and/or
security interest in such facility. In the event a corporation,
partnership, trust or other entity is listed, the name and address
of every person who has an ownership interest and/or beneficial
interest in the entity must be listed in order that the SPGA will
know who are the persons who actually own and control the store
or theater.
(2)
(3) Name and address of the manager.
The number of employees, or proposed number of employees, as
the case may be. Proposed security precautions, and the physical
layout of the premises.
(4)
D.
Special permits for adult entertainment facilities shall not be granted
to any person convicted of violating the provisions of Massachusetts
General Laws Chapter 119, § 63, or Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 272, § 28. All persons listed on the application for a special
permit as required in the previous subsection are subject to this
prohibition. Special permits for adult entertainment facilities shall only
be issued following public hearings held within 65 days after filing of an
application with the special permit granting authority, a copy of which
shall forthwith be given to the Town Clerk by the applicant. The special
permit granting authority shall act within 90 days following the public
E.
§ 205-35 WETLANDS § 205-35
202:185
§ 205-36. Self-service storage facilities. [Added ATM 5-6-2000 by
Art. 31]
§ 205-37. Cluster housing projects. [Amended STM 10-2-1978 by
Art. 5; 10-2-1978 STM by Art. 6; STM 11-1-2000 by Art. 7; ATM
5-3-2005 by Art. 45; ATM 5-1-2010 by Art. 31; STM 11-27-2018 by
Art. 9]
hearing for which notice has been given by publication or posting as
provided in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, § 11, and by
mailing to all parties in interest. Failure by the special permit granting
authority to take final action upon an application for a special permit
herein within said 90 days following the date of the public hearing shall
be deemed to be a grant of the permit applied for. Special permits
issued by the special permit granting authority herein shall require an
affirmative vote of four members of the five-member Board.
A special permit granted herein shall lapse within one year, including
such time to pursue or await the determination of an appeal referred
to in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, § 17, from the grant
thereof if a substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced except
for good cause or, in the case of permit for construction, if construction
has not begun by such date except for good cause.
F.
Any existing adult entertainment facility shall apply for such special
permit within 90 days following the adoption of this section.
G.
If any of the provisions of this section or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not
affect other provisions of the section, or the application of such other
provisions which may be given effect without the invalid provision or
application thereof.
H.
Self-service storage facility buildings shall not exceed one story or 13
feet in height.
A.
Self-service storage facilities shall be limited to personal property use
only.
B.
C. No outside storage shall be allowed.
The storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive
materials or hazardous chemicals shall be prohibited.
D.
E. The use of the unit for uses other than dead storage shall be prohibited.
Servicing or repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawnmowers, or
any similar equipment shall be prohibited.
F.
Purpose: For the purpose of encouraging the preservation of open
space and promoting the more efficient use of land and to protect
and promote the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of
A.
§ 205-35 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-37
202:186
the inhabitants of the Town, an owner or owners of a tract of land
containing five acres or more located in a residential district, or a duly
authorized agent thereof, may, pursuant to the requirements of this
bylaw and upon the review and approval by the Planning Board of a
definitive subdivision plan for such purpose, utilize such property for a
cluster housing project.
Applicability: Cluster housing projects shall be allowed by right in all
residential zoning districts.
B.
Dimensional standards:
Every lot shall contain not less than 15,000 square feet, except that
a lot abutting common open space may contain not less than 10,000
square feet.
(1)
Every lot shall have a minimum frontage of 50 feet on a way
created by the subdivision plan. No lot approved hereunder shall
front on an existing public or private way.
(2)
Provision shall be made so that each dwelling shall be set back
from the subdivision way on which its lot is located at least to a
point where the lot width is a minimum of 100 feet but in no event
less than 30 feet; and
(3)
Provisions shall be made so that each dwelling shall have two side
yards, each at least 15 feet, and a rear yard of at least 20 feet.
(4)
The number of lots allowed within a cluster housing subdivision
shall not exceed the number of lots that could be created through
a traditional subdivision plan.
(5)
C.
Provision of open space:
Provision shall be made so that open land shall be owned:
(a) In common by the owners of the lots in the tract; or
By membership corporation, trust or association whose
members are all the owners of the lots in the tract; or
(b)
(c) By the Town; or
(d) Otherwise as the Planning Board may approve.
(1)
Provision shall be made so that open land shall be:
Restricted to any one or more of the following uses:
recreational, agricultural, conservation or park.
(a)
Restricted so that no structure shall be erected thereon, except
as an incident to the above uses.
(b)
(2)
D.
E. Design standards:
§ 205-37 WETLANDS § 205-37
202:187
§ 205-38. Village Center District regulations.32 [Added ATM
5-7-2016 by Art. 36]
All land not utilized for lots and roads shall be set aside as open
space.
(1)
The open space shall be designed as large contiguous areas
whenever possible. Long, thin, narrow strips or narrow areas of
open space shall occur only when necessary for access, as
vegetated buffers along wetlands or the perimeter of the site, or as
connections between open spaces.
(2)
Open space shall be arranged to protect valuable natural and
cultural resources such as stream valleys, wetlands and buffers,
unfragmented forestland and significant trees, wildlife habitat,
open fields, scenic vistas, trails and archeological sites.
(3)
The areas of the site to be developed shall be outside of the
floodplain, steep slopes (grades of 25% or more), perennial
streams, wetlands and buffer zones.
(4)
The development shall be designed to conform to the existing
topography and natural features of the land, and minimize the total
amount of disturbance to a site.
(5)
In connection with an application for approval of a definitive
subdivision plan from the Planning Board under this section, the
applicant shall provide the following information:
A determination of the area of the tract usable for residential
construction;
(1)
A general description of the neighborhood in which the tract lies
and the effect of the plan on the area;
(2)
(3) The relation of the plan to the long-range plan of the Town;
The extent to which the plan is designed to take advantage of the
natural terrain of the tract.
(4)
F.
Purpose. The purpose of the Village Center District is to protect and
strengthen the traditional New England character of the Westminster
Village Center, encourage sustainable and attractive site design, and
promote a diverse and vibrant mix of commercial, residential,
institutional, and recreational opportunities in support of the
commerce, health, safety, and welfare of Westminster.
A.
Applicability and severability. The regulations within this section shall
apply to those lots located in whole or part within the Village Center
Zoning District. The regulations established herein shall be considered
B.
32.Editor's Note: Former § 205-39, Earth removal, added ATM 6-5-1993 by Art. 10, as
amended ATM 5-3-1997 by Art. 32, was repealed STM 10-26-2004 by Art. 21.
§ 205-37 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-38
202:188
controlling wherein they should be found in conflict with other sections
of this chapter. The invalidity of any section or provision of this section,
or its application to any development proposal, shall not invalidate any
other section, provision or application of this chapter.
Special use regulations in VC District.
Upper-story residential. Foregoing the limitations established for
residential units in other sections of this chapter, this section shall
control dimensional and density requirements for upper-story
residential units in the Village Center District. In order to
encourage increased housing opportunities in Westminster, upperstory
residential uses above existing first-floor commercial or
institutional units may be created subject to the following
limitations:
Existing buildings. Upper-story residential units may be
created in buildings that existed at the time of the adoption of
this section (May 7, 2016), provided that the following criteria
are met:
[1] The lot contains at least 7,500 square feet of area.
The provisions of § 205-30.7 shall not apply to upper-story
residential units. The parking requirement shall be one
parking space per unit.
[2]
Parking for any commercial uses shall be provided as
established under § 205-30.7. Spaces provided may be
shared use spaces, provided it can be demonstrated that
the combination of uses does not have concurrent peak
parking demands.
[3]
Any exterior alterations to provide adequate ingress or
egress must be reviewed by the Planning Board as part of
site plan review.
[4]
Dwelling units created must contain a minimum of 500
square feet of gross floor area.
[5]
(a)
New construction. Upper-story residential units may be
provided as part of new construction, provided that the
following criteria are met:
[1] The lot contains at least 15,000 square feet of area.
The proposed building does not contain more than 25,000
square feet of gross floor area. Dwelling units created
must have a minimum of 500 square feet of gross floor
area.
[2]
(b)
(1)
C.
§ 205-38 WETLANDS § 205-38
202:189
The provisions of § 205-30.7 shall not apply to upper-story
residential units. The parking requirement shall be one
parking space per unit.
[3]
Parking for any commercial uses shall be provided as
established under § 205-30.7. Spaces provided may be
shared use spaces, provided it can be demonstrated that
the combination of uses does not have concurrent peak
parking demands.
[4]
Provisions for multi-use lots. Lots may contain more than one
principal use in addition to accessory uses in the Village Center
District, provided that all dimensional and parking requirements
are met for all uses subject to the following exemptions:
Shared use parking spaces are allowed to count toward the
parking requirement, provided that it can be demonstrated the
combination of uses does not have concurrent peak parking
demands.
(a)
(2)
Additional dimensional requirements. The Planning Board may waive
any additional setbacks by special permit, provided that relief from
such dimensions provides for site design that allows for additional
landscaping, lighting, sidewalks, improved pedestrian or vehicular
circulation, or other such amenities that provide a public benefit.
Table 205-38-1
Dimensional Requirement
Front
(feet)
Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Maximum building setback1, 2 20 — —
Minimum parking setback 20 10 —
Minimum landscaped buffer 5 5 —
Maximum lot coverage 80%
Maximum building height for
upper-story residential
35 feet
Notes:
1. Maximum building setback applies only to the principal structure
on the lot; additional structures are not subject to this requirement.
2. Structures on lots with 50 feet of frontage or less are exempted
from this requirement.
D.
Additional district sign regulations.
Signs cabinets, moving signs, and other internally illuminated signs
are prohibited.
(1)
E.
§ 205-38 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-38
202:190
Window and door signs shall not conceal more than 30% of the
total area of the windows and doors on a building facade that an
individual business occupies.
(2)
Additional site plan review standards within the Village Center District.
The following site plan review standards shall apply within the Village
Center District, in addition to the generally applicable standards in
§ 205-43F. The Planning Board may waive any additional site plan
requirements, provided that relief from such standards provides
improved site design or other amenities that provide a public benefit.
Building placement and orientation.
Buildings and building entrances should be oriented to face
Main Street. It is especially desirable for buildings to be
oriented toward Main Street instead of parking lots.
(a)
Buildings should be placed on the front of lots near Main Street
to gradually realign the buildings in the Village Center District
and encourage a cohesive and consistent streetscape.
(b)
(1)
Landscaping.
A five-foot landscaped buffer should be maintained along the
front property line between the public sidewalk and buildings
to encourage a more hospitable pedestrian experience. The
use of shade trees within the landscaped buffer area along the
front lot line is highly encouraged.
(a)
Landscaping should consist of a combination of noninvasive
plantings that are inclusive of low ground cover plantings,
trees, shrubs, flowers, and grasses.
(b)
(c) Landscaping should be designed to be attractive in all seasons.
Landscaping should be used to help define spaces, entry
sequences, and pedestrian areas as well as screen parking
facilities, utilities, mechanical equipment, and waste
management facilities.
(d)
Landscaping should be maintained so as not to obscure
buildings, signage, or handicap accessibility features.
(e)
(2)
Pedestrian facilities.
Sidewalks should be paved with concrete and integrated within
site landscaping.
(a)
Pedestrian connections should be constructed between
building entrances and parking areas, and should provide
connectivity with other pedestrian facilities, such as public
sidewalks or walkways on adjacent sites where they exist.
(b)
(3)
F.
§ 205-38 WETLANDS § 205-38
202:191
Existing sites with insufficient pedestrian facilities, such as
limited sidewalks or no separation for pedestrian and vehicular
circulation, should upgrade those facilities when doing exterior
building modifications or other site upgrades.
(c)
Design of parking facilities.
Parking facilities should be screened from the streetscape with
landscaping. The parking facilities serving commercial,
institutional, and mixed use lots with more than five contiguous
spaces or more than one row of parking spaces should be
bordered by landscaped buffers. The landscaped buffers
should be maintained in good condition and should utilize
plantings that are attractive in all seasons.
(a)
Parking should be located behind or to the side of buildings.
Parking should not be located closer to the front lot line than
the front facade of the principal structure on the lot.
(b)
Parking lots should be marked with striping and signage as
needed to clearly identify expected vehicular circulation
patterns, queuing areas, temporary and handicap parking, and
other parking limitations.
(c)
(4)
Building facades and materials.
Exterior building materials inclusive of windows, siding, doors,
trim, decking, and other typical materials should be selected
for their consistency in appearance with the traditional New
England architectural vernacular.
(a)
High quality materials should be used on building exterior.
Where synthetic materials are used, they should be close in
approximation and appearance to traditional materials.
(b)
Sustainable and environmentally friendly building materials
should be used whenever possible.
(c)
Materials used on the front facade of a building should be
carried around on all sides of the building.
(d)
Windows in commercial structures inclusive of storefront
window systems and doors should not be obscured by opaque
glass.
(e)
(5)
Massing, window fenestration (arrangement, proportioning and
design), and doors.
Buildings should utilize irregular footprints, material
transitions, changes in roof slope, varying building heights and
massing, and architectural features, such as columns, bays,
or other projections. Avoiding monotonous building facades or
(a)
(6)
§ 205-38 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-38
202:192
the appearance of out-of-scale buildings through architectural
features is strongly encouraged.
Buildings on corner lots should be oriented to face both streets
and utilize high quality materials on both facades.
(b)
Flat roofs are generally discouraged unless deemed otherwise
appropriate by the Planning Board. Where flat roofs are
constructed, they should be adorned with a decorative parapet
wall or cornice to provide screening for rooftop equipment
and maintain a consistent appearance with the traditional New
England architectural vernacular.
(c)
Roofs with gables, dormers, cupolas, chimneys, or other design
features are encouraged.
(d)
Building facades should have an appropriate and proportionate
number of windows and doors. Windows should be selected
for their consistency with the style of the building. Where
windows are replaced in historic structures, the glazing of the
replacement windows should be consistent with that of the
original windows.
(e)
Utilities and mechanicals.
Open storage areas, service areas, loading facilities, and utility
buildings should be screened from the view of neighboring
properties, the street, and other structures using landscaping,
fencing, or other appropriate methods.
(a)
Garbage dumpsters should be enclosed by opaque fencing,
which should be kept closed except when being serviced, and
landscaping.
(b)
(7)
Signs and illumination.
Signs and banners should be constructed of substantial
materials.
(a)
(b) Second-story signage should be discouraged.
Illumination for signs should be provided by lamps which cast
light downward.
(c)
Lighting for signage or parking should not be cast onto
neighboring properties. The use of shields and other
mechanisms to prevent light pollution and nuisance should be
utilized to the extent necessary.
(d)
The installation of pedestrian-scale lamps adjacent to
pedestrian areas is encouraged. Lamps should be selected
for their consistency with the character of the Village Center
and should be sited appropriately to avoid visual clutter. Tall
(e)
(8)
§ 205-38 WETLANDS § 205-38
202:193
§ 205-39. Wireless communications towers and facilities.33 [Added
STM 6-18-2001 by Art. 3]
lamp posts should not be used adjacent to buildings, but are
acceptable in the interior of large parking areas.
Objectives. This section establishes the Wireless Communications
Facilities Overlay District, permits the use of wireless communications
facilities within the Town, regulates their impacts, and accommodates
their locations and uses in a manner intended to:
Protect the scenic, historic, environmental and natural or manmade
resources of the Town;
(1)
(2) Protect property values;
Minimize any adverse impacts on the residents of the Town (such
as, but not limited to, attractive nuisance, noise and falling objects)
with regard to the general safety, welfare and quality of life in the
community;
(3)
Provide standards and requirements for regulation, placement,
construction, monitoring, design, modification and removal of
wireless communications facilities;
(4)
Provide a procedural basis for action within a reasonable period of
time for requests for authorization to place, construct, operate or
modify wireless communications facilities;
(5)
(6) Encourage the use of certain existing structures and towers;
Minimize the total number and height of towers located within the
community;
(7)
Require tower sharing and clustering of wireless communications
facilities where they reinforce the other objectives in this section;
and
(8)
(9) Comply with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996.
A.
Applicability; terminology.
Applicability. [Amended STM 11-29-2012 by Art. 12]
The requirements of this section shall apply to all wireless
communications facilities, as well as any material change or
proposed change to an existing facility, except where federal
or state law or regulations exempt certain users or uses from
all or portions of the provisions of this section, and except for
(a)
(1)
B.
33.Editor's Note: Former § 205-39.2, Wireless communications facilities moratorium, added
STM 1-8-2001 by Art. 4, prohibited the construction of wireless communications facilities
in the Town and the issuance of building permits for such facilities, with certain
exceptions, for a period of six months beginning 1-8-2001. Said moratorium has expired.
§ 205-38 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-39
202:194
public safety providers as set forth in Subsection B(1)(c) below,
and is intended to repeal and supersede any section of the
Zoning Bylaw which may conflict with the provisions of this
section as they apply to wireless communications towers and
facilities, as defined herein.
No wireless communications facility shall be considered
exempt from this section by sharing a tower or other structure
with such exempt uses.
(b)
Waivers. For wireless communications facilities intended for
use by local, regional, state and/or federal public safety
providers, the special permit granting authority may waive
strict adherence to the requirements of this section (with the
exception of the height limitations and required fall zones).
(c)
Exemptions: facilities used by a federally licensed amateur
radio operator ("ham radio"), as referred to in MGL, c. 40A, § 3.
(d)
Terminology. In addition to the terms defined in § 205-4,
Definitions, of this chapter, the following words, which are
technical terms applying to wireless communications facilities,
shall have the meanings indicated below. Although set forth here
for convenience, the terms shall have the same effect as if set forth
in § 205-4, Definitions.
ABANDONED TOWER — A tower not being used for the purpose
for which it was permitted for a period of 12 months. Failure to file
the annual declaration with the Westminster Board of Selectmen
shall constitute an abandonment of the tower.
ACT — The Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996.
ADEQUATE COVERAGE — Coverage is adequate within that area
surrounding a base station where the predicted or measured
median field strength of the transmitted signal is such that the
majority of the time transceivers properly installed and operated
will be able to communicate with the base station without
objectionable noise (or excessive bit-error-rate for digital) and
without calls being dropped. In the case of cellular communications
in a rural environment, this would be signal strength of at least
90 DBMs. It is acceptable for there to be minor temporary loss of
signal within the area of adequate coverage. The outer boundary of
the area of adequate coverage is that location past which the signal
does not regain uniformly.
ANTENNA — A device by which electromagnetic waves are sent or
received, whether a dish, rod, mast, pole, set of wires, plate, panel,
line, cable or other arrangement serving such purpose.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — Any pole, telescoping mast,
tower tripod, or any other structure which supports a device used
in the transmitting and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves.
(2)
§ 205-39 WETLANDS § 205-39
202:195
AVAILABLE SPACE — The space on a tower or other structure to
which antennas of a wireless communications service provider are
able to fit structurally and be able to provide adequate coverage.
BASE STATION — The primary sending and receiving site in a
telecommunications facility network. More than one base station
and/or more than one variety of telecommunications provider may
be located on a single tower or structure.
BUILDING FOR EQUIPMENT SHELTER — An enclosed structure
used to contain batteries, electrical equipment, telephone lines,
transmitters, etc. used by the carriers on the towers.
BUILDING-MOUNTED ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — Any
antenna support structure mounted on, erected on, or supported in
whole or part by a building or structure occupied and/or used for
purposes other than wireless telecommunications.
CAMOUFLAGED — A wireless service facility that is placed within
an existing or proposed structure disguised, painted, colored, or
hidden by a compatible part of an existing or proposed structure,
or made to resemble an architectural feature of the building or
structure on which it is placed. The term "stealth" is sometimes
used as a synonym for "camouflaged."
CARRIER — A company, authorized by the FCC, that provides
wireless communications services.
CHANNEL — One of the assigned bands of radio frequencies as
defined in the Act, licensed to the service provider for wireless
service use.
COLLOCATION — The use of a single mount by more than one
carrier and/or several mounts on a building or structure by more
than one carrier. Each service on a collocation is a separate
wireless service facility.
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT SHELTER — A structure
designed principally to enclose equipment used in connection with
wireless communications transmission, and/or reception.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A monopole or self-supporting
tower, constructed as a freestanding structure or in association
with a building, other permanent structure or equipment,
containing one or more antennas intended for transmitting and/or
receiving wireless communications.
CONCEALED — A wireless service facility within a building or
other structure, which is not visible from outside the structure.
CONSULTANT — A qualified engineer licensed in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, selected by the ZBA or DAC at
the expense of the applicant to review the application and verify
that the new tower is necessary at the proposed site, or any other
§ 205-39 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-39
202:196
review required under this section or requested by the ZBA or DAC,
as the case may be.
DAC — Design Advisory Committee.
DBM — A unit of measure of the power level of an electromagnetic
signal expressed in decibels referenced to one milliwatt.
dBu — Unit of measure of the electric field strength of a signal,
expressed in an absolute measure for describing service areas and
comparing different transmitting facilities independent of the many
variables (See "DBM" above.) introduced by different receiver
configurations.
DESIGN ADVISORY COMMITTEE — The Westminster Planning
Board.
EA — See "Environmental Assessment."
EMERGENCY POWER — Electrical generators usually powered by
propane gas or diesel fuel so as to provide uninterrupted service
in the case of electrical utility failure, provided that any generators
used may not emit more than 35 decibels over the ambient noise
level at the property line.
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT — An EA is the document
required by the FCC and NEPA when a personal wireless facility is
placed in certain designated areas.
FAA — Federal Aviation Administration.
FACILITY SITE — A conforming lot or parcel, or any part thereof,
which is owned or leased by one or more wireless communications
providers and upon which one or more wireless communications
facility(s) and required landscaping are located.
FALL ZONE — The area on the ground within a prescribed radius
from the base of a tower, typically the area within which there is a
potential hazard from falling debris, or collapsing material.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.
FREQUENCY — The number of cycles completed each second
by an electromagnetic wave, measured in hertz (Hz), megahertz
(MHz, one million hertz), or gigahertz (GHz, one billion hertz).
HERTZ — One hertz (Hz) is the frequency of an electric or
magnetic field which reverses polarity once each second, or one
cycle per second.
LATTICE TOWERS — A type of mount that is self-supporting with
multiple legs and crossbracing of structural steel.
MODIFICATION OF AN EXISTING FACILITY — Any material
change or proposed change to an existing facility, including but
not limited to power input or output, number of antennas, change
in antenna type or model, repositioning of antenna(s), removal
§ 205-39 WETLANDS § 205-39
202:197
or replacement of transmission equipment, colocation of new
transmission equipment, or change in number of channels per
antenna above the maximum number approved under an existing
permit or special permit.[Amended STM 11-29-2012 by Art. 13]
MONITORING — The measurement, by the use of instruments
away from the antenna, of the electromagnetic radiation from a site
as a whole, or from individual wireless communications facilities,
towers, antennas, repeaters or associated power supplies and
generators.
MONOPOLE — A single self-supporting vertical pole with no guy
wire anchors, usually consisting of a galvanized or other unpainted
metal, or a wooden pole with below grade foundations.
NEPA — National Environmental Policy Act.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY — Facility for the
provision of personal services, as defined by the
Telecommunications Act.
PRE-EXISTING TOWERS AND ANTENNAS — Any tower or
antenna, which was lawfully erected before the effective date of
this section.
RADIO-FREQUENCY RADIATION (RFR) — The electromagnetic
emissions from wireless service facilities.
REPEATER — A small receiver/relay transmitter of not more than
20 watts output designed to provide service to areas which are not
able to receive adequate coverage from the primary sending and
receiving site in a wireless communications network.
RFI — Radio frequency interference.
RFR — Radio frequency radiation.
SCENIC VIEW — A wide-angle or panoramic field of sight and may
include natural and/or man-made structures and activities which
may be seen from a stationary viewpoint or as one travels along
a roadway, waterway, or path, and may be to an object in the
distance, such as a mountain, or an object nearby, such as an
historic building or a pond.
SELF-SUPPORTING TOWER — A communications tower that is
constructed without guy wires.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A permit under this section and § 205-50 of
this chapter as granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA).
SPECTRUM — Relating to any transmissions or reception of
electromagnetic waves.
STEALTH TOWER — A camouflaged tower.
STRUCTURALLY ABLE — The determination that a tower or
structure is capable of carrying the load imposed by the proposed
§ 205-39 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-39
202:198
new antenna(s) under all reasonable predictable conditions as
determined by professional structural engineering analysis.
TOWER — A structure or framework, or monopole, that is designed
to support wireless communications transmitting, receiving, and/or
relaying, antennas and/or equipment. Components of the wireless
communications facility used only to attach or support other
elements of that facility are excluded, provided such components
are relatively less substantial than those other elements and do not
materially affect a dimension of that facility.
TOWER HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the base
of the tower support structure to the highest point of the structure.
If the support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average
between the highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating
the tower height.
TOWN — Westminster, Massachusetts, and/or its elected or
appointed officials.
WCFOD — Wireless Communications Facilities Overlay District.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES OVERLAY DISTRICT
— All parcels of land shown on the map entitled: "Wireless
Communications Facilities Overlay District Map," dated August
2012.34[Amended STM 10-26-2004 by Art. 22; STM
11-29-2012 by Art. 15]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — All equipment,
buildings, and structures with which a wireless communications
service carrier broadcasts and receives the radio-frequency waves
which carry their services and all locations of said equipment or
any part thereof.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER — An entity
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to
provide wireless communication services to individuals, businesses
or institutions.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — Commercial mobile
radio services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier
wireless exchange access services as defined in the Act.
ZBA — Zoning Board of Appeals.
Location of facilities.
Criteria; priority for location of facilities.
Wireless communications facilities shall be located according
to the following priorities:
[1] Within an existing structure and camouflaged.
(a)
(1)
C.
34.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Town offices.
§ 205-39 WETLANDS § 205-39
202:199
Camouflaged on an existing structure, such as but not
limited to an existing electric transmission tower or an
existing radio antenna, a water tower, or building, and of a
compatible design.
[2]
Collocated with existing wireless communications service
facilities.
[3]
If adequately demonstrated to the ZBA in the special
permit process that each of the three types of locations is
not feasible, erection of a new facility which complies with
the other requirements of this section and where visual
impact can be minimized and mitigated. [Amended STM
11-29-2012 by Art. 14]
[4]
Applicants shall demonstrate that they have investigated
locations higher in priority ranking than the one for which they
are applying and whether sites are available and, if applicable,
under what conditions.
(b)
Locations where facilities are permitted by special permit. A
wireless communications facility may be installed in the Wireless
Communications Facilities Overlay District, all commercial
districts, and all industrial districts by a special permit from the
ZBA in accordance with this section.
(2)
Locations with nonconforming situations. The ZBA may grant a
special permit to modify, reconstruct, or replace a pre-existing
tower or facility if it decreases the degree of nonconformity with
this section.
(3)
Dimensional, screening and other site development requirements.
Shelters and accessory buildings. Any communications equipment
shelter or accessory building shall be designed to be architecturally
similar and compatible with the surrounding area. Whenever
feasible, a building shall be constructed underground.
(1)
Setbacks. Any new tower shall be set back at least 1 1/2 times
the height of the tower plus 10 feet from each lot line of the site
on which the tower is located. Any nonconcealed antenna shall
be set back at least 1 1/2 times the height of the antenna, as
measured from the ground level, from each lot line of the site on
which the antenna is located. However, if the antenna is being
attached to an existing tower whose setback complies with this
section, and if the ZBA determines that the addition of the antenna
does not materially alter the basis of that prior approval, then no
new, independent, setback requirement shall be created by the
addition of the antenna. In commercial and industrial districts, or
on publicly owned land, the ZBA may grant a special permit to
allow a lesser setback if it makes a finding that such lesser setback
provides adequate safety, promotes collocation or improves design,
(2)
D.
§ 205-39 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-39
202:200
and will not negatively impact the appearance and character of the
neighborhood.
Security; signs. The area around the wireless communications
facility shall be completely secure from trespass or vandalism. A
sign not larger than one square foot shall be posted adjacent to
the entry gate indicating the name of the facility owner(s) and
a twenty-four-hour emergency telephone number. Advertising or
symbols of any kind on any antenna, tower, fencing, accessory
building or communications equipment shelter is prohibited. The
tower ladder shall be designed and maintained to prevent
unauthorized climbers.
(3)
Lighting. Unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration,
no exterior night lighting of towers or the wireless communications
facility is permitted except for manually operated emergency lights
for use when operating personnel are on-site.
(4)
Other requirements.
Emergency power. Emergency power shall emit no more than
35 decibels over ambient noise level at all property lines.
(a)
Noise. Noise at the site perimeter from the operation of any
machinery or equipment shall be minimized to no more than
35 dB.
(b)
Design. Towers shall be designed to allow for future
rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept
antennas mounted at varying heights when overall permitted
height allows. Towers shall be designed structurally,
electrically and in all respects to accommodate both the
applicant's and additional antennas when overall permitted
height allows.
(c)
Distance requirements:
Distance between towers. Wireless communications
facilities shall be a minimum distance of 2 1/2 miles from
each other, unless it is determined by a qualified engineer
licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts that a closer proximity is needed for
"adequate coverage" as defined in this section. Under no
circumstances shall any wireless communications facility
be within a distance of one mile to another, unless such
tower is a stealth tower and the applicant's technology
cannot be used on an existing tower as determined by
a qualified engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts. The Town may select a consultant, at the
applicant's expense, to assist in evaluating the applicant's
requests in this regard.
[1]
(d)
(5)
§ 205-39 WETLANDS § 205-39
202:201
Distance for repeaters:
No repeater shall be located closer than 50 feet to an
existing residential dwelling unit.
[a]
No repeater shall be located less than 25 feet, nor
more than 70 feet above ground.
[b]
[2]
No wireless communication facility, with the exception of
repeaters, shall be located:
Within any of the following prohibited areas:
[i] Massachusetts or federally regulated wetlands.
[ii] A Massachusetts certified vernal pool.
[a]
Within 100 feet horizontally of any Massachusetts
regulated wetland.
[b]
Within 200 feet horizontally of the Outer Riparian
Zone measured horizontally from any river or
perennial stream.
[c]
Within 300 feet of any existing permanently occupied
residential dwelling (except camouflaged facilities).
[d]
Within a distance equal to the overall height of the
stealth or camouflaged facilities to any property line,
unless incorporated within an existing building, tower
or steeple.
[e]
[3]
Dimensional requirements. All wireless communications facilities
shall comply with the following requirements:
Height, general. Regardless of the type of mount, wireless
communications facilities shall be no higher than 15 feet above
the average height of buildings within 300 feet of the proposed
facility. In addition, the height of a wireless communications
facility shall not exceed by more than 15 feet the height limits
of the zoning district in which the facility is proposed to be
located, unless the facility is completely camouflaged, such as
within a flagpole, steeple, chimney, or similar structure.
(a)
Height, ground-mounted facilities. Ground-mounted wireless
communications facilities shall not project higher than 15 feet
above the average building height or, if there are no buildings
within 300 feet, these facilities shall not project higher than
15 feet above the average tree canopy height, measured from
ground level (AGL). If there are no buildings within 300 feet
of the proposed site of the facility, all ground-mounted wireless
communications facilities shall be surrounded by dense tree
growth to screen views of the facility in all directions. These
(b)
(6)
§ 205-39 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-39
202:202
trees may be existing on the subject property or planted on
site.
Height, side and roof-mounted facilities. Side and roofmounted
wireless communications facilities shall not project
higher than the height of the building, or more than 15 feet
above the height limit of the zoning district within which the
facility is located, whichever is higher. Wireless
communications facilities may locate on a building that is
legally nonconforming with respect to height, provided that the
facilities do not project above the building height, or the height
limit of the zoning district within which the building is located,
whichever is higher.
(c)
Height, existing structures. New antennas located on any of
the following structures existing on the effective date of this
section shall be exempt from the height restrictions of this
section, provided that there is no increase in the height of the
existing structure as a result of the installation of a wireless
communications facility: water towers, guyed towers, lattice
towers, fire towers and monopoles.
(d)
Height, existing structures (utility). New antennas located on
any of the following existing structures shall be exempt from
the height restrictions of this chapter, provided that there is no
more than a twenty-foot increase in the height of the existing
structure as a result of the installation of a new antenna:
electric transmission and distribution towers, telephone poles
and similar existing utility structures. This exemption shall not
apply in Historic Districts, within 150 feet of the right-of-way
of any scenic roadway, or in designated scenic viewsheds.
(e)
Height, wireless communications facilities overlay district.
Wireless communications facilities up to 150 feet in height
may be permitted by special permit in the Wireless
Communications Facilities Overlay District. Monopoles or
camouflaged towers are the only type of mount allowed for
such taller structures. Such structures shall comply with all
setback and other requirements of this section.
(f)
Justification of need.
Coverage area. The applicant shall provide a map of the geographic
area in which the proposed facility will provide adequate coverage.
(1)
Adequacy of other facility sites controlled by the applicant. The
applicant shall provide written documentation of any facility sites
in the Town and in abutting towns or cities in which it has a legal or
equitable interest, whether by ownership, leasehold or otherwise.
Said documentation shall demonstrate that these facility sites do
not already provide, or do not have the potential to provide by site
adjustment, adequate coverage.
(2)
E.
§ 205-39 WETLANDS § 205-39
202:203
Capacity of existing facility sites. The applicant shall provide
written documentation that it has examined all facility sites located
in the Town and in abutting towns in which the applicant has no
legal or equitable interest to determine whether those existing
facility sites can be used to provide adequate coverage.
(3)
Adequate coverage through the least disruptive means. The
applicant shall provide written documentation that the proposed
facility uses the least disruptive technology (through the use of
repeaters or other similar technology as may be developed
subsequent to adoption of this section) in which it can provide
adequate coverage in conjunction with all facility sites listed above.
(4)
Application.
Applicant. Application shall be made to the Zoning Board of
Appeals in the same manner as applications for any other special
permit. The applicant or co-applicant for any permit for a wireless
communications facility must be the wireless communications
services provider for the facility being proposed. The applicant
shall submit documentation of the legal right to install and use the
proposed facility mount at the time of the filing of the application
for the permit. No permits shall be granted for a tower or facility to
be built on speculation.
Applicants for wireless communications towers or facilities
shall include the following supplemental information in their
filings for special permit approval:
Location map. The location of the proposed structure on
the most recent United States Geological Survey
Quadrangle map, showing the area within at least a threemile
radius of the proposed tower site.
[1]
A map or sketch of the property proposed to be developed,
professionally drawn to scale and with the area to be
developed clearly indicated.
[2]
A report from qualified and licensed professional
engineers that:
[a] Describes the facility height, design, and elevation.
Documents the height above grade for all proposed
mounting positions for antennas to be collocated on
a wireless communications tower or facility and the
minimum separation distances between antennas.
[b]
Describes the tower's proposed capacity, including the
number, height, and types(s) of antennas that the
applicant expects the tower to accommodate.
[c]
[3]
(a)
(1)
F.
§ 205-39 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-39
202:204
Documents steps the applicant will take to avoid
interference with any established public safety
wireless communications, and includes both an
intermodulation study that predicts no likely
interference problems and certification that the study
has been provided to the appropriate public safety
agencies. Towers utilized by Westminster public safety
channels will not locate conflicting frequencies on the
same tower.
[d]
Describes existing and proposed coverage. In the case
of new tower proposals, the applicant shall
demonstrate that existing wireless communications
facility sites and other existing structures within
Westminster, in abutting towns, and within a ten-mile
radius of the proposed site cannot reasonably be
modified to provide adequate coverage and/or
adequate capacity to the Town of Westminster.
[e]
Describes potential changes to those existing facilities
or sites in their current state that would enable them
to provide adequate coverage, and provides a detailed
computer generated actual received level propagation
model that describes coverage of the existing and
proposed facilities.
[f]
Describes the output frequency, number of channels
and power output per channel for each proposed
antenna.
[g]
Includes a written five-year plan for use of the
proposed wireless communications facility, including
reasons for seeking capacity in excess of immediate
needs if applicable, as well as plans for additional
development and coverage within the Town of
Westminster.
[h]
Demonstrates the tower's compliance with the
municipality's setbacks for towers and support
structures.
[i]
Provides proof that at the proposed site the applicants
will be in compliance with all FCC regulations,
standards, and requirements, and includes a
statement that the applicant commits to continue to
maintain compliance with all FCC regulations,
standards, and requirements regarding both radio
frequency interference (RFI) and radio frequency
radiation (RFR). The Town of Westminster may hire
independent engineers to perform evaluations of
compliance with the FCC regulations, standards, and
[j]
§ 205-39 WETLANDS § 205-39
202:205
requirements on an annual basis at unannounced
times. The Town may allocate to the applicant any
reasonable expenses incurred or authorized by it in
retaining independent engineers to perform these
evaluations.
Commitment to share space. A letter of intent committing
the tower owner and his or her successors to permit
shared use of the tower if the additional user agrees to
meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use,
including compliance with all applicable FCC regulations,
standards and requirements and the provisions of this
section.
[4]
Existing structures. For wireless services to be installed on
an existing structure, a copy of the applicant's executed
contract with the owner of the existing structure must be
submitted.
[5]
Environmental assessment. To the extent required by the
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and as
administered by the FCC, a complete environmental
assessment (EA) draft of the final report describing the
probable impacts of the proposed facility shall be
submitted to the Building Inspector prior to the issuance
of a building permit.
[6]
Vicinity map. A topography priority resource map showing
the entire vicinity within a one-thousand-foot radius of the
tower site, including the wireless communications facility
or tower, public and private roads and buildings and
structures, water bodies, wetlands, landscape features
and historic sites. The map shall show the property lines of
the proposed tower site parcel and all easements or rightsof-
way needed for access from a public way to the tower.
[7]
Proposed site plans of the entire wireless communications
facility, professionally drawn to scale, showing all
improvements, including landscaping, utility lines,
screening and roads.
[8]
Elevations showing all facades and indicating all exterior
materials and color of towers, buildings and associated
facilities.
[9]
Where the proposed site is forested, the approximate
average height of the existing vegetation within 200 feet
of the tower base.
[10]
Construction sequence and estimated time schedule for
completion of each phase of the entire project.
[11]
§ 205-39 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-39
202:206
Any additional information requested by the Westminster
ZBA.
[12]
Plans shall be drawn at a minimum at the scale of one inch
equals 50 feet. The permit application shall be signed under
the penalties of perjury.
(b)
Review by the Design Advisory Committee.
The Town of Westminster's Design Advisory Committee shall
review an applicant's site plans and make recommendations
to the ZBA for special permits within 35 days of filing with
the Town Clerk. The Design Advisory Committee will make
comment on whether the site plans show that a proposed
wireless communications facility will be appropriate for the
site if built according to the plans.
(a)
The DAC may require a consultant to review the application
and proposed site at the applicant's expense.
(b)
(2)
Approval criteria. A special permit shall be granted under this
section only if the ZBA shall find that the project is in harmony
with the general purpose and intent of this article and chapter. In
addition, the ZBA shall make all applicable findings before granting
the special permit, including but not limited to the following:
That the applicant is not already providing adequate coverage
or is unable to maintain adequate coverage without the special
permit;
(a)
That the applicant is not able to use existing facility sites
either with or without the use of repeaters to provide adequate
coverage;
(b)
That the proposed wireless service facility minimizes any
adverse impact on historic resources, scenic views, residential
property values, natural or man-made resources;
(c)
That the applicant has agreed to implement all reasonable
measures to mitigate the potential adverse impacts of the
facilities;
(d)
That the facility shall comply with the appropriate FCC
regulations regarding emissions of electromagnetic radiation
and that the required monitoring program is in place and shall
be paid for by the applicant; and
(e)
That the applicant has agreed to rent or lease available space
on any tower it controls within Westminster or the contiguous
towns, under the terms of a fair-market lease, without
discrimination to other wireless service providers;
(f)
(3)
§ 205-39 WETLANDS § 205-39
202:207
That collocation is not possible due to structural or space
limitations on existing or approved facilities, interference
materially impacting existing or approved facilities, aesthetic
considerations, coverage area considerations, or a violation of
any federal standard or requirement.
(g)
Conditions. The ZBA may impose such conditions and safeguards
as it deems are in the interest of public health, safety, welfare
and convenience, and in all cases shall impose the following
conditions:35
By January 15 of each year, the wireless communications
service provider shall provide to the Board of Selectmen, in
care of the Town Administrator, the name of the operator,
the names of any tenants on the property where the facility
is located, FCC registrations for all wireless communications
service providers on the property, the frequencies being used,
the poser levels, insurance certificates, evidence that a
performance bond remains in place and emergency telephone
numbers.
(a)
By January 15 of each year, the wireless communications
service provider shall file with the Board of Selectmen, in care
of the Town Administrator, a certification of structural integrity
from a qualified structural engineer, evidence of continuing
compliance with the American National Standards Institute
and National Council for Radiation protection, FAA and FCC,
including compliance with updates and modifications.
(b)
(4)
Term of permit.
A special permit shall be valid for a fixed or conditional period
of time as determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals. A
special permit for any wireless communications facility that
exceeds the height provisions of the zoning district or
underlying zoning district, as the case may be, shall be valid
for a maximum of 15 years. At the end of the approved time
period, the facility shall be removed by the carrier, or a new
special permit shall be required.
(a)
All wireless communications service providers shall file
annually by January 15, with the Board of Selectmen, in care of
the Town Administrator, a statement regarding the operational
aspects of the facility, including, but not limited to the amount
of power consumption; power radiation; frequency
transmission; the number, location, and orientation of
antennas; and types of services provided.36
(b)
(5)
35.Editor’s Note: The Annual Town Meeting voted 5-1-2010 by Art. 30 to authorize the Board
of Selectmen to appoint a Town Administrator to replace the position of Town Coordinator.
The word “Coordinator” was changed to “Administrator” in this subsection pursuant to
said Art. 30.
§ 205-39 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-39
202:208
§ 205-40. Wind energy facilities. [Added ATM 5-5-2012 by Art. 44]
Removal of abandoned antennas and towers.37
A wireless communications service provider shall annually, by
January 15, file a declaration with the Westminster Board of
Selectmen, in care of the Town Administrator, certifying the
continuing safe operation of any facility installed subject to these
regulations. Failure to file a declaration shall be deemed an
abandonment of such facility.
(1)
A wireless communications facility shall also be considered
abandoned when it has not been used for the purpose for which it
was permitted for a period of 12 months.
(2)
The wireless communications service provider shall obtain and
maintain a performance bond in an amount no less than $100,000,
or such greater sum as the ZBA may determine, for the removal of
each wireless communications facility constructed in the Town of
Westminster and for the restoration of the site, in a form approved
by the Treasurer and the Town Counsel.
(3)
The wireless communications service provider shall obtain and
maintain $3,000,000 in personal injury and property damage
liability insurance. The Town of Westminster shall be named an
additional insured and the certificate holder shall be the Town
Administrator.
The wireless communications service provider shall have 90
days to remove a tower following the expiration of the special
permit, or from the date it is deemed abandoned as set forth
herein.
(a)
If such a facility is not so removed, the Town may exercise its
rights under the performance bond without further notice.
(b)
(4)
G.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to:
Provide a permitting process for wind energy facilities so they may
be utilized in a cost effective, efficient and timely manner to reduce
the consumption of utility-supplied electricity;
(1)
Integrate these facilities in the community in a manner that does
not disrupt the character of existing neighborhoods and minimizes
(2)
A.
36.Editor’s Note: The Annual Town Meeting voted 5-1-2010 by Art. 30 to authorize the Board
of Selectmen to appoint a Town Administrator to replace the position of Town Coordinator.
The word “Coordinator” was changed to “Administrator” in this subsection pursuant to
said Art. 30.
37.Editor’s Note: The Annual Town Meeting voted 5-1-2010 by Art. 30 to authorize the Board
of Selectmen to appoint a Town Administrator to replace the position of Town Coordinator.
The word “Coordinator” was changed to “Administrator” in this subsection pursuant to
said Art. 30.
§ 205-39 WETLANDS § 205-40
202:209
their impacts on nearby property values and on the scenic, historic,
and environmental resources of the Town; and
Protect health and safety of the community, while allowing wind
energy technologies to be utilized for citizens' general welfare.
(3)
Applicability.
This section applies to small wind energy facilities no greater than
750 kilowatts per hour of rated nameplate capacity in total that are
proposed to be constructed after the effective date of this section.
(1)
For residential wind energy facilities, this section applies to
facilities of no greater than 15 kilowatts per hour of measured
capacity in total. With the exception of a net metering agreement
between the owner of a residential wind energy facility and a utility
company, residential wind facilities shall provide electricity only to
the lot they are placed on. Experimental wind turbines shall not be
tied into the utility electric grid.
(2)
B.
Definitions.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL (DBA) — A measure of overall sound
pressure level designed to reflect the response of the human ear, which
does not respond equally to all frequencies. It is used to describe sound
in a manner representative of the human ear's response. It reduces the
effects of the low frequencies with respect to the frequencies centered
around 1,000 Hz. The resultant sound level is said to be A-weighted and
the units are dBA.
C-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL (DBC) — Similar in concept to the Aweighted
sound level (dBA), but C-weighting does not de-emphasize
the frequencies below 1,000 Hz as A-weighting does. It is used for
measurements that must include the contribution of low frequencies
in a single number representing the entire frequency spectrum. Sound
level meters have a C-weighting network for measuring C-weighted
sound levels (dBC) meeting the characteristics and weighting specified
in ANSI S1.43-1997 Specifications for Integrating Averaging Sound
Level Meters for Type 1 instruments.
DAYTIME SOUND — The ambient sound level heard during the daytime
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
EXPERIMENTAL WIND FACILITY — A wind turbine and associated
equipment that is used for experimental, demonstration, educational
and/or research purposes that does not have a rated nameplate and is
not connected to the electrical grid. Experimental wind facilities that
are not anchored to an existing structure shall be considered temporary
structures for the purposes of this bylaw.
FALL ZONE — An area surrounding the wind turbine into which the
turbine and/or turbine components might fall due to inclement weather,
poor maintenance, faulty construction methods, or any other condition
causing turbine failure that shall remain unobstructed and confined
C.
§ 205-40 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-40
202:210
within the property lines of the primary parcel where the turbine is
located at, the purpose being that if the turbine should fall or otherwise
become damaged, the falling structure will be confined to the primary
parcel and will not fall onto dwellings, accessory buildings, and will
not intrude onto a neighboring property. The fall zone area shall be the
circumference of the area around the turbine equal to the height of the
turbine as measured from the bottom of the base of the tower to the tip
of the wind turbine blade at its highest point.
HEIGHT — The height of a wind turbine measured from natural grade
to the tip of the rotor blade at its highest point, or blade tip height.
HERTZ — Frequency of sound expressed by cycles per second.
LOW FREQUENCY SOUND (LFN) — Refers to sounds with energy
in the lower frequency range of 20 to 200 Jz. LFN is deemed to be
excessive when the difference between a C-weighted sound pressure
level and an A-weighted sound pressure level is greater than 20
decibels at any measurement point outside or inside a sound sensitive
receptor.
MEASURED CAPACITY — The maximum rated output of electric power
production equipment. This output is typically measured by
mathematical extrapolation of mean wind over voltage multiplied by
resistance or test meters connected to the equipment.
NIGHT TIME SOUND — The ambient sound level heard during the
nighttime between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
QUALIFIED INDEPENDENT ACOUSTICAL CONSULTANT —
Qualifications for persons conducting baseline and other measurements
and reviews related to a small wind energy facility application or for
enforcement action against operational wind facilities include
demonstration of competence in the specialty of sound testing and full
membership in the Institute of Sound Control Engineers.
RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY — The maximum rated output of
electric power production equipment. This output is typically specified
by the manufacturer with a "nameplate" on the equipment.
RESIDENTIAL WIND ENERGY FACILITIES — All equipment,
machinery and structures utilized in connection with the conversion
of wind to electricity. This includes, but is not limited to, storage,
electrical collection and supply equipment, transformers, service and
access roads, and one or more wind turbines, which have a measured
capacity of 15 kW or less.
SENSITIVE RECEPTOR — Places or structures intended for human
habitation, whether occupied or not, public parks, institutional uses
(places of public assembly, churches, schools, health care facilities),
state and federal wildlife areas, recreation areas used by the public.
SHADOW FLICKER — A repeating cycle of changing light intensity that
occurs when shadows caused by the rotating blades of a wind turbine
§ 205-40 WETLANDS § 205-40
202:211
pass over an object or across a window.[Added STM 11-29-2012 by
Art. 17]
SMALL WIND ENERGY FACILITIES — All equipment, machinery and
structures utilized in connection with the conversion of wind to
electricity. This includes, but is not limited to, storage, electrical
collection and supply equipment, transformers, service and access
roads, and one or more wind turbines, which have a rated nameplate
capacity of 750 kW or less.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A permit provided by the special permit granting
authority for small wind energy facilities.
SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY — The special permit
granting authority shall be the Planning Board, for the issuance of
special permits to construct and operate small wind energy facilities.
WIND MONITORING OR METEOROLOGICAL TOWER (MET TOWERS)
— A temporary tower equipped with devices to measure wind speeds
and direction, used to determine how much wind power a site can be
expected to generate.
WIND TURBINE — A device that converts kinetic wind energy into
rotational energy that drives an electrical generator. A wind turbine
typically consists of a tower, nacelle body, and a rotor with two or more
blades.
General siting standards. Note moved to bylaw from regulations.
Height.
Residential wind energy facilities shall be no higher than 35
feet above the current grade of the land to the tip of the wind
turbine blade or 10 feet above the building structure which it
is mounted to, including the tip of the wind turbine blade.
(a)
Small wind energy facilities shall be no higher than 225 feet
above the current grade of the land, as measured from the
bottom of the base of the tower to the tip of the wind turbine
blade at its highest point.
(b)
The Planning Board may allow for a height up to 300 feet if all
of the following conditions are met:
The applicant demonstrating by substantial evidence that
a greater height reflects industry standards for a similar
sited wind facility;
[1]
Demonstration that a greater height is necessary for the
facility to be technically and financially feasible, to prevent
financial hardship to the applicant; and
[2]
The facility satisfies all other criteria for the granting of a
special permit and site plan approval.
[3]
(c)
(1)
D.
§ 205-40 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-40
202:212
Setbacks.
Small wind facilities shall be set back a distance at least three
times the total height of the wind turbine (as measured from
the bottom of the base of the tower to the tip of the wind
turbine blade at its highest point) from all inhabited structures,
overhead utility lines, public roads or rights-of-way and
property boundaries, provided that no setback shall be
required from a building or buildings which are on the same
parcel and which are served by the wind energy facility. The
SPGA may reduce the minimum setback distance if written
permission is granted by the entity with care and control over
the affected asset.
(a)
Residential wind facilities shall be set back a distance equal
to the total height of the wind turbine plus 25 feet from all
inhabited structures, overhead utility lines, public roads or
rights-of-way and property boundaries, provided that no
setback shall be required from a building or buildings which
are on the same parcel and which are served by the wind
energy facility. No wind energy facility shall be erected within
the front yard setback restriction of any residentially zoned
parcel.
(b)
(2)
Maintenance and removal. Note: moved to bylaw from regulations.
Maintenance. The owner shall maintain the wind energy facility
conversion system in good condition. Maintenance shall include,
but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs, and security
measures.
(1)
Abandonment or decommissioning. Any wind energy facility
conversion system which has reached the end of its useful life
or has been abandoned shall be removed. A wind energy facility
conversion system shall be considered abandoned when it fails to
operate continuously for one year (excluding periods of shutdown
for the purpose of flicker control) and the turbine owner has not
notified the SPGA of the need to temporarily suspend operation for
a period of time lasting past one year.
(2)
Removal plan. The applicant shall submit a detailed plan for the
removal of the wind facility and restoration of the site to its
preexisting condition upon abandonment or decommissioning. The
removal plan shall be prepared by a qualified professional and
include a detailed estimate of the anticipated removal and site
restoration costs that includes a mechanism to account for
inflation. Upon a notice of abandonment issued by the Building
Commissioner, the wind energy system owner will have 30 days
to provide sufficient evidence that the system has not been
abandoned.
(3)
E.
§ 205-40 WETLANDS § 205-40
202:213
Temporary wind monitoring towers (met towers). Wind monitoring or
meteorological towers shall be permitted in all zoning districts subject
to issuance of a building permit for a temporary structure and shall be
limited to 18 months after construction has commenced.
F.
Approved wind turbines. Small wind turbines must be approved under
an emerging technology program such as the California Energy
Commission, International Electotechnical Commission, or any other
small wind certification program recognized by the American Wind
Energy Association (AWEA) or the U.S. Department of Energy.
G.
Special permit criteria for small wind energy facilities.
Special permits shall be granted by the SPGA only upon its written
determination that the proposed use or structure(s) shall not cause
substantial detriment to the neighborhood, or the Town, taking into
account the characteristics of the site and the proposal in relation
to the site. In addition to any specific factors that may be set
forth elsewhere in this bylaw and its associated regulations, such
determination shall include consideration of each of the following:
Social, economic, or community needs which are severed by
the proposal;
(a)
(b) Traffic flow and safety, including parking and loading;
(c) Adequacy of utilities and other public services;
(d) Neighborhood character;
(e) Impacts on the natural environment; and
Potential fiscal impact, including impact on Town services, tax
base and property values.
(f)
(1)
The SPGA's determination for each of the six criteria shall be set
forth in the special permit decision as findings of fact.
(2)
H.
Expiration and renewal.
Special permits and/or building permits issued pursuant to this
bylaw shall expire if:
The wind energy system is not installed and functioning within
24 months from the date the permit is issued; or
(a)
The wind energy system is abandoned (failure to continuously
operate for one year, excluding periods of shutdown for the
purpose of flicker control), and the owner has not notified the
SPGA of the need to temporarily suspend operation.
(b)
(1)
Special permits for small wind energy facilities shall automatically
expire after five years from the date of SPGA approval. Current
(2)
I.
§ 205-40 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-40
202:214
§ 205-40.1. Large-scale solar photovoltaic installations. [Added
STM 11-27-2018 by Art. 12]
owners wishing to renew the special permit must seek approval
from the SPGA before the use is allowed to continue.
Regulations. The SPGA may periodically adopt or amend rules and
regulations for the implementation of this section by majority vote for
the purpose of setting forth performance standards for sound levels and
shadow flicker, as well as requirements for sureties and insurance for
small wind energy facilities.
J.
Severability. The provisions of this bylaw are severable, and the
invalidity of any section, subdivision, paragraph, or other part of this
bylaw shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remainder of
the bylaw.
K.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to facilitate the creation of
new large-scale solar photovoltaic installations by providing standards
for the placement, design, construction, operation, monitoring,
modification and removal of such installations that address public
safety, minimize impacts on environmental, scenic, natural and historic
resources, and to provide adequate financial assurance for the eventual
decommissioning of such installations.
A.
Applicability. Subject to the requirements below, large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installations are permitted by special
permit in the residential zoning districts (R-I, R-II and R-III) and
commercial zoning districts (C-I and C-II) and upon site plan approval
from the Planning Board. For this use, the Planning Board shall be the
special permit granting authority (SPGA). Large-scale ground-mounted
solar photovoltaic installations are not allowed in the industrial zoning
districts (I-I and I-II) or in the Village Center Zoning District (VC).
Further, such installations shall not be allowed on:
Properties that are currently undergoing active remediation for
hazardous waste contamination. Formerly contaminated sites that
have obtained "permanent solution" status from the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection may be considered
suitable for ground-mounted large-scale solar installations
depending upon the stipulations attached to said status.
(1)
Properties where in order to construct the large-scale groundmounted
solar facility, it will be necessary to disturb an amount
of land (either earth removal or placement of fill) that will trigger
the need to obtain an earth removal and/or placement of fill permit
under the Town's Earth Removal and Placement of Fill Bylaw
(Chapter 97, Article III).
Large-scale roof-mounted solar photovoltaic installations are
allowed by right in all zoning districts upon site plan approval from
(2)
B.
§ 205-40 WETLANDS § 205-40.1
202:215
the Planning Board, and upon receipt of a report by a qualified
structural engineer that documents the roof is capable of
supporting the solar array.
Residential-scale solar photovoltaic installations are allowed by
right in all zoning districts upon obtaining a building permit from
the Building Commissioner.
Special permit criteria: The SPGA must make all of the following
findings in order to grant a special permit for a large-scale groundmounted
solar installation:
(1) The proposed use is appropriate on the site in question.
The proposed use will not be unduly detrimental to the health,
safety or welfare of the community or neighborhood by reason of
noise, traffic, pollution, visual impact, or demand on community
services.
(2)
C.
Reasonable conditions: The SPGA may impose any conditions upon its
granting of a special permit deemed necessary to achieve the purpose
of this bylaw, such as, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Greater than minimum setback requirements;
(2) Modification of exterior appearance;
(3) Limitation of size or extent of facilities;
(4) Regulation of traffic and site plan features;
Screening of premises from view by use of appropriate walls,
fencing or buffer strips;
(5)
(6) Limitation of sound levels;
(7) Additional design and siting modifications where appropriate.
D.
Utility notification. When submitting a site plan to the Planning Board
for a large-scale solar installation, the applicant shall submit evidence
at the time of the application that the utility company operating the
electrical grid where the installation is to be located has been informed
of the applicant's intent to construct a solar photovoltaic installation
and that approval to connect to the grid has been granted or
appropriate application(s) have or will be made to such utilities for
interconnection.
E.
Buffers and setbacks.
Buffer strips. All large-scale ground-mounted installations shall
be surrounded by a buffer strip which shall be 100 feet from
all abutting properties zoned for residential use. For large-scale
ground-mounted solar installations that abut commercial and/or
industrial zoning districts, this setback shall be reduced to 50 feet.
(1)
F.
§ 205-40.1 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-40.1
202:216
Buffer strips shall not be disturbed and left in their natural state.
The Planning Board may require the applicant to plant additional
vegetation within the buffer strips to better screen the use from
abutters.
Setbacks. All large-scale ground-mounted installations (including
all panels, inverters, transformers and all other associated
equipment) shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from all lot lines
(front, rear and sides). The setbacks shall be measured from the lot
lines to the fence enclosing the solar array.
(2)
Lot coverage limitation: Large-scale ground-mounted installations
shall not cover more than 50% of the lot on which it is situated.
Lot coverage includes the land covered by solar panels and all
associated equipment.
(3)
Design standards.
Lighting and security. Lighting of solar photovoltaic installations
shall be consistent with local, state and federal law. Lighting of
other parts of the installation, such as any appurtenant structures,
shall be limited to that required for safety and operational purposes
and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties. Where
feasible, any required lighting shall be directed downward and
shall incorporate full cutoff fixtures to reduce light pollution.
Surveillance and security cameras shall be shielded from viewing
abutting private property or invading the privacy of any abutting
residential property owner.
(1)
Signage. All signs shall comply with the Zoning Bylaw and shall
not be used for displaying any advertising except to identify the
owner and/or operator of the solar installation and a twenty-fourhour
emergency contact telephone number.
(2)
Land clearing. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to
what is necessary for construction, operation and maintenance
of the installation. Any land disturbance shall be subject to
stormwater management criteria and by applicable laws,
regulations and bylaws.
(3)
Visual impact. Any large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installation shall be designed to minimize visual impacts, including
preserving natural vegetation to the maximum extent possible,
blending in equipment with the surroundings, and adding
vegetative buffers to screen abutting residential properties
whether developed or not. Siting shall be such that the view of the
solar electric generating installation from other areas of Town shall
be as minimal as possible. Buffer strips shall surround the proposed
project. A screening plan, that assures the facility is shielded to the
greatest extent possible from public view, shall be required to be
reviewed under the site plan review.
(4)
G.
§ 205-40.1 WETLANDS § 205-40.1
202:217
Access roads. All access roads and interior roads shall be
constructed to minimize grading, removal of stone wall or trees,
and to minimize impacts to environmental or historic resources.
(5)
Hazardous materials. Hazardous materials that are stored, used or
generated on site shall not exceed the amount for a "very small
quantity generator of hazardous waste" as defined by the
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) pursuant to 310
CMR 30.000. Any applications of herbicides, or pesticides shall be
conducted in accordance with the Massachusetts Department of
Agriculture regulations.
(6)
Additional site plan requirements. In addition to the provisions set forth
above, special permit applicants for large-scale ground-mounted solar
projects shall comply with all provisions of the Planning Board's site
plan approval regulations, unless specifically waived by the Planning
Board.
H.
Discontinuance and removal.
Removal requirements: Any large-scale solar photovoltaic installation,
or any substantial part thereof, not used for a period of one continuous
year or more without written permission from the SPGA, or that has
reached the end of its useful life, shall be considered discontinued, and
shall be removed. Upon written request from the Zoning Enforcement
Officer addressed to the contact address provided and maintained by
the owner or operator as part of the special permit application, the
owner or operator shall provide evidence to the Zoning Enforcement
Officer demonstrating continued use of the solar facility. Failure to
provide such evidence within 30 days of such written request shall be
conclusive evidence that the installation has been discontinued. Anyone
intending to decommission and/or remove such an installation shall
notify the SPGA and Zoning Enforcement Officer by certified mail of the
proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for removal.
The owner or operator shall physically remove the installation no more
than 150 days after the date of discontinued operations. Removal shall
consist of:
Physical removal of all parts of and appurtenances to the solar
photovoltaic installation, including structures, equipment, security
barriers and transmission lines from the site.
(1)
Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local,
state, and federal waste disposal regulations.
(2)
Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to minimize
erosion. The Planning Board may allow the owner or operator to
leave landscaping or designated below-grade foundations in order
to minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation.
(3)
(4) Gravel or ground cover consistent with landscape.
I.
§ 205-40.1 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-40.1
202:218
§ 205-41. Medical marijuana treatment center/registered marijuana
dispensary (RMD). [Added ATM 5-4-2013 by Art. 37; amended ATM
5-3-2014 by Art. 35]
If the owner or operator of the solar photovoltaic installation fails
to remove the installation in accordance with the requirements
of this section, the Town shall have the right, to the extent it is
authorized by law, to enter the property and remove the installation
at the expense of the owner of the installation and the owner(s) of
the site on which the facility is located.
Financial surety. Proponents seeking to construct and operate a largescale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall provide,
prior to construction, surety in form and amount satisfactory to the
SPGA, which may be an escrow account, bond or otherwise, to cover
the cost of removal in the event the Town must remove the solar
array and remediate the landscape. Such surety will not be required
for municipally or state-owned facilities. The project proponent shall
submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal
(minus salvage value), prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount
shall include a mechanism for calculating increased removal costs due
to inflation. The SPGA may require that the amount of surety be
increased as required during the life of the installation.
J.
Local standards. An RMD shall comply with the locational standards set
forth in regulations promulgated by the DPH, 105 CMR 725.110(A)(14).
A.
Operational standards.
All RMDs shall operate in full compliance with the regulations
promulgated by the DPH as provided in 105 CMR 725.000.
(1)
RMDs which wish to produce edible marijuana-infused products
at their RMD must receive Board of Health approval for food
processing and preparation.
(2)
B.
Necessary permits and approvals. An RMD shall require both a special
permit and site plan approval. The Planning Board is the special permit
granting authority (SPGA) for such uses. The application and public
hearing process for the special permit and site plan approval shall be
conducted concurrently by the SPGA. In evaluating a special permit
application for an RMD, the SPGA shall not issue a permit unless the
SPGA makes a finding that the RMD use is appropriate for the proposed
site and that the use will not be unduly detrimental to the health,
safety, morals or welfare of the community or neighborhood by reasons
of noise, traffic, pollution, noxious gases or wastes, or demand on
community services. In its final decision, the SPGA shall stipulate any
conditions it deems necessary to ensure that the use will not become
unduly detrimental to the Town.
C.
D. Additional site plan requirements.
§ 205-40.1 WETLANDS § 205-41
202:219
§ 205-41.1. Temporary moratorium on the sale and distribution of
recreational marijuana. [Added STM 11-28-2017 by Art. 13]
All site plans for an RMD shall include a ten-foot nonvegetative
buffer around all parking areas and buildings.
(1)
Interior building plans for a registered medical marijuana
dispensary shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Building,
Police and Fire Departments.
(2)
Special permit terms. A special permit granted under this section shall
expire within two years of the date of permit issuance. Prior to the
expiration of the special permit, the applicant may request a renewal
of the special permit for an additional two-year period. Said renewal
shall not require the applicant to go through the site plan approval
process, provided that conditions of the site and RMD have not changed
materially from the original application.
E.
Transfer of special permit. The special permit shall have a term limited
to the duration of the applicant’s ownership of the premises as an RMD.
A special permit may be transferred only with the approval of the SPGA
in the form of a modification of the original special permit and with all
information required in this section and the Planning Board’s Site Plan
Rules and Regulations. No transfer may be approved unless it is also
approved by the DPH.
F.
Purpose: By vote at the State election on November 8, 2016, the voters
of the Commonwealth approved a law regulating the cultivation,
distribution, possession and use of marijuana for recreational purposes.
The law took effect on December 15, 2016, and (as amended by Chapter
351 of the Acts of 2016) requires the Cannabis Control Commission to
issue regulations regarding the licensing of commercial activities by
March 15, 2018, and begin accepting applications for licenses on April
1, 2018. Currently under the Zoning Bylaw, non-medical marijuana
establishments (hereinafter "recreational marijuana establishments")
as defined in MGL c.94G, § 1 are not a permitted use in the Town
of Westminster. Any regulations promulgated by the State Cannabis
Control Commission are expected to provide guidance to the
Massachusetts municipalities in regulating recreational marijuana
establishments. Further, the Act establishes a provision that involves
ballot action by the Town whereby the Town may, by ballot, determine
whether it will prohibit recreational marijuana establishments within
the Town. The regulation of recreational marijuana establishments
raises novel and complex issues in terms of legality, planning, and
public safety, and the Town needs time to study how best to address
these issues. Further, the Town needs time to assess the potential
impact of the state regulations on local zoning and to undertake a
planning process that will consider amending the Zoning Bylaw
regarding regulation of recreational marijuana establishments and
other uses related to the regulation of recreational marijuana. The
Town intends to adopt a temporary moratorium on the use of land and
A.
§ 205-41 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-41.1
202:220
structures in Westminster for recreational marijuana establishments so
as to allow the Town sufficient time to engage in a planning process
to address the effects of such structures and uses and to adopt zoning
provisions in a manner consistent with state law, sound land use
planning goals and objectives.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
MANUFACTURE — To compound, blend, extract, infuse or otherwise
make or prepare a marijuana product.
MARIJUANA ACCESSORIES — Equipment, products, devices or
materials of any kind that are intended or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body.
MARIJUANA CULTIVATOR — An entity licensed to cultivate, process
and package marijuana, to deliver marijuana to marijuana
establishments and to transfer marijuana to other marijuana
establishments, but not to consumers.
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT — A marijuana cultivator, marijuana
testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or
any other type of licensed marijuana-related business.
MARIJUANA PRODUCT MANUFACTURER — An entity licensed to
obtain, manufacture, process and package marijuana and marijuana
products, to deliver marijuana and marijuana products to marijuana
establishments and to transfer marijuana and marijuana products to
other marijuana establishments, but not to consumers.
MARIJUANA PRODUCTS — Products that have been manufactured and
contain marijuana or an extract from marijuana, including concentrated
forms of marijuana and products composed of marijuana and other
ingredients that are intended for use or consumption, including edible
products, beverages, topical products, ointments, oils and tinctures.
MARIJUANA RETAILER — An entity licensed to purchase and deliver
marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana establishments and
to deliver, sell or otherwise transfer marijuana and marijuana products
to marijuana establishments and to consumers.
MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY — An entity licensed to test marijuana
and marijuana products, including certification for potency and the
presence of contaminants.
B.
Temporary moratorium. For the reasons set forth above and
notwithstanding any other provision of the Zoning Bylaw to the
contrary, the Town hereby adopts a temporary moratorium on the use
of land or structures for recreational marijuana establishments. The
moratorium shall be in effect through December 31, 2018. During the
C.
§ 205-41.1 WETLANDS § 205-41.1
202:221
§ 205-42. Home occupations. [Added ATM 5-6-2017 by Art. 38]
moratorium period, the Town shall undertake a planning process to
address the potential impacts of recreational marijuana in the Town,
consider the Cannabis Control Commission regulations regarding
recreational marijuana establishments and related uses, determine
whether the Town shall, by ballot measure, restrict any, or all,
recreational marijuana establishments, and shall consider adopting
new provisions of the Zoning Bylaw to address the impact and operation
of recreational marijuana establishments and related uses.
Severability. The provisions of this bylaw are severable. If any
provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this bylaw or the
application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances
shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions
or application of this bylaw.
D.
Purpose and intent.
Conducting limited business activity from home has become more
feasible and more widespread with modern technology and
telecommunications. Residents of Westminster should have the
ability to conduct reasonable business activities from home that are
ancillary to the residential use and that will not be visible to the
neighborhood or result in a negative impact.
(1)
The purpose of this section is to set forth reasonable performance
standards for home occupations that will ensure that such uses
are compatible with surrounding permitted uses, do not adversely
affect property values, and do not create any significant adverse
impact on the quiet enjoyment of a residential neighborhood by
others residing in the vicinity.
(2)
A.
Home occupations: types.
Contractors: home-based: the use of a portion of a dwelling or
accessory building thereto by a resident builder, carpenter, painter,
plumber, mason, electrician or other artisan or by a resident tree
surgeon or landscape gardener for incidental work and storage in
connection with their off-premises occupation, provided that there
is no external change which alters the residential appearance of
the buildings, and further provided there is no exterior storage of
goods or materials.
(1)
Home office: the use of a portion of a dwelling or accessory building
as an office for a resident physician, dentist, attorney-at-law,
architect, engineer or member of other recognized profession
similar to the aforementioned, provided that there is no external
change which alters the residential appearance of the buildings,
and further provided there is no exterior storage.
(2)
B.
§ 205-41.1 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-42
202:222
§ 205-43. Site plan review. [Amended ATM 5-3-2005 by Art. 4438]
Home sales: the use of a portion of a dwelling or accessory building
thereto by the residents of the dwelling for an office or for the sale
of antiques or like merchandise, provided that there is no exterior
storage, that all work or sale of goods is carried on inside a building
and further provided there is no external change which alters the
residential appearance of the buildings.
(3)
Home personal services: the use of a portion of a dwelling or
accessory building thereto by a resident service provider for
personal services such as barbershops, beauty shops and like
services, provided there are no external changes which alter the
residential appearance of the buildings.
(4)
Performance standards. All home occupations must register with the
Building Commissioner who will verify that the occupation is in
compliance with the following performance standards:
The home occupation shall be conducted within a detached singlefamily
dwelling or in an accessory building on the same property.
If within the single-family dwelling, the total area devoted to the
home occupation shall not exceed one-third (33%) of the dwelling's
gross floor areas.
(1)
The home occupation must be operated by the resident occupant
of the dwelling and may not employ more than three full-time
equivalent persons on site who are not residents therein.
(2)
There shall be no evidence of the occupation through persistent or
excessive sound, or through vibration, smell, or sight discernable
at the boundaries of the premises.
(3)
Not more than one commercial vehicle shall be regularly parked
outdoors on the premises. Such vehicles shall not weigh more than
15,000 pounds nor have more than two axles.
(4)
Traffic and parking generated by the home occupation shall not be
more disruptive to the neighborhood than traffic normally resulting
from residential development considering volume, type, hours and
other traffic characteristics.
(5)
The portion of any structure utilized for the home occupation shall
conform to all applicable fire, building, electrical, plumbing and
health codes.
(6)
C.
Purpose. The purpose of site plan approval is to promote public health,
safety, and welfare by encouraging the laying out of parking,
circulation, and buildings in a safe and convenient manner; to ensure
A.
38.Editor's Note: This article also repealed former 205-34, Certain parking lots subject to
review, as amended STM 3-15-1989 by Art. 7.
§ 205-42 WETLANDS § 205-43
202:223
that new developments are designed to protect and enhance the visual
and environmental qualities of the Town, and to provide for an adequate
review of development plans which may have significant impacts on
traffic, drainage, Town services, environmental quality and community
character.
Applicability. Site plan approval shall be required for commercial,
business, industrial, office, multiple dwelling residential structures,
municipal, institutional, utility, fraternal or recreational purposes. No
permit for construction, exterior alteration, relocation, occupancy, or
change in use of any building shall be given and no existing use shall
be extended unless site plan approval has been granted by the Planning
Board. Site plan approval shall also be required for the resumption of
any use discontinued for more than two years or for the expansion of
any existing use. Expansion shall include any increase in floor space of
25% or more within a ten-year period.
B.
Exemptions.
The following shall not require site plan approval:
In all zones, normal maintenance or repair of any building or
accessory structure.
(a)
(b) Customary home occupations.
The construction or enlargement of any single-family dwelling
or building accessory to such dwelling.
(c)
(1)
The Planning Board may vote to waive the applicant's need to
submit an application for site plan review under these provisions if
the Board determines the proposed changes to the site are minimal
and do not require site plan review.
(2)
C.
Procedures.
Applications shall be filed by the petitioner with the Planning Board
at a regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting. Once the
application is deemed complete, the Planning Board will mark the
application received and notify the Town Clerk. Applications shall
be filed with eight prints of the plans.
(1)
Upon receipt of the site plan application, the Planning Board shall
transmit one copy each to the Inspector of Buildings, the
Selectmen, the Police Chief, the Fire Chief, the Conservation
Commission, the Director of Public Works and any other
department the Planning Board deems appropriate. Such agencies
shall, within 25 days of receiving such copy, report to the Planning
Board about their concerns and questions. Agencies may
recommend conditions or remedial measures to accommodate or
to mitigate the expected impacts of the development. Failure of
such agency to respond within 25 days shall be construed as
(2)
D.
§ 205-43 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-43
202:224
nonopposition by that agency. The Planning Board shall not render
a decision until it has received all board reports or said 25 days has
elapsed.
Public meeting. The Planning Board will schedule the review of the
site plan at a regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting within
35 days after receipt thereof. A decision regarding the site plan
shall be rendered within 30 days after the close of the site plan
review. The Planning Board shall notify the applicant, in writing,
of its decision. The decision of the Planning Board shall be upon a
majority vote of those present. The required time limits for a public
meeting and for said action may be extended by written agreement
between the applicant and the Planning Board.
(3)
Outside consultants. The Planning Board may hire outside
consultants, at the expense of the applicant, to review the plan for
conformance with the requirements of the Board.
(4)
Plans. Site plans shall be submitted according to the specifications set
forth in the Site Plan Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board.
E.
Decision. Site plan approval shall be granted upon determination by the
Planning Board that new buildings or other site alterations have been
designed in the following manner, after considering the qualities of the
specific location, the proposed land use, the proposed building form,
grading, egress points, and other aspects of the development.
The proposal shall comply with the purpose and intent of the
Zoning Bylaw and with existing local and regional plans.
(1)
The development shall be integrated into the existing terrain and
surrounding landscape and shall be designed to protect abutting
properties and community amenities. To the extent possible,
building sites shall be designed to minimize the use of wetlands,
steep slopes, floodplains, hilltops; minimize obstruction of scenic
vistas from publicly accessible locations; preserve unique natural,
scenic and historic features; minimize tree, soil and vegetation
removal; and maximize open space retention.
(2)
Architectural style shall be in harmony with the prevailing
character and scale of buildings in the neighborhood and the Town
through the use of appropriate building materials, screening,
breaks in the roof and wall lines, and other architectural
techniques. Proposed buildings shall relate harmoniously to each
other.
(3)
Adequate measures shall be proposed to prevent pollution of
surface and ground water, to minimize erosion and sedimentation,
to prevent changes in groundwater levels, to minimize potential for
flooding, and to provide for stormwater drainage consistent with
the functional equivalent of the Planning Board's Subdivision Rules
and Regulations.39
(4)
F.
§ 205-43 WETLANDS § 205-43
202:225
Roadways and circulation systems shall be designed to promote
convenience and safety for both pedestrians and vehicles. Access
roads by which the proposed development is reached shall be
adequate in width, grade and construction to carry, without danger
or congestion, the additional traffic that is generated from the
development.
(5)
Adequate buffers shall be provided to protect abutting properties
from lighting, sight, sound, dust and vibration.
(6)
Adequate facilities shall be provided for water supply and for
handling and disposal of waste and other production by-products.
(7)
Any new building construction or other site alteration shall provide
adequate access to each structure for fire and service equipment.
(8)
Conditions. The Planning Board may impose reasonable conditions to
ensure such conformance, including such conditions, safeguards and
limitations on time and use upon the applicant, developer and/or
operator(s) of the site as the Planning Board may deem to be necessary
to assure harmony with the intent of the Zoning Bylaw, including, but
not limited to, the following:
Requirements that parking areas or other parts of the premises
be screened from adjoining properties or from the street by walls,
fences, planting or other devices.
(1)
Modification of the location or of the exterior features of any and
all structures on the site.
(2)
(3) Limitation on the hours of operation of outdoor lighting.
Off-site traffic improvements to accommodate traffic generated by
the proposed development.
(4)
G.
Regulations. The Planning Board may periodically adopt or amend rules
and regulations for the implementation of this section by majority vote
of the Planning Board.
H.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 231, Subdivision of Land.
§ 205-43 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-43
202:226
ARTICLE X
Signs
§ 205-44.1. Compliance required.
No signs or advertising devices of any kind or nature shall be erected on
any premises or affixed to the outside of any structure or be visible from the
outside of any structure in Westminster, except as specifically permitted in
this section.
§ 205-44.2. Residential districts.
The following signs shall be permitted:
One sign, except for mailbox identification, the letters of which
shall not exceed four inches in height and shall identify only the
box holder, displaying the street number, or name of the occupant
of premises, or both, not exceeding two square feet in area. Such
sign may be attached to a building or may be on a rod or post not
more than six feet high and not less than 10 feet from the street
line. Such sign may include identification of an accessory studio
or professional office in the dwelling or on the premises, or may
identify other permitted accessory uses, including customary home
occupations.
(1)
One bulletin or announcement board or identification sign for a
permitted nonresidential building or use, with not more than six
square feet of signboard area. For churches and institutions, two
bulletin or announcement boards or identification signs are
permitted for each building. Each such church or institution sign
shall have not more than 10 square feet of signboard area. No such
signs shall be located nearer street than one-half (1/2) the required
front yard depth.
(2)
On the premises with a lawfully nonconforming nonresidential use,
one sign with not more than six square feet of signboard area.
(3)
Two "for sale" or "for rent" or "for lease" signs with not more than
six square feet of signboard area each and advertising only the
premises on which the sign is located.
(4)
Two building contractor's signs on a building while actually under
construction not exceeding six square feet of signboard area each.
(5)
A.
In residential districts, all signs or advertising devices shall be
stationary and shall not contain any visible moving or movable parts.
No sign or advertising device in such districts shall be of neon or
illuminated-tube type. Lighting of any sign or advertising device shall
be continuous (not intermittent nor flashing nor changing) and shall
be so placed or hooded as to prevent direct light from shining onto
any street or adjacent property. No sign or advertising device shall be
illuminated after 11:00 p.m.
B.
§ 205-44.1 WETLANDS § 205-44.3
202:227
§ 205-44.3. Commercial and industrial districts.
In commercial and industrial districts, signs shall relate to the premises
on which they are located and shall only identify the occupancy of
such premises or advertise the articles or services available within said
premises.
A.
In commercial and industrial districts, there shall be no temporary or
permanent special promotion signs, banners, streamers or placards
erected, suspended, posted or affixed in any manner outdoors or on the
exterior of any building except for public or institutional purposes.
B.
On each lot in a commercial or industrial district, there is permitted
one sign affixed to the exterior of a building, for each occupant. The top
edge of each such sign shall be not higher than the roof ridge of the
building, or the highest point of the roof, if no ridge pole, nor higher
than the plate of a flat roof.
C.
Signs permitted in commercial and industrial districts shall not have
more than 100 square feet of signboard area per sign, nor more than
three-fourths (3/4) of the length of the face of the building on which the
sign is affixed.
D.
In commercial and industrial districts where buildings are set back 40
feet or more, one freestanding sign per lot is permitted. The top edge
of any such freestanding sign shall be not higher than 25 feet vertical
measured above the average level of the ground between the supports
of each sign. For traffic safety, the whole of the signboard or display
elements of any freestanding sign shall be either below three feet in
height or above 10 feet in height above average ground level. Any such
freestanding sign may be located within the front yard space, if any are
on such lot, but not nearer than 12 feet to any lot line.
E.
No freestanding sign shall have a signboard area (or display area, if no
signboard) exceeding 100 square feet gross area, measured from the
tops of the topmost display elements and from exterior side to exterior
side of display elements, and including in such measurements any blank
space between display elements. No display or signboard dimension
shall exceed 16 feet for a freestanding sign.
F.
Illuminated signs are permitted, subject to the following conditions:
No sign shall be intermittently illuminated nor be of a travelinglight,
animated or flashing-light type.
(1)
Each steadily illuminated sign shall not exceed 100 square feet
gross display area as measured in Subsection E above.
(2)
G.
Sign illumination is permitted only between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
in the morning and 11:00 p.m. in the evening, except that signs of
commercial or industrial establishments may be illuminated during any
hours these establishments are open to the public or in operation.
H.
§ 205-44.3 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-44.3
202:228
§ 205-44.4. Illuminated signs.
In all zoning districts, for safety reasons, any private outdoor lighting
fixture, whether temporary or permanent, other than gaseous tube letters in
signs, shall be so placed or hooded so that no light beams shall be directed
at any point beyond the lot lines of the premises illuminated.
§ 205-44.5. Nonconforming signs.
All nonconforming signs shall conform to the requirements of
§ 205-44.3G(1) of this chapter within one year of the date of adoption of this
chapter, for safety reasons. All signs shall conform to all other regulations
of this Article X within seven years of the date of adoption of this chapter,
except that signs in residential districts on legally nonconforming uses shall
be required to conform to Article X this chapter as if they were located in a
district in which the use was permitted as a matter of right.
§ 205-44.6. Real estate signs and building contractors signs in
commercial and industrial zones and on acreage over five acres.
§ 205-45. (Reserved)
In any commercial or industrial district, for any building in excess of
40,000 square feet of gross floor area, the requirements of Subsections
C, D and E may be increased by 10 square feet for each 10,000 square
feet of gross floor area in excess of 40,000 square feet gross floor area.
I.
For commercial, industrial or acreage over five acres in any zone, two
"for sale," "for rent" or "for lease" signs, with not more than 32 square
feet signboard area and advertising only the premises on which the sign
located shall be permitted.
A.
For commercial, industrial or acreage over five acres two building
contractor's signs not more then 32 square feet each signboard area,
while actually under construction, shall be permitted.
B.
§ 205-44.3 WETLANDS § 205-45
202:229

ARTICLE XI
(Reserved)40
§ 205-46. (Reserved)
40.Editor’s Note: Former Article XI, Floodplain and/or Wetland Protection District, as
amended, was repealed STM 11-28-2017 by Art. 14.
§ 205-46 WETLANDS § 205-46
202:231

ARTICLE XII
Appeals and Board of Appeals
§ 205-47. Variances. [Added STM 10-2-1978 by Art. 9]
The Board of Appeals shall have the power, after public hearing and notice
as required by MGL C. 40A, to grant upon appeal or upon petition with
respect to particular land or structures a variance from the terms of this
chapter, expressly including variances for use or activity not otherwise
permitted in the district in which the land or structure is located, upon
a specific finding that, owing to circumstances related to soil conditions
shapes or topography of such land or structures and especially affecting
such land or structures, but not affecting generally the zoning district in
which it is located, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
would involve substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the petitioner
or appellant, and that desirable relief may be granted without substantial
hardship, financial or otherwise, to the petitioner or appellant, and that
desirable relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public
good and without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or
purpose of this chapter.
§ 205-48. Board of Appeals; membership; powers. [Amended STM
10-2-1978 by Art. 1; STM 3-15-1989 by Art. 7]
As provided by the Massachusetts General Laws, there shall be in
Westminster a Board of Appeals. Such Board of Appeals shall consist of
three members and four associate members, all of whom shall be appointed
by the Selectmen in a manner specified in the Massachusetts General
Laws. Such Board members shall have and exercise the powers applicable
under said Massachusetts General Laws. The Board of Appeals shall act
as the permit granting authority and as special permit granting authority
designated by MGL C. 40A.
§ 205-49. Appeals. [Amended STM 10-2-1978 by Art. 1]
An appeal to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved
by reason of his or her inability to obtain a permit or enforcement action
from any administrative officer under the provisions of MGL C. 40A, by the
regional Planning Agency, by any persons, including an officer or board of
the Town, or of an abutting city or Town aggrieved by an order or decision
of the Building Inspector or other administrative official in violation of any
provision of MGL C. 40A or this chapter.
§ 205-50. Special permits. [Added STM 10-2-1978 by Art. 1]
Except as otherwise provided for in Article IX, special permits, as
provided for in Article VI, shall only be issued or denied by the Board
of Appeals following a public hearing held within 65 days after filing
of an application for a special permit with the Town Clerk and upon
a finding by the Board that the use request is appropriate on the site
A.
§ 205-47 WETLANDS § 205-50
202:233
§ 205-51. Lapse of variance. [Added STM 10-2-1978 by Art. 1]
If the rights authorized by a variance are not exercised within one year of
the date of the grant of such variance, they shall lapse.
in question and that the use will not be unduly detrimental to the
health, safety, morals or welfare of the community or neighborhood by
reason of noise, traffic, pollution or demand on community facilities or
utilities. The Board, in issuing any special permits, shall stipulate any
conditions it deems necessary to ensure that the use will not become
unduly detrimental to the Town or area in which it is located.
A special permit granted by the Board shall lapse within two years,
which shall not include such time required to pursue or await the
determination of an appeal if one is taken, from the grant thereof,
if a substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced, except for
good cause or, in the case of permit for construction, if construction
has not begun by such date, except for good cause. [Amended STM
11-29-2012 by Art. 16]
B.
§ 205-50 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-51
202:234
ARTICLE XIII
Amendments
§ 205-52. Amendment procedure. [Amended STM 10-2-1978 by Art.
1]
§ 205-53. Change in boundary descriptions.
If geographic change of a zoning boundary description is proposed, words
of boundary description change for insertion in the warrant shall be
accompanied by a brief written statement of the nature, extent and location
in the Town of the Zoning Map change proposed together with three
blackline prints of a diagram to scale showing the area to be changed,
stating pertinent dimensions in feet.
§ 205-54. Costs for hearing and notices. [Amended STM 10-2-1978,
Art. 1]
The costs of publication and of mailing of notices of public hearing and the
costs of holding such zoning hearing and of making public record of the
proceedings at such public hearing, if such a record be made, shall be paid
by the Planning Board, but the Planning Board may determine whether a
fee to cover such costs shall be required of zoning amendment proponents.
This zoning chapter may be amended by one of the following submitting
the proposed amendment to the Board of Selectmen:
(1) The Board of Selectmen.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals.
(3) An individual owning land to be affected by the amendment.
(4) Request of registered voters of a Town pursuant of MGL C. 39, § 10.
(5) The Planning Board.
(6) The Regional Planning Agency.
A.
The Board of Selectmen shall, within 14 days of receipt of a proposed
amendment, submit it to the Planning Board for review, public hearing,
and report with recommendations, pursuant to MGL C. 40A, § 5.
B.
§ 205-52 WETLANDS § 205-54
202:235

ARTICLE XIV
Enforcement; Violations and Penalties
§ 205-55. Zoning permit required. [Amended STM 10-2-1978 by Art.
1]
No building shall be erected, altered or moved in the Town without a written
permit issued by the Building Inspector. Permits shall be applied for in
writing. The Building Inspector shall not issue any such permit unless the
plans for the building and the intended use thereof in all respects fulfills the
provisions of this chapter, except as may have been specifically permitted
otherwise by action of the Board of Appeals, provided that a written copy
of the terms governing any such permission be attached to the application
and to the resulting building permit issued. One copy of each such permit,
as issued, including any conditions or exceptions attached thereto, shall be
kept on file in the office of the Building Inspector. This provision shall not
apply to alterations of less than $2,000.
§ 205-56. Plot plans.
Each application for a permit to build, alter or move a building shall be
accompanied by a plot plan in such number of copies and drawn to such
scale as is required by the Building bylaws of the Town. Each such plot plan
shall show dimensions and areas of lots and of structures to be erected,
altered or moved and adjacent streets or angles of all lot lines shown
thereon, and also of any streets or ways. Such plot plans shall also indicate
approved street grades and proposed elevations of the tops of foundations,
the locations of existing sanitary sewers, storm drains and water pipes in
any street shown and the locations of all existing buildings and structures
within the application area, provided that the cost of said construction
exceeds $500.
§ 205-57. Enforcement officer; notice. [Amended STM 10-2-1978 by
Art. 1; ATM 5-3-2005 by Art. 47]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Inspector or other person
designated by the Board of Selectmen. The Building Inspector, upon being
informed, in writing, of a possible violation of this chapter or on his own
initiative shall make or cause to be made an investigation. After
investigation and inspection, he shall give written notice of such premises.
The Building Inspector shall demand in such notice that such violation
is abated within a reasonable time, designated therein by the Building
Inspector. Such notice and demand may be given by mail addressed to the
owner at the address appearing for him on the most recent real estate tax
records of the Town and to the occupant at the address of the premises of
such seeming violation. A copy of said notice shall be filed with the Board
of Selectmen. The Building Inspector shall also comply with the notice
requirements in MGL C. 40A, § 7.
§ 205-55 WETLANDS § 205-58
202:237
§ 205-58. Failure to abate. [Amended STM 10-2-1978 by Art. 1]
If, after such notice and demand, such violation has not been abated within
the time specified, the Building Inspector shall institute appropriate action
or proceedings in the name of the Town to prevent, correct, restrain or
abate any violation of this chapter. Penalties as specified in § 205-58 shall
begin immediately upon expiration of the time specified for abatement by
the Building Inspector if such abatement has not taken place.
§ 205-59. Violations and penalties. [Amended STM 10-2-1978 by
Art. 8; ATM 5-3-1997 by Art. 34]
Any violation of any provision of this chapter or of any regulation by the
Town Health Officer pursuant to this chapter shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $300. Each violation and each day of violation shall constitute
a separate offense, punishable by fine as aforesaid.
§ 205-60. Noncriminal disposition. [Added STM 11-18-2014 by Art.
14]
In addition to the provisions of enforcement listed above, the Building
Commissioner may, in his discretion, enforce the provisions of the Zoning
Bylaw by noncriminal disposition pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D. Each day
on which a violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
Noncriminal citations may be appealed to Gardner District Court or
Worcester County Housing Court in accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21D. The
penalty for violation of any provision of the Zoning Bylaw pursuant to this
section shall be $50 for the first offense; $75 for the second offense; $100
for the third offense; and $125 for the fourth and each subsequent offense.
§ 205-58 WESTMINSTER CODE § 205-60
202:238
Chapter 209
(RESERVED)
Chapter 219
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 173.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 182.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 193.
Motor and recreational vehicles — See Ch.
196.
§ 205-60 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 205-60
219:239

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 219-1. Statutory authority; adoption of rules and orders.
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Westminster, acting by virtue of the
power given to it by MGL C. 40, § 22, and by virtue of any other power it
hereto enabling, hereby adopts and makes the following rules and orders
for the regulation of traffic upon the streets and highways of said town, the
same to be known as "Traffic Rules and Orders of the Town of Westminster."
Insofar as said rules and orders or any of them are the same as any valid
regulations, rules and orders now in force, they shall be deemed to be a
continuation thereof.
§ 219-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases used herein shall
have the following meanings, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES — Any vehicle being used in the transportation
of goods, wares or merchandise for commercial purposes.[Added
6-12-1978]
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES, HEAVY — Any commercial vehicle of two and
one-half (2 1/2) tons' capacity or over.[Added 6-12-1978]
EMERGENCY VEHICLES — Vehicles of the Fire Department, police
vehicles, ambulances and emergency vehicles of federal, state and
municipal departments or public service corporations when the latter are
responding to an emergency in relation to the Police or Fire Departments.
LANE — A longitudinal division of a roadway into a strip of sufficient width
to accommodate the passage of a single line of vehicles.
OFFICER — Any officer, constable or special officer, provided that he has
his badge of office displayed over his left breast upon his outer garment.
OFFICIAL STREET MARKING — Any painted line, legend, marking or
marker of any description painted or placed upon any way which purports
to direct or regulate traffic and which has been authorized by the Board of
Selectmen and which has the written approval of the Department of Public
Works, Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS — All signs, markings and devices, other than
signals, not inconsistent with this chapter and which conform to the
standards prescribed by the Department of Public Works of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and placed or erected by authority of
a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of guiding,
directing, warning or regulating traffic.
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading
or unloading or in obedience to an officer or traffic signs or signals or while
§ 219-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-2
219:241
making emergency repairs or, if disabled, arrangements are being made to
move such vehicle.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway between the regularly
established curblines or that part, exclusive of shoulders, improved and
intended to be used for vehicular traffic.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between property lines of every
way open to the use of the public for the purpose of travel.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon any street or highway, except devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 219-2 WESTMINSTER CODE § 219-2
219:242
ARTICLE II
Authority and Duties of Police
§ 219-3. Police to direct traffic.
It shall be the duty of the police officers to enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Police officers are hereby authorized to direct all traffic either
in person or by means of visible or audible signals in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter, provided that, in the event of a fire or
other emergency to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of
the Police or Fire Department may direct traffic, as conditions may require,
notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.
§ 219-4. Temporary closing of streets.
The police may close temporarily any street or highway in an impending
or existing emergency or for any lawful assemblage, demonstration or
procession, provided that there is reasonable justification for the closing of
such street.
§ 219-5. Temporary prohibition of parking.
The police may prohibit, temporarily, parking on any street or highway
or part thereof in any impending or existing emergency or for a lawful
assemblage, demonstration or procession, provided that there is reasonable
justification for such prohibition. Vehicles parking in places where parking
is prohibited temporarily may be moved by or under the direction of an
officer.
§ 219-6. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to operators actually engaged
in work upon a street or highway closed to travel or under construction or
repair, to officers when engaged in the performance of public duties nor
to drivers of emergency vehicles while operating in an emergency and in
performance of public duties when the nature of the work of any of these
necessitates a departure from any part of these rules and orders. These
exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any vehicle from the
consequences of a reckless disregard of the safety of others.
§ 219-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-6
219:243

ARTICLE III
Traffic Signs, Signals, Markings and Zones
§ 219-7. Interference with signs, signals and markings prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully deface, injure, move, obstruct
or interfere with any official traffic sign, signal or marking.
§ 219-8. Disobedience to instruction prohibited.
No driver of any vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic
control signal, sign, marking, marker or legend, unless otherwise directed
by a police officer.
§ 219-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-8
219:245

ARTICLE IV
Parking
§ 219-9. General prohibitions.
No person shall stand or park or allow, permit or suffer any vehicle
registered in his name to stand or park in any of the following places:
§ 219-10. No parking anytime. [Added 12-21-1970]
Upon the following streets or highways or parts thereof, parking is hereby
prohibited:
Name of Street Side Location
Academy Street [Added
11-10-1980]
South From Leominster
Street to the
entrance of the
Elementary
School parking
lot
Bolton Hill Road Both From the junction
of Mile Hill Road
westerly for a
distance of 500
yards
A. Within an intersection.
B. Upon any sidewalk.
C. Upon any crosswalk.
D. Upon the roadway in a rural or sparsely settled district.
Upon a roadway where parking is permitted, unless both wheels on the
right side of the vehicle are within twelve (12) inches of the curb or
edge of the roadway, except upon those streets which are designated
as one-way streets. On such one-way streets, vehicles shall be parked
in the direction in which said vehicle is moving and with both wheels
within twelve (12) inches of the curb. This shall not apply to streets or
parts of streets where angle parking is required by these regulations.
E.
Upon any roadway where the parking of a vehicle will not leave a clear
and unobstructed lane at least ten (10) feet wide for passing traffic.
F.
G. Upon any street or highway within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant.
H. In front of any private road or driveway.
Upon any street or highway within twenty (20) feet of an intersecting
way, except alleys.
I.
§ 219-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-10
219:247
Name of Street Side Location
Ellis Road [Added 6-21-1982] Both From the
intersection of
Carter Road
westerly for a
distance of 600
feet
Leominster Street [Added
11-10-1980]
South From a point 150
feet east of South
Street and
continuing for
150 feet
Mile Hill Road Both From Bolton Hill
Road for a
distance of 500
yards northerly
and 500 yards
southerly
Mile Hill Road [Added 1-10-1983] Both From the town
line of the Town
of Princeton
northerly for a
distance of 2,500
feet
Needham Road [Added 7-18-1988] Both From the
intersection of
South
Ashburnham
Road westerly for
a distance of 600
feet
Route 31 (Fitchburg Road) [Added
7-18-1988]
Both From the
Westminster-
Princeton Town
line for a distance
of 2,000 feet
South Ashburnham Road [Added
11-6-1972; amended 7-12-1976]
Both From a point 300
feet north of the
intersection of
Pierce Road for a
distance of 3,100
feet
§ 219-10 WESTMINSTER CODE § 219-10
219:248
Name of Street Side Location
South Street [Added 11-6-1972] Both From a point
3,585 feet south
of the
intersection of
Minott Road
continuing for a
distance of 1,420
feet
§ 219-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-10
219:249

ARTICLE V
Operation of Vehicles
§ 219-11. Isolated stop signs.
§ 219-12. One-way streets. [Added 8-6-1973]
The following streets are designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
Every driver of a vehicle, or other conveyance, approaching an
intersection of ways where there exists facing him an official sign
bearing the word "Stop" and authorized by this section, said sign
having, apart from this regulation, the written approval of the
Department of Public Works, Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and
such approval being in effect, shall, before proceeding through the
intersection, bring such vehicle, or other conveyance to a complete stop
at such point as may be clearly marked by a sign or line or, if a point is
not so marked, then at a place between said stop sign and the nearer
line of the street intersection. In the case of a line of two (2) or more
vehicles approaching such stop sign, the drivers of the second and third
vehicles in line in any group shall not be required to stop more than
once before proceeding through the intersection. This section shall not
apply when the traffic is otherwise directed by an officer or by a lawful
traffic regulating sign, signal or device.
A.
In accordance with the foregoing, the erection and maintenance of an
official stop sign or signs are authorized as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Digital Avenue [Added
10-2-1981]
SouthwestRoute 140
Gatehouse Road [Added
4-22-1986]
South Worcester Road (Route
140)
Knower Road [Added
10-29-1990]
Both Minott Road
Mile Hill Road [Added
4-22-1986]
North Worcester Road (Route
140)
Nichols Street [Added
10-31-1978]
South Route 2A (Main Street)
Overlook Road [Added
9-28-1970]
South Bacon Street
Overlook Road [Added
9-28-1970]
South North Common Road
Route 2 (eastbound) off-ramp
[Added 11-17-1982]
South West Main Street
B.
§ 219-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-12
219:251
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Elliott Street North Between Route 2A and
Bacon Street
Merriam Road East Between Route 2A and
Battles Road
Pleasant Street South Between Route 2A and
Bacon Street
§ 219-13. Operation of heavy commercial vehicles. [Added
6-12-1978]
The use and operation of heavy commercial vehicles having a carrying
capacity of more than two and one-half (2 1/2) tons are hereby
restricted on the following named street or parts thereof and in the
manner outlined and during the period of time set forth:
Name of Street Hours Location
West Main Street All Between the Route 2
interchange southeasterly
to its intersection with
Route 2A
A.
Exemptions. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to heavy
commercial vehicles going to or coming from places upon said streets
for the purpose of making deliveries of goods, materials or merchandise
to or similar collections from abutting land or buildings or adjoining
streets or ways to which access cannot otherwise be gained; or to
vehicles used in connection with the construction, maintenance and
repair of said streets or public utilities therein; or to federal- statemunicipal-
or public-service-corporation-owned vehicles.
B.
The provisions of Subsection A of this section shall be effective only
during such times as official signs are erected and maintained.
C.
§ 219-12 WESTMINSTER CODE § 219-13
219:252
ARTICLE VI
Violations and Penalties; Repealer
§ 219-14. Owner prima facie responsible for violations.
If any vehicle is found upon any street or highway in violation of any
provisions of this chapter and the identity of the driver cannot be
determined, the owner or the person in whose name such vehicle is
registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation.
§ 219-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of any rule, regulation or order made
hereunder, except as otherwise provided, shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding twenty dollars ($20.) for each offense.
§ 219-16. Independence of regulations.
These rules are adopted with the intent that each of them shall have force
and effect separately and independently of every other, except insofar as by
express reference or necessary implication any rule or any part of a rule is
made dependent upon another rule or part thereof.
§ 219-17. Continuation of existing provisions; effect of repeal.
The provisions of these rules so far as they are the same in effect as
those of any valid existing rules, orders or regulations heretofore made
by the Selectmen of Westminster relative to or in connection with official
signs, lights, markings, signal systems or devices shall be construed as a
continuation thereof, but all other existing rules, orders and regulations
so made for the regulation of vehicles are hereby expressly repealed. This
repeal, however, shall not affect any punishment or penalty imposed or
complaint or prosecution pending at the time of the passage hereof for an
offense committed under any of the valid rules, orders or regulations hereby
repealed.
§ 219-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-17
219:253

ARTICLE VII
Tow-Away Regulations
[Added 7-25-1983]
§ 219-18. Statutory authority.
In accordance with the provisions of MGL C. 40, § 22D, the Board of
Selectmen of the Town of Westminster hereby enacts the following
regulations authorizing the removal to a convenient place of vehicles
parked or standing in such manner, or in such areas as are hereinafter
described on any way under the control of the Town of Westminster.
Vehicles specifically exempt by MGL C. 40, § 22D shall not, however, by
subject to such removal.
§ 219-19. Chief of Police to authorize towing.
The moving or towing of any vehicle under the provisions of this Article shall
be by and at the direction of the Chief of Police or such other officer of the
rank of sergeant or higher, as he may from time to time designate.
§ 219-20. Fees.
The Board of Selectmen hereby imposes upon the owner of any vehicle
moved or towed to a convenient place, under the provisions of this Article,
the following fees:
§ 219-21. Liability for damage during removal or storage.
The contractor shall be liable to the owner for any damage arising out of
negligence caused to a vehicle in the course of removal and storage.
§ 219-22. General prohibition towing zones.
No person shall stand or park or allow, permit or suffer any vehicle
registered in his name to stand or park in any of the following places.
Vehicles found in violation of the provisions of this section, except those
specifically exempt by law, shall be removed to a convenient place under
the direction of an officer of the Police Department, and the owner of the
vehicle so removed or towed away shall be liable to the cost of such removal
and storage, if any, as set forth in § 219-20 of this Article. The owner of any
vehicle removed or towed away under the provisions of this section shall
also be subject to the penalties as authorized by MGL C. 90, § 20A 1/2.
Removal or towing fees shall not to exceed that which is provided in or
authorized by statute law.
A.
Storage fees shall not to exceed that which is provided in or as
authorized by statute law.
B.
A. Parking on sidewalks or crosswalks.
B. Parking in front of driveways or private ways.
§ 219-18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-22
219:255
§ 219-23. Parking prohibitions, towing zones.
No person shall stand or park or allow, permit or suffer any vehicle
registered in his name to stand or park on any of the ways or parts of ways,
hereinafter described and during the periods of time set forth. Vehicles
found in violation of the provisions of this section except those specifically
exempted by law shall be removed to a convenient place under the direction
of an officer of the Police Department, and the owner of the vehicle so
removed or towed away shall be liable to the cost of such removal and
storage, if any, as set forth in § 219-20 of this Article. The owner of any
vehicle removed or towed away under the provisions of this section shall
also be subject to the penalties as authorized by MGL C. 90, § 20A 1/2.
Name of Street Side Location
Bathrick Road [Added
10-29-1990]
Both Beginning at the
intersection of Route 2A
(State Road East) and
continuing northerly for a
distance of 200 feet
Bolton Road [Added
1-7-1987]
Both Beginning at the
intersection of Mile Hill
Road and continuing
westerly for a distance of
2,500 feet (from November
15 to April 15)
Church Street [Added
10-1-1990]
East Beginning at the
intersection of Main Street
(Route 2A) and continuing
southerly for a distance of
40 feet
Church Street [Added
10-1-1990]
West Beginning at the
intersection of Main Street
(Route 2A) and continuing
southerly for a distance of
800 feet
C. Parking in restricted or no parking areas.
D. Parking within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant.
E. Parking within twenty (20) feet of an intersection.
F. Interfering with the free flow of traffic.
G. Parking in an area reserved for the handicapped.
§ 219-22 WESTMINSTER CODE § 219-23
219:256
Name of Street Side Location
Depot Road [Added
10-29-1990]
Both Beginning at the
intersection of Route
2A(State Road East) and
continuing southerly for a
distance of 200 feet
East Road [Added
1-7-1987]
Both Beginning at the
intersection of Worcester
Road (Route 140) and
continuing northeasterly
for a distance of 5,000 feet
(from November 15 to April
15)
Gatehouse Road [Added
1-7-1987]
Both From the intersection of
Worcester Road (Route
140) easterly to its junction
with East Road (from
November 15 to April 15)
Mile Hill Road Both From the Princeton Town
line northerly for a distance
of 2,500 feet
Needham Road [Added
7-18-1988]
Both From the intersection of
South Ashburnham Road
and continuing westerly for
a distance of 600 feet
Nichols Street [Added
10-1-1990]
West Beginning at the
intersection of Main Street
(Route 2A) and continuing
southerly for a distance of
375 feet
Pleasant Street [Added
10-1-1990]
Southwest Beginning at the
intersection of Main Street
(Route 2A) and continuing
northwest for a distance of
475 feet
Route 31 (Fitchburg Road)
[Added 7-18-1988]
Both Beginning at the
Westminster-Princeton
Town line and continuing
for a distance of 2,000 feet
South Ashburnham Road Both Beginning at a point 300
feet north of the
intersection of Pierce Road
and continuing northerly
for a distance of 3,100 feet
§ 219-23 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-23
219:257
Name of Street Side Location
Wachusett Drive [Added
1-7-1987]
Both From the intersection of
Gatehouse Road northerly
for its entire length (from
November 15 to April 15)
Worcester Road (Route
140) [Added 1-7-1987]
Both Beginning at the town line
of the Town of Princeton
and continuing northerly
for a distance of 6,000 feet
(from November 15 to April
15)
§ 219-24. Official traffic signs.
The provisions of § 219-23 shall be effective only during such time as a
sufficient number of official traffic signs bearing the legend "Tow-Away
Zone" are installed, erected, maintained and located so as to be visible to
approaching drivers. Said signs to be appended above or incorporated into
the legend of parking prohibition signs.
§ 219-25. Police to keep record of towed vehicles.
The Police Department shall keep a record of all vehicles towed or removed
under the provisions of this Article. Such record shall be retained for one
(1) year and shall contain the following information.
A. The registration of the vehicle.
The location from which it was towed, and time and date of the tow
order.
B.
C. The location to which it was moved.
D. The fee charged for the towing.
E. The name of the towing contractor, if any.
F. The name and rank of the officer who authorized towing.
§ 219-23 WESTMINSTER CODE § 219-25
219:258
ARTICLE VIII
Speed Limits
[Added 2-2-1976]
§ 219-26. Statutory authority.
In accordance with the provisions of MGL C. 90, § 18, as amended, the
following special speed regulations are hereby adopted by the Board of
Selectmen of the Town of Westminster.
§ 219-27. Speed limits established.
The following speed limits are established at which motor vehicles may be
operated in the areas described:
Beacon Street, North Common Road and Oakmont Avenue,
northbound
A. Beginning at a point one hundred seventy (170) feet north of Route
2A, thence northerly:
(1) Twenty-one hundredths (0.21) miles at thirty (30) miles per hour;
(2) One and seven-hundredths (1.07) miles at thirty-five (35) miles
per hour;
(3) One and one-hundredths (1.01) miles at forty (40) miles per hour;
(4) Fifteen-hundredths (0.15) miles at thirty (30) miles per hour;
(5) Twenty-four hundredths (0.24) miles at forty (40) miles per hour;
(6) Six-hundredths (0.06) miles at twenty-five (25) miles per hour;
ending at South Ashburnham Road, the total distance being two
and seventy-four hundredths (2.74) miles.
Oakmont Avenue, North Common Road and Beacon Street,
southbound
A. Beginning at South Ashburnham Road, thence southerly:
(1) Thirty-hundredths (0.30) miles at forty (40) miles per hour;
(2) Fifteen-hundredths (0.15) miles at thirty (30) miles per hour;
(3) One and one-hundredths (1.01) miles at forty (40) miles per hour;
(4) One and seven-hundredths (1.07) miles at thirty-five (35) miles
per hour;
(5) Twenty-four hundredths (0.24) miles at thirty (30) miles per
hour; ending at Route 2A, the total distance being two and
seventy-seven hundredths (2.77) miles.
West Main Street, eastbound
A. Beginning at the Gardner City line, thence easterly:
(1) Fifty-three hundredths (0.53) miles at thirty (30) miles per hour
ending at the beginning of State Highway west of Route 2;
§ 219-26 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-27
219:259
B. And beginning again at the end of State Highway east of Route 2,
thence easterly:
(1) Sixty-one hundredths (0.61) miles at thirty-five (35) miles per
hour;
(2) Ten-hundredths (0.10) miles at twenty-five (25) miles per hour,
ending at Route 2A, the total distance being one and twenty-four
hundredths (1.24) miles.
West Main Street, westbound
A. Beginning at a point 300 feet west of Route 2A, thence westerly:
(1) Sixty-five hundredths (0.65) miles at thirty-five (35) miles per
hour ending at the beginning of State Highway east of Route 2;
B. And beginning again at the end of State Highway west of Route 2
thence westerly:
(1) Fifty-three hundredths (0.53) miles at thirty (30) miles per hour,
ending at the Gardner City line, the total distance being 1.18
miles.
South Ashburnham Road, eastbound
A. Beginning at the Ashburnham Town line, thence easterly:
(1) One and seventy-six hundredths (1.76) miles at forty (40) miles
per hour;
(2) Eleven-hundredths (0.11) miles at thirty-five (35) miles per hour;
(3) Two and twenty-four hundredths (2.24) miles at forty (40) miles
per hour;
(4) Seven-hundredths (0.07) miles at twenty-five (25) miles per hour;
ending at Route 2A, the total distance being four and eighteenhundredths
(4.18) miles.
South Street, northbound
A. Beginning at the Hubbardston Town line, thence northerly:
(1) Two and seventy hundredths (2.70) miles at forty (40) miles per
hour;
(2) Seventy-four hundredths (0.74) miles at thirty (30) miles per
hour; ending at Route 2A, the total distance being three and
forty-four hundredths (3.44) miles.
South Street, southbound
A. Beginning at a point one hundred fifty (150) feet south of Route 2A,
thence southerly:
(1) Seventy-one hundredths (0.71) miles at thirty (30) miles per
hour;
(2) Two and seventy hundredths (2.70) miles at forty (40) miles per
hour; ending at the Hubbardston Town line, the total distance
being three and forty-one hundredths (3.41) miles.
§ 219-27 WESTMINSTER CODE § 219-27
219:260
Route 31, northbound
A. Beginning at the Princeton Town line, thence northerly:
(1) One and seventy-three hundredths (1.73) miles at forty-five (45)
miles per hour; ending at the Fitchburg City line, the total
distance being one and seventy-three hundredths (1.73) miles.
Route 31, southbound
A. Beginning at the Fitchburg City line, thence southerly:
(1) One and seventy-three hundredths (1.73) miles at forty-five (45)
miles per hour; ending at the Princeton Town line, the total
distance begin one and seventy-three hundredths (1.73) miles.
Route 140, northbound
A. Beginning at the Princeton Town line, thence northerly:
(1) Eighty-six hundredths (0.86) miles at thirty-five (35) miles per
hour;
(2) Thirty-four hundredths (0.34) miles at thirty (30) miles per hour;
(3) Thirty hundredths (0.30) miles at thirty-five (35) miles per hour;
(4) One and six-hundredths (1.06) miles at fifty (50) miles per hour;
(5) Four-hundredths (0.04) miles at thirty (30) miles per hour;
ending at the beginning of the State Highway, the total distance
begin two and sixty hundredths (2.60) miles.
Route 140, southbound
A. Beginning at the end of the State Highway, thence southerly:
(1) One and ten hundredths (1.10) miles at fifty (50) miles per hour;
(2) Thirty-hundredths (0.30) miles at thirty-five (35) miles per hour;
(3) Thirty-four hundredths (0.34) miles at thirty (30) miles per hour;
(4) Eight-six hundredths (0.86) miles at thirty-five (35) miles per
hour; ending at the Princeton Town line, the total distance being
two and sixty hundredths (2.60) miles.
§ 219-28. Operation of vehicle in excess of established limits.
Operation of a motor vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of these limits shall
be prima facie evidence that such speed is greater than is reasonable and
proper.
§ 219-29. Effect on statutory provisions.
The provisions of this regulation shall not, however, abrogate in any sense
MGL C. 90, § 14.
§ 219-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 219-29
219:261
Chapter 228
COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 205. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 231.
§ 228-1. Applicability.
The rules and regulations contained herein shall apply only to applications
for comprehensive permits for construction of low and moderate income
housing, filed pursuant to MGL c. 40B, § 21, by a public agency, a nonprofit
organization, a limited dividend corporation, or any other approved
organization, when (a) the site is controlled by the applicant and (b) said
construction is fundable by a governmental agency under a low- and
moderate-income housing subsidy program.
§ 228-2. Submission procedure.
Except where the submission of any item is specifically waived by the
Chairman or by the majority of the Zoning Board of Appeals, all of
the following items and information shall be delivered to the office of
the Zoning Board of Appeals during the normal office hours or at a
hearing of the Board and, if satisfactory to the Board, shall constitute
the submission of an application for a comprehensive permit. Notice of
such satisfactory submission shall be given to the Town Clerk and the
applicant.
Filing fee in the form of a check made out to the Town of
Westminster. The fee shall be as specified in the most recent fee
schedule. The filing fee required hereunder is not in lieu of any
other fee required by law. If a permit is granted hereunder, the
applicant shall pay the fee required for a building or other permits
at the time of submission of detailed plans and specifications to the
Building Inspector. (See Board of Appeals Fee Schedule.41)
(1)
Fifteen copies of the completed application in the form prescribed
by the Board.
(2)
The applicant shall submit certified copies of authorities or votes,
identifying the individual authorized to act on its behalf.
Furthermore, the applicant shall submit a copy of its certificate
of organization as approved by the state and a list of names and
addresses of individuals or organizations who are stockholders,
shareholders, holders of beneficial interests or otherwise
interested in the applicant.
(3)
A.
41.Editor's Note: The Board of Appeals Fee Schedule is on file in the Town offices.
§ 219-29 WESTMINSTER CODE § 228-2
228:262
A certificate from the Massachusetts Commissioner of
Corporations and Taxation that the applicant is registered as a
nonprofit or a limited dividend corporation, or other approved
organization.
(4)
Two copies of a letter identifying the subsidizing federal or state
agency to which application has been made and identifying the
subsidy program. Project eligibility letter: a project eligibility/site
approval letter from a state or federal housing program which
states that the project has been determined eligible under a
particular housing program and a copy of the project eligibility
application form.
(5)
Ten copies of site and building plans, certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, registered land surveyor or
landscape architect, as applicable, as to compliance with Town of
Westminster, Commonwealth of Massachusetts or Federal Housing
Administration laws and regulations, bearing the appropriate
registration seal and showing the following information:
Site plans showing topographic changes, information on
vegetation, open spaces, property lines, drainage, soils,
dimensions, location, materials and construction of any
utilities, roads and other improvements, including crosssections,
profiles, details and specifications, also the locations
and dimensions of any buildings and structures, existing and
proposed.
(a)
Traffic analysis.
The analysis shall include:
Traffic counts on arterial streets that provide access
to the site showing data on average daily traffic and
a.m. and p.m. peak periods (conducted for two hours
divided into fifteen-minute segments);
[a]
Intersection turning movement counts on
intersections likely to be affected by the proposed
development showing two-hour counts for the a.m.
and p.m. periods divided into fifteen-minute time
segments;
[b]
An inventory of roadway characteristics showing the
width of the principal approach streets, the presence
or absence of curbing and its conditions;
[c]
Estimated trip generation showing the projected
inbound and outbound vehicular trips for the a.m. and
p.m. peak periods and a typical one-hour off-peak trip
generation;
[d]
[1]
(b)
(6)
§ 228-2 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 228-2
228:263
The estimated distribution of new trips by approach
streets;
[e]
The effect of additional traffic generated by the
development on traffic levels of service on each
approach street (The term level of service means level
of service as defined by the Highway Capacity Manual
issued by the Highway Resource Board of the U. S.
Department of Transportation.); and
[f]
Estimated off-street parking and loading requirements
and time of peak accumulation.
[g]
The applicant shall submit such information to the
Planning Board and the Town Engineering Department
prior to the public hearing and request a report and
recommendation on:
The adequacy of the data and the methodology
employed;
[a]
The effects of the additional traffic on adjacent
streets; and
[b]
Remedial measures, if any, to accommodate the
additional traffic on the adjacent streets, such as the
location of highways, limitation on left turns, hours of
operation, and the like.
[c]
[2]
Plot plan of the entire housing development showing distances,
bearings, radii and tangents of all lot or property lines, all
streets, rights-of-way, easements and the names of all abutting
owners and of all easement rights' holders. The plot plan shall
also show delineations of any and all vegetative wetlands and
applicable buffers, riverfront areas, watershed protection
areas and zoning designations.
(c)
Floor, roof and foundation plans of all buildings, also
elevations, wall sections and electrical, plumbing and other
mechanical plans. Construction details shall be shown and
materials and specifications listed. Proposed site development:
all proposed structures including building footprints, parking,
roads, drainage features, open space; typical drawings for
each housing type; utilities and infrastructure improvements;
changes in grading, topography, subdivision of land (if
applicable).
(d)
A list of all requested exceptions to local requirements and
regulations, including reference to the specific provisions of
the local bylaws or regulations from which the exceptions are
sought and a detailed description of the manner in which
(e)
§ 228-2 WESTMINSTER CODE § 228-2
228:264
§ 228-3. Processing of plans.
the proposed development departs from each of the specified
provisions.
(f) A certified abutters list.
Alternative site uses under existing zoning; first level
environmental assessment under MGL c. 21E (if available);
identification of any features of historic or archeological
significance; identification of any significant natural resource
or wildlife habitat. The level of detail should not exceed that
which is already available to the public from another agency,
or which the applicant will otherwise be required to provide to
another public agency.
(g)
Housing program (e.g., local initiative program); housing types
and bedroom mix data; proposed affordable/market rate ratios;
project density; ground coverage data; proposed landscaping/
buffers; MGL c. 21E remedial action (if applicable).
(h)
Building tabulation: a tabulation of the proposed number of
buildings, units, and bedrooms per building.
(i)
Subdivision plan: a preliminary subdivision plan, if a
subdivision is part of the proposal. The drafting of the plan
should conform to the technical standards of the Planning
Board.
(j)
Analysis of the projected number of students that will attend
the school from the project.
(k)
For the purposes of these rules and regulations, a "housing
development" shall be defined to include the entire parcel of land to
be used for the construction of dwellings and all the changes and
improvements to be undertaken thereon incidental to providing
subsidized housing.
B.
On the receipt of all the items enumerated above, the Board shall
distribute the copies thereof together with a request for
recommendations to other local boards and agencies as follows:
(1) One set of plans and one copy of application to the Selectmen.
One set of plans, 1 copy of application and 1 copy of letter of
commitment from the subsidizing agency to the Planning Board.
(2)
(3) One set of plans to the Board of Health.
(4) One set of plans to the Department of Public Works.
(5) One set of plans to the Building Inspector.
(6) One set of plans to the Conservation Commission.
A.
§ 228-2 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 228-3
228:265
(7) One set of plans to Town Counsel.
(8) One set of plans to the Fire Department.
(9) One set of plans to the Police Department.
(10)One set of plans to the Historic District Commission.
(11)One set of plans to the School Board.
The Chairman of the Zoning Board of Appeals may also send copies
of all or any of the plans and of the supplementary material to such
other agencies as he may deem appropriate, including, but not limited
to, the Montachusett Regional Planning Council and the Massachusetts
Department of Natural Resources, and may therefore request
additional copies of the submissions by the applicant.
B.
A public hearing on the proposed housing development shall be
established by the Board, and held by the Board within 30 days of the
receipt of the complete application; such hearing shall be advertised in
the local newspaper twice, the first notice not less than 14 days prior to
the date of the hearing. The notice of hearing shall contain at least the
following information:
(1) Place, date and time of the hearing;
(2) Name of the applicant;
Location of the proposed housing development sufficient for
identification and acreage of the parcel;
(3)
(4) Number and type of dwellings proposed;
Federal or state subsidy programs involved and the general income
and age groups for which the housing development is intended.
(5)
C.
Copies of the notice of the hearing shall be sent by mail, postage
prepaid, to all parties of interest as defined in MGL c. 40A, § 11, and to
all boards and agencies to whom the Board of Appeals has transmitted
copies of the application. The Board may request the attendance of such
boards, officials or persons or their agents or representatives at the
hearing or the submission of written reports.
D.
The hearing may be continued by the Board Chairman to a day within
the forty-day period after hearing, or for such further time agreeable
with the applicant without prejudice to either party to gather more
information, give the applicant time to provide further information, to
retain consultants, or for other reasons specified by the Chairman. The
applicant shall bear the costs of any consultants retained by the Board.
E.
§ 228-3 WESTMINSTER CODE § 228-3
228:266
§ 228-4. Construction of housing developments.
The construction of housing developments under the comprehensive
permits shall be subject to inspection at all reasonable times to ensure
compliance with the permit, the plans, the applicable standard
specifications of the Town of Westminster and with any other applicable
Except where specified otherwise, the Board shall proceed in
accordance with the Westminster Zoning Bylaw,42 the Board's Rules and
Regulations, and with Chapter 40A of General Laws.
F.
Within 40 days of the hearing, the Board shall either approve the
application and issue a comprehensive permit to proceed with
construction in strict compliance with the plans, terms and conditions
of the application, approve the application with contingencies or
modifications or disapprove it. In the event of approval with
modifications or disapproval, the Board shall enumerate the specific
reasons for its action. Copies of the decision, including any reasons or
conditions, shall be given to the Town Clerk, to the applicant and to
local boards and officials which had received copies of the plans.
G.
Except as provided below, comprehensive permits shall be valid only for
the applicant, subsidy program and development project and conditions
described therein. If, after a comprehensive plan has been granted,
the applicant desires to change the details of the project as approved,
the applicant shall notify the Board of Appeals in writing. Within 20
days of such notification, the Board of Appeals shall notify the applicant
whether it deems the proposed change to be substantial or
insubstantial. If the change is determined to be insubstantial or if
the Board fails to notify the applicant of its determination, the
comprehensive permit shall be deemed modified to incorporate the
change. If the change is determined to be substantial, the Board shall
hold a hearing on the change within 30 days of its determination, and
issue a decision on the change within 40 days of the termination of the
hearing.
H.
Unless construction under a comprehensive permit commences within
two years of the date on which the comprehensive permit becomes
final, or within such lesser or greater time period as the Board may
specify in the permit, said permit shall lapse and may not be
reestablished without a new application and hearing. The date upon
which the comprehensive permit becomes final is the date the Board of
Appeals' or the Housing Appeal subcommittee's decision if no appeal is
filed. Otherwise, the permit becomes final on the date the last appeal is
denied or otherwise disposed of.
I.
The Board of Appeals may, prior to the expiration date of a
comprehensive permit, authorize its extension. An extension shall not
be unreasonably denied.
J.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Zoning.
§ 228-3 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 228-4
228:267
laws, rules and regulations. Such inspection may be carried out by the
Board and by its agents and representatives, including, without limitation,
the Building Inspector and members of his department, the Planning Board
and its staff, and the Board of Health and its staff.
§ 228-5. Planning, design and construction standards.
Not less than 48 hours (excepting Saturday and Sunday) prior to
commencement of each phase of site development, the applicant shall
give notice thereof to the Planning Board and not less than 48 hours
(excepting Saturday and Sunday) prior to the commencement of each
phase of building construction, the applicant shall give notice thereof
to the Building Inspector. If material or work shall be covered without
the approval of the Planning Board or its agents as regards the site
development and of the Building Inspector or his agents as regards
the building construction, the applicant may be required to uncover,
open, disconnect and replace any work or materials covered in violation
hereof.
A.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may, following a public hearing thereon,
revoke the permit of any housing development violating Town
requirements, obstructing inspections by duly authorized Town
personnel, or where the workmanship or the materials are repeatedly
found to be not in conformance with the approved plans and
specifications.
B.
The Board of Appeals may require the applicant to provide a
performance guaranty consistent with the procedures established by
the Planning Board in their subdivision regulations. The process of the
performance guaranty shall be supervised by the Board of Appeals, and
the Board of Appeals may consult with the Inspector of Buildings, the
Director of the Public Works, the Planning Board, or other person or
entity to determine the sufficiency of the work prior to release of the
performance guaranty.
C.
As provided for in § 20 of Chapter 40B of General Laws, requirements
and regulations consistent with local needs shall apply as equally as
possible to both subsidized and unsubsidized housing. To the extent
consistent with said § 20, housing development shall be designed to
comply with zoning, building and sign bylaws of the Town of
Westminster,43 the rules and regulations of the Board of Health44 and
the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land45 in the
Town of Westminster and the standard specifications of the Department
of Public Works. Variances or waivers from local bylaws and regulation
may be granted by the Board of Appeals only where such variances
or waivers are consistent with local needs, that is where the regional
housing need outweighs the health, safety, environmental, design, open
A.
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 81, Buildings and Land, and Ch. 205, Zoning.
44.Editor's Note: See Division 4, Board of Health Regulations.
45.See Ch. A231, Subdivision of Land.
§ 228-4 WESTMINSTER CODE § 228-5
228:268
§ 228-6. Engagement of outside consultants.
space, or other local concern supporting the bylaw or regulation to
be varied or waived, or where the applicant has proposed sufficient
preventative or corrective measures to mitigate the local concern.
All housing developments shall be located in a manner compatible with
the long-range comprehensive Town and financial plan for Westminster,
Massachusetts, except as otherwise recommended by the Planning
Board. The suitability of a site for housing development will also be
evaluated in relation to the following:
Land served by a septic system or other means of handling sanitary
wastes;
(1)
(2) Accessibility from a collector or arterial street;
(3) Safety and convenience of vehicular access;
(4) Open or recreational space within or nearby;
(5) Accessibility to stores carrying convenience goods and to services;
(6) Convenience to public transportation;
Free of soil and engineering problems making the development
unduly difficult or costly.
(7)
(8) Availability of adequate drinking water supply.
(9) Impact on wetlands and aquifer protection areas.
(10) Impact on Town services.
B.
The importance of the above factors depends on the age and income
groups to be served by the development and increases with the
increased concentration of dwelling units.
C.
To assist the Board of Appeals, the Board may impose reasonable fees
for the engagement of outside consultants. The minimum requirements
of the consultant selected shall consist either of an educational degree
in or related to the field at issue or three or more years of practice
in the field at issue or a related issue. If the applicant believes the
consultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not possess the
minimum required qualifications, the applicant may bring an
administrative appeal to the Board of Selectmen. The required time
limits for action by the Board of Appeals upon the application shall
be extended by the duration of the administrative appeal. In the event
that no decision is made by the Board of Selectmen within one month
following the appeal, the selection made by the Board of Appeals shall
stand. Such administrative appeal shall not preclude further judicial
review, if otherwise permitted by law, on the grounds provided for in
this section.
A.
§ 228-5 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 228-6
228:269
§ 228-7. Severability.
The invalidity of any provision of these regulations shall not invalidate any
other section or provision herein.
Chapter 231
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 65.
Earth removal — See Ch. 97.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 173.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
Such fees shall be deposited in a special account established by the
Town Treasurer, and shall be kept separate and apart from other
monies. The special account, including accrued interest, if any, shall
be expended at the direction of the Board of Appeals without further
appropriation; provided, however, that such funds are to be expended
by the Board of Appeals only in connection with carrying out its
responsibilities under the law. Any excess amount in the account
attributable to a specific project, including any accrued interest, at
the completion of said project shall be repaid to the applicant or to
the applicant's successor in interest, and an accountant shall submit
annually a report of said special account to the Board of Selectmen
for its review, with a copy delivered to the Board of Appeals. Such
report shall be published by the Treasurer in the Town Annual Report.
The accountant shall also submit annually a copy of said report to the
bureau of accounts.
B.
§ 228-6 WESTMINSTER CODE § 228-7
228:270
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 231-1. Statutory authority.
Under the authority vested in the Planning Board of the Town of
Westminster by MGL c. 41, said Board hereby adopts these rules and
regulations governing the subdivision of land in the Town of Westminster.
Such rules and regulations shall be effective on the 10th day of December,
1970.
§ 231-2. Compliance with zoning regulations required.
No plan of a subdivision shall be approved unless all of the lots shown on
the plan comply with Chapter 205, Zoning.
§ 231-3. Number of dwellings per lot.
Not more than one building designed or available for use for dwelling
purposes shall be erected or placed or converted to use as such on any lot in
a subdivision or elsewhere in the Town of Westminster without the consent
of the Planning Board and that such consent may be conditioned upon
provision of adequate ways furnishing access to each site for such building
in the same manner as otherwise required for lots within a subdivision.
§ 231-4. Matters not covered.
For matters not covered by these rules and regulations, reference is made
to MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG, inclusive, and any amendments thereto.
§ 231-5. Board of Health restrictions on lots.
When, in accordance with the statute, the Board of Health reports, in
writing, to the Planning Board that certain lots within a proposed
subdivision cannot be used as building sites without injury to the public
health, Planning Board approval of any such subdivision plan shall be given
only on condition that the lots so specified shall not thereafter be built upon
except with prior consent, in writing, by the Board of Health.
§ 231-6. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of these rules and regulations shall
not invalidate any other section or provision thereof.
§ 231-1 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 231-6
228:271

ARTICLE II
Plans Thought Not To Require Approval
§ 231-7. Submission; fee.
§ 231-8. Validation of submission.
To validate such submission, any such person shall send to the Westminster
Town Clerk application Form A.48
§ 231-9. Determination of Planning Board.
§ 231-10. ANR plan requirements.
The plan shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor and shall contain
the following information:
Any person wishing to record in the Registry of Deeds or to file with
the Land Court a plan of land or a plan showing division of land and
who believes such plan does not require Planning Board approval under
the Subdivision Control Law46 shall submit to the Planning Board office
the printing master and four copies of the plan and two copies of
application Form A (see appendix),47 for determination that the plan is
complete. The plan will not be marked received until the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Planning Board after such plan is deemed
complete for review.
A.
All such submissions shall include the proper filing fee as determined
by the most recent Planning Board Fee Schedule.
B.
The Planning Board will endorse such plan within 21 days of submission
at a regularly scheduled meeting. If the plan was prepared using a CAD
program, the Board may require an electronic submittal of the plan
compatible with the Town's current hardware and software.
C.
If the Planning Board determines that such a plan does not require
approval, it shall forthwith, without a public hearing, endorse on the
plan the words "Approval under the Subdivision Control Law not
required."
A.
If the Planning Board shall determine that such a plan does require
subdivision review and approval, it shall so inform the applicant and the
Town Clerk, in writing.
B.
North point, date of survey, scale and locus map indicating the relation
of the parcel (s) to neighboring roads.
A.
46.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, §§ 81K et seq.
47.Editor's Note: Form A is included at the end of this chapter.
48.Editor's Note: Form A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 231-7 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 231-10
228:273
The statement "Approval Under the Subdivision Control Law Not
Required," together with sufficient space for the signatures of the
required number of Board members and the date of endorsement.
B.
Name and address of owner, subdivider, designer and engineer or
surveyor.
C.
Names and addresses of all owners of abutting land as they appear in
the most recent Town tax list.
D.
E. Town of Westminster Assessors' Map and Lot Number.
Boundary lines of all proposed lots or divisions of land, with their
areas and dimensions in square feet or acres, and with all of the lots
designated numerically in sequence.
F.
Names, widths, and status (public or private) of streets and ways shown
on the plan.
G.
Zoning classification of the subject property and location of any zoning
district boundaries running through or along the property.
H.
I. Notation clearly stating the purpose of the plan.
Location of all existing buildings and significant structures, stone walls,
easements, cemeteries, public or private burial grounds, rights-of-way,
streets, ways, and such other references as are known to the applicant
or Board and as shall sufficiently identify the land to which the plan
relates.
J.
Location of all watercourses and any bodies of water including wetlands
as defined by MGL c. 131, § 40, and the local Wetlands Bylaw;49 the area
of the lot outside of the wetlands and the one-hundred-foot buffer zone.
K.
Notation stating that "No determination of compliance with zoning
requirements has been made or intended."
L.
M. Deed reference of record owner by book and page number.
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 202, Wetlands.
§ 231-10 WESTMINSTER CODE § 231-10
228:274
ARTICLE III
Procedures for Submission and Approval of Plans
§ 231-11. Preliminary plan.
General.
Any person wishing to submit a definitive plan of land to the
Planning Board for its approval shall submit to the Planning Board
a copy of Form B-1 (see appendix).50 A preliminary plan of a
subdivision may be submitted by the subdivider to the Planning
Board and to the Board of Health for discussion and approval,
modification or disapproval by each Board. The submission of such
a preliminary plan will enable the subdivider, the Planning Board,
the Board of Health and others to discuss and clarify the problems
of a subdivision before a definitive plan is prepared. Therefore, it
is strongly recommended that a preliminary plan be filed in each
case. A preliminary plan shall be submitted for any nonresidential
subdivision.
(1)
Such a plan shall be submitted with eight prints at a regular
Planning Board meeting. Notice of submission shall be sent to the
Town Clerk in accordance with MGL c. 41.
(2)
A.
Contents of plan. The preliminary plan shall show, in a general way, the
proposed subdivision and shall include the following:
The subdivision name, North point, date and scale, legend and title
"Preliminary Plan."
(1)
The name and address of the record owner of the land, and the
names of the subdivider, surveyor and engineer.
(2)
The location and names of all abutters as determined from the most
recent tax list or lists.
(3)
The location, names and present widths of existing and proposed
streets in the immediate vicinity and within the plan, whether
public or private.
(4)
The location and boundaries of existing areas dedicated to other
public uses and the location and character of all easements, public
or private, within or immediately adjacent to the plan.
(5)
(6) Proposed lots and lot lines with approximate areas and dimension.
(7) Proposed storm drainage systems.
(8) Proposed public areas, if any, and easements.
B.
50.Editor’s Note: Form B-1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 231-11 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 231-11
228:275
§ 231-12. Definitive plan.
The location of all existing and proposed water and sewer pipes
indicating size of same.
(9)
Topographic plans of the subdivision, in a general manner,
including a clear and accurate disclosure of the grades of the
existing terrain adjacent to the subdivision, large trees and natural
watercourses. Existing buildings, together with fences and walls,
shall be shown.
(10)
(11)Center-line profile of all proposed streets and ways.
General. Any person submitting a definitive plan of a subdivision for
approval by the Planning Board shall, either at a regularly scheduled
meeting of the Board or by registered mail, file the following and
shall comply with the requirements listed below. The Planning Board
may require that all submission items, including plans, be submitted
in electronic format compatible with the Town's current hardware and
software:
Any person wishing to submit a definitive plan of land to the
Planning Board shall submit to the Planning Board a copy of Form
B.51 Every applicant, after submitting a definitive plan to the
Planning Board for approval, shall send to the Town Clerk a written
notice, which may be Form B, by registered mail, postage prepaid,
or by delivery, stating that he has submitted such plan, describing
the land to which the plan relates sufficiently for identification and
stating the date in the notice when the final plan was filed with the
Planning Board, along with the name and address of the owner of
such land. The Town Clerk shall, if requested, give written receipt
thereof
(1)
Form B (see appendix) shall be signed and submitted by the owner
or owners of all of the land within the proposed plan to the Planning
Board at a regularly scheduled meeting.
(2)
The application shall also state all easements and restrictions to
which the land within the plan is subject and all easements and
restrictions appurtenant to such land or over the land of others.
The application shall be accompanied by a plan on tracing cloth
or Mylar with black permanent ink, together with eight black-andwhite
prints of the plan prepared by a land surveyor and engineer
registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(3)
A filing fee as determined by the most recent fee schedule. (See
Appendix.)
(4)
(5) An environmental and community impact analysis (if required).
A.
51.Editor's Note: Form B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 231-11 WESTMINSTER CODE § 231-12
228:276
All drafts of proposed easements for utility, drainage and right-ofway
purposes.
(6)
A list of names and addresses of all abutters within 100 feet,
certified by the Town Assessor that they appear as such on the most
recent tax list.
(7)
Drainage calculations certified by the engineer who prepared
them; groundwater levels and percolation rates within the
proposed detention or retention basins.
(8)
(9) A list of all requested waivers from these regulations.
The definitive plan shall not be deemed to have been submitted to the
Board until the above-referenced items, together with the definitive
plan and prints, have been delivered to the Board at a regular or special
meeting thereof, and all are fully completed in accordance with these
rules and regulations.
B.
Public hearing. Upon determination by the Board that the application
for approval of the definitive plan is complete, the Board shall set a
date for the public hearing and so notify the applicant. Notice of the
hearing shall be arranged by the Board, at the applicant's expense,
by advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in each of two
successive weeks, the first publication being not less than 14 days
before the day of such hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given to
all owners of real estate abutting upon the land included in such plan
or lying within 100 feet of any tract of land of the applicant, any part
of which is included in the proposed plan, all as appearing on the most
recent tax list, also to all mortgagees of record, if any, of the land within
the proposed plan. The Planning Board shall arrange for the publication
and transmission of the notices of the hearing. Actual costs will be
billed to the applicant. Final endorsements will not be made until all
hearing fees have been paid.
C.
Preparation of definitive plan. (Figures 1 through 8 are attached as part
of these regulations.52)
Surveying and drafting requirements.
The final or definitive plan shall be prepared by a professional
civil engineer registered in Massachusetts from a field survey
made by a competent land surveyor also registered in
Massachusetts. This plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn on
tracing cloth or Mylar. The size of the sheets shall be 24 inches
by 36 inches in overall dimension with a one-and-one-halfinch
margin on the left-hand side and one-half-inch margins on
the other three sides. Both the registered engineer and land
surveyor shall affix their stamps adjacent to the title block.
(a)
(1)
D.
52.Editor's Note: Figures 1 through 8 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 231-12 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 231-12
228:277
The plan shall be drawn on tracing cloth or Mylar in black India
ink, except that the names of the streets and the proposed
system of utilities may be drawn in pencil until the plan has
been reviewed and instructions are given to ink all details prior
to approval. After approval is given, the applicant is required
to furnish to the Planning Board a duplicate of the plan on a
reproduction master on transparentized waterproof cloth or on
a polyester film material.
(b)
Drafting layout and form shall conform to the plans entitled
"Figures 1 through 8.53"
(c)
The horizontal scale shall be 40 feet to an inch, unless the
Planning Board approves a more convenient scale. The vertical
scale shall be four feet to the inch.
(d)
All surveying shall conform to the Technical Standards for
Property Surveys of the American Congress on Surveying and
Mapping. The land surveyor shall affix his stamp to the
definitive plan with a statement that the survey conforms to
these requirements.
(e)
All elevations shall be referred to mean sea level. Bench marks
used in survey work shall be clearly located on the plan.
(f)
Contents of plan. The final or definitive plan shall contain the
following:
Title block. A title in the lower right-hand corner, stating the
name of the plan, if any, the scale, the name of the applicant,
the registered land surveyor and the registered engineer who
prepared the plan and shall conform to Figures 1 through 8.54
(a)
The names, widths and exterior lines of proposed public ways,
and the boundaries of other public areas with the plan.
(b)
The lines, boundaries, areas, lot numbers, and street numbers
of all lots, sites or divisions under which the plan is to be
divided. Street numbers shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the Office of the Board of Assessors.
(c)
Data to determine readily the location, bearing and length of
every street line, lot line and other boundary line shown on
the plan, whether straight or curved, sufficient to reproduce
the same on the ground. Bounds are to be set at every angle
point and point of curvature of the proposed street lines and
indicated on the plan. These are to be tied into existing bounds
and street lines and shown on the plan.
(d)
(2)
53.Editor's Note: Figures 1 through 8 are included at the end of this chapter.
54.Editor's Note: Figures 1 through 8 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 231-12 WESTMINSTER CODE § 231-12
228:278
Profiles of proposed streets shall show the rates of grade and
the center-line elevations at fifty-foot intervals. The profile
shall show sufficient data to properly identify the vertical
curves used. Proposed gutter line grades shall be shown at
twenty-five-foot intervals around the curves at intersections
and continuing 100 feet therefrom. In addition, the existing
ground profile at the proposed center line must be shown.
(e)
Existing topography, with two-foot contour intervals and
details showing all fences, walls, building waterways and other
natural drainagecourses, large boulders or out-cropping of
ledge, trees and buildings within the subdivision or other
natural objects of like importance and all of the features
abutting each entrance to the subdivision. Topography plans
may be submitted as a separate plan and may be drawn in
pencil on tracing paper, but must conform in size and scale
to the definitive plan, and a reproduction master as outlined
under Subsection D(1), Surveying and drafting requirements,
shall be furnished to the Planning Board.
(f)
Proposed topography within the subdivision as required by the
Planning Board.
(g)
Size and location of existing and proposed water mains and
their appurtenances, if applicable.
(h)
Size and location of existing and proposed sewers and their
appurtenances; also, a profile showing rates of grade, if
applicable.
(i)
Size and location of existing and proposed subsurface or water
drains and their appurtenances; also, a profile showing rates
of grade.
(j)
Size and location of existing and proposed electric, telephone
and cable facilities.
(k)
The location and area of wetlands and the one-hundred-foot
buffer zone.
(l)
The zoning classification of the property, including the
delineation of all overlay districts, and the base flood
elevations for all lots or parcels within the floodplain.
(m)
There shall be a table prepared and displayed in a convenient
place on the plan showing the following:
[1] Zoning district(s) in which the land is located.
[2] The total area of the entire subdivision.
The number of building lots within the subdivision and the
total area of all such lots.
[3]
(n)
§ 231-12 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 231-12
228:279
[4] The total area of all ways within the subdivision.
The total number of linear feet, measured along the center
line, of all roadways and culs-de-sac proposed on the plan.
[5]
[6] The total area of wetlands within the subdivision.
The total area of open space within the subdivision (all
land not included in ways or building lots).
[7]
[8] The total number of bounds to be set.
Approval.
The Planning Board, after the hearing, shall vote to approve,
modify and approve or disapprove the plan within the time
prescribed by law, or such greater time as has been agreed upon,
and shall file forthwith a certificate of the vote with the Town Clerk
and mail a copy forthwith to the applicant. If the definitive plan is
prepared using a computer aided drafting program, an electronic
copy of the final definitive plan (on a medium and in a format
as directed by the Town Planner) shall be filed with the Planning
Board at the time of endorsement.
(1)
The approval of the definitive plan or the completion of streets
within any subdivision does not make the streets and ways set out
on the plan "accepted streets."
(2)
E.
Performance guaranty.
Required for approval. Before endorsement of its approval of a
plan, the Planning Board shall require that the construction of ways
and the installation of municipal services be secured by one, or in
part by one and in part by another, of the methods described in
the following Subsection F(1)(a), (b),(c) or (d), which method or
combination of methods may be selected and from time to time
varied by the applicant:
By a proper bond, sufficient in the opinion of the Planning
Board to secure performance of the construction of ways and
the installation of municipal services required for lots in the
subdivision shown on the plan, and the Planning Board may
require that the applicant specify the time within which such
construction shall be completed.
(a)
By a deposit of money or negotiable securities sufficient, in the
opinion of the Planning Board, to secure performance of the
construction of ways and the installation of municipal service
required for lots in the subdivision shown on the plan, and the
Planning Board may require that the applicant specify the time
within which such construction shall be completed.
(b)
(1)
F.
§ 231-12 WESTMINSTER CODE § 231-12
228:280
By a covenant, executed and duly recorded by the owner of
record, running with the land, whereby such ways and services
shall be provided to serve any lot before such lot may be built
upon or conveyed, other than by mortgaged deed; provided,
however, that a mortgagee who acquires title to the mortgaged
premises by foreclosure or otherwise and any succeeding
owner of such premises or part thereof may sell any such lot,
subject to that portion of the covenant which provides that no
lot shall be built upon until such ways and services have been
provided to serve such lot; and provided, further, that nothing
herein shall be deemed to prohibit a conveyance by a single
deed, subject to such covenant, of either the entire parcel of
land shown on the subdivision plan or of all lots not previously
released by the Planning Board. A deed of any part of the
subdivision in violation hereof shall be voidable by the grantee
prior to the release of the covenant, but not later than three
years from the date of such deed.
(c)
By delivery to the Planning Board of an agreement executed
after the recording of a first mortgage covering the premises
shown on the plan or a portion thereof given as security for
advances to be made to the applicant by the lender, which
agreement shall be executed by the applicant and the lender
and shall provide for the retention by the lender of funds
sufficient, in the opinion of the Planning Board and otherwise
due the applicant, to secure the construction of ways and the
installation of municipal services. Said agreement shall also
provide for a schedule of disbursements which may be made
to the applicant upon completion of various stages of the work
and shall further provide that, in the event that the work is not
completed within the time set forth by the applicant, any funds
remaining undisbursed shall be available for completion.
(d)
Release of performance guaranty.
When the applicant has completed the required improvements
specified in these regulations, the applicant shall send, by
registered mail, to the Town Clerk and the Planning Board, a
written statement that the required improvements have been
completed, such statement to contain the address of the
applicant. Such statement shall be accompanied by two copies
of a certificate by a designer, engineer, or land surveyor, as
the case is appropriate, that the work has been completed
to the extent described in the certificate and conforms in all
details with the approved subdivision plan and these rules and
regulations; or, if it does not so conform, such nonconformity
shall be accurately described in the certificate. No bond,
deposit, or covenant, or any portion or part thereof, shall be
released by the Planning Board until it has been established
that the work required has been completed in accordance
(a)
(2)
§ 231-12 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 231-12
228:281
with the approved plans and has been inspected and found
satisfactory according to the standards of the Planning Board.
When the foregoing requirements have been satisfied, the
Board will release all or part of the interest of the Town in such
bond and return the bond or the deposit or execute and deliver
to the applicant a release, which shall be in form for recording
in the Registry of Deeds. Thereafter the conditions relating to
such lots and so released shall terminate. Fifteen percent of
the total cost of the road improvements, as determined by the
Planning Board's engineer, shall be retained to guarantee the
integrity of the road after being completed for one full year. If
the Board determines that the required improvements have not
been satisfactorily completed, it shall specify in a notice sent
by registered mail to the applicant and the Town Clerk, the
details wherein improvements fail to comply; but, upon failure
by the Board to so notify the applicant within 45 days after
receipt by the Town Clerk of the written statement from the
applicant, obligations under the bond shall cease, any deposit
shall be returned, and any such covenant shall become void, to
the extent that it or they apply to the portion of the subdivision
or lots for which a release was requested.
(b)
The applicant shall retain title to the fee of each street, path or
easement in, or appurtenant to, the subdivision until conveyed
to the Town. Prior to final release of security, the applicant
shall submit all necessary documentation for street
acceptance, including a metes and bounds description of the
road and all easements, an as-built plan, and a draft of the
proposed deed and any easements.
(c)
Expenditure of bonds. If deemed necessary by the Planning Board,
the proceeds of any such bond or deposit shall be made available
to the Town for expenditure to meet the cost and expenses of the
municipality in completing the work as specified in the approved plan.
If such proceeds do not exceed $100,000, the expenditure may be made
without specific appropriation under MGL, c. 44, § 53; provided that
such expenditure is approved by the Board of Selectmen.
G.
As-built plans. An as-built plan and profile together with three copies
thereof, shall be submitted to the Planning Board after completion of
construction, or at such times or stages as required by the Planning
Board. Such plan shall show drainage lines and structures, water
mains, if any, underground gas, electric, telephone, and cable lines, and
other appurtenances as actually installed with sufficient ties for proper
identification. Street numbers shall be shown near the lots numbers,
and circled. On the as-built plan the following must also be shown:
A diagram in ink shall show in plan view the complete drainage
system, and municipal water and sewerage system, if any, as
constructed in the subdivision. This plan shall show the stationing
(1)
H.
§ 231-12 WESTMINSTER CODE § 231-12
228:282
of all structures, such as manholes, catch basins, wye's etc. The
invert elevations of all pipes at their outlets, as well as the pipe
sizes and the type of pipe are to be given.
On the plan view of the street, and the true line relative position of
all drainage structures, the mainline drain and its appurtenances
shall be shown.
(2)
On the profile view of the street and true relative position of the
mainline drain, its structures and appurtenances in profile shall be
shown. The invert elevation and percentage of grade of the pipe
shall be shown.
(3)
On the respective portions of the street and profile plan, the
applicant should show any additional information which would
more clearly explain or indicate his drainage and other utilities
systems.
(4)
§ 231-12 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 231-12
228:283

ARTICLE IV
Design Criteria and Requirements
§ 231-13. Suitability of system of ways.
§ 231-14. Width and grade of ways.
Ways shall be continuous and in alignment with existing ways, as far
practicable, and shall compose a convenient system with connections
adequate to ensure free movement of vehicular travel.
A.
If adjoining property is not yet subdivided , the applicant shall provide,
in a manner acceptable to the Planning Board, a way or ways to said
adjoining property. The plans should show such access as an extension
of a right-of-way. The Planning Board may require that the extension be
paved.
B.
Proposed development of applicant's other contiguous land. The
Planning Board may decline to approve a plan if the applicant owns
land contiguous to that shown on the plan and fails to furnish sufficient
data to enable the Planning Board to relate the proposed plan to
the applicant's remaining land. Such data shall include the lines of
proposed ways and lots in general manner and approximate grades, and
such other details as the Planning Board may reasonably require.
C.
D. No block shall exceed 1,000 feet in length in a residential subdivision.
In cases where, in the opinion of the Planning Board, soil conditions
warrant, the Planning Board may require the subdivider to take borings
at such locations as the Planning Board may deem necessary to provide
adequate disclosure of subsurface conditions.
E.
Roadways shall be designed in accordance with Table 1, Roadway
Design Standards.
Table 1
Roadway Design Standards
Requirement
Residential
Roadway
Industrial-
Commercial
Roadway
Maximum grade 6% 6%
Minimum grade 1% 1%
Pavement width (feet) 26 36
Minimum center-line radius of
horizontal curvature (feet)
140 300
Stopping sight distance (feet) 200 300
Curve radius (feet) at
intersections
20 20
A.
§ 231-13 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 231-14
228:285
§ 231-15. Dead-end streets.
§ 231-16. Intersection of ways.
Table 1
Roadway Design Standards
Requirement
Residential
Roadway
Industrial-
Commercial
Roadway
Right-of-way width1 (feet) 54 80
Shoulder width (feet) 4 4
NOTES:
1 The Planning Board may require a greater width of right-of-way
where deemed necessary to handle either the traffic from within or
outside of the subdivision.
A dead-end street shall not be longer than 500 linear feet in combined
total length unless, in the opinion of the Planning Board, a greater
length is necessitated by topography or other local conditions,
excluding financial considerations, or there are clear and compelling
benefits to the Town for granting a greater length. For the purpose of
these subdivision rules and regulations, a "dead-end street" is defined
as any street, extension of a street, or systems of streets, connected
to a through street only at a single point. Any such street shall be
considered a dead-end street regardless of size or internal circulation
patterns. Any street, segment of street, or system of streets which
intersects only with a dead-end street shall be deemed to be an
extension of the dead-end street. The length of a dead-end street shall
be measured along its center-line from the edge of the pavement of the
intersecting through street to the midpoint of the circular turnaround.
A.
The number of dwelling units served by a dead-end street shall not
exceed (10). Subdivisions containing more than 10 lots shall provide a
minimum of two means of vehicular access to and from the subdivision
onto previously existing public ways.
B.
A dead-end street or an extension of a dead-end street shall be provided
at its closed end with a circular turnaround having a minimum and
maximum dimension as shown below in Figures 1 and 1A.55
C.
All intersections of ways shall be at an angle of 90° or radial to curves.
Street lines at intersections shall be cut back to provide for radii of not
less than 25 feet in residential subdivisions and not less than 35 feet in
industrial and commercial subdivisions.
A.
55.Figures 1 and 1A are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 231-14 WESTMINSTER CODE § 231-16
228:286
§ 231-17. Reservation strips.
The Planning Board will not approve any plans having so-called reservation
strips which would prevent further extension of ways.
§ 231-18. Utilities.
The number of ways converging at an intersection shall be kept to a
minimum. The centerlines of said streets shall intersect at one common
point.
B.
Grades at intersection shall be designed to be no greater than 2%
for the first 40 feet and no greater than 4% for the next 30 feet.
Adequate sight lines for vehicles and pedestrians shall be provided for
and maintained at all street intersections.
C.
The intersection of centerlines of streets shall occur not less than 200
feet apart.
D.
The grading at the intersection of ways shall be so designed as to be
safe and convenient for travel and to direct the flow of surface water in
a suitable manner.
E.
Where applicable proper connections shall be made with existing
sewers, drains and water mains. Where, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, after consultation with the appropriate town department, the
capacity of an existing sewer, drain or water main is inadequate to
accommodate the entire subdivision, only that portion thereof which, in
their opinion can be adequately accommodated, shall be so connected.
A.
Where adjacent property is not subdivided, provisions shall be made
for extension of the utility systems by continuing appropriate sewers,
drains and water mains to the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, at
such size and grade as will allow for their proper projection.
B.
Design analysis. A design analysis shall be submitted with each
definitive plan submitted for approval. The design analysis shall include
at least the following information:
Sanitary sewer system.
The calculations used in designing the sewerage system,
including the method of estimating average flows (including
infiltration allowances), the peaking factor used and the
hydraulic design of the system, including quantity and velocity
of flow under both average and peak flow conditions, shall be
included.
(a)
Sanitary sewers shall be such as to ensure a flow of not less
than two feet per second nor more than 10 feet per second.
(b)
(1)
(2) Interceptor drains must be installed as conditions require.
C.
§ 231-16 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 231-18
228:287
Stormwater management.
General.
A stormwater management plan shall be designed in
accordance with the guidelines established in the publication
entitled "Stormwater Management: Volume One: Stormwater
Policy Handbook"; and "Volume Two: Stormwater Technical
Handbook," prepared by the Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) and the Office of Coastal Zone Management
(CZM), dated March 1997. This publication is hereby
incorporated by reference.
(a)
The plan shall include a detailed design certified by a
professional engineer registered in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts that will adequately dispose of surface water.
Drainage improvements shall be designed so that there will
be no adverse effects created by the proposed rates of runoff
for the two-year, ten-year, and one-hundred-year storms. The
location of the proposed development site within the regional
watershed, and the hydrologic characteristics of the regional
watershed shall be considered in the design and evaluation
of the stormwater management system. Calculations shall be
performed using the USDA SCS TR20 or'I'R55 methodologies.
Predevelopment and postdevelopment drainage divides shall
be shown on a diagram incorporated within the calculations.
Off-site runoff entering the subdivision shall be properly
considered and shall be calculated based on existing
conditions, assuming all culverts and other restrictions are
functioning properly. To the maximum extent feasible,
stormwater shall be recharged rather than piped to surface
water.
(b)
All surface retention and detention facilities shall be integrated
into the grading and landscaping plan so as to minimize the
visual impacts.
(c)
(1)
Infiltration or recharge.
Infiltration measures to recharge groundwater shall be
designed to control increased peak rates of runoff due to
development conditions. Infiltration basins, infiltration
trenches, dry wells and vegetated swales shall be used as
appropriate.
(a)
Design shall be based upon storage and infiltration of the
increase in runoff due to the proposed development based
upon the ten-year frequency storm as determined by SCS
methodology.
(b)
The bottom of infiltration measures shall be a minimum of two
feet above average high groundwater.
(c)
(2)
D.
§ 231-18 WESTMINSTER CODE § 231-18
228:288
Design of infiltration measures shall provide for controlling
the excess runoff from storms greater than the design storm
up to and including the one-hundred-year storm event. The
overflow shall be directed so that no increase in flooding of
adjacent properties occurs or that access to roadways is made
impassable.
(d)
Design shall be based upon the methodologies of the Standards
and Specifications for Infiltration Practices, developed by the
State of Maryland Department of the Environment, dated
February 1984. Runoff volumes shall be determined using the
SCS methodology.
(e)
Detention basins. Head-vs-discharge calculations shall be
furnished for the detention outlet control. The outlet control shall
be designed to minimize the possibility of clogging and shall permit
reasonable access for cleaning. The detention basins shall have an
emergency overflow provision in case of clogged outlet, or greater
than one-hundred-year storm. The detention basin shall have 3:1
maximum side slope, finished with a six-inch layer of loam, and
seeded.
(3)
Stormwater quality.
Best management practices (BMP) for urban runoff quality
should be implemented wherever possible in order to minimize
the impact development will have on the quality of runoff.
(a)
The development should incorporate as many individual
treatment devices as practicable. The use of vegetated swales
and overland flows is encouraged where appropriate in order
to reduce the amount of directly connected impervious
surfaces throughout the proposed development.
(b)
Following is a list of BMP's which may be utilized and minimum
guidelines for their design.
Vegetated swales. Swales should have side slopes equal to
or greater than three feet horizontal to one foot vertical
and be constructed at minimum slopes to reduce flow
velocities and encourage infiltration. The swales should
only hold water during and immediately after rainfall
events and should be planted with vegetation suitable for
soil stabilization, stormwater treatment and nutrient
uptake. The water quality benefits provided by swales are
limited due to short residence times.
[1]
Retention.
Retention areas may be designed to infiltrate the first
flush volume of stormwater. They should be designed
[a]
[2]
(c)
(4)
§ 231-18 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 231-18
228:289
§ 231-19. Access on state highways.
Where access to a state highway is necessary, evidence of state permission
must be presented to the Board with submission of the preliminary plan or
definitive plan, as the case may be.
§ 231-20. Adequate access from public way.
to retain the first 1/2 inch of runoff or the runoff
created by one inch of rainfall, whichever is greater.
Retention areas should have grassed bottoms and
sides to reduce maintenance and maintain soil
infiltration properties. A minimum of two feet should
be maintained between the bottom of the basin and
the seasonal high groundwater table.
[b]
Retention facilities should be located off-line, meaning
only runoff from small storms and the first flush
volume of large storms should be directed to and
stored in the facility. The system must be designed in
a manner which prevents large storm volumes from
damaging the basin or resuspending previously
settled pollutants.
[c]
Wet detention. Wet detention ponds consist of a permanent
water pool, a zone where stormwater runoff is temporarily
stored and treated, and a shallow littoral zone for
biological quality enhancement. The basin should be
designed to provide extended detention times of 24 to 48
hours for small storm events (first 1/2 inch of runoff or
the runoff generated by one inch of rainfall, whichever
is greater). Approximately 30% of the pond surface area
shall be littoral with bottom slopes of 6:1 or flatter and
planted with appropriate aquatic vegetation. The littoral
zone shall be established around a minimum of 50% of
the pond perimeter. The flow length between inlets and
the pond outlet should be maximized to prevent short
circuiting. A length-to-width ratio of at least 3:1 is
recommended, diversion baffles, dikes or peninsulas may
be utilized to increase the flow length. The outlet structure
of the pond should be designed to retain oil, grease and
floatable pollutants in the pond.
[3]
These recommendations are presented as guidelines only and
are not intended to limit the innovation or implementation of
new technology and designs. The burden shall be upon the
engineer to demonstrate the effectiveness of the system in
improving the quality of stormwater runoff quality.
(d)
§ 231-18 WESTMINSTER CODE § 231-20
228:290
§ 231-21. Subdivisions straddling municipal boundaries.
The Planning Board will not approve a subdivision of land where sole access
to the subdivision tract in Westminster is through another town, unless
the access is through an accepted public way at the time the subdivision
is submitted. In general, lot lines should be laid out so as not to cross
municipal boundaries.
§ 231-22. Open spaces.
Before approval of a plan, the Planning Board may require the plan to show
a park or parks suitably located for playground or recreation purposes or
for providing light and air. The park or parks shall not be unreasonable in
area in relation to the land being subdivided and to the prospective uses of
the land. The Board may, by appropriate endorsement on the plan, require
that no building be erected upon such park or parks for a period of not more
than three years without its approval. This land shall be made available for
purchase by the Town. Failure to purchase within three years shall free the
owners from restrictions.
§ 231-23. Protection of natural features.
Where the street system within a subdivision does not connect with or
have, in the opinion of the Board, adequate access from a Town, county
or state (public) way, the Board may require, as a condition of approval
of a plan, that such adequate access be provided by the subdivider and/
or that the subdivider make physical improvements to and within such
a way of access, in accord with the provisions of Article IV and Article
V of these regulations, from the boundary of the subdivision to a Town,
county or state way.
A.
Where the physical condition or width of a public way from which a
subdivision has its access is considered by the Board to be inadequate
to carry the traffic expected to be generated by such subdivision,
the Board may require the subdivider to dedicate a strip of land for
the purpose of widening the abutting public way to a width at least
commensurate with that required within the subdivision and to make
physical improvements to and within such public way to the same
standards required within the subdivision. Any such dedication of land
for purpose of way and any such work performed within such public
way shall be made only with permission of the governmental agency
having jurisdiction over such way, and all costs of any such widening or
construction shall be borne by the subdivider.
B.
Due regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as large trees,
watercourses, scenic points, historic spots, and similar community
assets, which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the
subdivision, and protect the natural resources of the Town.
A.
§ 231-20 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 231-23
228:291
§ 231-24. Street names.
Street names shall be submitted to the Historical Commission for comment
and be approved by the Fire Department to prevent duplication or close
similarity to names of existing streets and to provide names in keeping
with the character of the Town. Names reflecting geographic, natural or
historical features are preferred to names of persons.
§ 231-25. Lot numbers.
Prior to plan endorsements, lot numbers, as assigned by the Fire
Department, shall be shown on the plan.
§ 231-26. Lot grading and drainage.
Lots shall be prepared and graded in such a manner that development of
one lot does not cause detrimental drainage onto another lot, on areas
outside the subdivision, onto roadways, or onto wetlands.
Existing contours shall be preserved insofar as it is practical to do so.
No change shall be made in the contour of the land that adversely
affects the land abutting the proposed subdivision.
B.
To be more attractive and economical, subdivisions shall closely adhere
to the topography of the land, with streets designed so as to minimize
the necessity for excessive cut and fill.
C.
Building envelopes which restrict the placement of buildings within
approved lots will be required when necessary to protect significant
natural features or scenic viewpoints which might otherwise be
adversely impacted from construction.
D.
§ 231-23 WESTMINSTER CODE § 231-26
228:292
ARTICLE V
Required Improvements for Approved Subdivision
§ 231-27. Construction of ways.
Granite or precast reinforced concrete bounds, four feet long by six
inches square at the top, shall be set at points as indicated on the
approved plan. Such bounds shall be set in gravel with their tops at the
proposed sidewalk surface grades, unless otherwise directed. A hole 1/
2 inch in diameter and one inch deep shall be drilled in the bound at
the exact point of survey reference.
A.
All underground utilities, including surface water drains, shall be
installed and all ways shall be constructed by the subdivider at his
own expense, in accordance with the grades approved by the Planning
Board. Subdividers shall comply with the details and specifications
shown on Figures 2 through 856 and to any other specification as
indicated on the approved plan.
B.
Residential roads shall consist of at least 18 inches of gravel after
compaction in accordance with the Massachusetts Department of
Public Works, 1967 Standard Specifications, Sections 401 and 405, or
as amended, and treated with a prime coat of MC-1, applied at a rate of
0.3 gallon per square yard, the binder course shall be 2 1/2 inches thick
and the top course shall be 1 1/2 inches thick after rolling so as to form
a compacted final pavement depth of four inches as shown on in Figure
2. Commercial roads shall be designed to the same specifications as
residential roads except for a two-inch base, after compaction, should
be applied before the binder course and final course so as to form a
compacted final pavement width of six inches as shown in Figure 2A.
C.
Granite curb inlets conforming to Figure 4 will be required at every
catch basin.
D.
All sewers, surface water drains, water pipes and any other
underground facilities, together with their appurtenances, shall be
installed only after the subgrade of the way has been established.
E.
The excavating of trenches, the methods and material of backfilling
and all other matters relating to the installation of water pipes, sewer
lines, storm drains and subsurface drains shall be consistent with good
construction practices and shall at all times be subject to the inspection
of the applicable Town departments (Figure 8).
F.
Connections for all utilities from the main structure to the exterior line
of the way shall be constructed for each lot, whether or not there is a
building thereon.
G.
The subdivider shall protect improvements required under the
subdivision rules and regulations, including utilities, streets, curbings,
H.
56.Editor's Note: Figures 2 through 8 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 231-27 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 231-27
228:293
§ 231-28. Bituminous pavement.
§ 231-29. Sidewalks.
All sidewalks shall be designed meeting all applicable accessibility
requirements; constructed as shown on Figures 2 and 2A,57 and shall be of
bituminous concrete. Sidewalks shall be five feet wide with a base of eight
inches of suitable gravel in accordance with the Massachusetts Department
of Public Works, 1967 Standard Specifications, Sections 401 and 405, or as
sidewalks, etc., from any and all damage, until the entire subdivision is
completed and approved as a whole by the Planning Board. Any damage
to these utilities, etc., prior to the approval by the Planning Board,
shall be repaired in a manner satisfactory to the Planning Board, the
full cost of which shall be borne by the subdivider. Any material used
which does not meet the standards as set forth in these regulations
shall be replaced by the subdivider at his own expense. Underground
utilities and appurtenances not installed in accordance with the final
grade approved by the Planning Board shall be removed and reset to
proper grade at the expense of the subdivider.
Where the grade of the way is above or below the grade of the adjacent
land, walls or slopes shall be constructed by the subdivider in
conformance with the recommendations of the Planning Board.
I.
Curbing shall be sloped granite edging on all intersections, culs-de-sac
and all other radii. Cape Cod berm Type I dense mix shall be allowed in
all remaining sections (Figure 5).
J.
Bituminous concrete pavement shall conform to Massachusetts
Department of Public Works, 1967 Standard Specifications, Section
460, and designated as Class I binder course, top course and dense mix
(for curbings).
A.
Residential subdivisions shall have a two-and-one-half-inch binder
course and a one-and-one-half-inch top course. Industrial and
commercial subdivisions shall have two-inch binder courses and a twoinch
top course. The Planning Board may require a greater width of way
where deemed necessary to handle either the traffic generated from
within or outside of the subdivision. All drainage structures shall be
coated with 3,000 psi air-entrained concrete and coated with asphalt
cement, in accordance with the Westminster DPW requirements, before
final paving.
B.
Before application of the finish coat, the bituminous concrete base shall
have been in place for a minimum of 12 months or for a lesser period as
may be determined by the Board. A machine-applied tack coat shall be
applied over a cleaned bituminous binder course prior to installation of
final paving course.
C.
57.Editor's Note: Figures 2 and 2A are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 231-27 WESTMINSTER CODE § 231-29
228:294
amended, and a surface of Type I-1 bituminous concrete, 2 1/2 inches in
depth laid in two courses, one-and-one-half-inch binder and one-inch top.
§ 231-30. Driveways.
There shall he constructed for each lot a driveway ramp not less than
14 feet in width at the gutter line as shown on the plan entitled "Typical
Driveway Cross Section” (Figure 3).58 All driveways shall be designed to
meet the specifications of the Westminster DPW. In addition, driveway cuts
into streets shall be prohibited until the Planning Board finds that the
location, width, length, line of sight, grades, proximity to other driveways
and streets, grade and elevation will provide adequate provisions for the
public safety. Driveway cuts shall not be permitted within 100 feet of the
sideline of intersecting streets or railroad crossings. No more than one
driveway cut shall be permitted per lot.
§ 231-31. Signs.
All signage, street signs, stop signs, stop bars, and crosswalks, in
accordance with the US Department of Transportation Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, shall be installed within the subdivision.
§ 231-32. Trees.
§ 231-33. Fire protection.
All subdivisions shall be provided with adequate fire protection installation
and maintenance in accordance with the requirements of the Westminster
Fire Department entitled "Fire Protection Water Supply Regulations."
§ 231-34. Maintenance of site during construction; clean-up
following completion.
During construction, a sightly appearance shall be maintained. Upon
completion of all work on the ground, the applicant shall remove all
temporary structures and all surplus material and rubbish and shall leave
the work in a neat and orderly condition. Waste materials, debris, and
Trees shall be Sugar maple (or other species approved by the Planning
Board) with a diameter of two to three inches measured four feet from
the ground level and shall be eight to 10 feet tall. The trees shall be
nursery grown and planted in a hole at least one foot in diameter larger
than the root system, and the developers must apply good grade of
loam, mixed with bog peat and bovung or a good grade of organic
fertilizer.
A.
There shall be minimum of two trees per lot in residential subdivisions.
These two trees shall be planted anywhere in the front yard area as
defined in Chapter 205, Zoning.
B.
58.Editor’s Note: Figure 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 231-29 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 231-34
228:295
discards shall be removed to and disposed of at a place and in a manner
approved by the Board of Health and the Planning Board.
§ 231-35. Maintenance of roads and other improvements.
The applicant shall maintain the roads for vehicular travel in a manner
satisfactory to the Board. Further, the applicant shall maintain the road and
all other improvements within the subdivision, in a condition which meets
all the above requirements to the satisfaction of the Board until acceptance
of such roads by vote of the Town.
§ 231-36. Erosion and sedimentation control.
§ 231-37. Requirements for earth removal within the context of
subdivision approval.
All earth removal incidental to the subdivision of land shall receive an earth
removal permit from the Board of Selectmen before the commencement of
any earth removal activity.
§ 231-38. Environmental and community impact analysis.
The applicant shall control erosion and sedimentation during
construction according to the objectives, principles and design
considerations set forth in the following publications: "Residential
Erosion and Sediment Control," published by the Urban Land Institute,
the American Society of Civil Engineers, and the National Association
of Home Builders, 1978; and "Soil and Water Conservation in Urbanized
Areas of Massachusetts," published by the USDA Soil Conservation
Service, Amherst, 1975. These publications are hereby incorporated
as part of these regulations. If it is determined by the Conservation
Commission or the DPW that the erosion control plan is not working,
then the plan shall be revised. Failure to respond shall result in ceaseand-
desist of all site activity until the revised plan is approved.
A.
When directed by the Town, the applicant shall clean up, in a timely
manner, any sand, dirt, or debris which erodes from the subdivision
onto any public street or private property, and to remove any silt or
debris that enters any existing drainage system including catch basins,
sumps, pipelines, manholes, and ditches.
B.
Any submission of a subdivision requiring substantial cuts, earth
removal in excess of 3,000 cubic yards, creating 1,000 feet or more of
roadway/street, or creating more than 10 lots, and all nonresidential
subdivisions shall be accompanied by four copies of an environmental
and community impact analysis, as determined during the preliminary
plan process. The environmental and community impact analysis shall
assess the relationship of the proposed development to the natural and
man-made environment of Westminster. This report shall be prepared
by an interdisciplinary team of professionals qualified and experienced
and, where applicable, licensed in their field. Such teams shall typically
A.
§ 231-34 WESTMINSTER CODE § 231-38
228:296
consist of registered professional engineers, traffic engineers,
architects, landscape architects, land use planners, hydrogeologists,
hydrologists, and other environmental professionals.
It is intended that the report be a guide to the Planning Board in its
deliberations and will build into the Board's decision-making process
an appropriate and careful consideration of the environmental and
community impacts of the proposed development.
B.
For each of the components of the environmental and community
impact analysis listed under this section, each of the following concerns
must be separately addressed.
The environmental and community impacts of the proposed
development. All primary and secondary environmental and
community impacts, both beneficial and adverse, as a result of
the proposed development. This section shall include all impacts
resulting from the construction phase as well those resulting from
project completion.
(1)
Adverse impacts which cannot be avoided should the proposed
development be implemented. The report shall describe the kinds
and magnitudes of adverse impacts which cannot be reduced in
severity or which can be reduced in severity but not eliminated.
(2)
Alternatives to the proposed development. The report shall
develop, describe and objectively weigh alternatives to the
proposed development which are allowed pursuant to the
Westminster Zoning Bylaw.59
(3)
Measures to be used to minimize adverse environmental and
community impacts. Corrective and protective measures which will
be taken, as part of the project, to minimize adverse impacts shall
be described in detail.
(4)
C.
The Planning Board as part of a review for a preliminary subdivision
plan, submitted in accordance with the requirements of § 231-11, shall
specify which of the following topics shall be evaluated and the level
of detail required for each topic in the environmental and community
impact analysis and submitted with the definitive plan. If no preliminary
plan is submitted, the environmental and community impact analysis
shall evaluate all of the following topics.
Traffic analysis. A complete analysis of the traffic flow of the
proposed development and impacts of traffic on levels of service on
affected intersections.
(1)
Community impact analysis. Describe the effect of the project on
community services including public safety (police and fire
(2)
D.
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Zoning.
§ 231-38 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 231-38
228:297
protection), public water and sewer, drainage and stormwater
management, roadways, waste disposal, and educational services.
Natural environment.
Air and noise pollution. The impact of local air quality and
noise from the proposed development, including traffic
generated from the development both during construction and
after completion, shall be evaluated. The Planning Board may
require detailed technical reports of such impacts.
(a)
Water pollution. The impact of stormwater runoff on adjacent
and downstream surface watercourses and subsurface
groundwater shall be evaluated. Dangers of flooding as a result
of increased downstream runoff, especially peak runoff and
the impact of the proposed project on existing water table
elevations, shall be analyzed. The location and type of wells
located on abutting property within 100 feet of the property
line of the proposed project shall be identified. The analysis
shall include a report prepared and endorsed by a qualified
Massachusetts hydrological engineer setting forth the location
and elevation of the high groundwater table on the entire
portion of the land to be excavated and the location of
monitoring wells which have been used to establish high
groundwater table. The highest elevation of the groundwater
shall be determined by observation wells monitored during the
months of April and May. The report shall include a soil log
profile.
(b)
Land. Compatibility of the proposed development with existing
soils; the impact of any soils or other materials to be removed
from the site; and the potential danger and impacts of erosion
and sedimentation caused by the proposed development. The
analysis shall include an erosion and sediment control plan.
The Planning Board may require detailed soil borings.
(c)
Water supply. The average and peak daily demand and the
impact of such demands on groundwater aquifers, supplies and
adjacent watercourses.
(d)
Sewage disposal. The average and peak daily disposal and the
impact of such disposal on groundwater aquifers, supplies and
adjacent watercourses.
(e)
(3)
Man-made environment.
Existing neighborhood land use. Compatibility with adjacent
or nearby land uses or approved private development plans,
if known, or land use changes to occur during the life of the
proposed development. If not compatible, reason therefor shall
be detailed. Consultation with the Planning Board is strongly
recommended.
(a)
(4)
§ 231-38 WESTMINSTER CODE § 231-38
228:298
Zoning. Compatibility of proposed development with the
purpose of the Zoning Bylaw60 and the zoning district.
(b)
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Zoning.
§ 231-38 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 231-38
228:299

ARTICLE VI
Administration
§ 231-39. Variation.
§ 231-40. Project review fees.
To assist the Board in its review of the plan and at its discretion to serve
as its agent during the course of construction, the Board may hire, at the
developer's expense, an engineer or other professional to act as consultant
to the Board.
§ 231-41. Inspection.
Strict compliance with the requirements of these rules and regulations
may be waived when, in the judgment of the Planning Board such
action is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the Subdivision
Control Law.
A.
For matters not covered by these rules and regulations, reference is
made to §§ 81-K to 81-GG, inclusive, of Chapter 41 of the General Laws
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
B.
An engineer, reporting to and designated by the Planning Board, but
paid by the applicant, shall be required. The engineer shall not
authorize any changes from these regulations or from the approved
definitive plan for the subdivision without specific approval of the
Planning Board.
A.
As each construction phase listed below is completed, the applicant
shall notify the Planning Board and the Planning Board's engineer,
and no succeeding operation shall commence until the work has been
inspected by the Board or its authorized agent.
B.
The applicant shall furnish all data relative to baselines and grade
stakes on the ground, stake sheets, ties and other information which is
needed, in the opinion of the Board, to accomplish such checking as is
required for the requested approval and certification. Charges for such
inspections shall be paid for by the applicant as outlined above.
C.
Inspections shall be required at the following stages of construction:
After clearing, grubbing, stump removal, excavation to subgrade
and excavation of ditches for utilities.
(1)
After drainage system (pipe, manholes, catch basins and other
drainage structures) is installed, but before it is covered. Inspector
shall sight drainage pipe runs to adjacent basins. Any defective
runs shall he corrected before approval is given.
(2)
After surface gravel is in and compacted, the inspector shall also
reinspect pipe runs from catch basins as above.
(3)
D.
§ 231-39 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 231-41
228:301
§ 231-42. Engineering costs.
§ 231-43. Acceptance of roads.
(4) After bituminous concrete is installed.
Before acceptance by the Town of Westminster at an Annual Town
Meeting or at a Special Town Meeting.
(5)
(6) At other specific times deemed necessary by the Board or engineer.
The applicant shall give 72 hours' notice to the Planning Board
whenever an inspection is indicated.
E.
The applicant is responsible for requesting inspections at the proper
stage in the process of installation of improvements. No work will be
accepted that has been covered before inspection.
F.
Engineering costs incurred by the Planning Board during the
consideration of the preliminary plan and or the definitive plan, and
during the preparation and recording of an approved definitive plan will
be billed to the applicant, at cost, by the Town of Westminster.
A.
Engineering costs will be billed by the Town to the applicant to cover
the actual costs to the Town for the engineering services performed in
connection with the subdivision being considered. Normal services will
include the following:
Checking definitive plans for accuracy of data and for sound
engineering practice.
(1)
Checking record plans for accuracy of data and for sound
engineering practice.
(2)
(3) Inspections, as required.
B.
Other services beyond those outlined above and performed on behalf
of the applicant by the engineers of the Planning Board will be billed
to the applicant by the Town at cost. These extra services will not be
performed unless specifically agreed upon by the Planning Board and
the applicant.
C.
When a road or way in a subdivision has been constructed in a manner
fulfilling the requirements of the Planning Board and these regulations,
and the binder course has been exposed to a full year of weathering,
before the application of the final course, and the final course has also
been exposed to a full year of weathering, the applicant may request
the Board to inspect the road in order to make a recommendation to
the Board of Selectmen and Town Meeting on the question of accepting
said way or road. Subdivision road acceptances are the financial and
legal responsibility of the applicant. All road acceptance requests shall
follow the Town of Westminster's Road Acceptance Policy and
A.
§ 231-41 WESTMINSTER CODE § 231-43
228:302
§ 231-44. Lot release; building permits.
The roadway area within the frontage of a lot shall have all utilities,
including fire protection, and the bituminous concrete base installed and
approved by the appropriate agency before said lot can be released or built
upon.
§ 231-45. Appeals.
Appeals may be taken from the determination of the Board to Superior
Court in accordance with MGL c. 41, § 81BB.
Procedures. The following information will be required before the
Board makes a recommendation on road acceptance:
A Mylar plus two copies of the plan of the road as-built, at a
scale of one inch equals 40 feet. The center-line profile shall be
shown at 4 feet per inch on the vertical scale and 40 feet per
inch on the horizontal scale taken at fifty-foot intervals along the
road or way as it has been completed. The plan shall show the
monuments with the dates they were set and the traverse and
fixed points on the subdivision perimeter used to establish the
bound locations, all with bearings, distances, or coordinate values
sufficient to reestablish these points.
(1)
All utilities, including water lines, gas lines, cable lines, drainage
systems, electric poles and lines, and telephone poles and lines,
shall be shown on the plan as they exist.
(2)
Two typewritten copies and one electronic copy of the proposed
article for the Town Meeting covering the road or way which is to
be considered for acceptance by the Town.
(3)
If applicable, a certificate of compliance from the Conservation
Commission under MGL, c. 131, § 40, and the Westminster
Wetlands Bylaw.61
(4)
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 202, Wetlands.
§ 231-43 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 231-45
228:303
Chapter 238
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 238, Fees, adopted 4-7-1998, was repealed 5-21-2015.]
Chapter 240
HYDRONIC HEATERS, OUTDOOR
§ 240-1. Authority.
This regulation is adopted under MGL c. 111, §§ 31, 31C, 142B, 142D, and
310 CMR 7.52, which gives the Westminster Board of Health authority
to make reasonable health regulations. This regulation is also adopted
under MGL c. 111, § 122, which directs the Board of Health to examine all
nuisances, sources of filth, and causes of sickness within its Town which
may, in its opinion, be injurious to the public health and to destroy, remove,
or prevent the same.
§ 240-2. Purpose.
Outdoor hydronic heaters have been shown, because of their design, to emit
high quantities of particulate matter and noxious fumes. Health, safety, and
nuisance problems have arisen from the use of outdoor hydronic heaters.
Poor operational practices and inappropriate fuel exacerbate the
detrimental health effects of these devices. The purpose of these regulations
is to minimize the human health hazards resulting from the smoke and
noxious fumes emitted by outdoor hydronic heaters, and to encourage
proper technique in using and setting these boilers.
§ 240-3. Applicability.
§ 240-4. Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
This regulation applies to any person who owns or operates an outdoor
hydronic heater for use in the Town of Westminster, except outdoor
hydronic heaters rated with a heat input of one MMBtu/hr or greater
which are subject to the comprehensive plan application provisions at
310 CMR 7.02(5)(a) 4.
A.
Operators of existing units installed prior to the moratorium (February
28, 2008) on the installation of outdoor hydronic heaters wishing to
continue using an outdoor hydronic heater must apply for a permit
from the Board of Health within six months of the effective date of this
regulation.
B.
§ 231-45 WESTMINSTER CODE § 240-4
228:304
CLEAN WOOD — Wood that has no paint, stains, or other types of coatings,
and wood that has not been treated with, including, but not limited to,
copper chromium arsenate, creosote, or pentachlorophenol.
COMMERCIAL-SIZE OUTDOOR HYDRONIC HEATER — A heater with a
rated thermal output greater than 350,000 Btu/hr.
EXISTING UNIT or EXISTING OUTDOOR HYDRONIC HEATER — An
outdoor hydronic heater that is sold, installed and/or operated at the
intended location of use prior to February 28, 2008.
HEATING SEASON — The period beginning September 30 and ending May
15, inclusively.
OPACITY — The degree to which emissions other than water reduce the
transmission of light and obscure the view of an object in the background
as measured by EPA Method 9.
OPERATOR — Any person who owns or operates an outdoor hydronic heater
in the commonwealth.
OUTDOOR HYDRONIC HEATER or HEATER — A fuel-burning device:
RESIDENTIAL-SIZE OUTDOOR HYDRONIC HEATER — A heater with a
rated thermal output of 350,000 Btu/hr or less.
§ 240-5. Requirements for operators.
A. Designed to burn wood or other approved solid fuels;
That the manufacturer specifies for outdoor installation or installation
in structures not normally occupied by humans (e.g., garages); and
B.
That heats building space and/or water via the distribution, typically
through pipes, of a fluid heated in the device, typically water or a water/
antifreeze mixture.
C.
On and after the effective date of this regulation, no person shall:
Purchase, install or allow the installation of any outdoor hydronic
heater unless it has been certified in accordance with this
regulation to meet the applicable emission standard set forth in
this regulation.
(1)
Site or install an outdoor hydronic heater that meets the applicable
emission standards of this regulation unless it is installed
according to the following:
Residential-size outdoor hydronic heater.
[1] At least 50 feet from any property line.
At least 150 feet from any occupied dwelling or building
that it is not serving.
[2]
(a)
(2)
A.
§ 240-4 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 240-5
228:305
Has a clear radius of 20 feet, which must be maintained
between the outdoor hydronic heater and any trees or
vegetation of a height greater than the height of the top of
the fuel door.
[3]
Commercial-size outdoor hydronic heater.
[1] At least 275 feet from any property line.
At least 300 feet from any occupied dwelling or building
that it is not serving.
[2]
Has a clear radius of 20 feet, which must be maintained
between the outdoor hydronic heater and any trees or
vegetation of a height greater than the height of the top of
the fuel door.
[3]
(b)
Existing units. All operators of existing outdoor hydronic heaters shall
comply with the requirements at Subsection C through I, inclusively.
B.
Seasonal limitations. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the
operation of an outdoor hydronic heater from May 16 to September 29.
C.
Prohibited fuels. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the
burning of any of the following items in an outdoor hydronic heater:
(1) Any wood that does not meet the definition of clean wood;
(2) Garbage;
(3) Tires;
(4) Lawn clippings, leaves, brush trimmings, or general yard waste;
(5) Materials containing plastic;
(6) Materials containing rubber;
(7) Waste petroleum products;
(8) Paints and paint thinners;
(9) Chemicals;
(10)Coal;
(11)Glossy or colored papers;
(12)Construction and demolition debris;
(13)Plywood;
(14)Particleboard;
(15)Salt water driftwood;
D.
§ 240-5 WESTMINSTER CODE § 240-5
228:306
(16)Manure;
(17)Animal carcasses; and
(18)Asphalt products.
Allowable fuels. No person who operates an outdoor hydronic heater
shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the use of a fuel other than the
following:
(1) Clean wood;
(2) Wood pellets made from clean wood;
Home heating oil in compliance with the applicable sulfur content
limit or natural gas may be used as starter fuels for dual-fired
outdoor hydronic heaters; and
(3)
Other biomass fuels as approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection.
(4)
E.
Visible emission standard for commercial units.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the emission of air
contaminants from any commercial-size outdoor hydronic heater to
exceed an average of twenty-percent opacity for two minutes in any
one-hour period.
(1)
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the emission of air
contaminants from any commercial-size outdoor hydronic heater to
exceed at any time forty-percent opacity for the first six minutes
during the startup period, of a new fire. For the remainder of
the startup period no person shall cause or allow the emission
of air contaminants from any outdoor hydronic heater to exceed
a twenty-percent opacity standard in any consecutive two-minute
average period. This only applies to the initial firing of the unit
where no coal bed exists and does not apply to refueling.
(2)
F.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of any
outdoor hydronic heater except in conformance with the
manufacturer's operating and maintenance instructions.
G.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of an
outdoor hydronic heater in such a manner as to create a condition of air
pollution as defined in 310 CMR 7.00.
H.
Enforcement. An operator of an outdoor hydronic heater shall comply
with all applicable regulations, and state and local laws, including
but not limited to local ordinances. Operators are subject to the
enforcement provisions specified herein.
I.
J. Variances.
§ 240-5 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 240-5
228:307
§ 240-6. Particulate matter emission standards.
§ 240-7. Labeling.
On and after the effective date of this regulation, no person shall install or
allow for installation an outdoor hydronic heater in the Town of Westminster
without a US EPA permanent label indicating it has met the 0.32lb/MMBtu
requirement, or supply other documentation from an EPA-approved lab
showing that it meets the requirement as defined by EPA Test Method 28
OWHH.
§ 240-8. Permits.
The Board of Health may grant a variance for an outdoor hydronic
heater that meets the standard set forth in Subsection A(1) from
the requirements of Subsection C, if, in its opinion, the Board
of Health finds that granting such a variance would have no
significant deleterious effect on public health.
(1)
The variance request shall be made in writing and shall be subject
to a public hearing before the Board of Health. The requesting
party shall, at his/her sole expense, notify all property owners
within 400 feet of his/her property boundary by certified mail at
least 10 days prior to the public hearing.
(2)
Residential-size outdoor hydronic heater emission standard. On and
after the effective date of this regulation, no person shall install or allow
for installation a residential-size outdoor hydronic heater for use in the
Town of Westminster unless it has been certified to meet a particulate
matter emission limit of 0.32 pound per million British thermal units
(lb/MMBtu) heat output, as defined by EPA Test Method 28 OWHH.
A.
Commercial-size outdoor hydronic heater emission standard. On and
after the effective date of this regulation, no person shall install or allow
for installation a commercial-size outdoor hydronic heater for use in the
Town of Westminster unless it has been certified to meet a particulate
matter emission limit of 0.32 pound per million British thermal units
(lb/MMBtu) heat output, as defined by EPA Test Method 28 OWHH.
B.
The application for a permit for an outdoor hydronic heater shall be
made on a form provided by the Westminster Board of Health and will
include a suitable plan of the outdoor hydronic heater.
A.
B. A permit fee is due upon application submission.
For existing outdoor hydronic heaters, an informal plan depicting the
location of the outdoor hydronic heater in relation to property lines and
the building it serves and all buildings within 500 feet is required. All
buildings must be labeled as to their use (example: storage, occupied,
unoccupied, etc.).
C.
§ 240-5 WESTMINSTER CODE § 240-8
228:308
§ 240-9. Enforcement and remedies.
For new installations of an outdoor hydronic heater, in which the
setbacks are two times greater than required, an informal plan
depicting the location of the outdoor hydronic heater in relation to
property lines and the building it serves and all buildings within 500
feet and their heights is required. All buildings must be labeled as to
their use (example: storage, occupied, unoccupied, etc.).
D.
For new installations of an outdoor hydronic heater, in which the
setbacks are less than two times greater than required, three sets of
plans for the location and installation of the outdoor hydronic heater
shall bear the stamp of a Massachusetts professional engineer or
Massachusetts registered professional land surveyor and shall be
drawn at a suitable scale (one inch equals 40 feet or fewer for plot plans
and one inch equals 20 feet or fewer for details of furnace components)
are required and shall include a depiction of (Note: These plans must
include the outdoor hydronic heater and may be limited to the area
within a five-hundred-foot radius.):
(1) The legal boundaries of the lot to be served.
The location of all dwellings and buildings existing and proposed
on the lot to be served by the outdoor hydronic heater and
identification of those to be served.
(2)
The location of all utilities on the lot to be served, including, but
not limited to, water lines, sewer lines, and gas lines.
(3)
The location of all known easements and rights-of-way on the lot to
be served.
(4)
The location of all components of the outdoor hydronic heater,
including underground electric lines, fluid lines or ductwork.
(5)
(6) The proposed wood/fuel storage location.
(7) The proposed outdoor hydronic heater stack height.
The location of all roads, pass ways and rights-of-way within 100
feet of the proposed outdoor hydronic heater.
(8)
The location of all dwellings and buildings within 500 feet of the
proposed outdoor hydronic heater.
(9)
The roof heights of all buildings within 500 feet of the existing of
the proposed outdoor hydronic heater.
(10)
E.
It is the responsibility of the applicant to obtain any other permits as
required by but not necessarily limited to the Building Department,
Electrical Inspector, Plumbing Inspector and Fire Department.
F.
§ 240-8 COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS § 240-9
228:309
Chapter 241
(RESERVED)
Chapter 242
(RESERVED)
Chapter 243
PORTABLE BATHROOMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewage disposal — See Ch. 245. Water supplies — See Ch. 254.
§ 243-1. Authority to regulate use; stipulations.
The use of portable bathrooms in Westminster will be at the discretion of
the Board of Health. Authorization by the Board will be issued as a permit
with the following stipulations:
If an inspection or examination reveals an outdoor hydronic heater
is installed or operated in a manner that is not compliant with the
above regulations, the Board of Health is authorized to issue notices
of violation, cease-and-desist orders, and other administrative
enforcement orders to compel compliance with these regulations.
A.
If an inspection or examination determines that an outdoor hydronic
heater is operated in a manner that constitutes a threat to public
health, safety, welfare, a nuisance or cause of odor, filth or sickness, in
accordance with MGL Chapter 111, the Board of Health or its agent
shall issue an order to cease operation of the outdoor hydronic heater.
B.
The Board of Health may take enforcement action deemed appropriate
and lawful, including but not limited to criminal prosecution, and/or
civil action for injunctive relief and/or money damages.
C.
The permit must state the name, address and phone number of the
servicing/rental company as well as the date(s) of delivery and pickup
and be posted at the site where the units are placed.
A.
Use/rental of the units for more than three days will require that a
maintenance/cleaning/replacement schedule be provided to the Board
at the time of application.
B.
Lavatories with covered waste receptacles will be made available in
the immediate vicinity of the portable units along with soap and paper
C.
§ 240-9 WESTMINSTER CODE § 243-1
243:310
Chapter 245
SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plumbing — See Ch. 113.
Sewers — See Ch. 161.
Wells — See Ch. 200.
Private and semipublic wells — See Ch. 255.
In accordance with MGL c. 111, § 31, and MGL c. 21A, § 13, the Town of
Westminster Board of Health ("the Board") hereby adopts the following local
regulations for on-site subsurface disposal of sewage for the purpose of
protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and for the protection of
the environment.
The following regulations constitute an exercise of the power of home rule
as provided in Amendment Article 89 of the Massachusetts Constitution.
As such, they are in addition to the provisions of 310 CMR 15.000, the
State Environmental Code Title 5, Standard Requirements for the Siting,
Construction, Inspection, Upgrade, and Expansion of On-Site Sewage
Treatment and Disposal Systems and for the Transport and Disposal of
Septage ("Title 5"). All minimum offsets and other requirements of Title
5 shall apply unless otherwise hereby indicated in these regulations. All
previous local sewage disposal regulations indicated in Chapter 245 of the
Code of the Town of Westminster shall be superseded by these regulations.
Any existing requirement of Title 5 not specifically addressed in these
regulations shall be deemed to be incorporated herein by reference. Should
any such Title 5 regulation be amended, supplemented or modified after the
adoption of these regulations so as to render it less stringent than at the
time of the adoption of these regulations, such amendment, supplement or
modification shall not apply hereunder until and unless the Board votes to
adopt such amendment, supplement or modification.
towels. Alternatively, at the discretion of the Board, disposable wet
cloths can be substituted.
D. The units will be locked at the end of the day or when no one is on site.
Compliance inspections.
(1) A compliance inspection can be conducted as deemed necessary.
Compliance inspections will be performed by the Health Agent on
a monthly basis for portable bathrooms that are in place for an
extended period of time. [Added 11-24-1997]
(2)
E.
The permit fee(s) is $10 per unit, per month. The permit must be
renewed every three months if need be. [Amended 11-24-1997]
F.
§ 243-1 PORTABLE BATHROOMS § 245-1
243:311
§ 245-1. Definitions.
The following words as used in these regulations shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning is required by the context, or as
specifically provided:
AGENT — Any person authorized by the Board to act pursuant to MGL c.
111, § 30, 310 CMR 15.000 and these regulations.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board constituted in accordance with MGL c.
41, § 1 and/or § 1B .
CESSPOOL — A pit with open-jointed linings or holes in the bottom and/
or sidewalls into which raw sewage is discharged, the liquid portion of the
sewage being disposed of by seeping or leaching into the surrounding soils,
and the solids or sludge being retained in the pit.
EXPANSION OF USE — A change that would result in the increased
utilization of the current septic system. Examples include, but are not
limited to, increased flows, installation of a large whirlpool tub in a
bathroom, any change that may have an effect on how the system is
functioning.
LOT — A single parcel of land undivided by a street under one ownership
with ascertainable boundaries established by a deed of record.
SHARED OR COMMON SEPTIC SYSTEM — Any privately owned on-site
wastewater system that serves more than one lot or more than one principal
building or systems with a designed flow greater than 2,500 gallons per day.
SOIL ABSORPTION SYSTEM PERIMETER — The area defined by the outer
edge of the leaching bed/field or the outer edge of the leaching trenches
of a soil absorption system. This is the same area as is used in Title 5 to
calculate the minimum area for the design of a soil absorption system.
§ 245-2. Permits.
§ 245-3. Leaching area size.
In the Town of Westminster, all leaching areas shall be 125% of Title 5
design criteria.
§ 245-4. Increase of habitable space.
A passing official Title 5 inspection shall be required upon an increase
in habitable space requiring a building permit from the local building
inspector, where the estimated cost of such equals or exceeds 30% of the
assessed value of the structure at the time of the application. A Title 5
inspection may be waived by the agent where the landowner produces a
All permits granted by the Board must be in writing and signed by a
representative of the Board.
A.
B. No work shall be commenced prior to having a signed permit in hand.
§ 245-1 WESTMINSTER CODE § 245-4
243:312
valid certificate of compliance issued not more than 10 years prior thereto
or a valid Title 5 inspection report issued not more than five years prior
thereto. In either case, no such waiver shall be issued unless the landowner
also produces records acceptable to the agent showing that the system had
been pumped at least every three years since the issuance of the certificate
or the Title 5 inspection, as applicable.
§ 245-5. Location of system; retaining walls.
§ 245-6. Interpretation of inspection results.
A Title 5 inspection, including a passing Title 5 inspection report, shall not
be interpreted as establishing that the system is or will function properly,
and the Board reserves the right to undertake such enforcement action
as it deems appropriate with regard to an improperly functioning system
notwithstanding such a passing Title 5 report.
§ 245-7. Employment of outside consultants.
In accordance with MGL c. 44, § 53G, the Board may require an applicant
for a subsurface disposal system to deposit funds for the employment of
outside consultants. The applicant shall have the right to an administrative
appeal from the selection of the outside consultant to the Board of
Selectmen. The grounds for such an appeal shall be limited to claims that
the consultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not possess the
minimum, required qualifications. The minimum qualifications shall consist
either of an educational degree in or related to the field at issue or three or
more years of practice in the field at issue or a related field.
§ 245-8. Shared and/or common systems.
Shared and/or common subsurface disposal systems are hereby prohibited.
Any sewage disposal system must be located on the same lot as the dwelling
or facility it serves. The Board may issue a variance from this prohibition
of shared or common systems where an existing system has failed or is
No septic system shall be located in whole or in part on a lot other than
the lot upon which the facility to be served is located or to be located.
No septic system fill shall be placed or located on a lot other than the lot
upon which the facility to be served is located. These prohibitions shall
not apply to the repair or replacement of a system lawfully in place at
the time of the effective date of these regulations.
A.
The use of a retaining wall in the design of a septic system is hereby
prohibited. The Board may issue a variance from this prohibition where
the applicant can prove to the Board's satisfaction that the retaining
wall can be maintained and/or be rebuilt if necessary from the
applicant's lot without affecting or encroaching on abutting property.
The Board may, as a condition of such a variance, require security for
the repair or rebuilding of the retaining wall. A survey may be required
to delineate the property line.
B.
§ 245-4 PORTABLE BATHROOMS § 245-8
243:313
otherwise in need of repair or replacement, and due to soil or lot conditions
it is not feasible to replace the system with an individual system. The
landowner shall have the burden of establishing that an individual system is
not feasible. The Board may also grant a hardship variance for any shared
and/or common systems approved between September 21, 2005, and July
1, 2009, but not built. Any shared and/or common system approved by
variance or any system that becomes a shared and/or common system by
virtue of a conversion of the property to condominium ownership, shall be
subject to a financial security agreement providing for the ongoing repair,
upgrade and replacement of the system in a form and on terms acceptable
to the Board.
§ 245-9. Length of validity of soil tests.
Percolation tests and deep hole observation tests shall expire two years
after the date of completion. Written requests for extensions may be allowed
on a site-specific basis, provided that the location of the percolation test
and deep hole observation tests can be located from known and recoverable
reference points or benchmarks so that it may be located on the system
design plan within one foot, and that there have been no alterations of
the area, adjacent areas, or other changes that may have compromised the
validity of the tests.
§ 245-10. Percolation and soil testing.
Percolation and soil testing shall be allowed to be conducted year round.
On lots where it is difficult to determine the estimated seasonal high-water
table by soil mottling, the Board may require a groundwater-monitoring
well to be installed on the lot for confirmation of the estimated seasonal
high-water table. The type, design, time duration and other specifics of the
monitoring wells will be left to the discretion of the Agent and/or the Board.
No leaching area primary or reserve shall be sited within 25 feet from an
abandoned or unsuitable deep observation hole or unsuitable percolation
test. When the system design includes the reserve between the primary
trenches, there need to be two acceptable percolation tests within 10 feet of
the soil absorption system perimeter, with one being within the perimeter.
When the system design includes the reserve being separate from the
primary system, there needs to be one acceptable percolation test within
the soil absorption system perimeter and one within the designated area for
the reserve. When the percolation tests are not consistent, the agent will
require additional testing in order to assure proper sizing of the system.
§ 245-11. Design, construction and certification of compliance for
septic systems.
All piping, including the perforated leaching area pipe, shall be a
minimum Schedule 40.
A.
§ 245-8 WESTMINSTER CODE § 245-11
243:314
Except when indicated otherwise by Title 5, every septic tank shall be
equipped with an effluent outlet tee filter approved by the Department
of Environmental Protection.
B.
Access ports for gaining access to the D-box and tanks must be within
six inches of final grade.
C.
D. All distribution boxes installed shall be H-20 load rated.
All systems utilizing pump chambers shall have a system operation
manual posted in immediate proximity to the alarm panel so the
homeowner can access it.
E.
A septic plan shall contain a provision for pumping the tank if the
vertical distance between the bottom of the septic tank and the
elevation where the pumping truck is located is greater than 28 feet.
F.
All septic plans shall contain a change/revisions log. No changes from
the original submitted plan will be deemed approved unless each
change has been initialed by the approving authority.
G.
Inspections.
All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall have the following
minimum inspections as required by the Board.
Initial inspection prior to filling the leaching area with fill
(bottom of the bed/trench).
(a)
(b) Completed system prior to backfilling.
(c) Final grading inspection.
(1)
(2) The agent may require additional inspections at his/her discretion.
H.
The designer's as-built plan shall be prepared in accordance with Title
5's requirements, include final grading elevations, and submitted in
triplicate. The as-built shall also be submitted on compact disc in PDF
format.
I.
The installer's as-built plan shall be prepared on a form provided by the
Westminster Board of Health.
J.
Prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance by the Board of
Health, the applicant or the system installer shall provide the designer's
as-built drawing in a form specified by the Board as a permanent
document (laminated) at a location in the dwelling near the building
sewer exit location or electrical service entry, which shows location
on the lot of the septic tank, distribution box, leaching area, and well
where applicable.
K.
No construction shall begin on a septic system until the Building
Department grants a building permit.
L.
§ 245-11 PORTABLE BATHROOMS § 245-11
243:315
§ 245-12. Systems constructed within watershed protection areas.
§ 245-13. Septic tank pumping program.
Every subsurface disposal system septic tank shall be pumped when the
sludge exceeds 1/4 of the tank's depth or once every three years, whichever
occurs sooner. For multifamily dwellings, including condominiums,
apartments, motels, hotels and boardinghouses, the septic tank shall be
pumped at least once every year. The owner of any such multifamily
dwelling shall provide to the Board written proof of such annual pumping,
by paid invoice or other suitable documentation from a septage handler who
has a valid Massachusetts permit, on or before February 1 of each year, for
the preceding calendar year.
§ 245-14. Setback requirements.
No new sewage disposal system shall be installed within 100 feet of any
watercourse, stream, brook, river, pond or wetlands. For any system, the
distances required by Title 5 and these regulations are minimum distances
which may be increased if, in the opinion of the agent, such an increase is
required to protect the environment or the public health. The Board may
grant a hardship variance for lots purchased or created between September
21, 2005, and July 1, 2009, in reliance on the prior regulation where the
system could have been located 50 feet from such watercourse, stream,
brook, river, pond or wetland, but cannot be located more than 100 feet
therefrom.
§ 245-15. Deviations from approved plan.
The applicant shall install the subsurface disposal system in strict
conformity with the approved plan. Minor deviations from the approved
plan may be permitted by the agent where the designer submits, in writing,
a statement setting forth the deviation and affirming that the deviation does
not affect the plan's compliance with these regulations. All such deviations
shall be shown on the as-built plans.
No certificate of compliance will be issued until such time as the
building is complete enough to ascertain the number of bedrooms and
bathrooms.
M.
The Westminster Board of Health reserves the right to modify the
regulations and treat each system in drinking water and/or watershed
protection areas in the Town separately to assure the health and
general welfare of individuals using this resource.
A.
Anyone planning on siting a system in these areas must contact the
Health Agent prior to expending any resources to find out if additional
requirements may be required.
B.
§ 245-11 WESTMINSTER CODE § 245-16
243:316
§ 245-16. Required recordings.
The following events will require the applicant to file with the Registry of
Deeds a recording acceptable to the Board prior to granting a construction
permit or a certificate of compliance as specified in Title 5. Reference in
Title 5:62
§ 245-17. Possession and availability of plan.
All installers of subsurface disposal systems shall have a copy of the
stamped approved plan in their possession on the site while installing the
system, which shall be available to the agent at the time of any inspection.
§ 245-18. Extensive rehabilitation of unoccupied dilapidated
structure.
Where an existing unoccupied, dilapidated structure is proposed for
redevelopment, rehabilitated, renovated, reconstructed, or remodeled, the
septic system must have been designed and installed in compliance with
the then-current Title 5 regulations, and the owner shall provide a current
"passed" Title 5 inspection.
§ 245-19. Revocation of permit or certificate of compliance.
The Board reserves the right to revoke any approval, permit or certificate
of compliance which is found to be based on incorrect, incomplete or
misleading information.
Smaller number of bedrooms than presumed by Title 5: 15.002,
Bedroom.
A.
Open space created in a cluster development: 15.002, Cluster
Development.
B.
C. A home with flow of less than 330 gallons per day: 15.203.
D. The number of bedrooms in a condominium: 15.203.
E. Installation of a tight tank: 15.260(6).
F. Installation of an alternative technology: 15.287(10).
G. Installation of a shared system: 15.290(2)(e).
For large systems, demonstration of an equal level of environmental
protection: 15.304(3)(b)6.
H.
A variance issued for which a deed restriction is required: Title 5
15.413(1).
I.
J. Facility aggregation plans: 15.216(5)(a)2.
62.Editor's Note: See 310 CMR 15.000 et seq.
§ 245-16 PORTABLE BATHROOMS § 245-20
243:317
§ 245-20. Title 5 system inspectors.
All Title 5 inspections must be witnessed by the agent unless a waiver is
granted. All items included in a Title 5 onspection report must be personally
witnessed by the inspector, including but not limited to the number of
bedrooms, laundry facilities, water filtration systems, and the presence of
a garbage grinder. The report shall specifically identify the source of the
information in the report. Example: "Plan located at Board of Health dated
5/16/2005," or "septic plan from homeowner dated 5/16/2007." The agent
must be notified at least 72 hours in advance of any proposed inspection.
§ 245-21. Title 5 inspections.
§ 245-22. Plan approval and construction permit expiration.
All plans approved and construction permits granted shall lapse three years
from the date of endorsement or issuance unless a certificate of compliance
is issued therefor. If a plan or permit lapses, the applicant shall file a new
application and meet the then-current regulations. The Board may issue
one extension, for a period of no more than one year, provided that the
application for such extension is filed prior to the lapse of the permit.
A. All seepage pits must be located and inspected.
B. All cesspools systems shall constitute an automatic failure.
The Board or its agent may request a soil evaluation by a state-certified
soil evaluator for any Title 5 inspection.
C.
Private wells must be tested as Part of the Title 5 inspection done for
transfer of property.
D.
Groundwater determination may be accomplished with the concurrence
of the agent in the following ways:
(1) Perc test/soil evaluation data done after October 1995.
(2) Soil evaluation from nearby lot.
Observe below the deepest component to show it is not sitting in
groundwater.
(3)
The location/elevation of the system in proximity to a body of water
or wetland.
(4)
Other evidence of water table levels, i.e., sump pump, shallow well,
lake level, etc.
(5)
(6) Other methods listed in Title 5 inspector training book.
E.
Repairs to sanitary tees and the installation of risers do not need a
disposal works construction permit from the Board. All other repairs
will need a permit and require a licensed installer.
F.
§ 245-20 WESTMINSTER CODE § 245-23
243:318
§ 245-23. Wiring.
§ 245-24. Violations and penalties.
A fine of $50 per day will be imposed on anyone who knowingly violates the
state's and/or the Town's Sanitary Code.
Chapter 248
SMOKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tobacco and nicotine delivery products — See
Ch. 250.
Systems requiring power and/or alarms need a wiring permit and must
meet all applicable requirements.
A.
Additional requirements:
(1) All pumps need to be hard-wired; no plugs.
(2) No plugs in pump chamber.
(3) All alarms need to be hard-wired and on their own circuit.
B.
§ 245-23 PORTABLE BATHROOMS § 245-24
243:319

ARTICLE I
Smoking in Restaurants and Other Public Places
[Adopted 11-18-1985]
§ 248-1. Findings.
Our nation's Surgeon General has affirmed that cigarette smoking is
the chief preventable cause of death in our society; smoking is the most
important health issue of our time.
A.
Each year an estimated 350,000 Americans will die prematurely from
the effects of smoking. Millions more live with crippled lungs and
overstrained hearts. Cigarette smoking is a major cause of emphysema,
lung cancer, chronic bronchitis and heart disease.
B.
Furthermore:
Tobacco smoke pollutes air in enclosed places and affects
nonsmokers who are present.
(1)
Inhaling secondhand smoke makes the heart beat faster, the blood
pressure go up and the level of carbon monoxide in the blood
increase.
(2)
There is more cadmium in the smoke that drifts off the burning end
of tobacco products than in the drag the smoker takes. Large doses
of cadmium have been related to hypertension, chronic bronchitis
and emphysema.
(3)
Smoke from an idling cigarette contains even more tar and nicotine
than an inhaled one.
(4)
The amount of carbon monoxide in the blood of nonsmokers
doubles in a poorly-ventilated room filled with tobacco smoke. Even
outside the room, the inhaled carbon monoxide stays in the body
for three or four hours.
(5)
The nonsmoker is forced to breathe in smoke from the burning end
of the cigarette as well as the smoke exhaled by the smoker.
(6)
Researchers have found that respiratory infections, especially
pneumonia and acute bronchitis, are twice as common in young
children whose parents smoke at home, compared to those with
nonsmoking parents.
(7)
The United States Surgeon General has said:
"Nonsmokers have as much right to clean air and wholesome air
as smokers have their so-called right to smoke, which I would
redefine as a so-called right to pollute. It is high time to ban
smoking from all confined public places, such as restaurants,
theaters, airplanes, trains and buses. It is time that we interpret
the Bill of Rights for the nonsmoker as well as the smoker."
(8)
C.
§ 248-1 PORTABLE BATHROOMS § 248-2
243:321
§ 248-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of these regulations, the following definitions shall apply:
NONSMOKING AREA — That area of a restaurant designated and posted
by the proprietor or other person in charge where smoking by patrons or
employees shall be prohibited.
PUBLIC MEETINGS — All meetings which are regulated by the
commonwealth's Open Meeting Law (found in MGL c. 39, § 23A, B and C).
PUBLIC PLACES — All enclosed public property within the Town of
Westminster.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment with a seating capacity of 25 or more
persons, duly licensed by the Town of Westminster for the serving and
consumption of food on the premises which maintains tables for the use of
its customers.
SMOKING — The lighting of, or the having in one's possession, any lighted
cigarette, cigar, pipe or other tobacco product.
SMOKING AREA — All other areas of a restaurant, unless smoking is
prohibited by sanitation or fire safety codes or regulations.
§ 248-3. Regulated conduct.
The following describes which behaviors are or are not acceptable in order
to define clear expectations in terms of the intention of the regulations.
§ 248-4. Enforcement in restaurants.
The proprietor or other person in charge of a restaurant shall make
reasonable efforts to prevent smoking in the nonsmoking area by:
Public meetings. No person shall smoke at any public meeting while
the meeting is in progress. Every effort shall be made to maintain a
smoke-free entrance and egress to all public meetings. There may be a
designated smoking area outside and away from the principal meeting
area.
A.
Public places. No person shall smoke in any public place, except in
specifically designated smoking areas. The principal entrance and
egress of all public places shall be smoke-free areas.
B.
Restaurants.
This regulation shall not apply to any restaurant with a seating
capacity of fewer than 25 persons.
(1)
No person shall smoke in any restaurant, except in specifically
designated smoking areas. This prohibition does not apply in cases
in which an entire room or hall is used for a private social function
and not by the proprietor or person in charge of the restaurant.
(2)
C.
§ 248-2 WESTMINSTER CODE § 248-4
243:322
§ 248-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 248-6. Variance criteria.
A. Posting appropriate signs.
Arranging seating so that existing physical barriers and ventilation
systems minimize the effects of smoking in a smoking area upon
persons in an adjacent nonsmoking area.
B.
Directing patrons seated in a a nonsmoking area to refrain from
smoking.
C.
D. Any other means which may be appropriate.
Any person who smokes in a nonsmoking area after notice from the
person(s) in charge that such conduct violates this regulation shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $10 for each offense.
A.
Any proprietor(s) or any other person(s) in charge of a public place or
designated restaurant who fail(s) to make reasonable efforts to prevent
smoking in nonsmoking areas shall be subject to a fine of $30 for each
offense.
B.
Violations of these regulations shall be considered reportable to the
Westminster Board of Health by its designated agent for appropriate
action.
C.
Nothing in this regulation shall make it lawful to smoke in any area in
which smoking is or may hereafter be prohibited by law.
D.
If a restaurant has a bar/lounge area, and if the establishment was in
existence on or before September 2, 1997, through June 30, 1998, a
variance may be granted at the discretion of the Board based on the
following criteria:
The bar/lounge occupies a separate, enclosed room and the
number of seats in the bar/lounge area does not exceed 25% of
the establishment's total seating capacity or the current seating
capacity of the bar area, whichever is less;
(1)
The bar/lounge is equipped with a separate ventilation system to
produce a negative air environment so the air in the smoking bar/
lounge does not filter into the nonsmoking restaurant area.
(2)
The restaurant entrance area, waiting areas and restrooms shall be
smoke-free; and
(3)
Persons under the age of 18 are not permitted (prohibited) from
entering the restaurant bar/lounge area.
(4)
A.
B. Variances are nontransferable.
§ 248-4 PORTABLE BATHROOMS § 248-6
243:323
If the above criteria are met, then the following must be submitted to
the Westminster Board of Health for review.
A variance application (which is available at the Westminster Board
of Health office).
(1)
At the Board's discretion, proof of the confined/negative air flow
must be demonstrated.
(2)
If smoke or smoking is detected in nonsmoking areas, the variance
for smoking can be revoked.
(3)
Written verification by an indoor air quality specialist that the air
in the smoking bar/lounge is equipped with a separate ventilation
system to produce a negative air environment so that the air in the
smoking bar/lounge does not filter into the nonsmoking restaurant
area. Documentation must include the following:
(a) Qualifications/experience of the air quality specialist.
A description of the ventilation systems detailing how and
where air enters the area.
(b)
(c) The internal air flow and how and where air exits the area.
Any factors influencing the efficiency/effective-ness of the
system, such as open doors, windows, equipment, etc. This
must be included with a standard operating procedure for
maximum effectiveness.
(d)
(4)
C.
§ 248-6 WESTMINSTER CODE § 248-6
243:324
ARTICLE II
Smoking in Workplaces; Additional Prohibitions
[Adopted 5-5-2010]
§ 248-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this regulation is to protect the health of the employees and
general public in the Town of Westminster.
§ 248-8. Legislative authority.
This regulation is promulgated under the authority granted to the
Westminster Board of Health pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31, that "Boards
of health may make reasonable health regulations." It is also promulgated
pursuant to MGL c. 270, § 22(j), which states in part that "Nothing in
this section shall permit smoking in an area in which smoking is or may
hereafter be prohibited by law including, without limitation: any other law
or . . . health . . . regulation. Nothing in this section shall preempt further
limitation of smoking by the commonwealth . . . or political subdivision of
the commonwealth."
§ 248-9. Definitions.
As used in this regulation, the following words shall have the following
meanings, unless the context requires otherwise:
MEMBERSHIP ASSOCIATION — A not-for-profit entity that has been
established and operates for a charitable, philanthropic, civic, social,
benevolent, educational, religious, athletic, recreation or similar
purpose, and is comprised of members who collectively belong to:
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY — All properties owned or managed by the
Town of Westminster, including but not limited to buildings, municipal
vehicles, parking lots, land parcels, parks, and beaches.
MUNICIPAL VEHICLES — Any vehicle or vessel owned, leased, or
rented by the Town of Westminster.
A society, organization or association of a fraternal nature that
operates under the lodge system, and having one or more affiliated
chapters or branches incorporated in any state; or
(1)
A corporation organized under Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 180; or
(2)
An established religious place of worship or instruction in the Town
of Westminster, whose real or personal property is exempt from
taxation; or
(3)
A veterans' organization incorporated or chartered by the Congress
of the United States, or otherwise, having one or more affiliated
chapters or branches incorporated in any state.
(4)
A.
§ 248-7 PORTABLE BATHROOMS § 248-9
243:325
§ 248-10. Smoking prohibited.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE — An establishment which is not required
to possess a retail food permit whose primary purpose is to sell or
offer for sale to consumers, but not for resale, tobacco products and
paraphernalia, in which the sale of other products is merely incidental,
and in which the entry of persons under the age of 18 is prohibited
at all times, and maintains a valid permit for the retail sale of tobacco
products as required to be issued by the Westminster Board of Health.
SMOKING BAR — An establishment that primarily is engaged in the
retail sale of tobacco products for consumption by customers on the
premises and is required by MGL c. 270, § 22 to maintain a valid permit
to operate a smoking bar issued by the Massachusetts Department
of Revenue. "Smoking bar" shall include, but not be limited to, those
establishments that are commonly known as "cigar bars" and "hookah
bars."
SMOKING or SMOKE — The lighting of a cigar, cigarette, pipe or other
tobacco product or possessing a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other
tobacco or nontobacco product designed to be combusted and inhaled.
WORKPLACE — An indoor area, structure or facility or a portion
thereof, at which one or more employees perform a service for
compensation for an employer, other enclosed spaces rented to or
otherwise used by the public; and where the employer has the right or
authority to exercise control over the space.
WORK SPACE or WORK SPACES — An enclosed area occupied by an
employee during the course of his employment.
Terms not defined herein shall be defined as set forth in MGL c.
270, § 22 and/or 105 CMR 661. To the extent any of the definitions
herein conflict with MGL c. 270, § 22 and 105 CMR 661, the definition
contained in this regulation shall control.
B.
It shall be the responsibility of the employer to provide a smoke-free
environment for all employees working in an enclosed workplace and
work space(s).
A.
To the extent prohibited by MGL c. 270, § 22 (commonly known as the
"Smoke-Free Workplace Law") and 105 CMR 661, smoking is hereby
prohibited in Westminster.
B.
In addition to the prohibitions contained in MGL c. 270, § 22, MGL c.
111, § 31 and MGL c. 270, § 22(j), smoking is also hereby prohibited in:
(1) Smoking bars;
(2) Retail tobacco stores;
(3) Nursing and rest homes;
(4) Municipal property and municipal vehicles; and
C.
§ 248-9 WESTMINSTER CODE § 248-10
243:326
§ 248-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 248-12. Severability.
If any paragraph or provision of this regulation is found to be illegal or
against public policy or unconstitutional, it shall not effect the legality of
any remaining paragraphs or provisions.
(5) Membership associations (also known as private "clubs").
An owner, manager, or other person in control of a building, vehicle or
vessel who violates this article, in a manner other than by smoking in a
place where smoking is prohibited, shall be punished by a fine of:
(1) For the first violation: $100.
For a second violation occurring within two years of the date of the
first offense: $200; and
(2)
For a third or subsequent violation occurring within two years of
the second violation: $300.
(3)
A.
Each calendar day on which a violation occurs shall be considered a
separate offense.
B.
C. This article shall be enforced by the Board of Health and its designees.
Violations of § 248-10B shall, in accordance with MGL c. 270, § 22, be
disposed by a civil penalty using the noncriminal method of disposition
procedures contained in MGL c. 40, § 21D.
D.
Violations of § 248-10C may be disposed of by a civil penalty using the
noncriminal method of disposition procedures contained in MGL c. 40,
§ 21D.
E.
In addition to civil penalties, the Board may seek equitable relief to
enjoin any violations of these regulations.
F.
If an owner, manager or other person in control of a building, vehicle
or vessel violates this regulation repeatedly, demonstrating egregious
noncompliance as defined by regulation of the Department of Public
Health, the Board of Health may, pursuant to MGL c. 270, § 22(l) and
in accordance with any other applicable law or regulation, revoke or
suspend the license to operate and shall send notice of the revocation
or suspension to the Department of Public Health.
G.
Any person may register a complaint to initiate an investigation and
enforcement with the Board of Health, the local inspection department
or the equivalent.
H.
§ 248-10 PORTABLE BATHROOMS § 248-13
243:327
§ 248-13. Conflict with other provisions.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 248-10 of this regulation, nothing in this
regulation shall be deemed to amend or repeal applicable fire, health or
other regulations so as to permit smoking in areas where it is prohibited by
such fire, health or other regulations.
§ 248-14. Effective date.
This regulation was passed on May 5, 2010, and shall be effective as of May
5, 2010.
§ 248-13 WESTMINSTER CODE § 248-14
243:328
Chapter 250
TOBACCO AND NICOTINE-DELIVERY PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Smoking — See Ch. 248.
§ 248-14 PORTABLE BATHROOMS § 248-14
243:329

ARTICLE I
Sale of Tobacco Products
[Adopted 6-3-2009]
§ 250-1. Statement of purpose.
Whereas there exists conclusive evidence that tobacco smoke causes
cancer, respiratory and cardiac diseases, negative birth outcomes,
irritations to the eyes, nose and throat; and whereas more than 80% of all
smokers begin smoking before the age of 18 years [Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, "Youth Surveillance - United States 2000," 50
MMWR 1 (Nov. 2000)]; and whereas, nationally in 2000, 69% of middleschool-
age children who smoke at least once a month were not asked
to show proof of age when purchasing cigarettes (Id.); and whereas the
United States Department of Health and Human Services has concluded
that nicotine is as addictive as cocaine or heroin; and whereas, despite state
laws prohibiting the sale of tobacco products to minors, access by minors
to tobacco products is a major problem; now, therefore, it is the intention of
the Westminster Board of Health to curtail the access of tobacco products
by minors.
§ 250-2. Legislative authority.
This regulation is promulgated pursuant to the authority granted to the
Westminster Board of Health by MGL c. 111, § 31, that "Boards of health
may make reasonable health regulations."
§ 250-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this regulation, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
BUSINESS AGENT — An individual who has been designated by the owner
or operator of any establishment to be the manager or otherwise in charge
of said establishment.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual who performs services for an employer.
EMPLOYER — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, trust or
other organized group of individuals, including Westminster or any agency
thereof, which uses the services of one or more employees.
MINOR — Any individual who is under the age of 18.
PERMIT — A retail tobacco sales permit issued by the Board.
PERMIT HOLDER — Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of
tobacco products directly to consumers who applies for and receives a
tobacco sales permit or any person who is required to apply for a tobacco
sales permit pursuant to these regulations, or his or her business agent.
PERSON — An individual, employer, employee, retail store manager or
owner, or the owner or operator of any establishment engaged in the sale or
distribution of tobacco products directly to consumers.
§ 250-1 PORTABLE BATHROOMS § 250-3
243:331
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY — Any display from which customers may select
a tobacco product without assistance from an employee or store personnel,
excluding vending machines.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco,
bidis, clove cigarettes, snuff or tobacco in any of its forms.
VENDING MACHINE — Any automated or mechanical self-service device,
which upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses cigarettes or any other tobacco product.
§ 250-4. Sales to minors prohibited; posting of notice; verification
of age; face-to-face sales required.
§ 250-5. Permit required.
No person shall sell tobacco products or permit tobacco products to be
sold to a minor; or, not being the minor's parent or legal guardian, give
tobacco products to a minor.
A.
In conformance with and in addition to MGL c. 270, § 7, a copy of
MGL c. 270, § 6, shall be posted conspicuously by the owner or other
person in charge thereof in the shop or other place used to sell tobacco
products at retail. The notice shall be provided by the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health and made available from the Westminster
Board of Health. The notice shall be at least 48 square inches and
shall be posted conspicuously by the permit holder in the retail
establishment or other place in such a manner so that it may be readily
seen by a person standing at or approaching the cash register. The
notice shall directly face the purchaser and shall not be obstructed from
view or placed at a height of less than four feet or greater than nine
feet from the floor.
B.
Identification. Each person selling or distributing tobacco products
shall verify the age of the purchaser by means of government-issued
photographic identification containing the bearer's date of birth that
the purchaser is 18 years old or older. Verification is required for any
person under the age of 27.
C.
All retail sales of tobacco must be face-to-face between the seller and
the buyer.
D.
No person shall sell or otherwise distribute tobacco at retail within
Westminster without first obtaining a tobacco sales permit issued
annually by the Westminster Board of Health. Only owners of
establishments with a permanent, nonmobile location in Westminster
are eligible to apply for a permit and sell tobacco products at the
specified location in Westminster.
A.
As part of the tobacco sales permit application process, the applicant
will be provided with the Westminster Board of Health regulation. Each
applicant is required to sign a statement declaring that the applicant
B.
§ 250-3 WESTMINSTER CODE § 250-5
243:332
§ 250-6. Free distribution.
No person shall distribute, or cause to be distributed, any free samples of
tobacco products.
§ 250-7. Package contents; out-of-package sales.
No person may sell or cause to be sold or distribute or cause to be
distributed, any cigarette package that contains fewer than 20 cigarettes,
including single cigarettes.
§ 250-8. Self-service displays.
All self-service displays of tobacco products are prohibited. All humidors,
including, but not limited to, walk-in humidors, must be locked.
has read said regulation and that the applicant is responsible for
instructing any and all employees who will be responsible for tobacco
sales regarding both state laws regarding the sale of tobacco and this
regulation.
Each applicant is required to provide proof of a current tobacco sales
license issued by the Massachusetts Department of Revenue before a
tobacco sales permit can be issued.
C.
The fee for a tobacco sales permit shall be determined by the
Westminster Board of Health annually. All such permits shall be
renewed annually by December 31.
D.
A separate permit is required for each retail establishment selling
tobacco.
E.
Each tobacco sales permit shall be displayed at the retail establishment
in a conspicuous place.
F.
No tobacco sales permit holder shall allow any employee to sell
cigarettes or other tobacco products until such employee reads this
regulation and state laws regarding the sale of tobacco and signs a
statement, a copy of which will be placed on file in the office of the
employer, that he/she has read the regulation and applicable state laws.
G.
A tobacco sales permit is nontransferable. A new owner of an
establishment that sells tobacco must apply for a new tobacco sales
permit. No new permit will be issued unless and until all outstanding
penalties incurred by the previous permit holder are satisfied in full.
H.
Issuance of a tobacco sales permit shall be conditioned on an
applicant's consent to unannounced, periodic inspections of his/her
retail establishment to ensure compliance with this regulation.
I.
A tobacco sales permit will not be renewed if the permit holder has
failed to pay all fines issued and the time period to appeal the fines has
expired.
J.
§ 250-5 PORTABLE BATHROOMS § 250-9
243:333
§ 250-9. Tobacco vending machines.
All tobacco vending machines are prohibited.
§ 250-10. Violations and penalties.
It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder and/or his or her
business agent to ensure compliance with all sections of this regulation
pertaining to his or her distribution of tobacco.
The violator shall receive:
In the case of a first violation, a fine of $100 and the tobacco
sales permit shall be suspended for three consecutive business
days.
(a)
In the case of a second violation within 18 months of the date
of the current violation, a fine of $200 and the tobacco sales
permit shall be suspended for 14 consecutive business days.
(b)
In the case of three violations within 18 months of the date
of the current violation, a fine of $300 and the tobacco sales
permit shall be suspended for 30 consecutive business days.
(c)
In the case of a fourth violation within 18 months of the date
of the current violation, a fine of $300 and the tobacco sales
permit shall be permanently revoked.
(d)
(1)
All tobacco products shall be removed from public view for threeday
tobacco sales permit suspensions. All tobacco products shall be
removed from the premises for fourteen-day-or-more tobacco sales
permit suspensions. Failure to remove all tobacco products shall
constitute a separate violation of this regulation.
(2)
A.
Refusal to cooperate with inspections pursuant to this regulation shall
result in the suspension of the tobacco sales permit for 30 consecutive
business days.
B.
In addition to the monetary fines set above, any permit holder who
engages in the sale or distribution of tobacco products directly to a
consumer while his or her permit is suspended shall be subject to the
suspension of all Board of Health issued permits for 30 consecutive
business days.
C.
The Westminster Board of Health shall provide notice of the intent to
suspend a tobacco sales permit, which notice shall contain the reasons
therefor and establish a time and date for a hearing which date shall
be no earlier than seven days after the date of said notice. The permit
holder or its business agent shall have an opportunity to be heard at
such hearing and shall be notified of the Board of Health's decision and
the reasons therefor in writing. After a hearing, the Westminster Board
of Health shall suspend the tobacco sales permit if the Board finds that
a sale to a minor occurred. For purposes of such suspensions, the Board
D.
§ 250-9 WESTMINSTER CODE § 250-10
243:334
§ 250-11. Noncriminal disposition.
§ 250-12. Enforcement.
§ 250-13. Severability.
If any provision of these regulations is declared invalid or unenforceable,
the other provisions shall not be affected thereby but shall continue in full
force and effect.
§ 250-14. Effective date.
These regulations were revised and passed on June 3, 2009, and will go into
effect on July 1, 2009.
shall make the determination notwithstanding any separate criminal
or noncriminal proceedings brought in court hereunder or under the
Massachusetts General Laws for the same offense. All tobacco products
shall be removed from the retail establishment upon suspension of
the tobacco sales permit. Failure to remove all tobacco products shall
constitute a separate violation of this regulation.
Whoever violates any provision of this regulation may be penalized by
the noncriminal method of disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D
or by filing a criminal complaint at the appropriate venue.
A.
B. Each day any violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
Enforcement of this regulation shall be by the Board of Health of
Westminster or its designated agent(s).
A.
Any citizen who desires to register a complaint pursuant to the
regulation may do so by contacting the Board of Health of Westminster
or its designated agent(s) and the Board shall investigate.
B.
§ 250-10 PORTABLE BATHROOMS § 250-14
243:335

ARTICLE II
Sale and Use of Nontobacco Nicotine-Delivery Products
[Adopted 5-5-2010]
§ 250-15. Statement of purpose.
Whereas there exists conclusive evidence that the United States
Department of Health and Human Services has concluded that nicotine is
as addictive as cocaine or heroin; the appeal created by nicotine-delivery
products or e-cigarettes, which contain addictive nicotine, can lead minors
into a nicotine addiction that may result in their daily use of tobacco; the
United States Food and Drug Administration has conducted laboratory tests
finding e-cigarettes contain toxic chemicals and carcinogens; e-cigarettes
seriously compromise current laws governing indoor smoking bans,
including, but not limited to, the Smoke-Free Workplace Law (MGL c.
270, § 22) and the Education Reform Act (MGL c. 71, §§ 2A, 37H); and
Westminster aims to protect its youth against the use of nicotine-delivery
products and its residents against the involuntary exposure of vapors from
nicotine-delivery products such as e-cigarettes; now, therefor it is the
intention of the Westminster Board of Health to curtail the access and use
of nicotine-delivery products.
§ 250-16. Legislative authority.
This regulation is promulgated pursuant to the authority granted to the
Westminster Board of Health by MGL c. 111, § 31, that "Boards of health
may make reasonable health regulations."
§ 250-17. Definitions.
For the purpose of this regulation, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
BUSINESS AGENT — An individual who has been designated by the owner
or operator of any establishment to be the manager or otherwise in charge
of said establishment.
E-CIGARETTE — Any electronic nicotine-delivery product composed of a
mouthpiece, heating element, battery and/or electronic circuits that
provides a vapor of liquid nicotine to the user, or relies on vaporization of
any liquid or solid nicotine. This term shall include such devices whether
they are manufactured as e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes or under any other
product name.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual who performs services for an employer.
EMPLOYER — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, trust or
other organized group of individuals, including Westminster or any agency
thereof, which uses the services of one or more employees.
§ 250-15 PORTABLE BATHROOMS § 250-17
243:337
LIQUID NICOTINE (also known as "NICOTINE SOLUTION") — Any product
composed either in whole, or in part, of nicotine and manufactured for use
with nicotine-delivery products, including, but not limited to, e-cigarettes.
MINOR — Any individual who is under the age of 18.
NICOTINE-DELIVERY PRODUCT — Any article or product made wholly
or in part of a tobacco substitute or otherwise containing nicotine that is
expected or intended for human consumption, but not including a tobacco
substitute prescribed by a licensed physician or a product that has been
approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as
a tobacco use cessation or harm reduction product or for other medical
purposes and which is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose.
PERSON — An individual, employer, employee, retail store manager or
owner, or the owner or operator of any establishment engaged in the sale or
distribution of nicotine-delivery products directly to consumers.
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY — Any display from which customers may select
a nicotine-delivery product without assistance from an employee or store
personnel, excluding vending machines.
VENDING MACHINE — Any automated or mechanical self-service device,
which upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses nicotine-delivery products.
§ 250-18. Permit required.
A nicotine-delivery product permit is required for any retailer who sells
nicotine-delivery products in Westminster.
No person shall sell or otherwise distribute nicotine-delivery products
at retail within Westminster without first obtaining a nicotine-delivery
product sales permit issued annually by the Westminster Board of
Health. Only owners of establishments with a permanent, nonmobile
location in Westminster are eligible to apply for a permit and sell
nicotine-delivery products at the specified location in Westminster.
A.
As part of the nicotine-delivery product sales permit application
process, the applicant will be provided with the Westminster Board
of Health regulation. Each applicant is required to sign a statement
declaring that the applicant has read said regulation and that the
applicant is responsible for instructing any and all employees who
will be responsible for nicotine-delivery product sales regarding any
applicable state laws regarding the sale of nicotine-delivery products
and this regulation.
B.
The fee for a nicotine-delivery product sales permit shall be determined
by the Westminster Board of Health annually. All such permits shall be
renewed annually by January 1.
C.
A separate permit is required for each retail establishment selling
nicotine-delivery products.
D.
§ 250-17 WESTMINSTER CODE § 250-18
243:338
§ 250-19. Sales to minors prohibited; verification of age; face-toface
sales required.
§ 250-20. Free distribution; sampling; self-service displays; vending
machines.
Each nicotine-delivery product sales permit shall be displayed at the
retail establishment in a conspicuous place.
E.
No nicotine-delivery product sales permit holder shall allow any
employee to sell nicotine-delivery products until such employee reads
this regulation and any state laws regarding the sale of nicotinedelivery
products and signs a statement, a copy of which will be placed
on file in the office of the employer, that he/she has read the regulation
and applicable state laws.
F.
A nicotine-delivery product sales permit is nontransferable. A new
owner of an establishment that sells nicotine-delivery products must
apply for a new nicotine-delivery product sales permit. No new permit
will be issued unless and until all outstanding penalties incurred by the
previous permit holder are satisfied in full.
G.
Issuance of a nicotine-delivery product sales permit shall be
conditioned on an applicant's consent to unannounced, periodic
inspections of his/her retail establishment to ensure compliance with
this regulation.
H.
A nicotine-delivery product sales permit will not be renewed if the
permit holder has failed to pay all fines issued and the time period to
appeal the fines has expired.
I.
No person shall sell nicotine-delivery products or permit nicotinedelivery
products to be sold to a minor or give nicotine-delivery
products to a minor.
A.
Identification. Each person selling or distributing nicotine-delivery
products shall verify the age of the purchaser by means of governmentissued
photographic identification containing the bearer's date of birth
that the purchaser is 18 years old or older. Verification is required for
any person under the age of 27.
B.
All retail sales of nicotine-delivery products must be face-to-face
between the seller and the buyer.
C.
No person shall distribute, or cause to be distributed, any free samples
of nicotine-delivery products.
A.
B. No person shall permit any sampling of a nicotine-delivery product.
C. All self-service displays of nicotine-delivery products are prohibited.
D. Vending machines selling nicotine-delivery products are prohibited.
§ 250-18 PORTABLE BATHROOMS § 250-21
243:339
§ 250-21. Use prohibited.
The use of e-cigarettes is hereby prohibited in Westminster in locations
and establishments covered by MGL c. 270, § 22 (commonly known as
the "Smoke-Free Workplace Law") and in additional locations and
establishments covered by any regulation or bylaw in Westminster.
§ 250-22. Signage.
The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place used to sell
nicotine-delivery products at retail shall conspicuously post a sign stating
that "The sale of nicotine-delivery products to minors under 18 years of age
is prohibited." The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place
used to sell e-cigarettes at retail shall conspicuously post a sign stating
that "The use of e-cigarettes at indoor establishments may be prohibited
by local law." The notices shall be no smaller than 8.5 inches by 11 inches
and shall be posted conspicuously in the retail establishment or other place
in such a manner so that they may be readily seen by a person standing
at or approaching the cash register. These notices shall directly face the
purchaser and shall not be obstructed from view or placed at a height of
less than four feet or greater than nine feet from the floor.
§ 250-23. Violations and penalties.
Violations of §§ 250-18, 250-19 and 250-20:
It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder and/or his or
her business agent to ensure compliance with all sections of this
regulation pertaining to his or her distribution of nicotine-delivery
products.
The violator shall receive:
In the case of a first violation, a fine of $100 and the
nicotine-delivery product sales permit shall be suspended
for three consecutive business days.
[1]
In the case of a second violation within 18 months of
the date of the current violation, a fine of $200 and the
nicotine-delivery product sales permit shall be suspended
for 14 consecutive business days.
[2]
In the case of three violations within 18 months of the date
of the current violation, a fine of $300 and the nicotinedelivery
product sales permit shall be suspended for 30
consecutive business days.
[3]
In the case of a fourth violation within 18 months of the
date of the current violation, a fine of $300 and the
nicotine-delivery product sales permit shall be
permanently revoked.
[4]
(a)
(1)
A.
§ 250-21 WESTMINSTER CODE § 250-23
243:340
All nicotine-delivery products shall be removed from public
view for three-day nicotine-delivery product sales permit
suspensions. All nicotine-delivery products shall be removed
from the premises for fourteen-day-or-more nicotine-delivery
product sales permit suspensions. Failure to remove all
nicotine-delivery products shall constitute a separate violation
of this regulation.
(b)
Refusal to cooperate with inspections pursuant to this regulation
shall result in the suspension of the nicotine-delivery product sales
permit for 30 consecutive business days.
(2)
In addition to the monetary fines set above, any permit holder who
engages in the sale or distribution of nicotine-delivery products
directly to a consumer while his or her permit is suspended shall
be subject to the suspension of all Board of Health issued permits
for 30 consecutive business days.
(3)
The Westminster Board of Health shall provide notice of the intent
to suspend a tobacco sales permit, which notice shall contain the
reasons therefor and establish a time and date for a hearing which
date shall be no earlier than seven days after the date of said
notice. The permit holder or its business agent shall have an
opportunity to be heard at such hearing and shall be notified of
the Board of Health's decision and the reasons therefor in writing.
After a hearing, the Westminster Board of Health shall suspend
the nicotine-delivery product sales permit if the Board finds that
a sale to a minor occurred. For purposes of such suspensions, the
Board shall make the determination notwithstanding any separate
criminal or noncriminal proceedings brought in court hereunder
or under the Massachusetts General Laws for the same offense.
All nicotine-delivery products shall be removed from the retail
establishment upon suspension of the nicotine-delivery product
sales permit. Failure to remove all nicotine-delivery products shall
constitute a separate violation of this regulation.
(4)
Violations of § 250-21.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner, manager, or other person
in control of a building, vehicle or vessel to ensure compliance with
§ 250-21 of this regulation pertaining to the use of e-cigarettes.
The violator shall receive:
[1] For the first violation: $100.
For a second violation occurring within two years of the
date of the first offense: $200.
[2]
For a third or subsequent violation occurring within two
years of the second violation: $300.
[3]
(a)
(1)
B.
§ 250-23 PORTABLE BATHROOMS § 250-23
243:341
§ 250-24. Noncriminal disposition.
§ 250-25. Enforcement.
If an owner, manager or other person in control of a building,
vehicle or vessel violates this regulation repeatedly,
demonstrating egregious noncompliance, the Board of Health
may revoke or suspend the license to operate and shall provide
notice of the intent to suspend such license, which notice shall
contain the reasons therefor and establish a time and date for
a hearing which date shall be no earlier than seven days after
the date of said notice. The owner, manager or its business
agent shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing
and shall be notified of the Board of Health's decision, and the
reasons therefor in writing. For purposes of such suspensions,
the Board shall make the determination notwithstanding any
separate criminal or noncriminal proceedings brought in court
hereunder or under the Massachusetts General Laws for the
same offense.
(b)
An individual or person who violates § 250-21 by using an ecigarette
in a place where smoking is prohibited shall be subject to
a penalty of $100.
(2)
Violations may be disposed of by a civil penalty using the
noncriminal method of disposition procedures contained in MGL c.
40, § 21D.
(3)
Each calendar day on which a violation occurs shall be considered
a separate offense.
(4)
This regulation shall be enforced by the Board of Health and its
designees.
(5)
Any person may register a complaint to initiate an investigation
and enforcement with the Board of Health, the local inspection
department or the equivalent.
(6)
Whoever violates any provision of this regulation may be penalized by
the noncriminal method of disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D,
or by filing a criminal complaint at the appropriate venue.
A.
B. Each day any violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
Enforcement of this regulation shall be by the Board of Health of
Westminster or its designated agent(s).
A.
Any citizen who desires to register a complaint pursuant to the
regulation may do so by contacting the Board of Health of Westminster
or its designated agent(s) and the Board shall investigate.
B.
§ 250-23 WESTMINSTER CODE § 250-26
243:342
§ 250-26. Severability.
If any provision of these regulations is declared invalid or unenforceable,
the other provisions shall not be affected thereby but shall continue in full
force and effect.
§ 250-27. Effective date.
This regulation was passed on May 5, 2010. This regulation shall take effect
on May 5, 2010.
§ 250-26 PORTABLE BATHROOMS § 250-27
243:343
Chapter 251
TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 161.
Sewage disposal — See Ch. 245.
Water Supplies — See Ch. 254.
§ 251-1. Findings.
The Westminster Board of Health finds that:
§ 251-2. Statutory authority.
The Westminster Board of Health adopts the following in accordance with
MGL C. 111, § 31, as amended to Title V of the Environmental Code.
§ 251-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISCHARGE —
The groundwater underlying this town is a currently significant source
of its existing and future water supply, including drinking water.
A.
The groundwater aquifer is integrally connected with, and flows into
the surface waters, lakes, streams and ponds, which constitute
significant recreational and economic resources of the town, used for
bathing and other water-related recreation.
B.
Accidental spills and discharges of petroleum products and other toxic
and hazardous materials have repeatedly threatened the quality of
such groundwater supplies and related water resources in other
Massachusetts towns, posing potential public health and safety hazards
and threatening economic losses to the affected communities.
C.
Unless preventive measures are adopted to prohibit discharge of toxic
and hazardous materials and to control their storage within the town,
further spills and discharges of such materials will predictably occur
and with greater frequency and degree of hazard by reason of
increasing construction, commercial and industrial development,
population and vehicular traffic in the Town of Westminster.
D.
The accidental or intentional spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring,
emitting, emptying or dumping of toxic or hazardous material upon
or into any land or waters of the Town of Westminster. "Discharge"
includes, without limitation, leakage of such materials from failed or
A.
§ 250-27 WESTMINSTER CODE § 251-3
251:344
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance or mixture of such
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics as to pose, in the Board
of Health's judgment, a significant actual or potential hazard to water
supplies or other hazard to human health if such substance or mixture were
discharged to land or waters of this town. "Toxic or hazardous materials"
include, without limitation, organic chemicals, petroleum products, heavy
metals, radioactive or infectious wastes, acids and alkalis, and includes
products such as pesticides, herbicides, solvents and thinners. Wastes
generated by the following activities, without limitation, are presumed to be
toxic or hazardous, unless and except to the extent that anyone engaging
in such an activity can demonstrate the contrary to the satisfaction of the
Board of Health:
discarded containers or storage systems and disposal of such materials
into any on-site sewage disposal system, dry well, catch basin or
unapproved landfill.
The term "discharge," as used and applied in this chapter, does not
include the following:
Proper disposal of any material in a sanitary or industrial landfill
that has received and maintained all necessary legal approvals for
that purpose.
(1)
Application of fertilizers and pesticides in accordance with label
recommendations and with regulations of the Massachusetts
Pesticide Control Board.
(2)
Application of road salts in conformance with the Snow and Ice
Control Program of the Massachusetts Department of Public
Works.
(3)
Disposal of sanitary sewage to subsurface sewage disposal systems
as defined and permitted by Title V of the Massachusetts
Environmental Code.
(4)
B.
A. Airplane, boat and motor vehicle service and repair.
B. Chemical and bacteriological laboratory operation.
C. Cabinetmaking.
D. Dry cleaning.
E. Electronic circuit assembly.
F. Metal plating, finishing and polishing.
G. Motor and machinery service and assembly.
H. Painting, wood preserving and furniture stripping.
I. Pesticide and herbicide application.
J. Photographic processing.
§ 251-3 TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTES § 251-3
251:345
§ 251-4. Prohibited activities.
§ 251-5. Storage controls.
K. Printing.
L. Resin manufacturing.
The discharge of toxic or hazardous materials upon the ground or
into any surface or ground waters within the Town of Westminster is
prohibited.
A.
Outdoor storage of toxic or hazardous materials is prohibited, except
in product-tight containers which are protected from the elements,
leakage, accidental damage and vandalism and which are stored in
accordance with all applicable requirements of § 251-5 of this chapter.
For purposes of this subsection, road salts and fertilizers shall be
considered as hazardous materials.
B.
Registration.
Except as exempted below, every owner and every operator other
than an owner of a site at which toxic and hazardous materials
are stored in quantities totaling, at any time, more than fifty (50)
gallons liquid volume or twenty-five (25) pounds dry weight shall
register with the Board of Health the types of materials stored,
quantities, location and method of storage. The Board of Health
may require that an inventory of such materials be maintained
on the premises and be reconciled with purchase, use, sales and
disposal records on a monthly basis in order to detect any product
loss. Registration required by this subsection shall be submitted
within sixty (60) days of enactment of this chapter, and annually
thereafter. Maintenance and reconciliation of inventories shall
begin within the same sixty-day period.
(1)
Exemptions. Registration and inventory requirements shall not
apply to the following:
Fuel oil stored in conformance with Massachusetts Fire
Prevention Regulations and regulations of the Westminster
Board of Health for the purpose of heating buildings located on
the site; or
(a)
The storage of toxic and hazardous materials at a single- or
two-family dwelling, except where such materials are stored
for use associated with a professional or home occupation use.
(b)
(2)
A.
Wastes containing toxic or hazardous materials shall be held on the
premises in product-tight containers and shall be removed and disposed
of in accordance with the Massachusetts Hazardous Waste
Management Act, Ch. 704, Acts of 1979.
B.
§ 251-3 WESTMINSTER CODE § 251-5
251:346
§ 251-6. Report of spills and leaks.
Every person having knowledge of a spill, leak or other loss of toxic or
hazardous materials believed to be in excess of five (5) gallons shall report
the spill or loss of same to the Board of Health within two (2) hours of
detection.
§ 251-7. Enforcement.
§ 251-8. Notice of violation.
Written notice of any violation of this chapter shall be given by the agent of
the Board of Health, specifying the nature of the violation; any corrective
measures that must be undertaken, including containment and cleanup of
discharged materials; any preventive measures required for avoiding future
violations; and a time for compliance. Requirements specified in such a
notice shall be reasonable in relation to the public health hazard involved
and the difficulty of compliance. The cost of containment and cleanup shall
be borne by the owner and operator of the premises.
The Board of Health may require that containers of toxic or hazardous
materials be stored on an impervious, chemical-resistant surface
compatible with the material being stored and that provisions be made
to contain the product in the case of accidental spillage.
C.
The provisions of this regulation shall be enforced by the Board of
Health. The agent of the Board of Health may, according to law, enter
upon any premises at any reasonable time to inspect for compliance.
A.
Upon request of an agent of the Board of Health, the owner or operator
of any premises at which toxic or hazardous materials are used or
stored shall furnish all information required to monitor compliance with
this chapter, including a complete list of all chemicals, pesticides, fuels
and other toxic or hazardous materials used or stored on the premises,
a description of measures taken to protect storage containers from
vandalism, corrosion and spillage and the means of disposal of all toxic
or hazardous wastes produced on the site. A sample of wastewater
disposed to on-site septic systems, dry wells or sewage treatment
systems may be required by the agent of the Board of Health.
B.
All records pertaining to storage, removal and disposal of toxic or
hazardous wastes shall be retained for no less than three (3) years and
shall be made available for review by the agent of the Board of Health
upon request.
C.
The Building Inspector of the Town of Westminster shall condition
issuance of construction and occupancy permits upon conformity with
the requirements of this chapter respecting any toxic or hazardous
materials to be used in the course of such construction or occupancy.
D.
§ 251-5 TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTES § 251-9
251:347
§ 251-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished by
a fine of not more than twenty dollars ($20.). Each day or portion thereof
during which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense; if
more than one (1), each condition violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 251-10. Severability.
Each provision of this chapter shall be construed as separate, to the end
that, if any part of it shall be held invalid for any reason, the remainder shall
continue in full force and effect.
Chapter 254
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 254, Water Supplies, adopted 12-1-1986, was repealed
9-17-2014.]
Chapter 255
WELLS, PRIVATE AND SEMIPUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Wells — See Ch. 200.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 231.
Toxic and hazardous wastes — See Ch. 251.
§ 255-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY — Any water system serving or intended to serve
water for human consumption or for domestic uses on one lot. The system
shall include all of the sources, treatment works and transmission lines to
the point where distribution takes place within the building. Shared wells
are considered under semipublic water supply below.
REPAIR/ALTERATION — Addition of a disinfection or other treatment
device, deepening, fracturing, replacement or any other change to an
existing well.
SEMIPUBLIC WATER SUPPLY — Any water system serving or intended
to serve water for human consumption or for other uses or purposes, to
multiple dwellings of two or more units, or to more than one multiple
dwelling under a single ownership and located on the same lot and shall
§ 251-9 WESTMINSTER CODE § 255-1
251:348
include home parks, bottling plants, campgrounds, recreational camps,
beaches and parks.
WELL — For the purpose of this chapter, includes any pit, pipe, excavation,
spring, casing, drill hole or other source of water to be used for any
purpose, including but not limited to potable water in the Town of
Westminster, and shall include dug wells, driven or tubular wells, drilled
wells (artesian or otherwise) and springs, gravel-packed, gravel-walled
wells, gravel-developed and wash-boring.
§ 255-2. Well permits; fees; application.
A well permit shall be obtained from the Board of Health prior to
the construction, alteration, repair or destruction of any water well
or well system (except for those wells regulated by the Department
of Environmental Quality Engineering under Massachusetts Drinking
Water Regulations 310 CMR 22.00 et seq.).
A.
Fee schedule. Fees shall be as follows:
Action/Description Fee
Construction $80.00
Repair $40.00
Destruction $20.00
Plan alteration $10.00
B.
An application for a water well construction permit shall be submitted
to the Board of Health or its agent on forms furnished by the Board. The
well contractor is responsible for confirming that said permit has been
issued prior to well construction, destruction, alteration or repair.
C.
The location, design and operation of the water well must be approved
by the Board of Health or its agent prior to construction. Prior to
approval, the Board of Health requires the following information be
submitted:
For new well construction, the owner or his agent shall submit
a detailed plot plan, drawn by a Massachusetts-registered
professional engineer or sanitarian showing the location of the
well in relation to building foundations, property lines, roadways,
building sewer lines, wetlands/drainage, the subsurface sanitary
disposal systems serving the lot, all other septic systems within
100 feet and any other potential sources of contamination within
400 feet which could affect the well. Such sources of contamination
shall include landfills, auto body shops, auto junk yards and repair
facilities, underground storage tanks, wood waste disposal areas
and any other sites existing or proposed which the Board of Health
determines may present a threat to water quality.
(1)
D.
§ 255-1 TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTES § 255-2
251:349
§ 255-3. Well location.
In the case of multiple wells on one site (more than one) the Board
may require that a hydrogeological study be performed to prevent
depletion of groundwater within any given aquifer.
(2)
The Board may also request additional requirements be met as
specific site variations may warrant.
(3)
The location of the well on the lot must be staked prior to its installation
and the staked location approved by the Health Agent.
E.
Application for a permit must be made at the Board of Health office no
less than three business days prior to the commencement of installation
of a private or semipublic well.
F.
All well drillers doing business in the Town of Westminster must be
in possession of a current Massachusetts well driller license issued to
them under MGL c. 21,§ 16.
G.
All permits issued shall expire two years from the date of issue, unless
revoked for cause. Permits may be extended once for a period not to
exceed one additional year upon a written request to the Board prior to
expiration. No extension fee will be charged.
H.
I. The permit will be displayed at the well site.
The issuance of a private well certificate shall not be construed as a
guarantee that the water supply system will function satisfactorily.
J.
Setback distance requirements shall be as follows:
Description Setback (feet)
Property line 10
Roadway/public or private ways 30 feet from road layout (not edge
of pavement)
Leaching facility 100
Septic tank, sewer line 50
Catch basin, dry well 100
Building (including overhang) 10
Surface water, wetland 100
A.
Where, in the opinion of the Board of Health, adverse conditions exist,
the above distances may be increased. In certain cases, special means
of protection may be provided. Where possible, the well shall be up
gradient from possible sources of contamination.
B.
The above setback distance may be increased or special means of
protection required if the Board believes adverse conditions exist.
C.
§ 255-2 WESTMINSTER CODE § 255-4
251:350
§ 255-4. Well construction standards.
Each private well shall be accessible for repair, maintenance testing and
inspection, and, unless approved by the Board in advance, wells for human
consumption should be drilled.
Wells, including dug wells, shall be constructed in compliance with the
recommendations of the latest edition of the Manual of Individual Water
Supply, United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA),
Water Supply Division (exception: surface springs shall not be used for
the purpose of a potable water supply). A current Massachusetts well
drillers license should be held.
A.
The annular space, if any, between the protective well casing and the
wall of the drilled hole or the surface casing shall be effectively sealed.
The seal is to protect against contamination and surface and/or shallow,
subsurface waters. Casings on wells less than 100 feet from septic
systems (leach), wetland, etc., should be pressure grouted.
B.
The well casing shall be covered with a sanitary well seal. Casings shall
extend a minimum of 24 inches above the highest known flood levels
or 18 inches above the ground surface in areas which are not subject
to flooding. In addition, all nonvent openings shall be sealed to exclude
the intrusion of contaminants. Vent openings shall be complete with
screening.
C.
When well screens are used, the screen length and opening size should
be selected to ensure that the water supply will be free from silt, sand
and other suspended solids. Gravel packed wells should be adequately
sealed with a substance such as betonite and should be installed above
the screen area.
D.
Well pumps and water-storage equipment shall be selected to ensure
that the water supply is to be adequate. A minimum of five gallons
per minute (GPM) for four hours is required. When the pump test is
performed, a representative of the Board or its agent should be on site
to observe and confirm the flow rate.
E.
Pump suction lines, if used, shall not be closer than 100 feet from the
underground sewage leaching facilities or 50 feet from a septic tank
(310 CMR 15.03).
F.
Well pits to house the pumping equipment or to permit access to the
top of a well shall not be permitted.
G.
All connections to a well casing made below ground shall be protected
by either a pitless adapter or a pitless unit that complies with the
most recent revision of National Sanitation Foundation Standard 56,
ventilated Pitless Well Adapters.
H.
Cross connections shall be prohibited. No cross connection between a
private well and a public water supply shall be allowed.
I.
§ 255-4 TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTES § 255-4
251:351
§ 255-5. Disinfecting and other sanitary requirements.
All private wells shall be disinfected following construction, rehabilitation
and well or pump repair before the well is placed in service. The well shall
be pumped to waste (not to the septic system) until the water is as clear as
possible. Thereafter, the well and the pumping equipment (and plumbing, if
installed) shall be disinfected with a solution containing at least 50 parts per
million (ppm) of chlorine. The well shall remain in contact with the chlorine
solution for a minimum of 24 hours before the well is pumped to waste (not
to the septic system) and the water is found to be free of chlorine.
§ 255-6. Water quality; analysis; results to be submitted.
§ 255-7. Water treatment.
The construction of injection wells for liquid waste disposal shall be
prohibited.
J.
A well completion report must be submitted by the driller prior to Board
of Health approval of the well for human consumption.
K.
Water samples taken from the well will be submitted to a testing
laboratory certified by the DEP for the analysis performed with the
cost to be borne by the applicant. Samples can be collected by the
applicant, pump installer, laboratory representative or agent/Board of
Health representative, but samples will be collected in accordance
with current professional standards and practices in order to maintain
sample integrity. The sample will be taken at the end of the initial fourhour
pump test. However, if at the end of four hours, in the opinion
of the sampler, the water quality is visually unacceptable (for example,
contains sediment, particulates, turbidity, etc.), the pumping should
be continued until the water is clear before sampling occurs. Water
quality will be evaluated by the Board of Health using the most current
Massachusetts Primary and Secondary Drinking Water Standards, and
additional testing may be required by the Board or agent.
A.
The Board of Health further recommends that well owners have their
wells tested at a minimum of every two years and at more frequent
intervals when water quality problems are known to exist. These results
should also be forwarded to the Board.
B.
Both primary and secondary standards must be met and may require
a treatment system be installed to accomplish that. Parameters to be
tested include the following: [Amended 9-17-2014]
Alkalinity
Calcium
Chloride*
Coliform bacteria
Color*
A.
§ 255-4 WESTMINSTER CODE § 255-7
251:352
§ 255-8. Yield test.
Copper
Hardness*
Iron*
Lead, arsenic and chlorine
Magnesium*
Manganese*
Nitrate
Nitrogen ammonia*
Nitrogen nitrite*
Odor*
pH
Potassium*
Sediment*
Sodium
Sulfate
Total dissolved solids
Turbidity
NOTES:
* Parameters not certified for by the state.
** Additional parameters may be requested at the discretion of the
Board based on known or assumed site conditions.
If treatment is necessary, the system used should not be backwashed
to a subsurface disposal system and would preferably not require the
use of salts, since that can raise the sodium levels above the DEP
action limit. A water test will be required after the treatment system is
installed to confirm that the system is functioning properly.
B.
Every well shall be pump-tested. The pump test shall include a
drawdown test at a minimum rate adequate in supply to accommodate
the daily usage needs for the dwelling to be serviced. The agent or a
representative of the Board should be present. A pump test report will
be submitted by the pump installer and will be used for approval of the
well capacity by the Board.
A.
Rates below five gallons per minute (gpm) for four hours shall not be
approved without a special permit issued by the Board of Health. If
a well must be fractured to obtain the required flow rate, the well
completion report should reflect the final flow rate or supplemental
documentation must be submitted.
B.
§ 255-7 TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTES § 255-9
251:353
§ 255-9. Well destruction.
Abandoned wells, test holes or borings shall be destroyed or sealed to
protect the ground water supply as well as eliminate potential physical
hazards. This shall be accomplished by sealing with nonhazardous,
impervious materials after all exposed casing pumps and distribution lines
are removed and the area finished to existing grade. The agent or Board
representative should perform a site inspection and a well decommissioning
report submitted. This report will include the location of the well, including
owner address, date and method of destruction, name and address of
contractor, property owner and reason for destruction. This report should
be recorded at the Registry of Deeds and evidence of that recording
submitted to the Board of Health.
§ 255-10. Well approval.
§ 255-11. Certificate of compliance.
Upon approval of both the water quality and quantity, a certificate of
compliance will be issued.
§ 255-12. Enforcement.
The Board or its agent shall investigate violations of this regulation or of
any permit issued and may take such actions it deems necessary.
§ 255-13. Variances.
Wells shall not be placed into use for human consumption until the
Board of Health has approved the potability and quantity of the water
provided. Approval of the well will be based on the water meeting the
water quality criteria outlined above and on the well being shown to
be able to provide a yield of five gpm. Wells which fail to meet some
or all of these criteria may be approved by the Board of Health after a
hearing at which a variance from these standards may be granted.
A.
For new construction, a building permit will not be issued until the
Board of Health has approved the well as a source of potable water.
B.
The Board may grant a variance to the application of these regulations
with respect to any particular case when, in its opinion, the
enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice, and the applicant
has proven that the same degree of public health and environmental
protection required under these regulations can be achieved without
strict application of a particular provision(s).
A.
Variance requests shall be in writing to the Board and include all the
information/reasons and proposed measures necessary to assure the
protection of the public health and environment. The variance request
will appear on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the Board. Within 14 days of the next regularly scheduled meeting, the
B.
§ 255-9 WESTMINSTER CODE § 255-13
251:354
§ 255-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of these regulations or who fails to
comply with any order by the Board for which a penalty is not otherwise
provided in any of the General Laws shall, upon conviction, be fined not less
than $10 nor more than $500. Each day's failure to comply with an order
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 255-15. Disclaimer.
The issuance of a private well certificate shall not be construed as a
guarantee by the Board or its agent that the water supply system will
function satisfactorily nor that the water supply will be of sufficient quality
or quantity for its intended use.
§ 255-16. Severability.
If any provision of these regulations or the application thereof is held to be
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity shall be limited to
said provision(s), and the remainder of these regulations shall remain valid
and effective. Any part of these regulations subsequently invalidated by a
new state law shall automatically be brought into conformity with the new
or amended law and shall be deemed to be effective immediately.
Chapter A256
ACCEPTANCES OF GENERAL LAWS
§ A256-1. List of General Law acceptances.
MGL
c./Sec.
Chapter/Acts
of
Adoption Date/
Art. No. Subject
32/77 11-5-1912 Pensioning laborers
152/69 11-4-1913 Workmen's compensation
634/1911 11-3-1914 Retirement system
71/21 11-4-1919 Continuation of schools
41/6 3-1931 Official ballots
166/1946 11-5-1946 Contributory retirement
723/1945 ATM 3-1-1947/17
631/1947 ATM 3-7-1953/36 Public health
401/1956 ATM 3-9-1957/50 Indemnification
40/42A to
42F
ATM 3-9-1957/51 Water liens
Board shall grant, modify or deny a variance, in writing, and state the
reasons for any denial.
§ 255-13 TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTES § A256-1
251:355
MGL
c./Sec.
Chapter/Acts
of
Adoption Date/
Art. No. Subject
71/16 to
16-l
STM 8-14-1957/2 Establishing regional school
149/37 ATM 3-2-1963/11 Nine-hour workday
32B ATE 3-5-1966 Group insurance
139/1 to 3 STM 6-23-1966/7 Old buildings
553/1969 STM 11-6-1969/1 Construction of school building
114/22 to
26
ATM 3-14-1970/41 Election by ballot of a Board of
Cemetery Commissioners
consisting of 3 persons
90/20C ATM 3-13-1971/28 Tagging of motor vehicles in
violation of any rule, regulation,
order or bylaw regulating the
parking of motor vehicles and
for disposition of such violation
by payment of a fine through the
District Court
823/1971 STM 11-16-1971/4 Elimination of special water
assessments in town
486/1971 ATE 3-4-1972 Conduct of Beano
41/97A 40/
8D
ATM 3-10-1973/25
STM 4-9-1974/1
Establishment of Police
Department; appointment of
Police Chief Establishment of
Historical Commission
consisting of 7 members
40/8G STM 6-21-1976/2 Authorization of mutual aid
40/22D STM 10-2-1978/15 Authorization to make rules and
regulations providing for towing
and storage of vehicles which
impede removal or plowing of
snow or which violate rules on
parking or standing
258/13 ATE 4-11-1981 Indemnification of town
employees
90/20A 1/2 STM 11-10-1981/8 Parking violations
743/1981 ATM 5-1-1982/33 Senior citizens tax exemption
40/22D STM 12-13-1982/4 Authorization to adopt
regulations providing for the
towing of illegally parked
vehicles
653/1982 STM 5-23-1983/2 Senior citizens tax exemption
258/1982 STM 5-23-1983/3 Tax exemption for the blind
§ A256-1 WESTMINSTER CODE § A256-1
251:356
MGL
c./Sec.
Chapter/Acts
of
Adoption Date/
Art. No. Subject
44/53C STM 10-3-1984/6 Special fund for compensation of
Town employees for off-duty and
special detail work
477/1984 ATM 4-6-1985/39 Exempting certain purchases
from public bidding laws
48/42 32B/
9C
STM 5-17-1986/7
STE 7-1-1987
Establishment of Fire
Department and appointment of
Fire Chief Firefighters survivors
benefits
32B/9G STE 7-1-1987 Police officers survivors benefits
83/16A-F ATM 4-23-1988/30 Establishment of liens upon real
estate for unpaid sewer charges
59/5,
Clause 17D
STM 10-25-1988/3 Tax abatement to surviving
spouses and minor children of
deceased parents
140/147A ATM 5-6-1989/35 Withdrawal from Worcester
County dog program;
establishment of local dog
program
188, § 12/1985 ATM 5-6-1989/39 Equal educational opportunity
grant for Montachusett Regional
Vocational Technical School
59/57B STM 9-18-1989/6 Authorization for town to send 1
bill in any fiscal year for real
estate or personal property
taxes not in excess of $50
697/1987 ATM 5-5-1990/33 Establishing certain options for
governmental units in the
pension area
148/26,
26A, 26B,
26C, 26D,
26E, 26F,
26G, 26H,
27 and 27A
ATM 5-5-1990/34 Fire and smoke detection and
warning systems
291/1990 ATM 6-8-1991/17 Enhanced 911 Service
188, § 12/1985 ATM 6-8-1991/24 Equal educational opportunity
grant for Montachusett Regional
Vocation Technical School
§ A256-1 TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTES § A256-1
251:357
MGL
c./Sec.
Chapter/Acts
of
Adoption Date/
Art. No. Subject
41/19J ATM 6-20-1992/16 Alternative Provisions for
additional compensation of
clerks also serving on Boards of
Registrars of Voters
188, § 12/1985
188, § 12/1985
ATM 6-20-1992/17
ATM 6-5-1993/26
Equal education opportunity
grant for Montachusett Regional
Vocational Technical School
Equal education opportunity
grant for Montachusett Regional
Vocational Technical School
41/108L STM 10-25-1993/11 Career incentive pay program
40/57 ATM 6-25-1994/32 Permits and licenses of
delinquent taxpayers
64G/3A Board of
Selectmen,
1-17-1996
Imposition of local motel/hotel
excise tax
44/53C ATM 5-4-1996/35 Revolving fund for compensation
for off-duty or special detail
work of Westminster Fire
Department employees
143/3Z ATM 5-2-1998/35 Allowing local inspectors
employed by the Building
Department to engage in private
practice for hire within the Town
40/8C STM 10-12-1999/25 Allows for creation of
Conservation Commissions and
specifies the powers and duties
of said Commissions
41/19K and
108P
ATM 5-6-2000/23 Allows for additional
compensation to be paid to a
Town Clerk and Collector or
Treasurer, respectively upon
certification and to raise and
appropriate $1,000 for each
official to provide such
additional compensation
40/5F ATM 5-5-2001/23 To defray the cost of operating
the Emergency Medical Services
Division of the Westminster Fire
Department
44/53F 1/2 ATM 5-4-2002/32 Establish Water Enterprise Fund
44/53F 1/2 ATM 5-4-2002/33 Establish Sewer Enterprise Fund
§ A256-1 WESTMINSTER CODE § A256-1
251:358
MGL
c./Sec.
Chapter/Acts
of
Adoption Date/
Art. No. Subject
40/8A ATM 5-4-2002/34 Establish a Development and
Industrial Commission for the
promotion and development of
the industrial resources of the
Town; establishing membership
and initial terms
59/5 5-4-2002/35 Annual application of 100% of
cost-of-living adjustment as
determined by Commissioner of
Revenue to real estate
exemptions issued under
Clauses 17D and 41B of said
chapter and section
148/261 STM 9-24-2002/3 Automatic sprinkler systems;
new or rehabilitated multiunit
residential structures
80/13B 5-3-2003/16 Allowing residents who are 65
years of age or older to enter
into agreements by which
payment of betterments
assessed may be deferred
44/53F 1/2 5-3-2003/19 Establish Solid Waste Transfer
Station Enterprise Fund
40/22F 11-4-2003/26 Allow Town boards and officers
to set reasonable fees for
licenses, permits, certificates
and services
39/23D 79/2006 STM 11-14-2006/27 Allowing members of boards,
commissions and committees
who have missed a single
adjudicatory hearing to
participate in a decision on the
matter under certain
circumstances
59/57C ATM 5-1-2007/33 To establish a quarterly tax
payment system for real estate
and personal property tax bills,
effective with the fiscal year
beginning July 1, 2008
32B/18 ATM 5-7-2011/39 Medicare extension plans;
mandatory transfer of retirees
§ A256-1 TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTES § A256-1
251:359
MGL
c./Sec.
Chapter/Acts
of
Adoption Date/
Art. No. Subject
40/13E ATM 5-6-2017/27 Authorization of Ashburnham-
Westminster Regional School
District to establish a reserve
fund for unanticipated or
unbudgeted costs of special
education, out-of-district tuition
or transportation
200A/9A ATM 5-6-2017/29 Disposition of abandoned funds
by Town; notice of period during
which funds may be claimed;
appeal; disbursement
Chapter A257
SPECIAL ACTS AND RESOLVES
§ A257-1. List of Special Acts and Resolves.
Year Enacted Resolve or Chapter Subject
1933 Resolve 28 Resolve providing for an
unpaid commission to consider
the need of extending relief
because of loss of taxes in
certain communities due to the
construction of certain
additions to the metropolitan
water system
1933 Resolve 14 Resolve providing for an
investigation by the
Department of Public Works as
to the cost and detailed routes
of two proposed state highways
in or near the City of Fitchburg
and certain proposed
extensions of one of said
highways
1949 Ch. 513, Sec. 1, 2 An act authorizing the
Department of Mental Health
to take or purchase land in the
Town of Westminster for the
purpose of providing an
additional water supply for the
Gardner State Hospital
§ A256-1 WESTMINSTER CODE § A257-1
A257:360
Year Enacted Resolve or Chapter Subject
1950 Ch. 369, Sec. 1-10 An act authorizing the Town of
Westminster to supply itself
and its inhabitants with water
1951 Ch. 554, Sec. 1-3 An act increasing the amount
of money that the Town of
Westminster may borrow for
school purposes
1951 Ch. 732 An act authorizing the City of
Fitchburg to acquire water and
other property for the purpose
of increasing its water supply
1954 Ch. 89, Sec. 1-4 An act relative to assessments
in connection with the
operation of the water supply
system of the Town of
Westminster
1955 Ch. 440, Sec. 1, 2 An act validating action of the
Town of Westminster relative
to erecting and equipping a fire
station
1955 Ch. 86, Sec. 1-4 An act relative to water bonds
of the Town of Westminster
1956 Ch. 39, Sec. 1, 2 An act authorizing the Town of
Westminster to allow the use of
its equipment within its
operator on private property
for certain purposes
1957 Ch. 208, Sec.1-3 An act authorizing the Town of
Westminster to borrow money
for the improvement of an
existing school playground
1958 Ch. 57, Sec. 1-3 An act validating the
establishment of a regional
school district by the Towns of
Ashburnham and Westminster
1960 Ch. 133, Sec. 1-4 An act relative to assessments
in connection with the
operation of the water supply
system of the Town of
Westminster
1960 Ch. 393, Sec. 1-5 An act to provide for the
creation of a Board of License
Commissioners in the Town of
Westminster
§ A257-1 SPECIAL ACTS AND RESOLVES § A257-1
A257:361
Year Enacted Resolve or Chapter Subject
1960 Ch. 138 An act providing life tenure for
Toivo Tuominen, incumbent of
the Office of Chief of Police in
the Town of Westminster
1963 Ch. 788, Sec. 1-15 An act establishing the Holmes
Park Water District in the Town
of Westminster
1963 Ch. 485, Sec. 1-5 An act authorizing the City of
Gardner to sell water to the
Town of Westminster and
authorizing said town to
purchase the same
1964 Ch. 568 An act authorizing the
formation of a vocational
regional school district by the
Cities of Fitchburg and
Gardner and the Towns of
Ashburnham, Ashby, Harvard,
Lunenburgm, Pepperell,
Phillipston, Hubbardston,
Templeton, Townsend,
Westminster and Winchendon
1966 Ch. 453 An act designating certain
bridges in the Town of
Westminster as the Veterans of
Foreign Wars Bridge and the
American Legion Bridge
1968 Ch. 429, Sec. 1, 2 An act validating certain
proceedings taken by the Town
of Westminster at its Annual
Town Meeting in the current
year
1969 Ch. 817, Sec. 1-4_ of Fitchburg to purchase land
in Town of Westminster (for
sanitary landfill)
§ A257-1 WESTMINSTER CODE § A257-1
A257:362
Year Enacted Resolve or Chapter Subject
1969 Ch. 553, Sec. 1-3 An act authorizing the Towns
of Ashburnham and
Westminster to make
appropriation from their
respective stabilization funds
toward the construction of a
new school building belonging
to the Ashburnham-
Westminster Regional School
District (Oakmont Regional
High School)
1970 Ch. 323, §§ 1-8 Sanitary landfill with the City
of Fitchburg
1971 Ch. 616, Sec. 1, 2 An act directing the transfer of
certain lands of the
Commonwealth to the control
of the Department of Public
Works for highway purposes
and authorizing said
departments to acquire certain
public lands in the Town of
Westminster and the Cities of
Fitchburg and Leominster for
highway purposes
1971 Ch. 984, Sec. 1, 2 An act providing that the
Wachusett Mountain State
Reservation and Mt. Grylace
State Reservation shall be
included in any determination
of valuation for purposes of
state reimbursement
1971 Ch. 823, §§ 1, 2 An act repealing the law
authorizing the imposition of
special water assessments
upon certain estates within the
Town of Westminster
1974 Ch. 488 An act authorizing the Town of
Westminster to grant certain
alcoholic beverage licenses
within five hundred (500) feet
of a church
1974 Ch. 532 An act validating the acts and
proceedings at the Annual
Town Meeting of the Town of
Westminster held in the year
1974.
§ A257-1 SPECIAL ACTS AND RESOLVES § A257-1
A257:363
Year Enacted Resolve or Chapter Subject
1976 Resolve 1976, Ch. 9 Resolve providing for an
investigation and study by the
Department of Public Works
relative to the feasibility of
constructing a bypass near
Highway Route 2 in the Town
of Westminster
1981 Ch. 742 An act relative to the
alleviation of the financial
burden imposed on certain
towns by the tornado of June
22, 1981
1984 Ch. 186 An act establishing a
Westminster Board of Water
and Sewer Commissioners in
the Town of Westminster
1984 Ch. 385 An act directing the
Commonwealth to reimburse
the Town of Westminster for
certain moneys expended for
veteran's services
1984 Ch. 273 An act authorizing the
Ashburnham-Westminster
Regional School District to
hold annual district-wide
elections
1985 Ch. 398 An act establishing the Leino
Park District in the Town of
Westminster.
1986 Ch. 459 An act designating a certain
bridge in the Town of
Westminster as the Michael J.
Waterman Bridge
1986 Ch. 458 An act designating a certain
bridge in the Town of
Westminster as the Francis A.
Bond Bridge
1989 Ch. 293 An act authorizing the Town of
Westminster to transfer certain
park land to the Cemetery
Department of said town to be
used for cemetery purposes
§ A257-1 WESTMINSTER CODE § A257-1
A257:364
Year Enacted Resolve or Chapter Subject
1991 Ch. 531 An act authorizing the
development and use by the
City of Fitchburg and the Town
of Westminster of certain land
located in said town for solid
waste management purposes
1992 Ch. 357 An act authorizing the Division
of Capital Planning and
Operations to grant an
easement in certain lands
located in the Town of
Westminster
1995 Ch. 175 An act providing for recall
elections
1996 Ch. 404 An act validating the
proceedings of the Annual
Town Election in the Town of
Westminster
Chapter A258
OFFICERS, BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
§ A258-1. List of boards and committees.
Name
Adoption Date/
Art. No. Description
Board of Health ATM 3-14-1970/
13
Provision for election at
1971 ATM, to consist of 3
members
Building Inspector STM 2-24-1975/1 Agreement to employ
Regional Building Inspector
Council for the Aging ATM 5-3-1975/21 Establishment of Council to
consist of 7 members
Moderator ATM 3-13-1971/
24
Increase term from 1 year to
3 years
Personnel Committee ATM 4-6-1985/32 Authorization to appoint for
the purpose of reviewing
matters of personnel
management and police
Planner STM 11-4-2003 Appropriation for the
purpose of creating Town
Planner position
§ A257-1 SPECIAL ACTS AND RESOLVES § A258-1
A257:365
Name
Adoption Date/
Art. No. Description
Planning Board ATM 5-3-1980/31 Change term of office for
members from 5 years to 3
years
Treasurer/Collector ATM 4-23-1988/8 Combine positions of Town
Treasurer and Town
Collector to create single
position of Town Treasurer/
Collector
Treasurer/Collector STM 9-19-1988/8 Expansion of office to a fulltime
position
Tree Warden ATM 3-13-1971/
25
Increase term from 1 year to
3 years
Chapter A259
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town Clerk — See Ch. 19. Board of Health fees — See Ch. 238.
§ A258-1 WESTMINSTER CODE § A258-1
A259:366
ARTICLE I
Town Clerk Fees
[Adopted STM 9-18-1988 by Art. 15]
§ A259-1. Fees accepted.
The town accepts the following charges to Town Clerk fees as authorized by
MGL C. 262, § 34, clauses 1-79:
Clause Description Fee
1 For filing and indexing assignments for the
benefit of creditors
$10.00
11 For entering an amendment of a record of the
birth of a child born out of wedlock
subsequently legitimized
$10.00
12 For correcting errors in a record of birth $10.00
13 For furnishing a certificate of a birth $5.00
13A For furnishing an abstract copy of a record of
birth
$4.00
14 For entering a delayed record of birth $10.00
20 For filing a certificate of a person conducting
business under any title other than his real
name
$20.00
21 For filing by a person conducting business
under any title other than his real name of a
statement of change of his residence, or of his
discontinuance, retirement or withdrawal from
or change of location of such business
$10.00
22 For furnishing a certified copy of a certificate
of a person conducting business under any title
other than his real name or a statement by
such person of his discontinuance, retirement
or withdrawal from such business
$5.00
24 For recording the name and address, date and
number of the certificate issued to a person
registered for the practice of podiatry in the
Commonwealth
$20.00
29 For correcting errors in a record of death $10.00
30 For furnishing a certificate of death $5.00
30A For furnishing an abstract copy of a record of
death
$4.00
42 For entering a notice of intention of marriage
and issuing certificates thereof
$15.00
§ A259-1 FEES § A259-1
A259:367
Clause Description Fee
43 For entering a certificate of marriage filed by
persons married out of the Commonwealth
$5.00
44 For issuing a certificate of marriage $5.00
44A For furnishing an abstract copy of a record of
marriage
$4.00
45 For correcting errors in a record of marriage $10.00
54 For recording a power of attorney $10.00
57 For recording a certificate of registration
granted to a person engaged in the practice of
optometry, or issuing a certified copy thereof
$20.00
58 For recording the name of the owner of a
certificate of registration as a physician or
osteopath in the Commonwealth
$20.00
62 For recording an order granting locations of
poles, piers, abutments or conduits, alterations
or transfers thereof, and an increase in number
of wires and cable or attachments under the
provisions of MGL C. 166, § 22
$40.00
For an additional street $10.00
66 For examining records or papers relating to
birth, marriage or deaths upon the application
of any person, expense thereof, but not less
than
Actual
expense
thereof, but
not less than
$5.00
67 For copying any manuscript or record
pertaining to a birth, marriage or death, per
page
$5.00
69 For receiving and filing a complete inventory of
all items to be included in a "closing-out sale",
etc.:
First page $10.00
Additional page $2.00
75 For filing a copy of written instrument or
declaration of trust by trustees of an
association or trust, or any amendment thereof
as provided by MGL C. 132, § 2
$20.00
78 For recording a deed of lot or plot in a public
place of cemetery
$10.00
79 Recording any other documents:
First page $10.00
Additional page $2.00
§ A259-1 WESTMINSTER CODE § A259-1
A259:368
ARTICLE II
Sealer of Weights and Measures Fees
[Adopted ATM 6-8-1991 by Art. 29; amended in its entirety ATM
5-2-2006 by Art. 38]
§ A259-2. Fees set.
The Town shall set fees for services provided by the Sealer of Weights and
Measures as follows, as authorized by the provisions of MGL c. 98, § 56:
Balances and scales
Weight
(pounds) Fee
Over 10,000 $150
5,000 to 10,000 $100
1,000 to 5,000 $75
100 to 1,000 $50
Less than 100 $25
A.
Liquid measuring meters.
Type of Meter Fee
Gasoline $25
Vehicle tank pump $50
B.
Other devices.
(1) Coin counters: $50.
Authomated retail systems (scanners):
(a) One to three registers/terminals: $25 each.
(b) Four to 11 registers/terminals: $200.
(c) More than 11 registers/terminals: $300.
(2)
C.
§ A259-2 FEES § A259-2
A259:369
Chapter A260
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES OF THE BOARD OF
SELECTMEN
§ A260-1. Administrative.
The following is a list of administrative policies and procedures adopted
by the Board of Selectmen. Dates in parenthesis indicate at which
meeting of the Board these policies and procedures were adopted.
Additional information can be obtained from the Board of Selectmen.
The Fire, Police and Highway Departments should submit five (5)
year plans for their departments by December 1 of each year.
(3-20-1995)
(1)
Internal memoranda between town government departments
should follow a standard format. (12-19-1994)
(2)
The position of municipal representative for collective bargaining
on the Ashburnham-Westminster Regional School Committee will
alternate annually between the Westminster and Ashburnham
Boards of Selectmen. (8-22-1994)
(3)
The decision on whether or not to close the Town Hall because
of inclement weather or other circumstances rests with the Board
of Selectmen. If no member of the Board of Selectmen can be
reached, the decision becomes the responsibility of the Town
Coordinator.63 (2-22-1993)
(4)
Articles, which must be in writing, will be accepted for inclusion
on the Town Meeting warrant from individuals and groups other
than town departments, boards and commissions if they are
accompanied by the signatures of at least ten (10) registered voters
for the Annual Town Meeting and at least one hundred (100)
registered voters for any Special Town Meeting. (10-3-1988)
(5)
The central answering service (Dispatchers) comes under the
jurisdiction of the Police Chief. (3-5-1990)
(6)
No town employee may request a written opinion from Town
Counsel without first consulting the Town Coordinator64 or Board
of Selectmen. (6-5-1995)
(7)
Any town official who is subject to annual reappointment will be
asked at least six (6) weeks prior to the expiration of his or her
appointment if he or she wishes to be reappointed. One (1) month
(8)
A.
63.Editor’s Note: The Annual Town Meeting voted 5-1-2010 by Art 30 to authorize the Board
of Selectmen to appoint a Town Administrator to replace the position of Town Coordinator.
64.Editor’s Note: The Annual Town Meeting voted 5-1-2010 by Art 30 to authorize the Board
of Selectmen to appoint a Town Administrator to replace the position of Town Coordinator.
§ A259-2 WESTMINSTER CODE § A260-1
A259:370
prior to the expiration of annual appointments (i.e., May 30),
supervisors should send a memorandum to the Board of Selectmen
making recommendations for these appointments. (11-27-1995)
Town-owned vehicles should always be available for official use.
(4-27-1987)
(9)
Keys to the Town Hall will be assigned to those individuals
responsible for the administration of the building and those elected
officials or appointed employees whose duties and responsibilities
periodically require that they have access to the building at other
than regularly scheduled business hours or meeting nights.
(3-23-1987)
(10)
Policy with respect to the sale and consumption of alcoholic
beverages on town property is set forth in the minutes of the Board
of Selectmen's meeting of 11-23-1992. (See Attachment A.65)
(11)
Jurisdiction and control over all town-owned recreational and
playing fields rests with the Parks and Recreation Commission.
This Commission should be consulted regarding any use, repair or
maintenance work on these fields. (9-23-1991)
(12)
Solicitation of voters attending the Annual Town meeting is not
permitted. (4-30-1990)
(13)
It is also prohibited to solicit funds from town employees while they
are at work. (9-30-1991; 12-7-1992)
(14)
The Town Coordinator66 is responsible for knowing the
whereabouts of the Town Hall employees and when such employee,
if absent, plans to return to the Town Hall. If the Town Coordinator
is not in the building, this information should be left with the Town
Secretary. (11-13-1995)
(15)
Whenever members of town boards and committees are invited to
meet with the Selectmen, all members of the appropriate board
should be informed of the date, time and purpose of the meeting.
(11-27-1995)
(16)
Bids for procurement for goods and services must comply with the
provisions contained in MGL C. 30B, the so-called Procurement
Law. (11-27-1995)
(17)
Selectmen are required to be familiar with and adhere to the
provisions of MGL C. 268A, the so-called Conflict of Interest Law,
summarized in the State Ethics Commission document issued in
September, 1987, and revised in March 1990. (See Attachment B67)
(18)
65.Editor's Note: Attachment A is on file in the Town offices and may be examined there
during regular office hours.
66.Editor’s Note: The Annual Town Meeting voted 5-1-2010 by Art 30 to authorize the Board
of Selectmen to appoint a Town Administrator to replace the position of Town Coordinator.
§ A260-1 FEES § A260-1
A259:371
§ A260-2. Financial.
Responsibility for opening and securing the Town Hall during and
at the end of the working day rests with the Town Coordinator.68
(11-27-1995)
(19)
No individual member of the Board of Selectmen should take any
action, except in cases of emergency, without the approval of a
majority of the board. (7-27-1987)
(20)
No individual member of the Board of Selectmen should send any
letter or other communication on stationery bearing the seal of
the Board of Selectmen or of the town without the approval of a
majority of the Board. (7-27-1987)
(21)
No official documents of the Board of Selectmen shall be removed
from the Town Hall without the authorization of a majority of the
Board. (7-27-1987)
(22)
Any individual member of the Board of Selectmen stating a
personal opinion should make clear that the opinion expressed is
not a representation of the position of the Board. (7-27-1987)
(23)
The following is a list of financial policies and procedures adopted by
the Board of Selectmen. Dates in parenthesis indicate at which meeting
of the Board these policies and procedures were adopted. Additional
information can be obtained from the Board of Selectmen.
All town employees who are responsible for submitting bills for
payment should do so within sixty (60) days of receipt of the bill.
(11-27-1995)
(1)
Employees will be reimbursed at the rate of twenty-six cents
($0.26) per mile for the use of their private vehicles on official town
business. All employees claiming such reimbursement should keep
daily records of miles driven on town business and submit their
claims monthly. (11-27-1995) (See Attachment C, Monthly Mileage
Expense Report.69)
(2)
All out of state travel should be approved by the Board of
Selectmen. (10-3-1994)
(3)
Warrants for the payments of the town's obligations will be signed
by the selectmen on a weekly basis. (10-14-1992)
(4)
A.
67.Editor's Note: Attachment B is on file in the Town offices and may be examined there
during regular office hours.
68.Editor’s Note: The Annual Town Meeting voted 5-1-2010 by Art 30 to authorize the Board
of Selectmen to appoint a Town Administrator to replace the position of Town Coordinator.
69.Editor's Note: Attachment C is on file in the town offices and may be examined there
during regular office hours.
§ A260-1 WESTMINSTER CODE § A260-2
A259:372
Chapter A261
MISCELLANEOUS
§ A261-1. Additional Town Meeting enactments.
Subject Adoption Date/Art. No.
Board of Health authority to enter into
intermunicipal agreements to provide public
health services which the Board of Health is
authorized to perform, in accordance with an
intermunicipal mutual aid agreement to be
entered into between the Town and various
governmental units
ATM 5-2-2006/38
Board of Water and Sewer Commissioners
and Leino Park Water District, agreement
between for sale of water
STM 3-15-1989/6
Compensation of Town employees for offduty
and special detail work
STM 10-3-1984/6
Conservation and recreation, use of land
accepted as gift
STM 6-29-1977/6
Conservation and recreation, use of land
purchased
ATM 5-6-1978/16
Exchange of land, authorization of
Selectmen to enter into intergovermental
agreement with City of Fitchburg and to
petition the General Court for Special Act
ATM 5-4-1996/32
Fee increase for written demands issued by
Collector, as authorized by MGL c. 60, § 15,
effective July 1, 2009
ATM 5-2-2009/34
Graham Library Fund, establishment of ATM 4-16-1983/37
Indemnification of employees STM 10-2-1978/22
All requests submitted to the Advisory Board for transfers from
the Reserve Fund by department heads under the jurisdiction of
the Board of Selectmen must first be submitted to the Board of
Selectmen for approval. (6-1-1992)
(5)
All vouchers and payroll warrants submitted by a department
should be signed by the department head. If for any reason he or
she cannot sign, the document may be initialed by someone duly
authorized by the department head, using the following format: For
(department head) by _________________. (11-27-1995)
(6)
All checks exceeding fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.) require two
(2) signatures, that of the Town Treasurer-Collector and that of one
(1) member of the Board of Selectmen. (8-7-1995)
(7)
§ A260-2 FEES § A261-1
A259:373
Subject Adoption Date/Art. No.
Insurance for Town employees, health and
life, increase in Town's contribution
ATM 5-3-1980/10
Insurance for retirees, amount of Town's
contribution (MGL c. 32B, § 9A)
STE 4-27-1999/Question 1
Intermunicipal agreement with the City of
Leominster for implementing an educational
regulatory program to discourage the use of
tobacco products among youths
ATM 4-25-1995/33
Intermunicipal agreement with the Town of
Ashburnham for shared animal control
services
ATM 5-3-2008/32
Massachusetts League of Cities and Towns,
joining of
ATM 3-14-1970/42
Mobile lunch carts, establishment of license
fee of $100 for operation of
ATM 4-16-1983/35
National Flood Insurance Program, joining
of
ATM 5-3-1975/49
Sewer regulations, authorization to Water
and Sewer Commissioners to adopt
STM 2-5-1985/11
Workers' compensation benefits for elected
or appointed Town officers as designated by
Board of Selectmen, per MGL c. 152, § 69
ATM 5-2-2009/31
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Planning
Board
11-13-1995 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 231
ATM Art. 16 5-4-1996 Cross-connection control Ch. 88
ATM Art. 32 5-4-1996 Authorization to enter into
agreement
Ch A261
ATM Art. 35 5-4-1996 Acceptance of General Laws Ch. A256
STM Art. 22 10-1-1996 Acceptance of Code Editor's Note
Page
BOH Art. 9 12-23-1996 Sewage disposal
amendment
Repealed
effective
9-21-2005
§ A261-1 WESTMINSTER CODE § DL-1
A259:374
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM Art. 31 5-3-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 32 5-3-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 34 5-3-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 38 5-3-1997 Licenses and permits:
delinquent taxpayers
amendment
Ch. 131, Art. I
ATM Art. 39 5-3-1997 Peddling and soliciting Ch. 141
Board of
Health
6-30-1997 Fees amendment Repealed
effective
5-21-2015
STM Art. 21 10-6-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
BOH Art. 24 10-20-1997 Portable bathrooms Ch. 243
BOH 11-24-1997 Portable bathrooms
amendment
Ch. 243
Planning
Board
11-24-1997 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 231
BOH Art. 13 11-24-1997 Wells Ch. 255
BOH 11-24-1997 Sewage disposal
amendment
Repealed
effective
9-21-2005
STM Art. 5 2-23-1998 Public Works Commission Ch. 47
BOH 4-7-1998 Fees Repealed
effective
5-21-2015
BOH 4-7-1998 Massage establishments Ch. 242
Board of
Selectmen
4-27-1998 Reaffirmation of dog
restraining order
NCM
ATM Art. 31 5-2-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 35 5-2-1998 General Law acceptance Ch. A256
Board of
Health
5-18-1998 Smoking amendment Ch. 248
STE Question
1
4-27-1999 Town's contribution toward
cost of benefits for retirees
Ch. A261
ATM Art. 30 5-1-1999 Rapid entry systems
amendment
Ch. 148
ATM Art. 31 5-1-1999 Finances amendment Ch. 28
Board of
Health
9-24-1999 Sewage disposal
amendment
Repealed
effective
9-21-2005
§ DL-1 FEES § DL-1
A259:375
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Planning
Board
9-27-1999 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 231
STM Art. 13 10-12-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
STM Art. 14 10-12-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
STM Art. 15 10-12-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
STM Art. 25 10-12-1999 General Law acceptance Ch. A256
STM Art. 26 10-12-1999 Animals amendment Ch. 71
Board of
Health
2-8-2000 Sewage disposal
amendment
Repealed
effective
9-21-2005
ATM Art. 23 5-6-2000 General Law acceptance Ch. A256
ATM Art. 29 5-6-2000 Water use restrictions Ch. 198, Art. I
ATM Art. 30 5-6-2000 Zoning amendment: adult
entertainment
Ch. 205
ATM Art. 31 5-6-2000 Zoning amendment: selfservice
storage
Ch. 205
ATM Art. 35 5-6-2000 General Law acceptance Ch. A256
ATM Art. 36 5-6-2000 General Law acceptance Ch. A256
STM Art. 7 11-1-2000 Zoning amendment: cluster
developments
Ch. 205
STM Art. 4 1-8-2001 Zoning amendment:
moratorium on wireless
communications facilities
Ch. 205
ATM Art. 23 5-5-2001 General Law acceptance Ch. A256
STM Art. 3 6-18-2001 Zoning amendment:
wireless communications
towers
Ch. 205
STM Art. 4 6-18-2001 Zoning amendment:
wireless communications
towers
Ch. 205
STM Art. 5 6-18-2001 Zoning amendment:
wireless communications
towers
Ch. 205
ATM Art. 32 5-4-2002 General Law acceptance Ch. A256
ATM Art. 33 5-4-2002 General Law acceptance Ch. A256
ATM Art. 34 5-4-2002 General Law acceptance Ch. A256
ATM Art. 35 5-4-2002 General Law acceptance Ch. A256
ATM Art. 40 5-4-2002 Rapid entry systems
amendment
Ch. 148
§ DL-1 WESTMINSTER CODE § DL-1
A259:376
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM Art. 41 5-4-2002 Fire alarms amendment Ch. 67, Art. II
ATM Art. 42 5-4-2002 Finances amendment Ch. 28
ATM Art. 43 5-4-2002 Capital Planning Committee Ch. 15
ATM Art 44 5-4-2002 Animals amendment Ch. 71
ATM, Art. 45 5-4-2002 Meeting minutes for boards
and committees
Ch. 9, Art. I
ATM, Art. 46 5-4-2002 Polling hours amendment Ch. 25, Art. I
STM, Art. 3 9-24-2002 General Law acceptance Ch. A256
ATM Art. 16 5-3-2003 General Law acceptance Ch. A256
ATM Art. 19 5-3-2003 General Law acceptance Ch. A256
ATM Art. 22 5-3-2003 Capital Planning Committee
amendment
Ch. 15
STM Art. 5 11-4-2003 Creation of position of Town
Planner
Ch. A258
STM Art. 26 11-4-2003 General Law acceptance Ch. A256
STM Art. 28 11-4-2003 Finances amendment Ch. 28
ATM Art. 43 5-1-2004 Animals amendment Ch. 71
ATM Art. 44 5-1-2004 Animals amendment Ch. 71
ATM Art. 47 5-1-2004 Wetlands Ch. 202
Zoning Board
of Appeals
9-30-2004 Comprehensive permits for
low- and moderate-income
housing
Ch. 228, Art. I
STM Art. 19 10-26-2004 Elections and Town
Meetings amendment
Ch. 25, Art. I
STM Art. 20 10-26-2004 Capital Planning Committee
amendment
Ch. 15
STM Art. 21 10-26-2004 Removal of earth materials;
zoning amendment
Chs. 97
(superseded
11-19-2013); 205
STM Art. 22 10-26-2004 Zoning amendment;
wireless communications
facilities
Ch. 205
Board of
Selectmen
11-29-2004 Earth removal rules Ch. 209
Planning
Board
1-31-2005 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 231
ATM Art. 40 5-3-2005 Zoning amendment:
minimum building
requirements
Ch. 205
§ DL-1 FEES § DL-1
A259:377
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM Art. 41 5-3-2005 Zoning amendment: lot
frontage definition
Ch. 205
ATM Art. 42 5-3-2005 Zoning amendment:
principal use definition
Ch. 205
ATM Art. 43 5-3-2005 Zoning amendment: Table of
Use Regulations
Ch. 205
ATM Art. 44 5-3-2005 Zoning amendment: site
plan review
Ch. 205
ATM Art. 45 5-3-2005 Zoning amendment: cluster
developments
Ch. 205
ATM Art. 46 5-3-2005 Zoning amendment:
development rate guidelines
Ch. 205
ATM Art. 47 5-3-2005 Zoning amendment:
enforcement officer
Ch. 205
ATM Art. 48 5-3-2005 Zoning amendment:
accessory dwelling units
Ch. 205
Board of
Health
9-21-2005 Subsurface sewage disposal
systems
Superseded
8-19-2009
ATM Art. 38 5-2-2006 Board of Health authority to
enter into intermunicipal
agreements to provide
public health services
Ch. A261
ATM Art. 39 5-2-2006 Sealer of Weights and
Measures fees amendment
Ch. A259, Art. II
ATM Art. 48 5-2-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 51 5-2-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 53 5-2-2006 Illicit discharges and
connections
Ch. 123
ATM Art. 56 5-2-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
STM Art. 22 11-14-2006 Low impact development Ch. 136
STM Art. 27 11-14-2006 General Law acceptance Ch. A256
ATM Art. 33 5-1-2007 General Law acceptance Ch. A256
ATM Art. 34 5-1-2007 Emergency radio
communications
Ch. 100
STM Art. 13 11-27-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
STM Art. 15 11-27-2007 Adoption of revised Zoning
Map
Ch. 205 (Editor's
Note only)
STM Art. 16 11-27-2007 Elections and Town
Meetings amendment
Ch. 25, Art. I
§ DL-1 WESTMINSTER CODE § DL-1
A259:378
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
STM Art. 17 11-27-2007 Agricultural Commission Ch. 6
STM Art. 14 2-26-2008 Capital Planning Committee
amendment
Ch. 15
ATM Art. 32 5-3-2008 Animal control services
agreement
Ch. A261
ATM Art. 36 5-3-2008 Emergency radio
communications
amendment
Ch. 100
ATM Art. 37 5-3-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 39 5-3-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 40 5-3-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
Board of
Health
11-5-2008 Outdoor hydronic heaters Ch. 240
STM Art. 15 11-18-2008 Farming Ch. 102
Board of
Health
2-4-2009 Groundwater monitoring
and soil testing repealer
Ch. 241,
reference only
ATM Art. 31 5-2-2009 Eligibility for workers'
compensation benefits
Ch. A261
ATM Art. 32 5-2-2009 Enforcement of Board of
Health rules and regulations
Ch. 13, Art. II
ATM Art. 34 5-2-2009 Tax collection fee increase Ch. A261
Board of
Health
6-3-2009 Sale of tobacco products Ch. 250, Art. I
Board of
Health
6-5-2009 Massage establishments
repealer
Ch. 242,
reference only
Board of
Health
8-19-2009 Subsurface sewage disposal
systems
Ch. 245
ATM Art. 30 5-1-2010 Town Administrator
amendment
Ch. 15; Ch. 44;
Ch. 205; Ch.
A260 (Editor's
Notes only)
ATM Art. 31 5-1-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 32 5-1-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 33 5-1-2010 Buildings and land
amendment
Ch. 81
Board of
Health
5-5-2010 Smoking in workplaces;
additional prohibitions
Ch. 248, Art. II
Board of
Health
5-5-2010 Sale and use of nontobacco
nicotine-delivery products
Ch. 250, Art. II
§ DL-1 FEES § DL-1
A259:379
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM Art. 37 5-7-2011 Buildings and land
amendment
Ch. 81
ATM Art. 39 5-7-2011 General Law acceptance Ch. A256
Board of
Health
6-15-2011 Subsurface sewage disposal
systems amendment
Ch. 245
ATM, Art. 44 5-5-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM, Art. 45 5-5-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
STM Art. 12 11-29-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
STM Art. 13 11-29-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
STM Art. 14 11-29-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
STM Art. 15 11-29-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
STM Art. 16 11-29-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
STM Art. 17 11-29-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 37 5-4-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 38 5-4-2013 Licenses and permits:
delinquent taxpayers
amendment
Ch. 131, Art. I
ATM Art. 39 5-4-2013 Elections and Town
Meetings: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 25, Art. I
ATM Art. 40 5-4-2013 Streets and sidewalks:
temporary repairs to private
ways
Ch. 173, Art. V
STM Art. 11 11-19-2013 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 205 (Editor's
Note only)
STM Art. 12 11-19-2013 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 205 (Editor's
Note only)
STM Art. 13 11-19-2013 Earth removal and
placement of fill
Ch. 97, Art. III
STM Art. 14 11-19-2013 Buildings and land
amendment
Ch. 81
ATM Art. 35 5-3-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
Board of
Health
9-17-2014 Water supplies repealer Ch. 254,
reference only
Board of
Health
9-17-2014 Private and semipublic wells
amendment
Ch. 255
STM Art. 12 11-18-2014 Conservation Commission Ch. 21
STM Art. 13 11-18-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
§ DL-1 WESTMINSTER CODE § DL-1
A259:380
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
STM Art. 14 11-18-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
STM Art. 15 11-18-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 41 5-2-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 42 5-2-2015 Firearms amendment Ch. 104
Board of
Health
5-21-2015 Fees repealer Ch. 238,
reference only
STM Art. 10 11-17-2015 General provisions: general
rules amendment
Ch. 1, Art. I
ATM Art. 36 5-7-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 37 5-7-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 38 5-7-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 39 5-7-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 40 5-7-2016 Finances amendment Ch. 28
STM Art. 9 11-29-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 4 5-6-2017 Finances amendment Ch. 28
ATM Art. 27 5-6-2017 General Law acceptance Ch. A256
ATM Art. 28 5-6-2017 Licenses and permits:
delinquent taxpayers
amendment
Ch. 131, Art. I
ATM Art. 29 5-6-2017 General Law acceptance Ch. A256
ATM Art. 31 5-6-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 32 5-6-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 33 5-6-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 34 5-6-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 35 5-6-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 36 5-6-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 38 5-6-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM Art. 39 5-6-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
STM Art. 10 11-28-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
STM Art. 11 11-28-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
STM Art. 12 11-28-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
STM Art. 13 11-28-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
STM Art. 14 11-28-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
STM Art. 15 11-28-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
ATM, Art. 4 5-5-2018 Finances Amendment Ch. 28
ATM, Art. 29 5-5-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 205
§ DL-1 FEES § DL-1
A259:381
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 30 5-5-2018 Zoning Map Amendment Ch. 205 (Editor's
Note only)
STM, Art. 9 11-27-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 205
STM, Art. 10 11-27-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 205
STM, Art. 11 11-27-2018 Zoning Map Amendment Ch. 205 (Editor's
Note only)
STM, Art. 12 11-27-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 205
§ DL-1 WESTMINSTER CODE § DL-1
A259:382

ZONING
205 Attachment 2
Town of Westminster
Land Space Requirements
Chapter 205, Zoning
[STM 11-2-1978 by Art. 4; 10-10-1995 by Art. 17; 10-12-1999 by Art. 15; STM 6-18-2001 by Art. 5; 5-5-2012 by Art. 45;
ATM 5-7-2016 by Art. 38; ATM 5-6-2017 by Art. 36; 11-19-2019 STM by Art. 17]
Minimum Yard Depth2 Maximum Building
Zoning District
Minimum
Lot Size
(square feet)
Minimum Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Front1,4,5
(feet)
Rear1,4
(feet)
Side1,4
(feet) Stories
Height3
Feet
Maximum
Percentage of
Lot Coverage
Residence Districts
R-I 50,000 1504
25 20 15 2½ 35 20%4
R-II 60,000 1754
30 20 15 2½ 35 20%4
R-III 86,000 200 30 20 15 2½ 35 20%
Commercial
Districts
C-I 40,000 150 40 40 206
2 30 --
C-II 10,000 100 25 20 206
2 30 --
VC7
7,500 50 15 20 106
2 30 80%
Industrial Districts
I-I 40,000 150 25 50 258
4 50 65%
I-II 40,000 100 20 30 258
4 50 65%
Floodplain and/or
Wetland Protection
Districts9
NOTES:
1 Lots that are zoned for industry shall maintain a twenty-foot nondisturbed vegetated buffer along any lot line that abuts a property used for
residential purposes.
2
 On lots abutting streets on more than one side, the front yard requirements shall apply to each of the abutting streets.
3 These height restrictions shall not apply to chimneys, water towers, skylights and other necessary features appurtenant to buildings which
are usually carried above roofs and are not used for human occupancy. Note that the height of wireless communications towers and
associated facilities shall comply with the requirements of § 205-39.2, and the height of wind power generation facilities shall comply with
the requirements of § 205-39.3.
4
 See Article IX, § 205-37 (Apartments and attached dwellings) for the dimensional requirements that apply to apartments and attached
dwellings.
5 A dwelling need not be set back more than the average of the setbacks of dwellings on the lots adjacent to either side. If a vacant lot exists
on one side, it shall be considered as a dwelling set back the depth of the required front yard.
6 Except there is no requirement when the side of a building abuts another building.
7 See also § 205-38D, Additional dimensional requirements.
8
 Except 50 feet when abutting a residential zone.
9 Floodplain restrictions are set forth in Article XI.
205 Attachment 2:1 Supp 25, Nov 2019

ZONING
205 Attachment 1
Town of Westminster
Table of Use Regulations
Chapter 205, Zoning
(Part 1)
[Amended STM 10-25-1978 by Art. 1; STM 10-2-1978 by Art. 3; STM 10-2-1978 by Art. 4; STM 3-15-1989 by Art. 7; ATM 4-16-1983 by Art. 34; STM 10-10-1995 by Art. 17;
STM 10-6-1997 by Art. 21; ATM 5-6-2000 by Art. 30;ATM 5-6-2000 by Art. 31; STM 6-18-2001 by Art. 4; STM 10-26-2004 by Art. 21; STM 10-26-2004 by Art. 22; ATM 5-3-
2005 by Art. 43; ATM 5-2-2006 by Art. 56; ATM 5-3-2008 by Arts. 39, 40; ATM 5-5-2012 by Art. 44; ATM 5-3-2014 by Art. 35; STM 11-18-2014 by Arts. 13 and 15; ATM 5-7-
2016 by Art. 39; STM 11-28-2017 by Art. 15; STM 11-27-2018 by Art. 12; STM 11-27-2018 by Art. 10; 5-4-2019 ATM by Art. 30; 5-4-2019 ATM by Art. 32]
Residential Commercial Industrial
Use R-I R-II R-III C-I C-II VC I-I I-II
A. Residential Uses
(1) Detached dwelling on a separate lot occupied by not more than 1 family Y Y Y N N Y N N
(2) 1 2-family or 1 duplex dwelling on a separate lot Y Y N N N Y N N
(3) Townhouse apartments (For dimensional requirements, see § 205-33, Apartments and Attached
Dwellings.)
SP N N N N SP N N
(4) Apartments (For dimensional requirements, see § 205-33, Apartments and Attached Dwellings.) SP N N N N SP N N
(5) Motels and hotels (See § 205-32, Motels.) N N N Y Y Y SP SP
(6) Bed-and-breakfast SP SP SP Y Y Y N N
(7) Renting rooms in a dwelling existing at the time of adoption of this chapter to not more than 4
persons, provided that there are no separate cooking facilities
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(8) Renting of rooms in an existing dwelling to more than 4 persons N N N N SP SP N N
(9) Conversion of a dwelling existing at the time of adoption of this chapter to accommodate not
more than 2 families
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(10) Conversion of a dwelling existing at the time of adoption of this chapter to accommodate more
than 2 families. (For dimensional requirements, see § 205-33, Apartments and Attached Dwellings.)
SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
(11) Trailer or mobile home N N N N N N N N
(12) Temporary residential use of a camper or trailer Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(13) Temporary mobile homes, camping trailers, utility trailers, horse trailers, trailers, boats or pickup
campers
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(14) Trailer park or mobile home park N N N N N N N N
205 Attachment 1:1 Supp 24, May 2019
WESTMINSTER CODE
Town of Westminster
Table of Use Regulations
Chapter 205, Zoning
(Part 2)
Residential Commercial Industrial
Use R-I R-II R-III C-I C-II VC I-I I-II
B. Institutional, recreational and educational uses
(1) Place of worship Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(2) Religious, sectarian and nonsectarian denominational, private or public school Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(3) Federal, state and municipal buildings and related or supporting facilities Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(4) Cemeteries Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(5) Federal, state and municipal park, playground or recreational facility Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(6) Public utilities SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
(7) Private nonprofit libraries or museums SP SP SP Y Y Y SP SP
(8) Private nonprofit community center building, adult education center or other similar facility SP SP SP SP SP SP N N
(9) Hospital or infirmary Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(10) Nursing home, convalescent home, or assisted living facility Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(11) Day nursery, nursery school or kindergarten Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(12) Large family child-care home Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(13) Family child-care home [considered an accessory use under Subsection I(12)] Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(14) Trade, professional or other school SP N N Y Y Y SP SP
(15) Private nonprofit membership or social club or lodge SP SP SP Y Y Y SP SP
(16) Country club, golf, swimming, tennis or other recreational facility SP SP SP Y Y Y SP SP
(17) Entertainment and recreational facilities N N N Y Y Y N N
(18) Domestic charitable corporation kennel SP-PB SP-PB SP-PB N N N N N
C. Agricultural uses
(1) Farms: agriculture, orchard, horticulture, or silviculture Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(2) Livestock farms Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(3) One roadside stand per farm for sale of agricultural or horticultural products Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(4) Sales places for flowers, garden supplies or agricultural produce partly or wholly outdoors, including
commercial greenhouses on parcels less than 5 acres
SP SP SP Y Y Y SP SP
(5) The raising of swine on parcels of five acres or more and exempted under MGL c. 40A, § 3 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
D. Offices and laboratory
(1) Business, financial, professional offices N N N Y Y Y Y Y
205 Attachment 1:2 Supp 24, May 2019
ZONING
Town of Westminster
Table of Use Regulations
Chapter 205, Zoning
(Part 3)
Residential Commercial Industrial
Use R-I R-II R-III C-I C-II VC I-I I-II
(2) Medical offices and clinics N N N Y Y Y Y Y
(3) Research and development laboratory or research facility, including life science and biotechnology
laboratories having Biological Safety Levels 1, 2 and 3 as determined by the CDC
N N N Y Y Y Y Y
(4) Research and development laboratory or research facility, including life science and biotechnology
laboratories having a Biological Safety Level of 4 as determined by the CDC
N N N N N N SP SP
(5) Radio, movie or television studio N N N Y Y Y Y Y
(6) Radio or television transmission N SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
E. Retail business and consumer service establishments
(1) Store for retail sale of merchandise N N N Y Y Y N N
(2) Retail store containing more than 25,000 square feet of gross floor area N N N N N N N N
(3) Eating places serving food and beverages to be consumed within the building N N N Y Y Y N N
(4) Eating places serving food and beverages with an outside patio or deck N N N SP SP SP N N
(5) Brewery with restaurant and/or retail component N N N Y Y Y Y Y
(6) Stores for the sale or rental of boats, marine supplies and associated items N N N Y Y SP N N
(7) Marinas, including sales and repair of boats and related supplies SP SP SP Y Y N SP SP
(8) Personal services serving local needs N N N Y Y Y N N
(9) Studios for arts and handicrafts SP SP SP Y Y Y N N
(10) Mortuary, undertaking or funeral establishment SP N N Y Y Y N N
(11) Veterinary kennel SP-PB SP-PB SP-PB SP-PB SP-PB SP-PB SP-PB SP-PB
(12) Building supply store N N N Y Y N N N
(13) Glass sales and repairs, including auto glass repair and service N N N Y Y SP SP SP
(14) Business services N N N Y Y Y Y Y
(15) Adult bookstores, adult live entertainment, adult motion-picture theater, adult mini motion-picture theater,
adult video store, or adult paraphernalia store (See § 205-35)
N N N N N N SP SP
(16) Self-storage (mini warehouse facilities) N N N N N N SP SP
(17) Commercial boarding or training kennel SP-PB SP-PB SP-PB SP-PB SP-PB SP-PB SP-PB SP-PB
(18) Commercial breeder kennel N SP-PB SP-PB N N N N N
(19) Drive-in eating places where the motorist does not have to leave his car or where food is normally
consumed outside the building
N N N Y Y SP N N
(20) Place for exhibition, fabrication, lettering or sale of gravestones N N N Y Y Y Y Y
F. Automotive service and open air drive-in retail service
(1) Gasoline service stations N N N SP SP SP N N
(2) Sale or rental of automobiles, or other motor vehicles and accessory storage N N N Y N N N N
(3) Automobile and motorcycle repair shops, provided that all major work is carried out within the building N N N Y Y SP SP SP
(4) Bus or other large vehicle storage or repair N N N N N N Y Y
(5) Car washing establishments N N N Y Y Y N N
205 Attachment 1:3 Supp 24, May 2019
WESTMINSTER CODE
Town of Westminster
Table of Use Regulations
Chapter 205, Zoning
(Part 4)
Residential Commercial Industrial
Use R-I R-II R-III C-I C-II VC I-I I-II
G. Industrial, wholesale and transportation uses
(1) Laundries and dry-cleaning plants N N N Y Y SP Y Y
(2) Printing, binding, publishing and related arts and trades N N N Y Y SP Y Y
(3) Bottling of beverages, including spring water N N N N N N Y Y
(4) Plumbing, electrical or carpentry shop or other similar service or repair establishment N N N Y Y SP Y Y
(5) Light manufacturing N N N N N N Y Y
(6) Wholesale business and storage in an enclosed and roofed structure N N N Y SP SP Y Y
(7) Wholesale business with outside storage N N N N N N SP SP
(8) Truck terminals N N N N N N SP SP
(9) Artisanal manufacturing N N N Y Y Y Y Y
H. Other principal uses
(1) Mixed-use building containing retail, office, restaurant or consumer service establishments and residential
dwelling unit(s)
N N N N Y Y N N
(2) Open lot storage or sale of junk or salvaged materials N N N N N N N N
(3) Any use hazardous to health because of danger of flooding, inadequacy of drainage or inaccessibility to firefighting apparatus or other protective service
N N N N N N N N
(4) Recycling facility N N N N N N SP SP
(5) Airports, air pads, private or commercial propeller, jet, helicopter, glider planes, drone parts, sale or rental of
craft and storage
N N N N N N SP SP
(6) Wireless communications towers and facilities See § 205-39
(7) Residential wind energy facilities (See § 205-40) Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(8) Small wind energy facilities (See § 205-40) N SP-PB N N N N N N
(9) Medical marijuana treatment center/registered marijuana dispensaries (See § 205-41) N N N N N N SP-PB SP-PB
(10) Large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations (See § 205.40.1) SP SP SP SP SP N SP SP
(11) Large-scale roof-mounted solar photovoltaic installations Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(12) Residential-scale solar photovoltaic installations Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(13) Recreational marijuana establishments (See § 205-41.1) N N N N N N SP SP
(14) Retail sales of recreational marijuana N N N N N N SP SP
I. Accessory uses and off-street parking
(1) Private garage for residents of a dwelling on the same premises Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(2) Private greenhouse, toolsheds, tennis courts, swimming pools or other similar building or structure for
domestic use
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(3) The raising or keeping of animals, livestock or poultry as pets or for use by residents of the premises,
provided that no sty, paddock, building or similar enclosure for any animal may be less than 50 feet from any lot
line
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
205 Attachment 1:4 Supp 24, May 2019
ZONING
Town of Westminster
Table of Use Regulations
Chapter 205, Zoning
(Part 5)
Residential Commercial Industrial
Use R-I R-II R-III C-I C-II VC I-I I-II
(4) Customary home occupation – office Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(5) Customary home occupation – contractor Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(6) Restaurants inside a building for the use of the primary occupants of the building, provided that there is no
exterior evidence of the same
N N N Y Y Y Y Y
(7) Restaurants primarily for the use of residents of an apartment building or group of apartment buildings,
provided that there is no exterior evidence of the same
SP N N Y Y Y N N
(8) Beauty shop, barbershop or newsstand for the resident under the same conditions as set forth in Subsection
I(7) above
SP N N Y Y Y N N
(9) Customary home occupation – sales Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(10) Customary home occupation – personal services Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(11) Uses accessory to activities permitted as a matter of right, which activities are necessary in connection with
scientific research or scientific development or related production, provided that the proposed accessory use does
not substantially detract from the public good
SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
(12) Family day-care service with no more than 6 children under 16 and no children sleeping overnight Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(13) Retail use accessory to the principal manufacturing use N N N N N N SP SP
(14) Personal kennel Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(15) Dish antenna conforming to the building setbacks for primary structures (front, side, rear) required in the
zoning district in which it is located.
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(16) Accessory dwelling unit Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(17) Parking lots for commercial and/or industrial uses N N N Y Y N Y Y
205 Attachment 1:5 Supp 24, May 2019