
Watertown, MA Code of Ordinances


TOWN OF WATERTOWN, MASSACHUSETTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2018 S-6 Supplement contains:
Local legislation passed through 7-31-2018,
including Ordinance O-2018-59, passed 6-26-18



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  www.amlegal.com



OFFICIALS
WATERTOWN, MASSACHUSETTS



 



 


TOWN COUNCIL





Mark Sideris
 
Town Council President


Vincent J. Piccirilli, Jr.
 
Town Council Vice President


Caroline J. Bays
 
Town Councillor


Anthony J. Donato
 
Town Councillor


Susan G. Falkoff
 
Town Councillor


Lisa J. Feltner
 
Town Councillor


Angeline B. Kounelis
 
Town Councillor


Anthony Palomba
 
Town Councillor


Kenneth M. Woodland
 
Town Councillor


 
 
 



MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS



Michael J. Driscoll
 
Town Manager


KP Law, P.C.
 
Town Attorney


John E. Flynn
 
Town Clerk




 



WATERTOWN HOME RULE CHARTER



ARTICLE 1:  INCORPORATION; SHORT TITLE; POWERS; DEFINITIONS



   Section 1-1.   Incorporation



   Section 1-2.   Short Title



   Section 1-3.   Distribution of Power



   Section 1-4.   Powers of the Town



   Section 1-5.   Construction



   Section 1-6.   Intergovernmental Relations



   Section 1-7.   Definitions



ARTICLE 2:  LEGISLATIVE BRANCH



   Section 2-1.   Composition, Term of Office



   Section 2-2.   Council President



   Section 2-3.   Compensation



   Section 2-4.   General Powers



   Section 2-5.   Exercise of Powers; Quorum; Rules



   Section 2-6.   Access to Information



   Section 2-7.   Officers Appointed by the Council or Council President



   Section 2-8.   Ordinances and Other Measures



   Section 2-9.   Filling of Vacancies



ARTICLE 3:  TOWN MANAGER



   Section 3-1.   Appointment; Term of Office; Qualifications



   Section 3-2.   Powers and Duties



   Section 3-3.   Compensation



   Section 3-4.   Removal



   Section 3-5.   Acting Town Manager



   Section 3-6.   Evaluation of Town Manager



ARTICLE 4:  OTHER ELECTED OFFICERS



   Section 4-1.   School Committee



   Section 4-2.   Library Trustees



ARTICLE 5:  FINANCIAL PROCEDURES



   Section 5-1.   Budget Hearing and Goal Setting



   Section 5-2.   Submission of Budget; Message



   Section 5-3.   Action on the Budget



   Section 5-4.   Independent Audit



   Section 5-5.   Capital Outlay Program



ARTICLE 6:  ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION



   Section 6-1.   Reorganization Plans by Ordinance



   Section 6-2.   Reorganization Plans by Administrative Code



   Section 6-3.   Publication of Reorganization Plans



ARTICLE 7:  NOMINATIONS, ELECTIONS, INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM



   Section 7-1.   Board of Election Commissioners



   Section 7-2.   Town Elections: General; Preliminary



   Section 7-3.   Partisan Elections



   Section 7-4.   Preliminary Elections



   Section 7-5.   Ballot Position, Regular Town Election



   Section 7-6.   Districts



   Section 7-7.   Application of State General Laws



   Section 7-8.   Citizen Petitions to Council or School Committee



   Section 7-9.   Citizen Initiative Measures



   Section 7-10.   Citizen Referendum Procedures



   Section 7-11.   Ineligible Measures



   Section 7-12.   Submission of Other Matters to Voters



   Section 7-13.   Conflicting Provisions



ARTICLE 8:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Section 8-1.   Charter Changes



   Section 8-2.   Severability



   Section 8-3.   Specific Provisions to Prevail



   Section 8-4.   Rules and regulations



   Section 8-5.   Codification of Ordinances



   Section 8-6.   Uniform Procedures Applicable to Multiple Member
Bodies



   Section 8-7.   Number



   Section 8-8.   References to General Laws



   Section 8-9.   Certificate of Election or Appointment



   Section 8-10.   Notice of Vacancies



   Section 8-11.   Penalties for Elected Officials Convicted of a Felony



ARTICLE 9:  TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS



   Section 9-1.   Continuation of Existing Laws, Etc.



   Section 9-2.   Continuation of Government and Administration



   Section 9-3.   Transfer of Records and Property



   Section 9-4.   Continuation of Personnel



   Section 9-5.   Effect on Obligations, Taxes, Etc.



   Section 9-6.   Temporary Administrative Code



Editor’s note:
   This Home Rule Charter is as Amended through Chapter 98 of the Acts of
2001 and Acceptance by the voters, November 6, 2001; Further Amended by Town
Council Proposal and accepted by the voters on November 8, 2011.



ARTICLE 1
INCORPORATION; SHORT TITLE; POWERS; DEFINITIONS



SECTION 1-1  INCORPORATION



   The inhabitants of the Town of Watertown, within the territorial limits
established by law, shall continue to be a municipal corporation, a body
corporate and politic, under the name "Town of Watertown."



SECTION 1-2  SHORT TITLE



   This instrument shall be known and may be cited as the Watertown Home
Rule Charter.



SECTION 1-3  DISTRIBUTION OF POWERS



   The administration of the fiscal, prudential and municipal affairs of
Watertown, with the government thereof, shall be vested in an administrative
branch headed by a town manager, and a legislative branch to consist of a
town council. The legislative branch shall never exercise any administrative
power and the administrative branch shall never exercise any legislative
power.



SECTION 1-4  POWERS OF THE TOWN



   Subject only to express limitations on the exercise of any power or
function by a municipal government in the constitution or general laws of the
Commonwealth, it is the intention and the purpose of the voters of Watertown
through the adoption of this charter to secure for themselves and their
government all of the powers it is possible to secure as fully and as
completely as though each such power were specifically and individually
enumerated herein.



   For the purposes of classifying Watertown in those instances where laws
of the Commonwealth may distinguish between municipalities classified as
"towns" and other municipalities classified as "cities," it is intended that
this charter shall be construed as providing a city form of government.



SECTION 1-5  CONSTRUCTION



   The powers of Watertown under this charter are to be construed
liberally in its favor, and the specific mention of any particular power is
not intended to limit the general powers as stated in section 1-4.



SECTION 1-6  INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS



   Subject only to express limitations in the constitution or general laws
of the Commonwealth, Watertown may exercise any of its powers or perform any
of its functions, and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in
cooperation, by contract or otherwise, with the Commonwealth or any agency or
political subdivision thereof, or with the United States government or any
agency thereof.



SECTION 1-7  DEFINITIONS



   Unless another meaning is clearly apparent from the manner in which the
word or phrase is used, the following words and phrases as used in this
charter shall have the following meanings:



   (a)   Charter - The word "charter" shall mean this charter and any
amendment to it hereafter adopted.



   (b)   Emergency - The word "emergency" shall mean a sudden,
unexpected, unforeseen happening, occurrence or condition which necessitates
immediate action or response.



   (c)   Full Council, Full Multiple-Member Body - The words "full
council" or "full multiple-member body" shall mean the entire authorized
complement of the town council, school committee or other multiple-member
body notwithstanding any vacancy which might exist.



   (d)   general laws - The words "general laws" (all lower case
letters) shall mean laws enacted by the state legislature which apply alike
to all cities and towns, to all cities, to all towns, or to a class of two or
more cities and or towns of which Watertown is a member



   (e)   General Laws - The words "General Laws" (initial letter of
each word in upper case letters) shall mean the General Laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, a codification and revision of statutes
enacted on December 22, 1920, and including all amendments thereto
subsequently adopted.



   (f)   Initiative Measure - The words "initiative measure" shall mean
a measure proposed by the voters through the initiative process provided
under this charter



   (g)   Local Newspaper - The words "local newspaper" shall mean a
newspaper of general circulation within Watertown, with either a weekly or
daily circulation. Any information required to be published in a local
newspaper shall also be posted on the town website.



   (h)   Majority Vote - The words "majority vote" shall mean a
majority of those present and voting, unless another provision is made by
ordinance, by law, or by its own rules.



   (i)   Measure - The word "measure" shall mean any ordinance, order,
resolution, or other vote or proceeding adopted, or which might be adopted by
the town council or the school committee.



   (j)   Multiple-member Body - The words "multiple-member body" shall
mean any board, commission, committee, sub committee, or other body
consisting of two or more members whether elected, appointed or otherwise
constituted, but not including the town council, the school committee, and
the trustees of the public library.



   (k)   Referendum Measure - The words "referendum measure" shall mean
a measure adopted by the town council or by the school committee which is
protested by the referendum procedures provided under this chapter.



   (l)   Town - The word "town" shall mean the town of Watertown.



   (m)   Town Bulletin Board - The words "town bulletin board" shall
mean the bulletin board in the administration building on which the town
clerk posts official notices of meetings and upon which other official town
notices are posted, and the bulletin boards at any other locations as may be
designated town bulletin boards by the town council. Any information required
to be posted on the town bulletin board shall also be posted on the town
website.



   (n)   Town Agency - The words "town agency" shall mean any
multiple-member body. any department, division, or office of the town of
Watertown.



   (o)   Town Officer - The words "town officer" when used without
further qualification or description, shall mean a person having charge of an
office or department of the town who in the exercise of his or her powers or
duties exercises some portion of the sovereign power of the town.



   (p)   Town Website- The words "town website" shall mean the official
website maintained by the Town of Watertown.



   (q)   Vacancy- The word "vacancy" shall mean an office that becomes
open prior to the end of a person's elected or appointed term due to the
death, resignation, or removal of that person, or as a result of a failure to
elect.



   (r)   Voters - The word "voters" shall mean registered voters of the
town of Watertown.



ARTICLE 2
LEGISLATIVE BRANCH



SECTION 2-1  COMPOSITION, TERM OF OFFICE



   (a)   Composition -There shall be a town council of nine members
which shall exercise the legislative powers of the town. Four of these
members, to be known as councillors-at-large, shall be nominated and elected
by and from the voters at large. Four of these members, to be known as
district councillors, shall be nominated and elected by and from the voters
of each district, one such district councillor to be elected from each of the
four council districts into which the town is divided, in accordance with
section 7-6. The ninth member of the town council shall be a council
president, elected as provided in section 2-2.



   (b)   Term of Office -The terms of town councillors shall be for two
years each, beginning on the first business day of January in the year
following their election, until their successors have been qualified.



   (c)   Eligibility -Any voter shall be eligible to hold the office of
councillor-at-large. A district councillor shall at the time of election be a
voter of the district from which the councillor is elected, provided, however
if any such district councillor shall during the term for which the
councillor was elected remove to another district in the town, or be so
removed by a revision of district lines, such councillor may continue to
serve for the balance of the term for which the councillor was elected.



SECTION 2-2  COUNCIL PRESIDENT



   (a)   Election and Term -A council president shall be nominated and
elected by and from the voters at large at each biennial election to serve
for a term of two years, beginning on the first business day of January
following the election and until a successor is qualified.



   (b)   Powers and Duties – The council president shall be
recognized as the official head of the town for all ceremonial purposes and
shall be recognized by the courts for the purposes of serving civil process.



   The council president shall be the presiding officer of the town
council.  The council president shall have no power of veto but shall have
the same powers as any other member of the town council to vote upon all
measures coming before it.  The council president shall perform such other
duties consistent with the office as may be provided by charter, by
ordinance, or by vote of the town council.



   The council president shall also serve as a member of the school
committee. The officer provided for in this section shall be referred to as
"council president", but ballots used in electing the said office shall
contain the words "council president and member of school committee."



   (c)   Council Vice President -As soon as practicable after the
councillors elect have been qualified following each biennial election, the
town council shall elect from among its members a vice president who shall
act as president during the absence or disability of the council president



SECTION 2-3  COMPENSATION, EXPENSES



   (a)    Salary - The town council may, by ordinance, provide an
annual salary for its members. No ordinance increasing such salary shall be
effective, however, unless it shall have been adopted during the first
eighteen months of the term for which town councillors are elected, and it
provides that such salary is to take effect with the organization of the town
government following the next biennial election.



   (b)    Expenses - Subject to appropriation, the council members
shall be entitled to reimbursement of their actual and necessary expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties.



SECTION 2-4  GENERAL POWERS



   Except as otherwise provided by general law or by this charter, all
powers of the town shall be vested in the town council which shall provide
for their exercise and for the performance of all duties and obligations
imposed upon the town by law.  The town may enter into contracts for the
exercise of its corporate powers on such terms and conditions as are
authorized by the town council by ordinance.



SECTION 2-5  EXERCISE OF POWERS; QUORUM; RULES



   (a)   Exercise of Powers - Except as otherwise provided by general
law or by this charter, the legislative powers of the town council may be
exercised in a manner determined by it.



   (b)   Quorum - The presence of five members shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business, but a smaller number may meet and
adjourn from time to time. Except as otherwise provided by general law or by
this charter the affirmative vote of five members shall be required to adopt
any ordinance or appropriation order.



   (c)   Rules of Procedure - The town council shall from time to time
adopt rules regulating it procedures, which shall be in addition to the
following:



      (i)   Regular meetings of the town council shall be held at a
time and place fixed by ordinance.



      (ii)   Special meetings of the town council shall be held at
the call of the council president, or, on the call of any three or more
members, by written notice delivered to each member and which contains a
listing of the items to be acted upon. Except in case of an emergency, of
which the council president shall be judge, such notice shall be posted upon
the town bulletin board at least forty-eight week-day hours excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays in advance of the time set for such
meeting.



      (iii)   All sessions of the town council and of every
committee or sub committee thereof, shall at all times be open to the public
and to the press, unless another provision is made by law.



      (iv)   A full, accurate, up-to-date account of the proceedings
of the town council shall be kept, which shall include a record of each vote
taken, and which shall be made available with reasonable promptness following
each meeting.



SECTION 2-6  ACCESS TO INFORMATION



   (a)   In General - The town council may make investigations into the
affairs of the town and into the conduct and performance of any town agency
and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and require the
production of evidence.



   (b)   Town Officers, Members of Town Agencies, Employees - The town
council may require any town officer, member of a town agency or town
employee to appear before it to give such information as the town council may
require in relation to the municipal services, functions, powers, or duties
which are within the scope of responsibility of such person.



   (c)   Town Manager -The town council may require the town manager to
appear before it at any time to provide specific information on the conduct
of any aspect of the business of the town which is within his or her control
by or under this charter or by or under any statute or law.



   The town manager may on any such occasion bring any assistant,
department head or other town officer or employee or other resources to
assist the manager in responding to questions which may be posed to the
manager.



   (d)   Notice - Except in cases of emergency the town council shall
give not less than five days notice in writing to any person it may request
to appear before it under the provisions of this section. The notice shall
include specific questions on which the town council seeks information, and
no person called to appear before the town council under this section shall
be required to respond to any question not relevant or related to those
presented to the person in advance and in writing. Notice shall be by
delivery in hand, or by electronic mail (with notification of receipt
requested), by registered or certified mail to the last known place of
residence of any such person.



SECTION 2-7  OFFICERS APPOINTED BY THE COUNCIL OR COUNCIL PRESIDENT



   (a)   Town Auditor - The town council, by the affirmative vote of at
least five members, shall appoint a Town Auditor for an indefinite term of
office.



   The Town Auditor shall be appointed solely on the basis of his or her
professional qualifications and experience.



   The town auditor shall keep and have charge of the accounts of the town
and shall from time to time audit the books and accounts of all town
agencies. The town auditor shall have such other powers and duties as
provided for auditors and accountants by general laws and such additional
powers and duties as may be provided by the charter, by ordinance or by other
vote of the town council.



   (b)   Clerk of the Council - The town council  shall appoint, and
may remove at its discretion a person nominated by the council president, who
may be the town clerk, to serve as clerk for a term of three years and until
his or her successor is chosen and qualified. The clerk of the council shall
give notice of its meetings to its members and to the public, keep the
journal of its proceedings and perform such other duties as may be provided
by ordinance or by other vote of the town council.



   (c)   Salaries -The officers appointed under Section 2-7 shall
receive such salaries as may from time to time be provided for such office by
ordinance.



   (d)   Supervision- The council president shall be responsible for
day-to-day supervision of the town auditor and clerk of the council,
including but not limited to discipline of same up to and including an unpaid
suspension of not more than five days; provided, however, that the council
president may, at the council president's sole discretion, bring to the town
council any personnel matter involving the town auditor or clerk of the
council for appropriate action, and provided further that a vote of the town
council would be needed to remove the town auditor or clerk of the council.



SECTION 2-8  ORDINANCES AND OTHER MEASURES



   (a)   Emergency Ordinances - No ordinance shall be passed finally on
the date it is introduced, except in case of special emergency involving the
health or safety of the people or their property.



   No ordinance shall be regarded as an emergency ordinance unless the
emergency is defined and declared in a preamble to such ordinance, separately
voted upon and receiving the affirmative vote of six members of the town
council.



   No ordinance making a grant, renewal or extension, whatever its kind or
nature, of any franchise or special privilege of any kind or nature shall be
passed as an emergency measure, and except as provided in sections seventy
and seventy-one of chapter one-hundred sixty-four and in chapter one-hundred
sixty-six of the General Laws, no such grant, renewal or extension shall be
made otherwise than by ordinance.



   Emergency ordinances shall stand repealed on the sixty-first day
following their adoption, unless an earlier expiration date is specified in
the emergency ordinance, or unless a measure passed in conformity with the
procedures for measures generally has been passed extending it.



   (b)   Measures, In General - Excepting only proposed ordinances,
appropriation orders and loan authorizations, the town council may pass any
other measure through all of its stages at any one meeting, provided that no
member of the town council shall object; but, if any single member objects, a
vote on the measure shall be postponed to the next meeting of the town
council.



   On the first occasion that the question of adopting any measure is put
to the town council, except an emergency measure as defined in section
2-9(a), if a single member objects to the taking of a vote, the vote shall be
postponed until the next meeting of the town council regular or special. If
when the matter is next taken up for a vote, four or more members object to
the taking of the vote, the matter shall be further postponed for not less
than an additional five days. This procedure shall not be used more than once
for any measure, notwithstanding any amendment made to the original measure.



   (c)   Publication - Every proposed ordinance, appropriation order or
loan authorization [except emergency ordinances as provided in section
2-9(a)], shall be published once in full in a local newspaper, and in any
additional manner as may be provided by ordinance, at least five days before
its final passage. After final passage it shall be posted on the town
bulletin board and otherwise published as may be required by ordinance.
Provided, however, that whenever a proposed ordinance or codification of
ordinances or other measure would exceed in length ten column inches, then in
lieu of publication in a local newspaper, the same may be published and made
available at the office of the town clerk in booklet or pamphlet form and
posted on the town website, and if so published and available at least ten
days before its final passage shall be deemed sufficient notice. Whenever the
town council provides for publication in a booklet or pamphlet form in lieu
of the newspaper publication, it shall, at least five days before final
passage publish in a local newspaper a general summary of the proposed
ordinance, or ordinances, and a notice stating the times and places at which
copies of the booklet or pamphlet may be obtained or reviewed by the public.



SECTION 2-9  FILLING OF VACANCIES



   (a)   If a vacancy shall occur in the office of council president,
councillor-at-large or district councillor during the first twelve months of
the term for which councillors are elected, the vacancy shall be filled by
special election forthwith and no earlier than 64 days from the date election
is called; provided however, by vote of not less than 6 councillors, the town
council may instead vote to fill the vacancy from among the voters by
appointment.



   (b)   If a vacancy shall occur in the office of council president,
councilor-at-large or district councillor during the second twelve months of
the term for which councillors are elected, appointment by vote of not less
than 6 councillors from among the voters; provided, however that if approved
by a vote of not less than 6 councillors, a special election to fill the
vacancy may instead be held forthwith on a date at least 64 days from the
date the election is called.



   (c)   If an acting town councillor appointed under paragraphs (a) or
(b) is not elected to the office at the next town election, or if the
position remains vacant, the person certified by the election commission as a
successful candidate to the office shall forthwith be sworn and shall serve
the remainder of the vacant term in addition to the term for which the person
was elected.



   (d)   An acting town councilor appointed by the town council under
paragraphs (a) or (b) shall not be entitled to have the words " candidate for
reelection" printed against that person's name on the ballot at the next
election.



ARTICLE 3
TOWN MANAGER



SECTION 3-1  APPOINTMENT, TERM OF OFFICE; QUALIFICATIONS



   (a)   Appointment, Term of Office - The town council, by the
affirmative vote of at least five members, shall appoint a town manager to
serve for an indefinite term of office.



   (b)   Qualifications - The town manager shall be appointed solely on
the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications. The town
manager shall be a person especially fitted by education, training and
previous experience in municipal administration directly related to the
profession of municipal management to perform the duties of the office.



   The town manager need not be a resident of Watertown at the time of his
or her appointment, nor of the Commonwealth, but the town manager shall
establish residence in Watertown within twelve months following his or her
appointment unless excused from such requirement by the town council.



   The town manager shall devote his or her full time to the office and
shall not hold any other public office, elected or appointed, nor shall the
person serving as town manager engage in any other business, occupation or
profession unless such action is approved, in advance, by the town council.



   The town council may, by ordinance, establish other qualifications for
the office of town manager.



SECTION 3-2  POWERS AND DUTIES



   The town manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the town
and shall be responsible to the town council for the proper administration of
all town affairs placed under his or her charge by or under the charter. The
powers and duties of the town manager shall include, but are not intended to
be limited to, the following:



   1)   Supervise, direct and be responsible for the efficient
administration of all town activities placed under his or her control by the
charter, by ordinance, or otherwise, including all officers appointed by the
manager and their respective agencies.



   2)   Be responsible for the coordination of the activities of all
agencies under his or her control with the activities of all other town
agencies, including those elected by the voters of Watertown and those
appointed by other elected officials.



   3)   Appoint, and may remove, subject to the civil service law and
any collective bargaining agreements as may be applicable, all department
heads, all officers, subordinates and employees for whom no other method of
selection is provided by the charter, by ordinance, by administrative code,
or otherwise.  Appointments made by the town manager shall be subject to
confirmation of the town council, as provided by ordinance. 



   4)   Administer personnel related matters, including bargaining with
municipal employees, and shall fix the compensation of all municipal
employees appointed by the manager within the limits established by
appropriation and any ordinance or collective bargaining agreement.



   5)   Assure that all of the provisions of the General Laws, the town
charter, town ordinances, and other votes of the town council which require
enforcement by him or her, or by officers or employees subject to his or her
supervision, are faithfully carried out and enforced.



   6)   Prepare and submit an annual operating budget and a capital
outlay program as provided in Article 5.



   7)   Assure that a full and complete record of the financial and
administrative activities of the town is kept and shall render a complete
written report to the town council at the end of each fiscal year and at such
times as the town council may reasonably require.



   7A)   Execute contracts, subject to such prior town council approval
as may be prescribed by ordinance.



   8)   Have full jurisdiction over the rental and use of all town
facilities, except school and library buildings and grounds. The Town Manager
shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of all town-owned
property, including, if authorized by an ordinance establishing a central
town maintenance department, school and library buildings and grounds.



   9)   Inquire at any time into the conduct of office of any officer,
employee, or department under his or her supervision.



   10)   Assure that a full and complete inventory of all property
owned by the town, both real and personal, is kept.



   11)   Make such recommendations, from time to time, to the town
council, which, in the manager's judgment, are deemed necessary or desirable



   12)   Authorize any subordinate officer or employee to exercise any
power or perform any function which the town manager is authorized to
exercise or perform, provided, however, all acts performed under any such
delegation shall be deemed to be the acts of the town manager.



   13A)   Determine the existence of a public emergency or danger and
shall assume responsibility for the maintenance of public safety, public
order and enforcement of laws.  The manager shall notify the council
president as soon as practical, but within 24 hours, of such a public
emergency or danger and of the actions taken.  Should the public emergency
continue more than 24 hours, the town council may meet to review, ratify, or
terminate said public emergency.



   13B)   Execute all deeds conveying town real property, but that any
such conveyance shall have been previously authorized by the vote of the town
council pursuant to the applicable provisions of the General Laws.



   13C)   Publish an annual report comprising the complete statistical
record of the operations of every town department, commission and committee
for the preceding year, and it shall be published annually and made available
for distribution to the public not later than four months after the end of
the period on which the report is based.



   14)   Perform such other functions as may from time to time be
assigned to the office of town manager by ordinance or other vote of the town
council, or otherwise.



SECTION 3-3  COMPENSATION



   The town manager shall receive such compensation as may from time to
time be established for the office of town manager, by ordinance.



SECTION 3-4  REMOVAL



   Before the town manager may be removed, if the manager so demands, the
manager shall be given a written statement of the reasons alleged for the
manager's removal, and shall have a right to be heard thereon at a meeting of
the town council prior to the final vote on the question of removal, but
pending and during such hearing the town council may suspend the manager from
office The action of the town council in suspending or removing the town
manager shall be final, it being the intention of this provision to vest all
authority and to fix all responsibility for such suspension or removal in the
town council. The town manager shall continue to receive the manager's salary
until the effective date of a final vote of removal. The town council may, by
ordinance, establish a procedure governing the removal from office of a town
manager in such detail as it may deem necessary or desirable.



SECTION 3-5  ACTING TOWN MANAGER



   (a)   Temporary Absence -The town manager shall, by letter filed
with the town council and a copy filed with the town clerk, designate a
qualified town officer or administrative employee to exercise the powers and
perform the duties of the office during  temporary absence. During the first
ten working days of a temporary absence of the town manager, the town council
may revoke such designation by a two-thirds vote and, after the expiration of
ten working days, by a majority vote, whereupon it may appoint another
qualified town officer or employee to serve as acting town manager until the
town manager shall return and resume the manager's duties.



   (b)   Vacancy -Any vacancy in the office of town manager shall be
filled as soon as possible by the town council but pending such appointment
the town council shall designate a qualified town officer or administrative
employee to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the town manager on
an acting basis. The appointment of an acting town manager shall be for a
term not to exceed four months; provided, however, one renewal, not to exceed
a second four months, may be permitted.



   (c)   Powers and Duties -The powers of a temporary or acting town
manager shall be limited to matters not admitting of delay; provided,
however, no temporary town manager under (a) above shall have authority to
make any permanent appointment to, or removal from, any office or position
under the town.



SECTION 3-6  EVALUATION OF TOWN MANAGER



   (a)   There shall be an annual review of the town manager's job
performance conducted by town council.



ARTICLE 4
OTHER ELECTED OFFICES



SECTION 4-1  SCHOOL COMMITTEE



   (a)   Composition -There shall be a school committee of seven
members, six of whom shall be nominated and elected by and from the voters at
large, and the seventh member shall be the person elected as the council
president and school committee member as provided in Section 2-2(b).



   (b)   Terms of Office -At each biennial election, three school
committee members shall be elected at large and shall serve for a four year
term. The terms of school committee members shall begin on the first business
day of January following their election, and shall continue until their
successors are qualified.



   (c)   Eligibility - Any voter shall be eligible to hold the office
of school committee member .



   (d)   Powers and Duties - The school committee shall have all powers
which are conferred on school committees by general laws and such additional
powers and duties as may be provided by the charter, by ordinance, or
otherwise. Its powers and duties shall include, but are not intended to be
limited to the following:



      1)   To appoint a superintendent of the schools and other
employees consistent with the General Laws.  The superintendent shall be
charged with the day-to-day administration of the school system, subject to
policy directives adopted by the school committee;



      2)   To fix the salaries of those officers and employees as
authorized by the General Laws, subject to appropriation and collective
bargaining agreements, and to establish educational goals and policies
consistent with the requirements of the General Laws and statewide goals and
standards, including policies and procedures pursuant to a collective
bargaining agreement; and



      3)   To make all reasonable rules and regulations for the
management of the public school system and for conducting the business of the
school committee as may be deemed necessary or desirable.



      The school committee shall furnish all school buildings with
proper fixtures, furniture and equipment and shall provide ordinary
maintenance of all school buildings and grounds; provided, however, the town
council may, by ordinance, provide for the establishment of a central
municipal maintenance department which may include maintenance of school
buildings and grounds.



      4)   Salary - The school committee may provide an annual
salary for its members within the annual school department appropriation. 
No increase in such salary shall be effective, however, unless it shall have
been adopted during the first eighteen months after the biennial election of
members, and it provides that such salary is to take effect with the
organization of the town government following the next biennial election.



      5)   Expenses – Subject to the school department
appropriation, the members of the school committee shall be entitled to
reimbursement of their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties.



   Filling of Vacancies – (1) If a vacancy shall occur on the school
committee during the first 24 months of the term for which school committee
members are elected, the vacancy shall be filled by special election held
forthwith and no earlier than 64 days from the date the election is called;
provided, however, that town council, by vote of not less than 6 councillors,
may instead vote to have the vacancy filled by appointment by the remaining
members of the school committee from among the voters. (2) If a vacancy shall
occur on the school committee during the second 24 months of the term for
which the school committee members are elected, the vacancy shall be filled
forthwith by appointment by vote of the remaining members of the school
committee from among the voters; provided, however, that if approved by not
less than six town councilors within 14 days of the date the town council is
notified of the vacancy, a special election to fill the vacancy may instead
be held forthwith on a date at least 64 days from the date the election is
called. The school committee may provide the town council with a non-binding
recommendation concerning the manner of selection to be used to fill the
vacancy. (3) If an acting school committee member appointed under paragraphs
(1) or (2) is not elected to the office at the next town election, or if the
position remains vacant, the person certified by the election commission as a
successful candidate to the office shall forthwith be sworn and shall serve
remainder of the vacant term in addition to the term for which the person is
elected. (4) An acting school committee member appointed under paragraphs (1)
or (2) shall not be entitled to have the words "candidate for reelection"
printed against that person's name on the ballot at the next election.



   (f)   Council President -The council president shall have the same
power as any other member to vote on every matter coming before the school
committee.



SECTION 4-2  LIBRARY TRUSTEES



   (a)   Composition, Term of Office - There shall be a board of
trustees of the public library which shall consist of six persons elected for
terms of four years each, so arranged that three such terms shall expire at
each biennial town election.



   (b)   Powers and Duties - The board of trustees of the public
library shall have the custody and management of the library and reading
rooms and of all property of the town devoted to library purposes. All funds
raised or appropriated by the town for the support and maintenance of the
library shall be expended under the direction of the said board. All funds or
property which the town may receive by gift or bequest, or otherwise, for
library purposes shall be administered by the said board in accordance with
the terms of such gift, bequest or otherwise.



   The board of trustees of the public library shall, subject to
appropriation, have the following specific powers and duties:



   To appoint a director of the library and to set the director's salary
within the salary range set by the town manager.



      1)   The director shall be charged with the day-to-day
administration of the library system including appointment, supervision and
removal of all other employees connected with the library system, fixing
their salaries, defining their duties, and making rules concerning their
tenure of office, subject to policy directives adopted by the library
trustees and the provisions of any applicable collective bargaining agreement.



      2)   To make all reasonable rules and regulations for the
operation and management of the library system and for the conduct of their
own business and affairs as may be deemed necessary or desirable.



   The board of trustees of the public library shall in all matters of
general municipal policy and procedures be subject to policy directives
designed to achieve uniformity and better administrative control as may from
time to time be issued by the town manager. Responsibility for the ordinary
maintenance of library buildings and grounds may be transferred to a central
municipal maintenance department by ordinance adopted by the town council.
The board of trustees of the public library shall have all of the other
powers and duties as may be provided by general law, by charter, by ordinance
or otherwise.



   (c)   Filling of Vacancies –



      (1)   If a vacancy shall occur on the board of library
trustees during the first 24 months of the term for which library trustees
are elected, the vacancy shall be filled by special election held forthwith
and no earlier than 64 days from the date the election is called; provided
however, that the town council, by a vote of not less than 6 councillors, may
instead vote to have the vacancy filled by appointment by the remaining
members of the board of library trustees and the council president from among
the voters.



      (2)   If a vacancy shall occur on the board of library
trustees during the second 24 months of the term for which library trustees
are elected, the vacancy shall be filled forthwith by appointment by vote of
the remaining members of the board of library trustees and the council
president from among the voters; provided, however, that if approved by not
less than six town councilors within 14 days of the date the town council is
notified of the vacancy, a special election to fill the vacancy may instead
be held forthwith on a date at least 64 days from the date the election is
called.



      (3)   If an acting library trustee appointed under paragraphs
(1) or (2) is not elected to the office at the next town election, or if the
position remains vacant, the person certified by the election commission as a
successful candidate to the office shall forthwith be sworn and shall serve
the remainder of the vacant term for which the person was elected.



      (4)   An acting library trustee appointed under paragraphs (1)
or (2) shall not be entitled to have the words "candidate for reelection"
printed against the person's name on the ballot at the next election.



   (d)   Salary - The board of trustees may request an ordinance to
provide an annual salary for its members. No ordinance increasing such salary
shall be effective, however, unless it shall have been adopted during the
first eighteen months after the biennial election of members, and it provides
that such salary is to take effect with the organization of the town
government following the next biennial election.



   (e)   Expenses - Subject to appropriation, the members of the board
of trustees shall be entitled to reimbursement of their actual and necessary
expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.



ARTICLE 5
FINANCIAL PROCEDURES



SECTION 5-1  BUDGET HEARING AND GOAL SETTING



   The president of the town council shall call a meeting of the town
council prior to the commencement of the budget process, but not later than
October 30, to review the financial condition of the town, revenue and
expenditure forecasts, and other information relevant to the budget
process.  The president also shall invite the town's state legislative
delegation and representatives of the school committee and library board of
trustees to attend this meeting.  Subsequent to this meeting, the town
council shall meet to set policy goals with input from the town manager and
the community.  Based on these goals, the town manager will develop
budgetary goals and the town budget.



SECTION 5-2  SUBMISSION OF BUDGET, MESSAGE



   The town manager shall, within 14 days after the receipt of
departmental budget proposals, but in no event later than January 31, prepare
and submit to the town council a synopsis of all proposed budget initiatives
and requests for additional funding for its review and prioritization.  The
synopsis shall include a summary of each initiative, its justification and
its estimated costs.  Councillors may also propose budget initiatives for
review and prioritization.  Any such proposal must include a summary,
justification and estimate of costs.  The town manager shall provide an
estimate of projected revenues.



   By the first regularly scheduled town council meeting in April, or a
later date if approved by a vote of the town council, the town manager shall
submit to the town council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal
year, which shall provide a complete financial plan of all town funds and
activities for the ensuing fiscal year, an accompanying budget message, and
supporting documents.



   The message of the town manager shall explain the proposed budget for
all town agencies, in fiscal terms, in terms of work programs, and as to how
the budget incorporates the policy goals established by the council. It shall
outline the proposed financial policies of the town for the ensuing fiscal
year, describe the important features of the budget, indicate any major
changes from the current fiscal year in terms of financial policies,
expenditures or revenues, together with the reasons for such changes, show
the amount budgeted and actually expended for the current fiscal year,
summarize the town's debt position, and include such other material as the
town manager deems desirable or the town council may reasonably require.



SECTION 5-3  ACTION ON THE BUDGET



   (a)   Public Hearing - The town council shall, within 14 days
following its receipt of the proposed budget, publish in one or more local
newspapers the general summary of the proposed budget as submitted by the
town manager and a notice stating: (1) the times and places where complete
copies of the proposed budget and supporting documents are available for
examination by the public and (2) the date, time and place, not less than ten
days after such publication, when the town council, or a standing committee
of the town council, will hold a public hearing on the proposed budget as
submitted by the town manager.



   (b)   Adoption - The town council shall adopt the budget, with or
without amendments, within sixty days following the day the proposed budget
is received by it, or such other period as may be provided by general law. In
amending the budget the town council may delete or decrease any programs or
amounts, except expenditures required by law, or for debt service. If the
town council fails to take any action with respect to any item in the
proposed budget within sixty days following the date of its receipt of the
proposed budget, or such other period as may be provided by general law, such
amount shall, without any action by the town council, become a part of the
appropriations for the ensuing fiscal year and shall be available for the
purposes specified.



   The town council may add budget items or increase funding for existing
budget items as generally described in sections 32 and 33 of chapter 44 of
the General Laws for items not funded or insufficiently funded in the town
manager's proposed budget.



SECTION 5-4  INDEPENDENT AUDIT



   The Town Council shall provide for an audit to be completed by a
certified public accountant, or firm of such accountants not later than
December 31st following the close of each fiscal year.



SECTION 5-5  CAPITAL OUTLAY PROGRAM



   (a)   Submission - The town manager shall prepare and submit to the
town council a five year capital outlay program at least three months prior
to the final date for submission of a proposed annual operating budget.



   (b)   Contents - The capital outlay program in the form submitted
shall include:



      1)   A clear general summary of its contents,



      2)   A listing of all capital expenditures which are proposed
to be made during the five fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate
financial and other details concerning each such expenditure,



      3)   Cost estimates, proposed methods of financing, and a time
schedule for each such expenditure,



      4)   The estimated annual cost of operating or maintaining any
facilities to be acquired or constructed.



      The above information shall be revised and extended, annually.



ARTICLE 6
ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION



SECTION 6-1  REORGANIZATION PLANS BY ORDINANCE



   Except as otherwise prohibited by general law or by the charter, the
town council may, by ordinance, reorganize, consolidate, or abolish any
existing town agency in whole or in part, establish new town agencies, and
prescribe the functions of any town agency. All town agencies under the
direction and supervision of the town manager shall be headed and
administered by officers appointed by the manager.



SECTION 6-2  REORGANIZATION PLANS BY ADMINISTRATIVE CODE



   (a)   Submission - The town manager may from time to time prepare
and submit to the town council reorganization plans which may, unless
prohibited by general law or the charter, reorganize, consolidate, or abolish
any existing town agency in whole or in part, establish new town agencies,
and prescribe the functions of any town agency. Each such reorganization plan
shall be accompanied by an explanatory message when submitted to the town
council.



   (b)   Council Action - Every such reorganization plan shall, upon
receipt by the town council, be referred to an appropriate standing committee
of the town council for study and report. Within thirty days following its
referral to a committee a public hearing shall be held concerning the
proposal, either before the standing committee, or before the full town
council. Within fourteen days following the conclusion of the public hearing
the standing committee to which such matter was referred shall file a report
stating either that it approves of the reorganization plan or that it
disapproves of it. A reorganization plan shall become effective on the
ninetieth day following the date of its receipt by the town council, unless a
later date is specified in the reorganization plan, or unless the town
council has within said period voted to disapprove of it. A reorganization
plan submitted by the town manager under this section may not be amended by
the town council but shall either be approved or disapproved in the form as
submitted.



SECTION 6-3  PUBLICATION OF REORGANIZATION PLANS



   An up-to-date record of reorganization plans under section 6-2(b) shall
be kept on file in the office of the town clerk and copies of all such plans
shall be published as an appendix to any publication of the ordinances of the
town.



ARTICLE 7
NOMINATIONS, ELECTIONS, INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM



SECTION 7-1  BOARD OF ELECTION COMMISSIONERS



   (a)   Composition - The board of election commissioners shall
consist of four persons, of whom two shall always represent each one of the
two leading political parties, as defined in section one of chapter fifty of
the General Laws.



   (b)   Appointment, Term of Office - The town manager, subject to
approval by the town council, shall appoint the members of the board of
election commissioners for terms of four years each, so arranged that one
such term of office shall expire on April first of each year. Every such
appointment shall be made from a list to be submitted by the town committee
of the political party from the members of which the position is to be
filled, containing the names of three enrolled members of such party resident
in the town, selected by a majority vote at a duly called meeting at which a
quorum is present, of such committee; provided, however, if the chair of the
town committee has not submitted such a list to the town manager within forty
five days after a notification to the said chair by certified mail, the town
manager shall make such appointment without reference to such a list. Members
shall serve until the qualification of their successor. In case of a vacancy
it shall be filled in the same manner as aforesaid, except it shall be for
the balance of the unexpired term.



   (c)   Organization - The board of election commissioners shall
organize annually in the month of April by choosing a chair and a secretary.
In case the members are unable to agree upon a chair and a secretary, such
officers shall be designated by the town manager. The secretary shall keep a
full and accurate record of the proceedings of the board and shall perform
such other duties as the board may require.



   (d)   Powers and Duties - All the powers, rights, privileges,
liabilities and duties relating to caucuses, primaries, preliminary elections
and elections by law vested in and imposed upon mayors, managers, boards of
aldermen, selectmen, city or town clerks and board of registrars of voters,
except the power and duty of giving notice of elections and fixing the days
and hours of holding the same shall be vested in and performed by the board
of election commissioners. The board may appoint such assistant commissioners
and such assistants as it deems necessary, who shall at all times equally
represent the two leading political parties as defined aforesaid. Said
assistant commissioners shall have such powers and perform such duties as are
prescribed by general law for assistant registrars of voters, and shall
perform such other duties as the board may require. Persons appointed to
serve temporarily as assistant commissioners shall not be subject to chapter
31 of the General Laws. The board shall have such other powers and duties as
may be provided to such boards of election commissioners under section
sixteen A of chapter fifty-one of the General Laws, or otherwise.



   (e)   Compensation - The members of the board of election
commissioners shall receive such compensation for their services as the town
manager and town council may from time to time determine.



SECTION 7-2  TOWN ELECTIONS: GENERAL; PRELIMINARY



   The regular general town election shall be held on the first Tuesday
following the first Monday in November in each odd numbered year.



   On the seventh Tuesday preceding every regular general town election
there shall be a preliminary election for the purpose of nominating
candidates.



SECTION 7-3  PARTISAN ELECTIONS



   All elections for town offices shall be non-partisan and election
ballots shall be printed without any party mark, emblem, or other designation
whatsoever.



SECTION 7-4  PRELIMINARY ELECTION



   (a)   Signature Requirements - The number of signatures of voters
required to place the name of a candidate on the official ballot to be used
at a preliminary election shall be as follows: for the office of council
president and member of the school committee, councillor-at-large, school
committee member, or library trustee, not less than one-hundred such
signatures, not more than fifty of which shall be from any one district; for
the office of district councillor not less than one hundred such signatures
from the district from which the nomination is sought.



   (b)   Ballot Position - The order in which names of candidates
appear on the ballot for each office shall be determined by a drawing, by
lot, conducted by the board of election commissioners, which shall be open to
the public.



   (c)   Determination of Candidates - The two persons receiving at a
preliminary election the highest number of votes for nomination for any
office shall be the sole candidates for that office whose names shall be
printed on the official ballots to be used at the regular general town
election at which such office is to be voted upon, and no acceptance of a
nomination shall be necessary to its validity. If two or more persons are to
be elected to the same office at such regular election, the several persons,
in number equal to twice the number so to be elected, receiving at such
preliminary election the highest number of votes for nomination for that
office shall be the sole candidates for that office whose names shall be
printed on the official ballots.  If the preliminary election results in a
tie vote among candidates for nomination receiving the lowest number of votes
which, but for said tie vote, would entitle a person receiving the same to
have his or her name printed on the official ballots for the election, all
candidates participating in said tie vote shall have their names printed on
the official ballots, although in consequence thereof there be printed on
such ballots the names of candidates exceeding twice the number to be elected.



   (d)   Condition Making Preliminary Unnecessary - If at the
expiration of time for filing statements of candidates to be voted upon at
any preliminary election not more than twice as many such statements have
been filed with the election commission for an office as candidates are to be
elected to such office, the candidates whose statements have been filed with
the election commission shall be deemed to have been nominated to such
office, and their names shall be voted upon for such office at the succeeding
general election, and the board of election commissioners shall not print
their names on the ballots to be used at said preliminary election and no
other nomination to such office shall be made. If in consequence it shall
appear that no names are to be printed upon the official ballots to be used
in any particular district or districts of the town, no preliminary election
shall be held in such district or districts.



SECTION 7-5  BALLOT POSITION, REGULAR TOWN ELECTION



   The order in which names of candidates appear on the ballot for each
office shall be determined by a drawing, by lot, conducted by the board of
election commissioners which shall be open to the public.



SECTION 7-6  DISTRICTS



   The territory of the town shall be divided into four districts so
established as to consist of compact and contiguous territory, bounded
insofar as possible by the center line of known streets or ways or by other
well defined limits. Each such district shall be composed of voting precincts
otherwise established in accordance with general laws. The town council shall
from time to time review such districts to insure their uniformity in number
of inhabitants.



SECTION 7-7  APPLICATION OF STATE GENERAL LAWS



   Except as expressly provided in this charter and authorized by law, all
town elections shall be governed by the laws of the commonwealth relating to
the right to vote, the registration of voters, the nomination of candidates,
the conduct of preliminary, general and special elections, the submission of
charters, charter amendments and other propositions to the voters, the
counting of votes, the recounting of votes, and the determination of results.



SECTION 7-8  CITIZEN PETITIONS TO COUNCIL OR SCHOOL COMMITTEE



   The town council or the school committee shall hold a public hearing
and act with respect to every citizen petition which is addressed to it,
which petition shall not be required to take any particular form, and is
signed by one-hundred-fifty voters, or more, and which seeks the passage of a
measure concerning matters other than action under section 8-11(c). The
hearing shall be held by the town council or the school committee, or, in
either case, by a committee or sub committee thereof, and the action by the
town council or the school committee shall be taken not later than three
months after the petition is filed with the clerk of the council or the
secretary of the school committee, as may be appropriate. Hearings on two or
more petitions filed under this section may be held at the same time and
place. The clerk of the council or the secretary of the school committee
shall mail notice of the hearing to the ten persons whose names appear first
on the petition at least forty-eight hours before the hearing. Notice, by
publication, of all such hearings shall be at public expense.



SECTION 7-9  CITIZEN INITIATIVE MEASURES



   (a)   Commencement - Initiative procedures shall be started by the
filing of an initiative petition with the clerk of the council or the
secretary of the school committee, as the case may be. The petition shall be
addressed to the town council or to the school committee, shall contain a
request for the passage of a particular measure, which shall be set forth in
full in the petition, and shall be signed by at least ten percent of the
total number of voters as of the date of the most recent town election.
Signatures to an initiative petition need not all be on one paper, but all
such papers pertaining to any one measure shall be fastened together and
shall be filed as a single instrument, with the endorsement thereon of the
name and residence address of the person designated as filing the same. With
each signature on the petition there shall also appear the street and number
of the residence of each signer.



   Within ten days following the filing of the petition the board of
election commissioners shall ascertain by what number of voters the petition
has been signed, and what percentage that number is of the total number of
voters as of the date of the most recent town election. The board of election
commissioners shall attach its' certificate to the petition to the clerk of
the council or the secretary of the school committee according to how the
petition is addressed. A copy of the certificate shall also be mailed to the
person designated upon such petition as having filed the same.



   (b)   Referral to Town Attorney - If the board of election
commissioners determines that a petition has been signed by a sufficient
number of voters, the clerk of the council or the secretary of the school
committee, as the case may be, shall forthwith following receipt of such
certificate deliver a copy of the petition to the town attorney. Within
fifteen days following the date a copy of the petition is delivered to the
town attorney, the town attorney shall, in writing, advise the town council
or the school committee, as may be appropriate, whether the measure as
proposed may lawfully be proposed by the initiative process and whether, in
its present form, it may be lawfully adopted by the town council or by the
school committee. If the opinion of the town attorney is that the measure is
not in proper form, the town attorney shall state the reasons in full in the
reply. A copy of the opinion of the town attorney shall also be mailed to the
person designated on the petition as having filed the same.



   (c)   Action on Petitions - Within thirty days following the date a
petition has been returned to the clerk of the council or to the secretary of
the school committee by the town attorney, and after publication in
accordance with the provisions of section 2-8(c), the town council or the
school committee shall act with respect to each initiative petition by
passing it without change, by passing a measure which is stated to be in lieu
of an initiative measure, or by rejecting it. The passage of a measure which
is in lieu of the initiative measure shall be deemed to be a rejection of the
initiative measure. If, at the expiration of the said thirty days the town
council or the school committee has not voted on such petition, no other
business of said council or committee shall be in order or lawfully acted
upon until a vote to approve of the measure, to disapprove of the measure, or
to adopt some other measure in lieu thereof, has been taken.



   (d)   Supplementary Petitions - Within forty-five days following the
date an initiative petition has been rejected, a supplemental initiative
petition may be filed with the clerk of the council or the secretary of the
school committee. The supplemental initiative petition shall be signed by a
number of additional voters which is equal to five percent of the total
number of voters as of the date of the most recent town election. If the
number of signatures to such supplemental petition is found to be sufficient
by the board of election commissioners, the town council shall call a special
election to be held on a date fixed by it not less than thirty nor more than
forty-five days following the date of the certificate of the board of
election commissioners that a sufficient number of voters have signed the
supplemental initiative petition, and shall submit the proposed measure,
without alteration, to the voters for determination; provided, however, if
any other town election is to be held within one-hundred-twenty days
following the date of the said certificate, the town council may omit the
calling of such special election and cause said question to appear on the
election ballot at such approaching election for determination by the voters.



   (e)   Publication - The full text of any initiative measure which is
submitted to the voters shall be published in a local newspaper not less than
seven nor more than fourteen days preceding the date of the election at which
such question is to be voted upon. Additional copies of the full text shall
be available for distribution to the public in the office of the board of
election commissioners.



   (f)   Form of Question - The ballots used when voting on a measure
proposed by the voters under this section shall contain a question in
substantially the following form:



   Shall the following measure which was proposed by voters in an
initiative petition take effect?



   (Here insert the full text of the proposed measure, or a fair, concise
summary, as determined and prepared by the town attorney, in consultation
with the town clerk.)



   YES      ___



   NO      ___



   (g)   Time of Taking Effect - If a majority of the votes cast on the
question is in the affirmative, the measure shall be deemed to be effective
forthwith, unless a later date is specified in such measure; provided,
however, that no such measure shall be deemed to be adopted if fewer than
twenty percent of the total number of voters of the town, as of the date of
the most recent town election, participate at such election.



SECTION 7-10  CITIZEN REFERENDUM PROCEDURES



   (a)   Petition, Effect on Final Vote - If, within twenty days
following the date on which the town council or the school committee has
voted finally to approve of any measure, a petition signed by a number of
voters equal to fifteen percent of the total number of voters as of the date
of the most recent town election and addressed to the town council or to the
school committee, as the case may be, against the measure or any part thereof
is filed with the secretary of the school committee or clerk of the council,
the effective date of such measure shall be temporarily suspended. The school
committee or the town council shall forthwith reconsider its vote on such
measure or part thereof, and, if such measure is not rescinded the town
council shall provide for the submission of the question for a determination
by the voters either at a special election which it may call at its
convenience, or within such time as may be requested by the school committee,
or at the next regular town election, but pending such submission and
determination the effect of such measure shall continue to be suspended.



   (b)   Certain Initiative Provisions to Apply - The petition
described in this section shall be termed a referendum petition and insofar
as applicable, Section 7-9 (a), (b) and (e) shall apply to such referendum
petitions, except that the words "measure or part thereof protested against"
shall be deemed to replace the word "measure" in said sections wherever it
may occur and the word "referendum" shall be deemed to replace the word
"initiative" wherever it may occur in said sections.



   Form of Question-The question that shall appear on the ballot shall
take the following form:



Shall the following measure enacted by the Town Council take effect?



(Here insert the full text of the proposed measure, or a fair, concise
summary of the measure, as determined and prepared by the town attorney in
consultation with the town clerk)



   YES ____



   NO  ____



SECTION 7-11  INELIGIBLE MEASURES



   None of the following shall be subject to the initiative or the
referendum procedures: (1) proceedings relating to the internal organization
or operation of the town council or of the school committee, (2) an emergency
measure adopted in conformity with the charter, (3) the town budget or the
school committee budget as a whole, (4) revenue loan orders, (5) any
appropriation for the payment of the town's debt or debt service, (6) an
appropriation of funds to implement a collective bargaining agreement, (7)
proceedings relating to the election, appointment, removal, discharge,
employment, promotion, transfer, demotion, or other personnel action, (8) any
proceedings repealing or rescinding a measure or part thereof which is
protested by referendum procedures, and (9) any proceedings providing for the
submission or referral of any measure to the voters at an election.



SECTION 7-12  SUBMISSION OF OTHER MATTERS TO VOTERS



   The town council may of its own motion, and shall, at the request of
the school committee, if a measure originates with that body and pertains to
affairs under its jurisdiction, submit to the voters at any regular town
election for adoption or rejection any measure in the same manner and with
the same force and effect as are hereby provided for submission by petitions
of voters.



SECTION 7-13  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS



   If two or more measures passed at the same election contain conflicting
provisions, only the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes
shall take effect.



ARTICLE 8
GENERAL PROVISIONS



SECTION 8-1  CHARTER CHANGES



   (a)   In General - This charter may be replaced, revised or amended
in accordance with any procedure made available under the state constitution,
or by statutes enacted in accordance with the state constitution.



   (b)   Periodic Review - The town council shall provide, in every
year ending in a zero, for a complete review of the charter by the entire
council and six additional voters to be appointed by the council president.
The said committee shall file a report within the said year recommending any
changes in the charter which it may deem to be necessary or desirable, unless
an extension is authorized by vote of the town council.



SECTION 8-2  SEVERABILITY



   The provisions of this charter are severable. If any provision of this
charter is held invalid, the other provisions shall not be affected thereby.
If the application of this charter, or any of its provisions, to any person
or circumstance is held invalid, the application of this charter and its
provisions to other persons and circumstances shall not be affected thereby.



SECTION 8-3  SPECIFIC PROVISION TO PREVAIL



   To the extent that any specific provision of this charter may conflict
with any other provision expressed in general terms, the specific provision
shall prevail.



SECTION 8-4  RULES AND REGULATIONS



   A copy of all rules and regulations adopted by town agencies shall be
placed on file in the office of the town clerk and posted on the town website
and shall be available for review by any person who requests such information
at any reasonable time. No rule or regulation adopted by any town agency
shall become effective until five days following the date it is so filed.



SECTION 8-5  CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES



   The town council shall provide, in each year ending in two, for a
complete review and recodification of all ordinances of the town for the
purpose of determining if any amendments or revisions may be necessary or
desirable and to ensure internal consistency. Such review shall be conducted
under the supervision of the town attorney, or, if the town council so
directs, by special counsel appointed for that purpose. A report, with
recommendations, shall be submitted within the said year.



   The town clerk shall annually review all ordinances adopted since the
close of the previous fiscal year, insert them in their proper place in the
code of ordinances, and publish them on the town's website.



SECTION 8-6  UNIFORM PROCEDURES APPLICABLE TO MULTIPLE MEMBER BODIES



   (a)   Meetings - All multiple-member bodies of the town shall meet
regularly at such times and places as they may, by their own rules,
prescribe, unless some other provision is made by ordinance or by law.
Special meetings of any multiple-member body shall be held on the call of the
chair or by one third of the members thereof, by written which contains a
list of the item or items to be acted upon. Except in case of an emergency
such notice shall be posted on the town bulletin board at least forty-eight
hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays in advance of the time
set for such meeting and delivered to members of such multi-member body,
forthwith, after such posting.



   (b)   Rules and Journals - Each multiple-member body shall determine
its own rules and order of business unless another provision is made by
ordinance or by law, and shall provide for the keeping of a journal of its
proceedings. These rules and journals shall be a public record, and certified
copies shall be kept on file in the office of the town clerk, in the
Watertown Free Public Library and posted on the town's website.



   (c)   Voting - If requested by any member, any vote of any
multiple-member body shall be taken by a call of the roll and the vote of
each member shall be recorded in the journal; provided, however, that if the
vote is unanimous only that fact need be recorded.



   (d)   Quorum - A majority of the members of a multiple-member body
shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may meet and adjourn from
time to time.



   (e)   Conflict of Interest- Unless such service may otherwise be
authorized by law, no member of an elected multiple-member body shall, while
holding such office, hold any other town office or employment for which a
salary or other emolument is payable from the town treasury. No member of an
elected multiple-member body shall hold any compensated appointed town office
or employment until six months following the date on which the person's
elected service to the town is terminated. This provision shall not prevent a
town officer or town employee who has taken a leave of absence from such
office or employment from resuming the same office or employment following
service as an elected member of a multiple member board.



   Provided, however, that an elected member of the town council shall not
be prohibited by the preceding paragraph from holding a position under the
authority of the school committee; and further that if the council president
shall hold such an office or position the town council shall, by vote,
designate the vice president or some other member of the town council not so
ineligible to serve as school committee member in the council president's
place, and such councillor shall have all the powers and duties of the
council president serving as a school committee member as set forth in
section 4-1 of this charter.



SECTION 8-7  NUMBER



   Words importing the singular number may extend and be applied to
several persons or things; words importing the plural number may include the
singular.



SECTION 8-8  REFERENCES TO GENERAL LAWS



   All references to General Laws contained in the charter refer to the
General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and are intended to refer
to and to include any amendments or revisions to such chapters or sections,
or to the corresponding chapters and sections of any rearrangement,
recodification, or revision of such statutes enacted or adopted subsequent to
the adoption of this charter.



SECTION 8-9  CERTIFICATE OF ELECTION OR APPOINTMENT



   Every person who is elected, including those elected by the town
council, or appointed to an office of the town shall receive a certificate of
such election or appointment from the town clerk.



   Except as otherwise provided by law, before performing any act under an
appointment or election, all such persons shall take and subscribe to an oath
of office and be sworn to the faithful performance of their duties.



SECTION 8-10  NOTICE OF VACANCIES



   Whenever a vacancy shall occur in any town office or in the employment
of the town, or, when by reason of a retirement, or resignation, or the
expiration of a fixed term, or otherwise, a vacancy can be anticipated, the
town manager or other appointing authority shall forthwith cause public
notice of such vacancy or impending vacancy to be publicly posted on the town
bulletin board for not less than ten days. Each such notice shall contain a
brief description of the duties of the office or position and shall indicate
a list of necessary or desirable qualifications for the office or position.
Any person who desires to be considered for an appointment to fill such
vacancy may, within ten days following the date the notice is posted, or such
longer period as may be indicated in such announcement, file with the
appointing authority a statement setting forth with reasonable clarity and
specificity, the qualifications of such person for such appointment. No
permanent appointment to fill any position shall be effective until at least
fourteen days have elapsed following such posting to permit the reasonable
consideration of all such applicants. This section shall not apply to
positions covered under the civil service law and rules or if in conflict
with the provisions of a collective bargaining agreement.



SECTION 8-11  PENALTIES FOR ELECTED OFFICIALS CONVICTED OF A FELONY



   (a)   Definition – For the purposes of this section of the
charter, "conviction" means a finding of guilt resulting from a plea of
guilty, the decision of a court or magistrate or the verdict of a jury,
irrespective of the pronouncement of judgment or sentence or the suspension
thereof.



   (b)   Criminal Actions Involving Discharge of Official Duties –
Notwithstanding any general or special law or charter provision to the
contrary, any person convicted of any criminal offense involving a violation
of the person's official duties in any elective office at the time of
conviction shall be deemed to have vacated said office at the time of
conviction.



   (c)   Felony Conviction – Notwithstanding any general or special
law or charter provision to the contrary, any person convicted of a felony in
any jurisdiction of the United States, while holding elective office in the
town of Watertown, who still holds such elective office at the time of
conviction, may be subject to censure, permanent removal from any committee
chairs held by virtue of the office, or expulsion by a two-thirds vote of the
remaining members of the body of which the elected official is a member, and
said body shall have authority to exclude said officer and to declare the
office vacant.



   (d)   Reversal of Conviction or Pardon – If the conviction is
reversed or vacated and the term of such person has not yet expired, the
elected official shall be restored to office with all its rights.  If
pardoned, the official shall not by reason thereof be restored, unless it is
so expressly ordered by the terms of the pardon or by majority vote of the
members of the body.  If an elected official is restored to office in
accordance with this section after a conviction is reversed or vacated, any
person previously chosen to fill the vacancy created as a result of such
prior conviction shall be deemed to have vacated the office at the time the
conviction is reversed or vacated.



ARTICLE 9
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS



SECTION 9-1  CONTINUATION OF EXISTING LAWS, ETC.



   All general laws, special laws, town ordinances, and rules and
regulations of or pertaining to the town that are in force when any
amendments to this charter takes effect, and not specifically or by
implication repealed hereby, shall continue in full force and effect until
amended or repealed, or rescinded by due course of law, or until they expire
by their own limitation.



SECTION 9-2  CONTINUATION OF GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION



   Except as otherwise provided in this charter, following a charter
amendment all town agencies shall continue to perform their duties until
reselected, or until successors to their respective positions are duly
appointed or elected and qualified, or until their duties have been
transferred and assumed by another agency as so provided.



SECTION 9-3  TRANSFER OF RECORDS AND PROPERTY



   All records, property and equipment whatsoever of any town agency, or
part thereof, the powers and duties of which are assigned in whole or in part
to another town agency pursuant to a charter amendment, shall be transferred
forthwith to such agency.



SECTION 9-4  CONTINUATION OF PERSONNEL



   Following a charter amendment affecting a particular town office,
position or employment, any person holding such town office or position in
the administrative service of the town, or any person holding full time
employment under the town, shall subject to appropriation and the continued
existence of such office, position or employment, retain the same and
continue to perform the duties thereof until provision shall have been made
for the performance of those duties by another person or agency unless sooner
removed in accordance with this charter, applicable collective bargaining
agreement, employment contract or ordinance; provided, however, no person in
the permanent full time service of the town shall forfeit the employee's pay
grade, or time in service of the town. Subject to appropriation and in accord
with the provisions of any applicable collective bargaining agreement, all
such persons shall be retained in a capacity as similar to the capacity in
which they were serving at the time this charter is amended as is
practicable, and any reduction in the personnel needs of the town shall be
accomplished through a policy of attrition, unless specific provision is
otherwise made.



SECTION 9-5  EFFECT ON OBLIGATIONS, TAXES, ETC.



   All official bonds, recognizances, obligations, contracts, and other
instruments entered into or executed by or to the town before the adoption of
this charter, and all taxes, assessments, fines, penalties, forfeitures,
incurred or imposed, due or owing to the town, shall be enforced and
collected, and all writs, prosecutions, actions and cause of action, except
as herein otherwise provided, shall continue without abatement and remain
unaffected by the charter or any amendment thereto; and no legal act done by
or in favor of the town shall be rendered invalid by reason of the adoption
or amendment of this charter. .



SECTION 9-6  TEMPORARY ADMINISTRATIVE CODE



   (a)   Until such time as another provision is made in accordance
with the provisions of the charter, for a different organization of the
administration of the government of the town, the following temporary
provisions shall be in effect.



      (i)   The town manager shall appoint the following town
officers who shall serve at his or her pleasure:



      a town clerk, a town treasurer-collector, a personnel assistant,
a superintendent of public works and an administrative assistant and other
department heads or deputy town managers as may be authorized by the town
council.



      (ii)   The town manager shall appoint the following officers,
subject to the civil service law and rules: a fire chief, a police chief and
a purchasing agent.



      (iii)   The town manager shall appoint the following town
officers for a term of years:



.



      constables, members of a council on aging and the staff of such
council, an animal inspector and a veterans' services director.



      Provided, however, that to the extent that any of these offices
set forth in this section are no longer required, this section shall not be
interpreted to require the town manager to make appointments thereto.



      (iv)   The town manager shall appoint the following town
officers, subject to the approval of the town council; and in accordance with
the provisions of applicable laws, provided, however, if the town council
shall fail to take any action on a proposed appointment by the town manager
within thirty days following the date notice of such appointment is filed by
the town manager with the town council, such appointment shall be deemed to
have been confirmed:



      a town attorney, a licensing board, a board of assessors, a board
of appeals, a planning board, a housing authority, a conservation commission,
a board of health, and an election commission and other committees that may
from time to time be authorized by the town council by ordinance..



      With respect to the offices and multiple- member bodies
identified in subsections 9-6(a)(iii) and 9-6(a)(iv), the town council may,
by ordinance, set the term of office, and determine the size of any such
multiple-member board; provided, however, that adoption of an ordinance
hereunder shall not affect the term of any incumbent holding office at the
time of the effective date of the ordinance.



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter



         10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Construction of ordinances; recordation, publication



   10.05   Captions



   10.06   Definitions



   10.07   Rules of interpretation



   10.08   Severability



   10.09   Reference to other sections



   10.10   Reference to offices



   10.11   Errors and omissions



   10.12   Official time



   10.13   Reasonable time



   10.14   Ordinances repealed



   10.15   Ordinances unaffected



   10.16   Effective date of ordinances



   10.17   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.18   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.19   Section histories; statutory references



   10.99   General penalty



Cross-reference:



   Code enforcement procedures, see Ch. 35



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the City known as the Town
of Watertown, Massachusetts shall be designated as the Code of Watertown and
may be so cited.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCES; RECORDATION, PUBLICATION.



   (A)   All bylaws passed by the Town Council shall be termed
"ordinances," and the enacting style shall be similar to: "Be it ordained by
the Town Council of the City known as the Town of Watertown as follows."



   (B)   All the ordinances of the town shall be recorded by the Town
Clerk, in a fair and legible hand or typewritten, without interlineation or
erasure, in the order in which they are passed, in a book to be kept for that
purpose, with proper margin and index, to be entitled "The Ordinances of the
Inhabitants of the City know as the Town of Watertown," which book shall be
preserved in the office of the Town Clerk, subject to the inspection of the
citizens.



   (C)   All the ordinances of the town and such resolutions and orders
as the Town Council may direct shall be published by causing the same to be
inserted once in 1 or more newspapers printed and published in the town as
the Town Council shall from time to time designate; but whenever the town
shall make a general revision of all of its ordinances, no publication of
such revised ordinances shall be required in any newspaper.



§ 10.05  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.06  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or ordinary
and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical
import.



   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      CITY.  The City known as the Town of Watertown, Massachusetts.



      CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This municipal code
as modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



      COMPUTATION OF TIME.  When time is to be reckoned from a day,
date, act done, or the time of an act done, either by force of law, or by
virtue of a contract made, such day, date, or the day when such act is done
shall not be included in the computation.



      CORPORATE OR TOWN LIMITS.  The legal boundaries of the Town of
Watertown, Massachusetts.



      COUNTY.  Middlesex County, Massachusetts.



      DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.  Whenever a provision appears requiring
the head of a department or some other town officer to do some act or perform
some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or
other officer to designate, delegate, and authorize subordinates to perform
the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provisions of
the section specify otherwise.



      JOINT AUTHORITY.  All words purporting to give a joint authority
to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such
authority to a majority of such persons or officers, unless otherwise
expressly declared.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR
and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



      OFFICERS, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission, or department of this municipality
unless the context clearly requires otherwise.



      OWNER or OCCUPANT.  Any sole owner or occupant and any joint
tenant and tenant in common of the whole or any part of a building or lot of
land.



(1982 Code, Ch. I, § 5)



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



      PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes every species of property except
real property, as herein described.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



      PUBLIC WAY.  Any highway, townway, road, bridge, street, avenue,
boulevard, roadway, parkway, lane, sidewalk or square.



(1982 Code, Ch. I, § 5)



      REAL PROPERTY.  Lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



      REGISTERED MAIL.  When used in connection with the requirement
for notice by mail shall mean either registered mail or certified mail.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.



      STATE.  The State of Massachusetts.



      STREET.  Includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys,
lanes, viaducts, and all other public ways in the town, and shall include all
areas thereof embraced between the property lines and dedicated to the public
use.



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of
the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter
of the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.



      TENANT or OCCUPANT.  Applied to a building or land, shall
include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole
or part of such buildings or land, either alone or with others.



      TOWN.  The Town of Watertown, Massachusetts.



      TOWN COUNCIL.  The Town Council of Watertown, Massachusetts.



      WHOLESALE, WHOLESALER or WHOLESALE DEALER.  In all cases where
the words WHOLESALE, WHOLESALER or WHOLESALE DEALER are used in this code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, they shall be understood and held to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to
persons who purchase for purposes of resale, as distinguished from a retail
dealer who sells in smaller quantities direct to the consumer.



      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



§ 10.07  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:



   (A)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written "and/or," if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.08  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in 1 section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.10  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.11  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and
such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.12  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws,
shall be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of
all municipal business.



§ 10.13  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.15  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.16  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take
effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.17  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.18  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of such chapter or section.  In addition to
such indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance,
a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.19  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any,
are listed following the text of the code section.



Example:  (Ord. passed 5-13-1960; Am. Ord. passed 1-1-1970; Am. Ord. passed
1-1-1980; Am. Ord. passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute. 



Example: (Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 35, § 10)  (Ord. passed 1-17-1980; Am. Ord.
passed 1-1-1985)



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory
reference" following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information.



Example:



   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



      This municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



   Statutory reference:



      For provisions concerning the inspection of public records,
seeMass. Gen. Laws Ch. 66, §§ 1 et seq.



   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the town published in 1982 and subsequently amended, the 1982
code chapter and section number shall be indicated in the history by "(1982
Code, Ch. __, §     )."



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this code, or any rule
or regulation of any Watertown officer, board or department (including
without limitation any sanitary code or regulations of the Board of Health
issued pursuant to Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 111, §§ 31 and 31B, and any Fire
Safety Code issued by the Fire Chief pursuant to Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 148, §
28), provided that the issuance or adoption of any such code, rule or
regulation was the subject of a public notice prior to the effective date and
that on the date of the alleged violation a confirmed copy of the current
version of that code, rule or regulation was available in the Town Clerk's
office, including any mandate, requirement, prohibition, or proscription,
shall be subject to the penalties set forth in division (B) of this section.



   (B)   Except as set for in § 35.05 of this code, and unless
controlled by Massachusetts General Laws and unless other fine or penalty is
expressly stated in this code, violators of any provision of this code, rules
or regulations shall forfeit and pay a fine not to exceed $300.



   (C)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during which a violation occurs or continues and shall be subject to a
separate penalty.



(1982 Code, Ch. I, § 6)  (Am. Ord. 31, passed 3-26-1991)



Cross-reference:



   Non-criminal disposition, see § 35.05



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter



         30.   TOWN OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



         31.   BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND DEPARTMENTS



         32.   FINANCES



         33.   TAXATION



         34.   PURCHASING PROCEDURES



         35.   CODE ENFORCEMENT



         36.   COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE



CHAPTER 30: TOWN OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



Section



General Provisions



   30.01   Tax Collector



   30.02   Auditor



   30.03   Administration Building hours of operation; closing



Personnel Regulations



   30.15   Authorization



   30.16   Definitions



   30.17   Personnel Board



   30.18   Classification plan



   30.19   Compensation plan



   30.20   Amendment of the plans



   30.21   Position classes: salary, wage and miscellaneous
compensation schedules



   30.22   Part-time positions classified in the administrative and
clerical group



   30.23   Work week



   30.24   Initial application of the compensation plan



   30.25   Overtime compensation



   30.26   Paid holidays



   30.27   Vacation leave



   30.28   Sick leave



   30.29   Physical examination



   30.30   Civil service



   30.31   Residency requirement for police officers and fire fighters



   30.32   Longevity payments



Cross-reference:



   Duties of Superintendent  of Public Works, see § 50.01



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 30.01  TAX COLLECTOR.



   The Collector of Taxes shall collect, under the title of Town
Collector, all accounts due the town which are committed to him or her.  The
duties of the Collector of Taxes of the Town shall be performed by the Town
Treasurer.



(1982 Code, Ch. III, § 1)



§ 30.02  AUDITOR.



   (A)   The Auditor shall have and perform for the town all powers and
duties prescribed by the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws governing
municipal auditors and accountants.



   (B)   The town shall cause to be made annually, with the approval of
the Town Council, an outside audit of the books and accounts of the town. The
audits shall be conducted in accordance with generally accepted government
auditing standards and shall be presented to the Town Council upon its
completion.



   (C)   The outside audit shall be performed by an external auditor or
public accountant who meets the independent standards set forth under the
generally accepted government auditing standards. The outside auditor shall
have an appropriate background and training in municipal account systems.



(1982 Code, Ch. III, § 2; Am. Ord. 35, passed 6-14-1994)



§ 30.03  ADMINISTRATION BUILDING HOURS OF OPERATION; CLOSING.



   (A)   All offices in the Administration Building shall be open to
the public for the transaction of business from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily,
except Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays.



   (B)   The Town Manager, after reasonable notice to the public, may
by appropriate order direct that the Administration Building be closed on any
day preceding or following a legal holiday or on any other day when, in his
or her judgement, it is deemed expedient, necessary, or advisable.



   (C)   The Building Inspector’s Office continued to be open for
transaction of business beginning at 7:30 a.m. until 5:00 p.m., when all
offices in the Administration building are open. This division (c) can be
rescinded at the discretion of the Town Manager.



(1982 Code, Ch. I, §§ 10 and 11; Am. Ord. O-2013-15, passed 3-26-2013; Am.
Ord. O-2014-26, passed 4-22-2014; Am. Ord. O-2015-15, passed 4-14-2015; Am.
Ord. 2016-10, passed 3-22-2016; Am. Res. R-2016-66, passed 11-9-2016; Am.
Res. R-2017-9, passed 3-28-2017)



PERSONNEL REGULATIONS



Editor's note:



   These regulations were reprinted from Chapter 10 of the By-Laws,
1980-81.  Voted by Action of Town Meeting March 16 and March 23, 1964 under
Articles 8 and 51, respectively, with amendments through 1980 Annual Town
Meeting.



§ 30.15  AUTHORIZATION.



   Pursuant to the authority contained in Mass. Gen Laws Ch. 41, §§ 108A
and 108C, there shall be established plans, which may be amended from time to
time by vote of the town at an annual town meeting:



   (A)   Classifying positions in the service of the town other than
those filled by popular election, those under the jurisdiction of the School
Committee, those for which incumbents render contractual services which are
not provided during regularly established working hours and those which are
essentially seasonal with respect to the duties which the incumbents perform
and which do not appear in Schedule A, referenced in § 30.21, into groups
and classes doing substantially similar work or having substantially equal
responsibilities;



   (B)   Authorizing a compensation plan for positions in the
classification plan;



   (C)   Providing for the administration of the classification and
compensation plans; and



   (D)   Establishing certain working conditions and fringe benefits
for employees occupying positions in the classification plan.



§ 30.16  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this subchapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings unless a different construction is clearly required by
the context or by the laws of the commonwealth.



   ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY.  The elected or appointed official or board,
having jurisdiction over a function or activity.



   BOARD.  The Personnel Board as defined in § 30.17.



   CLASS.  A group of positions in the town service sufficiently similar
in respect to duties and responsibilities so that the same descriptive title
may be used to designate each position allocated to the class, that the same
qualifications shall be required of the incumbents, that the same tests of
fitness may be used to choose qualified employees and that the same scale of
compensation can be made to apply with equity.



   CLASSIFICATION PLAN.  Class titles appearing in Schedule A, referenced
in § 30.21 of this subchapter, plus class specifications which are on file
with the Personnel Board and which are hereby incorporated by reference.



   COMPENSATION GRADE.  A range of salary or wage rates appearing in
Schedules B, C, D or E, referenced in § 30.21.



   COMPENSATION PLAN.  Schedules B, C, D and E, referenced in § 30.21.



   CONTINUOUS EMPLOYMENT.  Employment (either full- or part-time)
requiring a predetermined minimum work week and uninterrupted except for
required military service and for authorized vacation or other leave of
absence.



   DEPARTMENT.  Any department, board committee commission or other
agency of the town subject to this subchapter.



   EMPLOYEE.  An employee of the town occupying a position in the
classification plan.



   FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE.  An employee retained in full-time employment.



   FULL-TIME EMPLOYMENT.  Employment for not less than 7.5 hours per diem
for five days a week for 52 weeks per annum, minus legal holidays and
authorized vacation leave, sick leave and other leave of absence.



   GROUP or OCCUPATIONAL GROUP.  A group of classes designated by
occupation as appearing in Schedule A, referenced in § 30.21.



   INCREMENT.  The dollar difference between step rates.



   MAXIMUM RATE.  The highest rate in a range which an employee normally
is entitled to attain.



   MINIMUM RATE.  The rate in a range which is normally the hiring rate
of a new employee.



   PART-TIME EMPLOYEE.  A person employed in a permanent status to a
position in the several departments whose period of employment is less than
the regular hours of work for the department to which he or she has been
employed.



   PART-TIME EMPLOYMENT.  Employment on a regular basis with scheduled
hours less than the regular scheduled hours of work for the department.



   PERMANENT EMPLOYEE.  An employee retained in continuous employment in
a permanent position.



   PERMANENT POSITION.  A full-time or part-time position in the town
service which has required or which is likely to require the services of an
incumbent in continuous employment for a period of 52 calendar weeks.



   PERSONAL RATE.  A rate above the maximum rate applicable only to a
designated employee.



   POSITION.  An office or post of employment in the town service with
duties and responsibilities calling for the full-time, part-time or seasonal
employment of one person in the performance and exercise thereof.



   PROMOTION.  A change from a position of lower class and compensation
grade to a position with greater responsibilities in a higher class and
compensation grade.



   PROVISIONAL EMPLOYEE.  An employee who is appointed to the employee
force for regular full-time or part-time employment pending certification to
permanent status, or to a permanent position in probationary or acting status
pending certification to permanent status.



   RANGE.  The dollar difference between minimum and maximum rates.



   RATE.  A sum of money designated as compensation for personal services
on an hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, annual or other basis.



   REGULAR EMPLOYEE.  An employee who has worked 30 weeks in the
aggregate during the 12 consecutive months ending May 31st of any calendar
year.



   STEP RATE.  A rate in a range of a compensation grade.



   SEASONAL EMPLOYMENT.  Appointment to the employee force for a fixed
period of time, and which appointment shall terminate at the conclusion of
that period of time.



   TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE.  An employee retained in a temporary position as
defined below, or an employee retained in a position the title of which
contains the adjective temporary.



   TEMPORARY POSITION.  A position in the town's service which requires
or is likely to require the services of one incumbent for a limited time and
a special purpose, either full-time or on a part-time basis.



§ 30.17  PERSONNEL BOARD.



   (A)   There shall be a Personnel Board consisting of five members,
responsible for the administration of the classification and compensation
plans. One member shall be a member of the Finance Committee, and four shall
be citizens at large of the town. Appointments to the Personnel Board shall
be made by the Moderator.



   (B)   In making these appointments, the Moderator shall give
consideration to the personal qualifications of those citizens who will best
meet the responsibility of the Board to represent both town employees and
taxpayers. If possible, the make-up of the Board shall consist of members
professionally qualified who are familiar with the principles and experienced
in the methods and practices of labor relations and personnel administration.



   (C)   The terms of office of members of the Board shall be as
follows: The Member of the Finance Committee shall serve for a term of one
year. One citizen for a term of one year, and one citizen shall be appointed
for a term of two years, and two citizens shall be appointed for terms of
three years. Upon expiration of the first terms of the citizen members, their
successors shall be appointed for terms of three years.



   (D)   The Board shall administer the plans and shall establish such
procedures as it deems necessary for the proper administration thereof.



   (E)   Forthwith after its appointment and annually, the Board shall
meet and organize by electing a chairman and appointing a secretary who shall
be a member of the Board. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business. A majority of the Board shall determine the
action the Board must take in all matters which it is authorized or required
to pass under this subchapter.



   (F)   The Board may employ assistance and incur expenses as it deems
necessary subject to the appropriation of funds therefor. It shall appoint a
clerk.



   (G)   The clerk of the Board shall maintain adequate personnel
records of all employees occupying positions subject to the classification
and compensation plans.



   (H)   The Board from time to time, of its own motion, shall
investigate the work features and rates of salaries or wages of any or all
positions subject to the provisions of this subchapter. Reviews shall be made
at intervals as the Board deems necessary and, to the extent which the Board
considers practicable, shall include all occupational groups in the
classification plan.



   (I)   The Board shall maintain written job descriptions or
specifications of the classes in the classification plan, each consisting of
a statement describing the essential nature of the work and the
characteristics that distinguish the class from other classes. The
description for any class shall be construed solely as a means of
identification and not as prescribing what the duties or responsibilities of
any position shall be, or as modifying, or in any way affecting, the power of
any administrative authority, as otherwise existing, to appoint, to assign
duties to, or to direct and control the work of any employee under the
jurisdiction of such authority.



   (J)   (1)   Upon recommendation of a department head, supported
by evidence in writing of special reasons and exceptional circumstances
satisfactory to the Board, the Board may authorize an entrance rate higher
than the minimum rate for a position, and/or such other variance in the
compensation plan as it may deem necessary for the proper functioning of the
services of the town. No variance shall become effective unless, or until,
the necessary funds have been appropriated therefor.



      (2)   Initial employment in the library service in any of the
professional positions or classifications included in § 30.21 may be at
rates above the minimum rate shown when, in the judgment of the Trustees of
the Free Public Library, prior experience and training justifies the rate,
and the authorization of the Board in such cases shall not be required.



   (K)   (1)   Whenever a vacancy occurs in any position subject to
the compensation plan, the Personnel Board will be notified of the vacancy.



      (2)   In departments which come under the jurisdiction of the
Civil Service Commission, the appropriate list of certified candidates shall
be requested, if the position is to be filled.



      (3)   In the absence of such a list, appropriate Civil Service
procedures shall be followed, if the position is to be filled.



      (4)   In departments which are exempt from Civil Service, the
position(s) shall be advertised. if the position is to be filled.



      (5)   Applications shall be reviewed and a.list of eligible
candidates shall be prepared and sent to the appointing authority for final
selection, except that the Library Department, under provisions of Mass. Gen.
Laws Ch. 78, will reserve the right to receive applications from which the
Trustees may make appointments.



      (6)   No employees shall commence work, receive wages or
compensation unless these procedures shall have been followed.



   (L)   The Board shall make an annual report in writing to the Board
of Selectmen and the Finance Committee not later than the fourth Monday prior
to the first business meeting of the annual town meeting.



§ 30.18  CLASSIFICATION PLAN.



   (A)   All positions in the service of the town except those excluded
by § 30.15 are hereby classified by titles appearing in Schedule A,
referenced in § 30.21 which is made a part hereof. These classes of
positions shall constitute the classification plan for paid town services.



   (B)   The title of each class, as established by the classification
plan, shall be the official title of every position allocated to the class
and the official title of each incumbent of a position so allocated, and
shall be used to the exclusion of all others on payrolls, budget estimates
and other official records and reports pertaining to the position.



   (C)   The title of a position which is held by an employee with a
dual or a multiple Civil Service rating shall be that recommended by the
employee's department head, or by the administrative authority having
jurisdiction over the organization unit to which the employee is assigned.



   (D)   Whenever a new position is established, or the duties of an
existing position are so changed that in effect a new position is created,
upon presentation of substantiating data satisfactory to the Personnel Board,
the Board shall allocate the new or changed position to its appropriate class.



   (E)   No position may be reclassified until the Personnel Board
shall have determined the reclassification to be consistent with the
classification plan.



§ 30.19  COMPENSATION PLAN.



   (A)   The compensation plan shall consist of Schedules B, C, D and
E, referenced in § 30.21, which provide minimum and maximum salaries or
wages for certain of the classes in the classification plan. The salary range
of a class shall be the salary range of all positions allocated to the class.



   (B)   Each employee shall continue to be paid on the same basis as
in effect at the time of adoption of this subchapter unless otherwise
provided in the compensation plan.



   (C)   No administrative authority shall fix the salary of any
employee in a position in the classification plan except in accordance with
the compensation plan.



   (D)   No person shall be paid as an employee in any position subject
to the provisions in the classification plan under any title other than those
appearing in Schedule A, referenced in § 30.21.



   (E)   An employee in continuous employment in a class appearing on
Schedules B, C, or certain grades of Schedule E, referenced in § 30.21 shall
receive the increment between his or her present rate and the next higher
step rate as follows:



      (1)   Beginning with the pay period following completion of 12
months service at the minimum or other rate if a rate other than the minimum
is authorized as his or her hiring rate.



      (2)   Thereafter 12 months from the date of his or her
previous increase until he or she attains the maximum rate of the range of
the compensation grade to which his or her class is assigned.



   (F)   (1)   An employee receiving a promotion to a vacant
position or to a new position as defined in § 30.18(C) shall, upon
assignment resulting from such promotion, receive the rate in the
compensation grade of the vacant or new position next above his or her
existing rate. If the resulting adjustment does not equal $100 for a position
class assigned to Schedule B or $.05 for a position class assigned to
Schedule D, the adjustment shall be to the second rate above the existing
rate but within the compensation grade of the vacant or new position.



      (2)   Upon recommendation of a department head supported by
evidence in writing, the Personnel Board may authorize a rate of pay above
the minimum for an employee receiving a promotion to a vacant or new position
as defined in § 30.18(C) but consistent with the classification plan and the
appropriation voted therefor.



   (G)   The employee receiving a promotion and adjustment in rate
pursuant to the provisions of the preceding division shall receive the next
increment of his or her compensation grade following completion of 12 months
at the rate resulting from the promotion.



   (H)   The employee who is transferred to a similarly rated or to a
lower rated position for the convenience of the town shall enter the new
position at his or her rate in the position from which he or she is
transferred.



   (I)   Each administrative authority shall include in its estimates,
required by the provisions of Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 41, § 59, a pay adjustment
section setting forth in detail the amounts which will be required for
anticipated pay adjustments during the ensuing year and shall furnish a copy
thereof to the Board.



§ 30.20  AMENDMENT OF THE PLANS.



   (A)   The classification plan and/or the compensation plan and/or
other provisions of this subsection may be amended by vote of the town at an
annual town meeting in the same manner as other by-laws of the town may be
amended. However, no amendment shall be considered or voted on by town
meeting unless the proposed amendment has first been considered by the Board
and the Finance Committee.



   (B)   The recommendation of the Personnel Board as to a proposed
amendment to this subchapter shall be made to the town meeting before a vote
is taken thereon. A proposed amendment must be submitted to a town meeting
substantially as presented to and as heard by the Personnel Board.



   (C)   Similarly, the Finance Committee shall report to the town
meeting as a part of its estimates of town expenditures the impact of a
proposed amendment which is approved by the Personnel Board together with a
recommendation or recommendations as the Finance Committee deems expedient.



   (D)   The Board, of its own motion, may propose an amendment to the
plans or other provisions of this subchapter based on its findings resulting
from its investigations as provided in § 30.17(H).



§ 30.21  POSITION CLASSES: SALARY, WAGE AND MISCELLANEOUS COMPENSATION
SCHEDULES.



   The following schedules, together with class specifications previously
incorporated by reference, are hereby adopted by reference as if fully
attached hereto, and constitute the classification and compensation plans of
the town as defined in § 30.16.  Copies of the schedules are on file for
examination and inspection in the office of the Town Clerk:



   (A)   Schedule A.  Classification of positions by occupational
groups and assignment to compensation grades.



   (B)   Schedule B.  General annual salary schedule.



   (C)   Schedule C.  Police and fire annual salary schedule.



   (D)   Schedule D.  Hourly wage schedule.



   (E)   Schedule E.  Miscellaneous salary schedule.



§ 30.22  PART-TIME POSITIONS CLASSIFIED IN THE ADMINISTRATIVE AND CLERICAL
GROUP.



   Employees occupying administrative or clerical positions in part-time
employment which may be continuous employment or which may constitute
intermittent or casual service shall be compensated at hourly rates appearing
in a schedule located on file in the office of the Town Clerk and which is
hereby incorporated in the compensation plan.



§ 30.23  WORK WEEK.



   The work week for full-employment in each occupational group shall be
as follows:



 

Group
 
Work Week




Administrative and Clerical Group
 
37.5 hours


Custodian Group
 
40 hours


Inspection Group
 
**As required


Professional Group
 
**As required


Mechanical and Construction Group
 


   Fire Alarm Signal Operator
 
42 hours


   All others in this group
 
40 hours


Labor Group
 
40 hours


Library Group
 
40 hours


Public Safety Group
 


   Police Classes
 
*As required


   Fire Classes
 
42 hours


Supervisory Group
 
**As required


* Each member of the Police Department shall work not more than an average of
40 hours per week over a period of six weeks, and not more than eight and
one-quarter (8 1/4) hours a day on a regularly scheduled basis, each member
to receive not less than 121 regular days off yearly, characteristic of the
four-two-one work schedule, so-called, and not less than two consecutive days
off weekly.


** Which shall be not less than 40 hours per week and which may be computed
over any 2 week cycle.




 



§ 30.24  INITIAL APPLICATION OF THE COMPENSATION PLAN.



   (A)   Upon adoption of this subchapter at an annual town meeting,
the rate of each eligible employee occupying a position in the classification
plan shall become effective on July 1 of the year of adoption.



   (B)   The rate of each eligible employee shall be adjusted in the
same corresponding step rate in his or her designated compensation grade of
§ 30.21 as the step rate which he or she occupied as of July 1 of the year
of adoption. His or her corresponding step rate shall be determined by the
same number of increments below maximum. (If more step rates are in his or
her old than in his or her new compensation grade, the adjustment shall be at
least to the minimum rate of the new compensation grade.)



   (C)   The adjustment of the rate of an individual employee as
provided in the preceding paragraph shall, however, be subject to the
following:



      (1)   If the amount of the increase is in excess of $500, the
first year adjustment shall be limited to $500.



      (2)   The balance of the initial adjustment determined by
division (B) of this section shall be paid to the eligible employee in the
second year following adoption of the compensation plan in addition to any
further increment for which the employee may be eligible during that year.



   (D)   If the minimum rate of an employee's old compensation grade is
higher than the minimum rate of his or her new compensation grade and if his
or her rate is at the old minimum at the time of adoption, his or her
adjustment shall be to the step rate of the new compensation grade which is
next above the old minimum rate.



   (E)   If an employee's rate at the time of adoption is above the
maximum rate of his or her appropriate new compensation grade, his or her
rate shall become a personal rate and as defined in § 30.16, shall apply to
the subject employee and not to the position.



   (F)   Following adoption of this subchapter and application of rates
in § 30.21 as provided in the preceding divisions, employees shall be
eligible for subsequent pay adjustments on anniversary dates as set forth in
§ 30.19(E).



   (G)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as authorizing
adjustment to any rate above the maximum rate in the range of the
compensation grade.



§ 30.25  OVERTIME COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Administrative and Clerical Group.  An employee occupying a
position classified in this group shall receive overtime compensation for
hours worked in excess of 40 hours per week at the rate of one and one half
(1 1/2) times his or her regular rate. In lieu of overtime compensation, the
employer may, allow compensatory time off.



   (B)   Custodian Group.  An employee occupying a position classified
in this group shall receive compensation for hours worked in excess of those
constituting his or her established work week at time and one half determined
by dividing his or her weekly rate by 40.



   (C)   Inspection and Professional Group.  An employee occupying a
position classified in one of these two groups is not entitled to overtime
compensation as set forth in § 30.23.



   (D)   Mechanical and Construction Group.



      (1)   Employees occupying positions classified in this group
are normally not eligible for compensation for hours worked in excess of
those constituting the work week for this group as set forth in § 30.23. In
the event of special circumstances which may require overtime services on the
part of an employee, the Personnel Board may approve compensation to the
employee at time and one half upon application of the department head setting
forth the nature and extent of such services.



      (2)   The Personnel Board may also grant blanket approval upon
application of a department head for the payment of overtime at time and one
half to employees occupying positions in the Mechanical and Construction
Group for services which may be required under emergency conditions.



      (3)   Payment of overtime compensation to an employee
occupying a position in this group will not be made without Personnel Board
approval either before or after the fact.



   (E)   Labor Group.  An employee occupying a position in this group
shall be compensated at one and one-half times his or her regular hourly rate
for hours worked in excess of eight hours during a regularly assigned work
day and for all hours worked on other than a regularly assigned work day
provided that he or she has been credited with 40 hours pay at his or her
regular rate for five consecutively-assigned work days prior to performing
work on the non-assigned work day. Double time will be paid for all hours
worked on Sunday, not part of the work week.



   (F)   Public Safety Group.



      (1)   If an employee whose position is in one of the police
classifications is required, except for court appearances, to be on duty for
any period in excess of his or her regular hours of duty as from time to time
established, he or she may be given time off equal to the period of overtime
duty or if time off cannot be given by reason of personnel shortage or other
cause, he or she may be paid for the period of overtime duty at an hourly
rate as may be determined by the authority in charge of the department, which
rate shall in no event be less than one and one-half times the hourly rate of
his or her regular compensation for his or her average weekly hours of
regular duty.



      (2)   If an employee whose position is in one of the fire
classifications shall be required to be on duty for any period of time in
excess of his or her regular hours of duty, as from time to time established,
he or she may be given time off equal to the period of overtime duty, or if
time off cannot be given by reason of a personnel shortage or other cause he
or she may be paid for the period of overtime duty at hourly rate as may be
determined by the authority in charge of the fire department, which rate
shall in no event be less than one and one-half times the hourly rate of his
or her regular compensation for his or her average weekly hours of regular
duty.



   (G)   Library Group.  A permanent full time employee occupying a
position in this group shall be compensated at one and one-half times his or
her regular hourly rate for all hours worked on Sunday, providing they shall
have worked a minimum of 37 hours in the previous week. No employee shall be
required to work on Sunday.



§ 30.26  PAID HOLIDAYS.



   (A)   The following days, proclaimed and recognized by the
Commonwealth, shall be recognized as legal holidays within the meaning of
this subchapter, on which days employees shall be excused from all duty not
required to maintain essential town service:



 



New Year's Day


Martin Luther King Day


Washington's Birthday


Patriot's Day


Memorial Day


Independence Day


Labor Day


Columbus Day


Veteran's Day


Thanksgiving Day


Christmas Day




 



   (B)   Every employee in full-time employment shall be entitled to
these designated holidays on the following terms:



      (1)   If paid on an hourly basis he or she shall receive one
day's pay at his or her regular rate based on the number of hours regularly
worked on the day which the designated holiday occurs.



      (2)   If paid on a weekly, monthly or similar basis, he or she
shall be granted each designated holiday without loss in pay.



      (3)   Permanent part-time employees whose hours of work follow
a regular weekly schedule of an average of 20 hours or more, which average
may be computed over the previous eight-week cycle, shall be paid in such
proportion as their part-time service bears to full-time service. Temporary
employees, or employees in a temporary employment status, hired on and after
December 31, 1971 shall be granted time off without pay. Employees rendering
essentially contractual services shall not be paid for time off on such
holidays.



      (4)   Provisional employees shall be deemed to be permanent
employees for purposes of holiday pay.



   (C)   Payment under the provisions of this section shall be made
provided the eligible employee shall have worked on his or her last regularly
scheduled working day prior to and his or her next regularly scheduled
working day following the holiday, or was in full pay status on the preceding
and following days in accordance with other provisions of this subchapter.



   (D)   An employee occupying a position classified in the Mechanical
and Construction or Labor Groups who, because of a rotation of shifts, works
different days in successive weeks shall be granted, in each year in which
the number of holidays falling on his or her regular days off is in excess of
the number of holidays in that year falling on Saturday, additional days off
equal to the excess.



   (E)   An employee occupying a position classified in the Custodian,
Mechanical and Construction or Labor groups who performs work on one of the
days or dates designated in division (A) shall be paid at his or her regular
rate for the day or date in addition to the amount to which he or she is
entitled under division (B) unless the work is performed during a tour of
duty which began on the day preceding the holiday.



   (F)   An employee occupying a position classified in the Custodian
or Mechanical and Construction groups shall be paid at his or her regular
rate for work performed on Saturday of a week in which one of the days or
dates designated in division (A) occurs, provided the work performed is that
which was scheduled for the day of the holiday.



   (G)   An employee occupying a position classified in the Public
Safety group in one of the police classifications shall be entitled to
compensation in addition to that provided under division (B) in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 268, Section 17A of the Acts of 1952 accepted
by the town on April 4, 1955.



   (H)   An employee occupying a position classified in the Public
Safety group in one of the fire classifications shall be entitled to
compensation in addition to that provided under division (B) in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 640 of the Acts of 1953, accepted by the town
on April 4, 1955.



   (I)   Employees occupying positions classified in the Administrative
and Clerical, Inspection, Professional and Supervisory groups shall not be
entitled to additional compensation for work performed on one of the days or
dates designated in division (A).



   (J)   Whenever one of the holidays set forth in division (A) falls
on a Sunday, the following day shall be the legal holiday.



§ 30.27  VACATION LEAVE.



   Eligible employees shall be entitled to vacation leave as provided
elsewhere in the bylaws of the town.



§ 30.28  SICK LEAVE.



   Eligible employees shall be entitled to sick leave as provided
elsewhere in the bylaws of the town.



§ 30.29  PHYSICAL EXAMINATION.



   Every person hereinafter employed by the town in a position included in
the classification plan as well as School Custodians, School Clerical
Employees and Cafeteria Personnel, except when performing casual service,
shall undergo a physical examination satisfactory to the State Watertown
Contributory Retirement Board. The examining physician shall be appointed by
the Board of Selectmen or School Committee, as the case may be, and shall
render a sealed report of his or her findings to the Personnel Board, or, in
the case of a school employee, to the School Personnel Director, having the
name of the applicant written on the envelope. After receipt of the report
has been entered on the respective personnel records, the report shall be
deposited with the State Watertown Contributory Retirement Board for safe
keeping, the contents subject to future view only by a physician designated
by the Selectmen, or the School Committee, as the case may be, otherwise the
report shall be confidential.



§ 30.30  CIVIL SERVICE.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to conflict with Mass.
Gen. Laws Ch. 31.



§ 30.31  RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT FOR POLICE OFFICERS AND FIRE FIGHTERS.



   (A)   Every person appointed to the position of Police Officer or
Fire Fighter subsequent to the adoption of this subchapter shall be a
resident of the Town of Watertown.



   (B)   Any Police Officer or Fire Fighter appointed prior to August
1, 1978 who resides in a city or town located further than 15 miles from the
limits of the Town of Watertown and who changes his or her domicile after
August 1, 1978 shall be required to reside within 15 miles of the limits of
the Town of Watertown pursuant to Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 41, § 99A.



§ 30.32  LONGEVITY PAYMENTS.



   (A)   Longevity payments shall be added to the annual compensation
of each full time employee under this subchapter (except those in Police and
Fire classifications) after completion of ten years of continuous employment
in accordance with specific collective bargaining agreements.



   (B)   Permanent part-time employees who work 20 or more hours per
week shall receive longevity payments on a pro-rated basis.



CHAPTER 31: BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND DEPARTMENTS



Section



General Provisions



   31.01   Meetings and records



   31.02   Rules and regulations



   31.03   Annual report and distribution



   31.04   Correspondence



   31.05   Statutory duties



   31.06   Conflict of interest



Legal Services Department



   31.15   Appointments and duties



   31.16   Defense of suits



   31.17   Settlement authority



Recycling Advisory Board



   31.30   Board created



   31.31   Members of Board



   31.32   Compensation



   31.33   Officers



   31.34   Duties and responsibilities



   31.35   Procedures



Timing and Process of Appointments



   31.50   Expiration of terms



   31.51   Timing of appointments



   31.52   Appointment process



   31.53   Effective date



Cross-reference:



   Administration Building hours of operation, see § 30.03



   Department of Community Development and Planning, see §§ 151.01 et
seq.



   Historic District Commission, see §§ 152.30 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  MEETINGS AND RECORDS.



   All boards, committees, commissions or trustees, shall hold a regular
meeting at least once each month and shall keep records exactly and in detail
of all motions made, votes passed and business transacted at each such
meeting.  All such records shall be kept in a bound book of standard form. 
The books in which records of meetings are currently made shall be kept in
their respective places in the town offices of the board whose records they
are, and shall not be removed therefrom.  The books shall, unless otherwise
provided by law, be open to public inspection at any reasonable time, but
shall remain during such inspection under supervision of the officer, board,
committee, commission or trustee having custody thereof. When any record book
is completely filled and a new book of records begun, the completed volume
shall within a reasonable time, at least within a year, be filed with the
Town Clerk for safe keeping and permanent record.



(1982 Code, Ch. II, § 1)



§ 31.02  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   All boards, officers, commissions, committees, boards of
trustees or departments which adopt or promulgate rules or regulations or
have heretofore adopted or promulgated the same, shall forthwith file a copy
thereof with the Town Clerk for a permanent record.



   (B)   Whenever there are additions to or amendments of any rules and
regulations, the board, officer, commissioner, committee, board of trustees
or department responsible therefor shall file with the Town Clerk a new and
complete copy of the rules and regulations in substitution for the copy
already on file.



(1982 Code, Ch. II, § 2)



§ 31.03  ANNUAL REPORT AND DISTRIBUTION.



   (A)   On or before March 15 each year, all officers of the town and
the boards, committees, commissions and trustees referred to in the preceding
section and the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works including
report of the Town Engineer, shall make a report to the town of the work done
and business transacted in their respective department during the fiscal year
of the town last preceding.  The reports shall be made by filing the
original thereof with the Town Manager prior to March 15 in the year which it
is made and at the same time a copy thereof with the Town Clerk for a
permanent record. All reports shall be made on paper 8-1/2 inches wide and 11
inches long.



   (B)   The annual printed reports of the officers of the town shall
be made and published by the Town Manager.  It shall include the Auditor's
report showing in detail all moneys received into and paid out of the Town
Treasury in the fiscal year last preceding and such other matters as are
required by law to be contained therein, or as may be inserted by the Town
Manager under the discretion granted him or her by law.  The reports shall
be completed and a copy, after being completed, be delivered via mailing or
other expeditious means to all Town Council Members and department heads. 
Copies shall be made available at the Town Clerk's office.



(1982 Code, Ch. II, §§ 3-4)



§ 31.04  CORRESPONDENCE.



   All correspondence between officers or departments of the town and all
reports and other instruments to be filed for record shall be on paper 8-1/2
inches wide and 11 inches long.



(1982 Code, Ch. II, § 5)



§ 31.05  STATUTORY DUTIES.



   In addition to the duties fixed in this code, all officers, boards,
committees and commissions shall have the duties imposed upon them by law by
virtue of their office.



(1982 Code, Ch. II, § 6)



§ 31.06  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   No town officer or member of any board or committee chosen by the town,
or any agent of any such officer, board or committee, shall have any
pecuniary interest in any contract agreement, sale, bargain or the settlement
of any claim by or against the town made or approved on behalf of the town by
himself or herself or any board or committee of which he or she is a member
or for which he or she may act as agent and no such officer, member or agent
shall represent a claimant or defendant in any legal proceeding, civil or
criminal, by or against the town or any of its officers or agents acting in
their official capacities. No officer, member or agent shall represent a
defendant in any criminal proceeding instituted by a member of the Police
Department for the prosecution of a crime committed within the jurisdiction
of such department or for any violation of this code.



(1982 Code, Ch. III, § 10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



LEGAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT



§ 31.15  APPOINTMENTS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   There shall be a Legal Services Department established for the
town under the supervision and control of the Town Manager. The Town Manager,
with the approval of the Town Council, shall appoint a Town Attorney who,
together with any Assistant Town Attorney, shall be a member in good standing
of the Massachusetts bar.  The Town Attorney shall direct the functions of
the Legal Services Department and may employ, with the approval of the Town
Manager, such employees or special employees as may be necessary to carry out
the duties of the Department. The Town Attorney, for the purposes of this
code, shall be an officer of the town.



   (B)   The Legal Services Department shall, in addition to any
statutory requirements or specific assignments by the Town Manager, perform
and be responsible for the following duties and services:



      (1)   To counsel and advise all executive officers, boards,
committees and commissions of the town concerning all legal matters in which
the town has an interest, and such executive officers, boards, committees or
commissions shall, in the first instance, confer with or refer to said legal
services department for its attention all such legal matters, except those
carried on in the regular course of business.



      (2)   To represent the town in all legal proceedings by or
against the town.



      (3)   All legal opinions given to any executive officer,
board, committee or commission shall be in writing signed by the Town
Attorney and the Legal Services Department shall be responsible for filing
the original with the Town Clerk for a permanent record, for sending a
duplicate of the original to such person, board, committee or commission
requesting the opinion and for sending a copy thereof to the Town Manager.



      (4)   To discuss, assist in, supervise or conduct any and all
legal matters for any officer, department head, board, committee or
commission of the town.



      (5)   To pay all proper charges against the town for any and
all legal services or expenses that are properly incurred by any Town
Officer, department head, board, committee or commission  except those that
by statute are allowed to pay their own bills for legal services and expenses
or who, by proper Town Council vote, have an appropriation for legal services
and expenses in the budget of their own office, department, board, committee
or commission.



(1982 Code, Ch. IV, § 1)



§ 31.16  DEFENSE OF SUITS.



   The Town Manager shall have full authority as agent of the town to
institute and prosecute suits in the name of the town or its officers in his
or her official capacity and to appear and defend suits brought against its
officers in their official capacity, unless otherwise ordered by a vote of
the town, or provided by law.



(1982 Code, Ch. IV, § 2)



§ 31.17  SETTLEMENT AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Town Manager may institute, prosecute, defend, compromise
and settle claims, actions, suits or other proceedings brought by, on behalf
of, or against the town.



   (B)   In no case shall a settlement be so made by a payment of more
than $2,500 without a vote of authority from the town.



   (C)   He or she may employ special counsel in suits by or against
the town whenever he or she deems it necessary.



(1982 Code, Ch. IV, § 3)



RECYCLING ADVISORY BOARD



§ 31.30  BOARD CREATED.



   There is hereby established a Watertown Recycling Advisory Board.



(Ord. 36, passed 9-8-1992)



§ 31.31  MEMBERS OF BOARD.



   The Recycling Advisory Board shall be composed of 12 citizens at large,
to be appointed by the Town Manager, in 3 groups of 4 persons, appointed for
staggered 3-year terms, with 1 group to be initially appointed for 1 year,
the second group to be initially appointed for 2 years, and the third group
to be initially appointed for 3 years.



(Ord. 36, passed 9-8-1992)



§ 31.32  COMPENSATION.



   The members of the Recycling Advisory Board shall receive no
compensation for their services as Board members, but all expenses incurred
that are reasonable and that were pre-approved by the Town Manager shall be
paid by the town.



(Ord. 36, passed 9-8-1992)



§ 31.33  OFFICERS.



   (A)   Chairperson.  The members of the Board shall from time to
time appoint 1 of its members as Chairperson.



   (B)   Secretary.  The Recycling Advisory Board shall designate 1 of
its members as Secretary. The Secretary shall arrange meetings, supply
records, obtain data, prepare reports and attend to such other duties as
shall be decided by the Recycling Advisory Board.



(Ord. 36, passed 9-8-1992)



§ 31.34  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Recycling Advisory Board shall assist the Town Manager in
developing a plan for the town to address the problems of the rising cost of
solid waste disposal and impending state exclusion of many recyclable
materials from incinerators and landfills.  In addition, the Recycling
Advisory Board shall advise the Town Manager on the operations of the
Watertown Recycling Center. The Town Manager may from time to time assign
further duties to the Board as the Town Manager deems suitable or appropriate.



(Ord. 36, passed 9-8-1992)



§ 31.35  PROCEDURES.



   All reports, suggestions and advice relative to the establishment of a
recycling program in the town and on the operations of the Watertown
Recycling Center shall first be submitted through the Secretary of the
Recycling Advisory Board to the Board for study and recommendations before
being acted upon by the Town Manager, unless the Town Manager shall deem
otherwise.



(Ord. 36, passed 9-8-1992)



TIMING AND PROCESS OF APPOINTMENTS



§ 31.50  EXPIRATION OF TERMS.



   (A)   The terms of appointments to town boards, commissions, and
committees (hereafter "town boards") expire as follows:



      (1)   Board of Health: First Monday in February;



      (2)   Zoning Board of Appeals: February 15;



      (3)   Planning Board: February 15;



      (4)   Conservation Commission: February 15;



      (5)   Licensing Board: February 15;



      (6)   Bicycle and Pedestrian Committee: February 15;



      (7)   Election Commission: April 1;



      (8)   Traffic Commission: May 15;



      (9)   Board of Assessors: May 15;



      (10)   Watertown Housing Authority: May 15;



      (11)   Council on Aging: May 15;



      (12)   Cultural Council: May 15;



      (13)   Cable Access Corporation: September 15;



      (14)   Historical Commission: October 1;



      (15)   Commission on Disability: November 1;



      (16)   Environment and Energy Efficiency: November 15;



      (17)   Historic District Commission: November 15;



      (18)   Recycling Advisory Board: November 15; and



      (19)   Stormwater Advisory Committee: July 15.



   (B)   All persons serving on a town board for a term of years at the
time of enactment of this subchapter shall continue to serve on that town
board until their terms would otherwise expire, and until their successors
are qualified, unless otherwise terminated.



(Ord. 46, passed 10-23-2007; Am. Ord. O-2013-6, passed 1-22-2013)



§ 31.51  TIMING OF APPOINTMENTS.



   (A)   Appointments upon expiration of term.



      (1)   At least 90 days before the expiration of a town board
member's term, the Town Manager will notify the member in writing of the
expiration date of his or her term and determine whether the member wishes,
at the Town Manager's discretion, to serve another term.



      (2)   Within 7 business days of giving the notice required in
division (A)(1), the Town Manager will post the position. If the Town Manager
has determined that the current member wishes to serve another term, the
posting will include that information.



      (3)   If the appointment requires confirmation by the Town
Council, the Town Manager will transmit his or her appointment to the Town
Council at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the term.



      (4)   If the appointment does not require confirmation by the
Town Council, the Town Manager will transmit to the Town Council notice of
his or her appointment prior to the expiration of the term.



   (B)   Appointments other than upon expiration of term.



      (1)   Vacancies on town boards occurring other than upon
expiration of term, whether due to resignation, removal, or other cause,
shall be filled by appointment by the Town Manager for the unexpired term.



      (2)   Upon learning of a vacancy occurring other than upon
expiration of term, the Town Manager may either:



         (a)   Appoint a new member from among people who have
previously applied and been interviewed for a position on a Town Board; or



         (b)   Post the position.



      (3)   Preferably within 60 days, but not more than 90 days,
after learning of a vacancy, the Town Manager shall transmit to the Town
Council his or her appointment (if Town Council confirmation is required) or
notice of his or her appointment (if Town Council confirmation is not
required).



   (C)   Failure to make timely appointments.



      (1)   If, for any reason, the Town Manager is unable to make
an appointment within the time periods provided in this section, he or she
will make a report to the Town Council explaining the reasons for the delay
and indicating the date by which he or she expects to make the appointment.



      (2)   Members of town boards who are willing to continue to
serve after the expiration of their terms will serve until they are
reappointed and qualified or their successors are appointed and qualified.



(Ord. 46, passed 10-23-2007)



§ 31.52  APPOINTMENT PROCESS.



   (A)   Annual listing.  Not later than January 15 of each year, the
Town Clerk will prepare a list of all town board terms due to expire during
that calendar year. The list will be transmitted to the Town Council and Town
Manager, posted on the town bulletin board and town website, and published at
least twice in the local newspaper.



   (B)   Posting of positions.  All positions on town boards posted in
accordance with this subchapter shall be posted for not less than 14 days on
the town bulletin board and town website and published at least twice in the
local newspaper. The posting shall contain a description of the position and
duties and a list of necessary and desirable qualifications, and shall
indicate whether the person currently holding the position wishes to serve
another term. No appointment shall be made until at least 21 days have
elapsed following the initial posting.



   (C)   Interviews.  Except where the Town Manager appoints a prior
applicant under § 31.51(B)(2)(a), the Town Manager or his or her designee
shall interview no less than 3 candidates for each position on a town board.
If there are fewer than 3 applicants, the Town Manager or his or her designee
shall interview all of the applicants.



   (D)   Confirmation by the Town Council.



      (1)   For appointments requiring confirmation by the Town
Council, the Town Council or a committee thereof must interview the appointee
at a public meeting for which the posted agenda contains notice of the
interview.



      (2)   A vote by the Town Council on confirmation of an
appointment must take place at a meeting for which the posted agenda contains
notice of the vote.



      (3)   If the Town Council fails to take any action on an
appointment within 30 days following the date notice of the appointment is
filed by the Town Manager with the Town Council, such appointment shall be
deemed to have been confirmed.



(Ord. 46, passed 10-23-2007)



§ 31.53  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall apply to all appointments upon expiration of term
and other vacancies occurring after January 1, 2008.



(Ord. 46, passed 10-23-2007)



CHAPTER 32: FINANCES



Section



   32.01   Borrowing procedure



   32.02   Deeds executed by Town Manager



   32.03   Acceptance of gifts of land



   32.04   Sale of property under tax title



   32.05   Collection of fees



   32.06   Town Clerk fee schedule



   32.07   Payroll procedure



   32.08   Revolving funds



§ 32.01  BORROWING PROCEDURE.



   The Town Auditor, Town Treasurer, Town Manager and Town Council
President shall be personally consulted by any board or committee appointed
by or acting on behalf of the town whenever such board or committee proposes
or plans any project or undertaking which involves in whole or in part the
borrowing of money by the town.



(1982 Code, Ch. III, § 3)



§ 32.02  DEEDS EXECUTED BY TOWN MANAGER.



   Whenever it shall be necessary to execute any deed conveying land or
other instrument required to carry into effect any vote of the town, the same
shall be executed by the Town Manager on behalf of the town, unless otherwise
ordered by a vote of the Town Council.



(1982 Code, Ch. III, § 4)



§ 32.03  ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS OF LAND.



   The Town Manager may accept from time to time, in behalf of the town,
gifts of land at the intersection of public ways with public or private ways,
to be used for the purpose of rounding street corners provided such gift is
made by a good and sufficient deed executed by the donor in proper form to be
recorded in the Registry of Deeds.



(1982 Code, Ch. III, § 8)



§ 32.04  SALE OF PROPERTY UNDER TAX TITLE.



   The Town Manager may sell at public auction and in a manner, upon the
terms and for the consideration as in his or her judgment is for the best
interest of the town, lands held from time to time by the town under tax
titles the right of redemption from which has been foreclosed.



(1982 Code, Ch. III, § 9)



§ 32.05  COLLECTION OF FEES.



   All town officers shall pay all fees received by them by virtue of
their office into the town treasury and the aggregate annual compensation of
all town officers or employees shall be limited to the amount of the annual
appropriation therefor.



(1982 Code, Ch. III, § 11)



§ 32.06  TOWN CLERK FEE SCHEDULE.



   The schedule of fees charged by the Town Clerk for certain services,
certificates, documents and copies, as passed by the Town Council and amended
from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as
if set out in full.  A copy of the specific fee schedule is on file in the
office of the Town Clerk.



§ 32.07  PAYROLL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Each town officer, head of department, chairperson of any
board or committee or other person immediately responsible for the submission
to the Auditor of a payroll to be included in a warrant for payment, shall
certify under oath or under the penalties of perjury that the services listed
thereon have been rendered, except as otherwise noted, and are properly
chargeable against the appropriation designated.



   (B)   If the services listed thereon have not been rendered due to
illness, day off, vacation time, or otherwise, the person responsible for the
payroll shall state in his or her certification the reason for absence from
work, the dates of absence, and such other explanatory statement as shall be
required from time to time by the Town Manager. Bill warrants submitted,
vouchers or statements of materials delivered or services rendered, other
than the ordinary payroll for salary and wages, shall contain the
certification under oath or under the penalties of perjury, as shall be
requested from time to time by the Town Manager, as will in his or her
judgment assure full delivery of materials in good condition and full and
proper performance of services contracted for.



(1982 Code, Ch. III, § 12)



§ 32.08  REVOLVING FUNDS.



   (A)   There are hereby established in the Town of Watertown pursuant
to the provisions of Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 44, § 53E1/2, the following
revolving funds, from which the specified department head, board, committee,
or officer may incur liabilities against and spend monies from without
appropriation in accordance with the limitations set forth in this section.



   (B)   Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages
are paid from the fund shall also be paid from the fund.



   (C)   No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available
balance of the fund.



   (D)   The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed
the amount authorized by the Town Council or any increase therein as may
later be authorized by the Town Manager and Town Council in accordance with
the provisions of Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 44, § 53E1/2.



   (E)   Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund
established by this section shall be credited to the general fund.



   (F)   Authorized revolving funds.



 


Revolving fund program or purpose

 

Department receipts to be credited to fund

 

Representative or board entity authorized to spend





Commander's mansion to pay costs associated with rental and use of the
commander's mansion
 
Fees and receipts from rentals and use
 
Director of Community Development and Planning


Organized crime drug enforcement task force to pay costs associated with the
operation and equipping of the crime task force
 
Fees and receipts for task force rental and operations
 
Town Manager


Senior center to pay costs associated with programs and activities provided
at or by the senior center
 
Fees and receipts for program participation
 
Senior Center Director


Library copier to pay costs of copier maintenance, materials, and equipping
 
Fees from copier usage
 
Library Director


Faire on the square to pay costs associated with Faire activities
 
Fees and receipts received from faire participants
 
Town Clerk


Farmers' market to pay costs associated with the operation of the farmer's
market
 
Fees and receipts from participation in farmers' market
 
Director of Community Development and Planning


Animal control to pay costs associated with the operation of the animal
control program
 
Fees and receipts from the animal control program
 
Director of Public Health


Affordable housing development to pay costs associated with the creation
and/or preservation of affordable housing
 
Fees and receipts received in connection with affordable housing development
 
Director of Community Development and Planning




 



   (G)   Procedures and reports. Except as provided in Mass. Gen. Laws
Ch. 44, § 53E1/2 and this section, all applicable state and local laws and
regulations that govern the receipt, custody, expenditure and payment of town
funds shall apply to the use of revolving funds established and authorized by
this section.



(Ord. O-2017-47, passed 6-27-2017)



CHAPTER 33: TAXATION



Section



Failure to Pay Taxes or Charges



   33.01   Purpose



   33.02   Definitions



   33.03   Duties of Tax Collector



   33.04   Notice and hearing procedures



   33.05   Conditions on reissuance of licenses



   33.06   Deposit requirement for private work



FAILURE TO PAY TAXES OR CHARGES



§ 33.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to authorize the town, through its
licensing authorities, to deny, revoke or suspend any local license or
permit, of any party who has neglected or refused to pay any local fees,
assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, or any license or permit
with respect to which the licensed or permitted activity, event or matter is
carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about
real estate owned by any party who has neglected or refused to pay any local
fees, assessment, betterments or other municipal charges.



(Ord. 711, passed 1-10-1989; Am. Ord. 40, passed 8-16-1994)



§ 33.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indites or requires a different meaning.



   LICENSE or PERMIT.  Any license or permit, including renewals and
transfers, issued by any licensing authority in the town except those
licenses specifically excepted by Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40, § 57.



   LICENSING AUTHORITY.  The  Town Manager, the Town Clerk, and the
Watertown Licensing Board or any other board, commission, department or
division of the town responsible for the issuing of any license or permit.



   PARTY.  Any person, corporation or business enterprise.



(Ord. 711, passed 1-10-1989; Am. Ord. 40, passed 8-16-1994)



§ 33.03  DUTIES OF TAX COLLECTOR.



   The Tax Collector shall annually furnish to each licensing authority a
list of all parties that have failed to pay any local taxes, fees,
assessments, betterment or other municipal charges for not less than a 12
month period, including, where applicable, identification of the real estate
which is the subject of such tax, fee, assessment, betterment or other
municipal charge.  The list shall not include the name of any party that has
filed an application for an abatement of such tax or a petition with the
appellate tax board.



(Ord. 711, passed 1-10-1989; Am. Ord. 40, passed 8-16-1994)



§ 33.04  NOTICE AND HEARING PROCEDURES.



   The licensing authority may deny, revoke, suspend or refuse to renew or
transfer any license or permit of any party named on the list furnished by
the Tax Collector, or any license or permit with respect to which the
licensed or permitted activity, event or matter is carried out or exercised
or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate owned by any
party named on the list, provided written notice is given to the party and
the Tax Collector, and a hearing is held not earlier than 14 days after the
notice.  The Tax Collector may participate in any such hearing conducted by
the licensed authority. Any findings made by the licensing authority with
respect to a license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for
the purpose of the proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in
any other proceeding, except for an appeal from such action.



(Ord. 711, passed 1-10-1989; Am. Ord. 40, passed 8-16-1994)



§ 33.05  CONDITIONS ON REISSUANCE OF LICENSES.



   (A)   Any license or permit that has been denied, suspended or
revoked shall not be reissued or renewed until the licensing authority
receives a certificate issued by the Tax Collector which states that the
party is on good standing with respect to any and all taxes, fees,
assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, payable to the
municipality as of the date of the issuance of the certificate.



   (B)   Any party shall be given the opportunity to enter into a
payment agreement, thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a
certificate indicating the limitation to the license or permit. The validity
of the license shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with the
agreement. Failure to comply with the agreement shall be grounds for the
suspension or revocation of the license or permit, after proper notice and
hearing.



(Ord. 711, passed 1-10-1989; Am. Ord. 40, passed 8-16-1994)



§ 33.06  DEPOSIT REQUIREMENT FOR PRIVATE WORK.



   No board, committee or officer having charge of any work, the payment
for which is in any part to be contributed by private citizens, shall perform
such work until a sum has been deposited with the town officer, upon estimate
made by such board, committee or officer, sufficient to cover the payment of
the portion of the work chargeable to such private citizens.



(1982 Code, Ch. III, § 7)



CHAPTER 34: PURCHASING PROCEDURES



Section



   34.01   Designation of the Chief Procurement Officer



   34.02   Contracts for supplies and services



   34.03   Bonding requirements for contracts for supplies and services



   34.04   Alternate procurement procedures



   34.05   Contracts for design services



   34.06   Contracts for public works construction projects



   34.07   Contracts for building construction projects



   34.08   Award of contracts



   34.09   Execution of contracts



   34.10   Town Council review of contracts



§ 34.01  DESIGNATION OF THE CHIEF PROCUREMENT OFFICER.



   The provisions of Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 30B (hereinafter "Chapter 30B")
are incorporated by reference into this chapter. The Town Manager is hereby
designated as the Chief Procurement Officer for all purposes pursuant to this
chapter. The Purchasing Agent shall exercise general authority over the
procurement process as set out in the General Laws and pursuant to this
chapter and such additional responsibilities as may be delegated to him or
her from time to time by the Town Manager. Any power, authority, judgment,
determination, control, supervision, or discretion that may be exercised by
the Purchasing Agent under this chapter, or any policies and procedures
established from time to time by the Purchasing Agent with the approval of
the Town Manager, may also be exercised by the Town Manager, at his or her
election.



(Ord. 8, passed 3-9-2004)



§ 34.02  CONTRACTS FOR SUPPLIES AND SERVICES.



   Every contract for goods, materials, supplies, equipment, furnishings
(hereinafter referred to as "supplies" as such term is defined in Mass. Gen.
Laws Ch. 30B) or for contractual services (hereinafter referred to as
"services" as such term is defined in Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 30B), or for the
acquisition of interests in real property, and every contract for disposal of
supplies or interests in real property by any department of the town shall be
procured in accordance with this chapter and Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 30B. All
invitations for bids, requests for proposals or purchase orders to be issued
by the town shall be approved in writing by the originating department head
and shall be forwarded to the Purchasing Department for approval and issuance
by the Purchasing Agent. In the case of a request for proposals for supplies
or services, the originating department head shall provide a supporting
memorandum setting out in full the reasons why the selection of the most
advantageous offer for such supplies or services requires the comparative
judgement of factors in addition to price.  The Chief Procurement Officer
shall determine in writing that the use of a request for proposals is
appropriate prior to the issuance of any such solicitation by the Purchasing
Agent.



(Ord. 8, passed 3-9-2004)



§ 34.03  BONDING REQUIREMENTS FOR CONTRACTS FOR SUPPLIES AND SERVICES.



   The Chief Procurement Officer, in his or her discretion, may establish
security requirements for contracts for supplies or services if he or she
deems it in the best interests of the town, including but not limited to a
bid bond, performance bond, labor and material payment bond or deposit of
money or certified check, notwithstanding the absence of any such
requirements in Chapter 30B.



(Ord. 8, passed 3-9-2004)



§ 34.04  ALTERNATE PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES.



   The Purchasing Agent may, in his or her discretion, purchase supplies
or services from a state bid list established through the Commonwealth's
Operational Services Division or other list of approved vendors established
by any state office or agency. The Purchasing Agent may also participate in a
joint procurement or serve as lead community for a joint procurement with
other municipalities pursuant to Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 7, §§ 22A or 22B.



(Ord. 8, passed 3-9-2004)



§ 34.05  CONTRACTS FOR DESIGN SERVICES.



   Contracts for design services in connection with the construction,
reconstruction, installation, demolition, maintenance or repair of any
building shall be procured in compliance with the applicable provisions of
the Designer Selection Law, being Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 7, §§ 38A1/2 to 38O,
and the town's local designers selection procedures. All requests for
proposals for such projects to be issued by the town shall be approved by the
originating department head and shall be forwarded to the Purchasing
Department for approval and issuance by the Purchasing Agent.



(Ord. 8, passed 3-9-2004)



§ 34.06  CONTRACTS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS.



   Contracts for the construction, reconstruction, alteration, remodeling
or repair of any public work, or for the purchase of materials therefor, and
contracts for the construction, reconstruction, installation, demolition,
maintenance or repair of any building estimated to cost less than $25,000, or
such other statutory limitation which may be enacted for this purpose from
time to time, shall be procured in compliance with the applicable provisions
of Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 30, § 39M, and all related provisions of the General
Laws. All invitations for bids for such projects to be issued by the town
shall be approved by the Superintendent of Public Works or other originating
department head and shall be forwarded to the Purchasing Department for
approval and issuance by the Purchasing Agent.



(Ord. 8, passed 3-9-2004)



§ 34.07  CONTRACTS FOR BUILDING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS.



   Contracts for the construction, reconstruction, installation,
demolition, maintenance or repair of any building shall be procured in
compliance with the applicable provisions of Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 149, §§
44A through 44M, and all related provisions of the General Laws. All
invitations for bids for such projects to be issued by the town shall be
approved by the originating department head and shall be forwarded to the
Purchasing Department for approval and issuance by the Purchasing Agent.



(Ord. 8, passed 3-9-2004)



§ 34.08  AWARD OF CONTRACTS.



   The Purchasing Agent, with the assistance of such other town officers
and employees as he or she deems advisable, shall review and evaluate all
bids and proposals, shall determine the successful bidder or proposer, and
shall issue a notice of award. Thereafter, it shall be the responsibility of
the Purchasing Agent to obtain all necessary contract documents, including
but not limited to certificates of insurance, performance bonds, material and
payment bonds and other contractor certifications, prior to submitting the
contract to the Town Manager for execution. In addition, the Town Auditor
shall certify on the face of every contract that there is an appropriation
available for the purpose and in the amount of the contract.



(Ord. 8, passed 3-9-2004)



§ 34.09  EXECUTION OF CONTRACTS.



   Unless otherwise provided by a vote of the Town Council, the Town
Manager is authorized to execute all contracts for the exercise of the town's
corporate powers on such terms and conditions as he or she shall deem
appropriate. No contract shall be executed by the Town Manager unless it
includes on its face a certification by the Town Auditor of an available
appropriation in the amount of the full contract price. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the Town Manager shall not contract for any purpose, on any terms,
or under any conditions inconsistent with any applicable provision of any
general or special law.



(Ord. 8, passed 3-9-2004)



§ 34.10  TOWN COUNCIL REVIEW OF CONTRACTS.



   A summary of all contracts with a cost to the town of $50,000 or
greater shall be provided to the Town Council within 5 business days of the
contract's execution by the Town Manager. The contract summary shall be in a
format agreed upon by the Town Council and the Town Manager. The full
contract shall be provided upon the request of an individual Council Member.



(Ord. 8, passed 3-9-2004)



CHAPTER 35: CODE ENFORCEMENT



Section



   35.01   Prosecution of offenses



   35.02   Time limit for prosecution



   35.03   Power to license or permit



   35.04   Application for criminal complaint



   35.05   Non-criminal disposition



§ 35.01  PROSECUTION OF OFFENSES.



   Except when otherwise provided by law, prosecutions for offenses under
this code may be made by any police officer of the town.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 19)



§ 35.02  TIME LIMIT FOR PROSECUTION.



   Prosecution for the breach of any of the provisions of this code shall
be commenced within 1 year from such breach.



(1982 Code, Ch. I, § 8)



§ 35.03  POWER TO LICENSE OR PERMIT.



   When anything in this code is prohibited from being done, without the
license or permission of a certain officer, officers or board, such officer,
officers or board shall have the power to license or permit such thing to be
done.



(1982 Code, Ch. I, § 4)



§ 35.04  APPLICATION FOR CRIMINAL COMPLAINT.



   The officer, department head, or employee responsible for enforcement
of any code provision, rule or regulation, or any employee designated by the
Town Manager, is hereby empowered to apply for a criminal complaint in the
District Court and to seek the imposition of the penalty set forth in §
10.99.



(1982 Code, Ch. I, § 7(a))  (Am. Ord. 31, passed 3-26-1991)



§ 35.05  NON-CRIMINAL DISPOSITION.



   (A)   Any town officer, department head, or employee taking
cognizance of a violation of any ordinance, code, rule or regulation that he
or she is empowered to enforce and the violation of which ordinance, code,
rule or regulation is subject to a specific penalty, may also, in his or her
discretion, with or without applying for a criminal complaint, issue
citations and notice to appear before the clerk of the District Court,
pursuant to Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40, § 21D, to such person who violates any
provision, including any mandate, requirement, prohibition or proscription,
of such ordinances, code, rule or regulation.



   (B)   The provisions of division (A) of this section shall not apply
to the enforcement of codes, rules and regulations unless the issuance or
adoption of such code, rule or regulation was the subject of a public notice
prior to the effective date and that on the date of the alleged violation a
conformed copy of the current version of such code, rule or regulation was
available in the Town Clerk's office.



   (C)   (1)   Any person notified to appear before the clerk of the
District Court as hereinbefore provided may so appear and confess the offense
charged either personally or through a duly authorized agent or by mailing to
the Town Clerk together with the notice the specific sum set forth on the
notice, which shall be the specific penalty set forth in the ordinance, code,
rule or regulation, but in no case shall be more than:



         (a)   $25 for the first offense;



         (b)   $50 for the second offense; and



         (c)   $100 for the third and any subsequent offense, or
as otherwise limited by Massachusetts General Laws.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the enforcing officer
shall have the discretion to issue a warning in lieu of the citation for $25
for the first offense.



      (3)   The Town Clerk shall forward such sums collected to the
Treasurer-Collector. If the Treasurer-Collector, instead of the Town Clerk,
receives directly from the payor any sums or payments as described above,
then the Treasurer-Collector shall keep and deposit the sums or payments and
shall also notify the Town Clerk of receipt of  payment, so that the Town
Clerk may deem payment to have been made on his or her records.



   (D)   Upon receipt of the notice, the Town Clerk shall forthwith
notify the District Court clerk of payment, and the receipt by the District
Court clerk of notification shall operate as a final disposition of the case.



   (E)   Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the authority of
the enforcing officer to cancel or rescind a notice or citation previously
issued, or to retrieve it from the District Court, if in the judgment of the
enforcing officer circumstances warrant such action.



(1982 Code, Ch. I, § 7(b))  (Am. Ord. 31, passed 3-26-1991; Am. Ord. 32,
passed 5-12-1992)



Cross-reference:



   General penalty provisions, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 36: COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE



Section



   36.01   Establishment



   36.02   Membership and term



   36.03   Operations



   36.04   Duties



   36.05   Effective date



§ 36.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby established a Community Preservation Committee,
consisting of nine voting members pursuant to.the provisions of Mass. Gen.
Laws Ch. 44B.



(Ord. O-2018-59, passed 6-26-2018)



§ 36.02  MEMBERSHIP AND TERM.



   The composition of the Committee and the appointment authority for the
Committee members shall be as follows.



   (A)   Statutory membership. 



      (1)   There shall be five statutory members of the Committee
designated as provided herein.



         (a)   One member of the Planning Board as designated by
the Board.



         (b)   One member of the Conservation Commission as
designated .by the Commission.



         (c)   One member of the Historical Commission as
designated by the Commission.



         (d)   One member of the Housing Authority as designated
by the Authority.



         (e)   One member appointed by the Town Manager who shall
be a resident or employee of the town who acts in the capacity or performs
like duties of a Board of Park Commissioners.



      (2)   Any vacancy in the statutory membership shall be filled
for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner as the original
designation,



      (3)   Should any of the statutory entities listed above no
longer be in existence for whatever reason, the Town Manager shall appoint a
member who acts in the capacity or performs like duties of such statutory
entity.



   (B)   Appointed membership.  There shall be four members appointed
by the Town Manager and confirmed by the Town Council.



      (1)   The four appointed members shall be residents of the
town and shall not be employees or appointees under the authority of the Town
Manager or elected officials of the town, at the time of appointment or
during the pendency of their terms. Acceptance of employment, appointment or
election, or removal of residence from the town, shall be deemed a vacating
of office.



      (2)   The Town Manager should seek to appoint members who are
not just advocates for open space and land for recreational use, historic
resources, and community housing, but who also:



         (a)   Have deep connections to different constituencies
within the town to make it more responsive to the needs of its residents;



         (b)   Can bring specific skills to the execution of
tasks required by the Committee;



         (c)   Can bring specific outlooks that may not normally
be heard through the town's routine procedures; and



         (d)   Value new approaches and ideas to identifying
projects outside the town’s routine budget priority process.



      (3)   Publication and outreach for these positions must be
widely advertised, using all available methods, including but not limited
to,  current methods, but also using social media as an additional tool.



      (4)   Any vacancy in the appointed membership shall be filled
for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same maimer as the original
appointment.



   (C) Term.



      (1)   Statutory and appointed members shall serve for
alternating three-year terms, or for such shorter periods as they remain
eligible for designation or appointment.



      (2)   Initial terms shall be as follows:



         (a)   One year: Planning Board designee and two resident
members;



         (b)   Two years: Conservation Commis-sion and Historical
Commission designees, and one resident member;



         (c)   Three years: Housing Authority designee, appointed
statutory member, and one resident member.



   (D)   Removal.  Any member of the Committee may be removed by their
respective designating or appointing authority, for cause as determined by
each such respective designating or appointing authority.



   (E)   Annual election of chair and other officers.  The Committee
shall annually elect one of its members to serve as chairperson, and may
elect such other officers, adopt procedural rules and regulations, and
establish such subcommittees as it deems appropriate; provided, however, that
nothing herein shall prevent the Committee from reorganizing from time to
time.



(Ord. O-2018-59, passed 6-26-2018)



§ 36.03  OPERATIONS.



   (A)   The Committee shall not meet or conduct business without the
presence of a quorum, and shall keep a written record of its proceedings. A
majority of the members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum.



   (B)   Each fiscal year, the Committee shall recommend to the Town
Manager an  operational and administrative budget, which cannot exceed five
percent of the Community Preservation Fund’s estimated annual revenues. The
Committee shall provide budget recommendation(s) as requested to the Town
Manager.



   (C)   Members of the Committee shall not be compensated by the town
in any way for their service on the Committee, with the exception being a
member who may also be a town employee as set forth in § 36.02(A)(1)(e).



   (D)   The Committee shall report to the Town Council twice during
each fiscal year and at other times as may be requested.



(Ord. O-2018-59, passed 6-26-2018)



§ 36.04  DUTIES.



   The Community Preservation Committee shall have all powers and duties
as set forth in Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 44B, and in particular Mass. Gen. Laws
Ch. 44B, § 5, as may be amended.



(Ord. O-2018-59, passed 6-26-2018)



§ 36.05  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   (A)   Following Town Council approval of  Ordinance O-2018-59, each
appointing authority shall have 60 days to make initial designations or
appointments to the Community Preservation Committee. Should any appointing
authority fail to make its appointment within that allotted time, the Town
Manager shall make the appointment for the membership of such appointing
authority.



   (B)   The position of Community Preservation Committee member shall
be classified as a special municipal employee position for the purposes of
Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 268A, the conflict of interest law.



(Ord. O-2018-59, passed 6-26-2018)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



      Chapter



         50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



         51.   ELECTRICITY



         52.   GARBAGE



         53.   SEWERS



         54.   WATER



         55.   CURBS AND SIDEWALKS



CHAPTER 50: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   50.01   Duties of Superintendent of Public Works



§ 50.01  DUTIES OF SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.



   (A)   Account of work performed.  The Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works shall keep an accurate account of all money
expended and all work done by the Department of Public Works and a daily
record of the number of persons, teams and motor vehicles employed, the
extent and nature of the work done, the amount expended and the time spent in
doing the work.



   (B)   Daily payroll account.  The Superintendent of the Department
of Public Works shall keep a daily payroll account, including the names of
the employees of the Department of Public Works, the names of the owners of
teams or motor vehicles employed by the Department of Public Works, and the
rate of wages or charges against the town for each employee, team or motor
vehicle.  He or she shall also keep a daily record showing in detail the
materials delivered to the Department of Public Works at any place
whatsoever, including the names of the parties furnishing the same, the time
when payment is to be made and the rate and amount of price or charge to the
town therefor.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, §§ 1-2)



CHAPTER 51: ELECTRICITY



Section



General Provisions



   51.01   Appointments



   51.02   Inspector of Wires



   51.03   Rules and regulations



   51.04   Duties of Assistant Superintendent of Wires



   51.05   Supervision of all wires



   51.06   Enforcement



   51.07   Wires and poles on streets



   51.08   Street lights



   51.09   Access to property



   51.10   Connection of systems



   51.11   Permission needed to cover wiring system



   51.12   Order of Installation



   51.13   Records of inspections



   51.14   Inspector's right to disconnect



   51.15   Responsibility of party owning or controlling



   51.16   Underground conduit systems



   51.17   Re-inspection upon change of tenant



   51.18   Placement of poles, wires and transformers



Permits



   51.30   Permit requirements



   51.31   Annual permits



   51.32   Fees



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.01  APPOINTMENTS.



   The Assistant Superintendent of Wires shall be appointed by the Town
Manager, subject to the provisions of Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 31, §§ 1 et seq.,
and its rules and regulations.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 10)



§ 51.02  INSPECTOR OF WIRES.



   The Assistant Superintendent of Wires is hereby designated as Inspector
of Wires, under the provisions of Section 36 of Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 166 in
amendment thereof.  The Inspector of Wires shall have all the powers and be
subject to all the duties conferred and required by law.  The Assistant
Superintendent of Wires is hereby authorized to delegate his or her authority
to 1 or more assistants as the duties of the office may require.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 11)



§ 51.03  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Assistant Superintendent of Wires shall make rules and regulations
not inconsistent with this code to provide safe and proper installation of
wiring systems, apparatus and materials both for outside and inside
construction.  A certified copy of all the rules and regulations shall be
filed with the Town Clerk.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 12)



§ 51.04  DUTIES OF ASSISTANT SUPERINTENDENT OF WIRES.



   (A)   The Assistant Superintendent of Wires shall have the
supervision and management of:



      (1)   The erection and maintenance of all wires owned by the
town, including the fire alarm telegraph, police telegraph and electrical
signal and telephone systems and traffic signal lights;



      (2)   The apparatus, machinery and other property connected
therewith; and



      (3)   The posts and other supports erected or owned by the
town.



   (B)   He or she shall supervise the erection of all wires, posts,
supports, electrical equipment, machinery and other electrical equipment
appliances required by the town in all departments and shall see that the
same are maintained in good order and condition.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 13)



§ 51.05  SUPERVISION OF ALL WIRES.



   The Assistant Superintendent of Wires shall supervise every wire over
and under streets, or buildings in the town, and every wire within a building
which is designed to carry an electric current.  He or she shall promptly
notify the person owning or operating the wire whenever its attachment,
insulation, supports, or appliances are unsuitable or unsafe or whenever the
tags or marks thereon required by Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 166, § 32 are
insufficient or illegible.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 14)



§ 51.06  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Assistant Superintendent of Wires shall remove every wire, the use
of which has been abandoned and every wire not tagged or marked as required
by law, and shall see that all laws, ordinances and regulations relative to
wires are strictly enforced, and shall perform the other duties as are or may
hereafter be imposed upon him or her by law.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 15)



§ 51.07  WIRES AND POLES ON STREETS.



   The Assistant Superintendent of Wires shall supervise all poles
carrying electric wires upon or over the streets and buildings within the
town, and all supports of all wires when attached to buildings and ascertain
if the poles and supports are kept in proper condition, and not weakened by
decay or other causes.  In case any person, firm or corporation owning,
leasing, or operating wires shall neglect or refuse to maintain the supports
in proper condition for safety, the Assistant Superintendent of Wires shall
cause the fixtures and supports to be put in proper condition at the expense
of the person, firm or corporation, owning or operating the same, after first
giving notice in writing of his or her intended action.  He or she may
require the owner or user of the poles, supports, or fixtures, to furnish to
him or her, at their expense, adequate assistance to enable him or her to
make a thorough examination of the poles, supports, or fixtures.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 16)



§ 51.08  STREET LIGHTS.



   The Assistant Superintendent of Wires shall have the supervision of all
street lamps installed by order of the Town Manager.  He or she shall attend
to all complaints arising from lack of service by any light, and shall see
that continuous schedule service is maintained throughout the town, and shall
report each month to the supplier of this service the number and style of all
lights reported as not lighted during the previous month.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 17)



§ 51.09  ACCESS TO PROPERTY.



   All wires, cables, conduits, race-ways, fittings, appliances and
apparatus in or on public or private property which are intended for the
transmission of electricity, either for lighting, heating, or power or to be
connected with an outside circuit, shall be made, placed and kept safe to the
satisfaction of the Assistant Superintendent of Wires, and he or she may, at
all proper and reasonable times, have access to the property for the purpose
of inspecting the equipment and materials.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 18)



§ 51.10  CONNECTION OF SYSTEMS.



   No current of electricity shall be connected with a system of wiring or
apparatus intended to be used for power, lighting or heating without
permission being first obtained and a written permit granted by the Assistant
Superintendent of Wires.  The jurisdiction of the Assistant Superintendent
of Wires shall include all public and private electrical systems.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 19)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.11  PERMISSION NEEDED TO COVER WIRING SYSTEM.



   No person shall cover or cause to be covered in any building a system
of wiring designed to carry light, heat or power current unless permission is
given by the Assistant Superintendent of Wires to do so.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.12  ORDER OF INSTALLATION.



   No wires shall be placed in that portion of any building in the process
of alteration or construction where gas, water, heating, refrigerating, and
ventilating pipes and ducts are planned to be installed until the same have
been placed in proper position.  The work of the electrician shall not at
any time precede the installation of the above mentioned items unless it is
shown that it is an emergency and permission is obtained from the Assistant
Superintendent of Wires.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 21)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.13  RECORDS OF INSPECTIONS.



   The Assistant Superintendent of Wires shall cause to be kept records of
all inspections made and permits issued, and these records shall be open to
inspection at all reasonable times by any interested parties.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 22)



§ 51.14  INSPECTOR'S RIGHT TO DISCONNECT.



   The Assistant Superintendent of Wires may in case of the violation of
any provision of this chapter, or of any rule and regulation adopted, after
due notice in writing to occupant or owner of the property where a violation
exists, disconnect or order disconnected service from the wires of any
outside circuit or isolated plant where the violation occurs.  If in the
opinion of the Assistant Superintendent of Wires a condition of emergency or
hazard to life or property exists, he or she may disconnect or order
disconnected the electric service immediately.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 23)



§ 51.15  RESPONSIBILITY OF PARTY OWNING OR CONTROLLING.



   This chapter shall not be construed to relieve or lessen the
responsibility of any party owning, operating or controlling any electrical
equipment, for damages to property or to anyone injured by reason of any
defect therein, nor shall the town be held as assuming the liability by
reason of the inspection authorized herein, or by permit given by its
officers or agents exercising the rights or power given.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 24)



§ 51.16  UNDERGROUND CONDUIT SYSTEMS.



   In any underground conduit system, the sufficient space as shall be
determined by the Town Manager shall be reserved free of expense for the use
of the town, for municipal purposes.  The town, by the Assistant
Superintendent of Wires and other proper servants, shall be allowed access to
the conduits at all times and the town shall be allowed equal facilities and
privileges with others using the same conduits in putting in, taking out, and
repairing wires.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 25)



§ 51.17  RE-INSPECTION UPON CHANGE OF TENANT.



   An inspection of all commercial and industrial occupancies shall be
made when a change in tenancy occurs before a current of electricity can be
connected for the new tenants.  No permits shall be required for this
service unless alterations, additions or changes are made to the existing
wiring.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 29)



§ 51.18  PLACEMENT OF POLES, WIRES AND TRANSFORMERS.



   (A)   No public utility, including without limitation electrical
companies or telephone companies, shall add, relocate, or site poles on any
street or way or public property in the town without first petitioning and
obtaining the permission of the Town Council therefor, with due notification
to abutters; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not
apply to repair work done to existing poles.



   (B)   Except for temporary emergencies of durations not to exceed 3
days, a public utility seeking to add, replace, or increase the size of
existing electrical wires, or to increase the electrical load carried by the
existing wires, shall, before proceeding, notify the Inspector of Wires of
the location, specification, and reason for the intended construction.  If
the Inspector approves the petition, within 7 days of notification of the
petition the Inspector shall forward it to the Town Council, with due
notification to abutters, for approval subject to the provisions of division
(C) of this section.



   (C)   The Inspector shall forward to the Town Council utility
petitions made under the provisions of division (B) of this section whenever
1or more of the following conditions apply:



      (1)   The petition concerns owners of any building, excluding
1 and 2-family residences, seeking to install or replace electrical service
larger than 200 amperes or to increase their current supply of electricity
provided by extant lines by more than 200 amperes.



      (2)   The petition concerns wires or transformers used to
supply bulk electricity, as defined by Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 164, § 1.



      (3)   The petition concerns increases in the current of
electricity in a facility as defined by Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 164, § 69G.



(Ord. 46, passed 6-11-1991; Am. Ord. 141, passed 12-19-1995)



PERMITS



§ 51.30  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   No wiring, devices, appliances and equipment for the transmission or
distribution of electricity for any purpose shall be installed within or on
any building or structure nor shall any alterations or addition be made on
any existing wiring, devices, appliances or equipment without first securing
a permit from the Assistant Superintendent of Wires.



   (A)   No permit shall be required for minor repair work, for the
replacement of lamps or for the connection of portable devices to suitable
receptacles which have been permanently installed.  Any damage to wiring
caused by fire, water, heat or explosion shall not be considered a minor
repair.



   (B)   No permit shall be required for the installation, maintenance
or alteration of electric wiring, devices, appliances and equipment to be
installed by or for a public service corporation for the use of the
corporation in the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of
electric energy, or for the use of a corporation in the operation of signals
or the transmission of intelligence, or the operation of electric railways 
except as is provided by the General Laws of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.



   (C)   Application for permits, describing the work to be done shall
be made by the person, firm or corporation installing the work on forms
furnished by the Assistant Superintendent of Wires and the permit when issued
shall be in the name of the applicant.  The application shall be accompanied
by the plans, specifications and schedules necessary to determine whether the
installation complies with this chapter.



   (D)   The permit when issued shall be for the installation as is
described in the application and no deviation therefrom shall be made without
the approval of the Assistant Superintendent of Wires.



   (E)   No permit for the installation or alteration of any electric
wiring, devices, appliances and equipment shall be issued to any person, firm
or corporation unless the person, firm or corporation is the holder of a
license, issued by the State Examiners of Electricians of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, or is exempt from the provisions of Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 141
and amendments thereof, entitling the person, firm or corporation to secure
permits for and to execute work described in the application for the permit.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 26)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.31  ANNUAL PERMITS.



   Upon application, an annual permit shall be issued to any person, firm
or corporation regularly employing 1 or more electricians for the
installation and maintenance of electric wiring devices, appliances and
equipment on premises owned or occupied by the applicant for the permit. 
The application shall be made in writing to the Assistant Superintendent of
Wires and shall contain a description of the premises within which the work
is to be done under the permit.  The person, firm or corporation to which an
annual permit is issued shall keep a record of all electric wiring, devices,
appliances and equipment installed under the permit and the Assistant
Superintendent of Wires shall have access to the record.  Each annual permit
shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it was issued.  Holders of
annual permits shall be excepted from provisions of § 51.02 of this chapter.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 27)



§ 51.32  FEES.



   The fee schedule for permits to install wiring for electricity or
electrical fixtures shall be established by the Town Manager and posted in
the Wire Department office.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 28)



CHAPTER 52: GARBAGE AND REFUSE



Section



   52.01   Regulations for refuse collection



   52.02   Separation of recyclables



§ 52.01  REGULATIONS FOR REFUSE COLLECTION.



   The Town Manager shall make rules and regulations and establish regular
periods for the collection of garbage, ashes, paper, refuse and waste from
all dwellings and buildings in the town free of charge to the owners or
occupants thereof, except that a charge as determined by the Town Manager per
barrel or its equivalent shall be made by the town against the owner or
occupant of any building used as a store, warehouse, restaurant, theater or
as a factory or manufacturing establishment for the collection of any
garbage, ashes, paper, refuse and waste from such premises or produced
thereon.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 3)



§ 52.02  SEPARATION OF RECYCLABLES.



   (A)   Under this section, the term RECYCLABLE shall mean specified
types of glass, paper, plastic, yard waste and metal, as well as any other
material that the Town Manager may deem appropriate for recycling.



   (B)   The Town Manager is hereby authorized to require all
residential households authorized to use the town's curbside trash collection
to separate recyclable materials from their solid waste and to prepare the
materials to be collected for recycling.



   (C)   The Town Manager is hereby authorized to determine which
materials shall be acceptable for recycling pursuant to changing markets for
recycled materials.  The Town Manager shall have the authority to add, alter
or delete items from the list of items separated for recycling purposes.



(Ord. 124, passed 9-26-1995)



Cross-reference:



   Duties of the Recycling Advisory Board, see §§ 31.30 et seq.



CHAPTER 53: SEWERS



Section



   53.01   Drain into common sewer



   53.02   Obstruction in sewers



   53.03   Emptying matter into drains



Cross-reference:



   Stormwater regulations, see Ch. 97



§ 53.01  DRAIN INTO COMMON SEWER.



   No person shall undertake to enter a particular drain into a common
sewer without a permit in writing from the Manager or Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works or without complying with the conditions and
directions of the permit.



(1982 Code, Ch. VII, § 11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.02  OBSTRUCTION IN SEWERS.



   No person shall deposit, place in or throw or suffer to fall into any
common sewer in the town, or into any drain or inlet into any common sewer,
any grease, fat, dead animals, stones, bricks, sticks, waste or other
substances or matter likely to obstruct the flow of water.



(1982 Code, Ch. VII, § 12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.03  EMPTYING MATTER INTO DRAINS.



   No person shall lead or cause to be led into any public way, or running
stream, any drain or pipe from any house or other building whereby filthy
water or other unclean matter may be emptied into or upon any public way or
running stream, and whoever shall throw, lead or discharge or cause to be
thrown, led or discharged, into any public way, or running stream, any
noxious or poisonous matter or substance, or any matter of substance which
shall because an offensive smell or odor, or which shall be destructive of,
or injurious to animal life.



(1982 Code, Ch. VII, § 13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 54: WATER



Section



   54.01   Supervision by Town Manager



   54.02   Rules and regulations



   54.03   Domestic water bill procedure



   54.04   Location of private hydrants



   54.05   Water charges for town departments



   54.06   Bills committed to Town Collector



§ 54.01  SUPERVISION BY TOWN MANAGER.



   The Water Department shall be under the charge and control of the Town
Manager who shall have full power over and control of all matters relating to
the public water supply of the town; provided, however, that all water
service shall be metered, except water used by the Fire Department for fire
fighting purposes.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 4)



§ 54.02  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Town Manager shall make rules and regulations or orders for the
introduction, use and government of the public water supply as they deem
proper or expedient for the interests of the town.  The water shall not be
introduced or supplied to any building or premises except upon the written
application to, and in the form prescribed by the Town Manager, by the owner
thereof, or by a duly authorized agent.  The rules, regulations and orders
as the Manager shall make shall be considered as a part of the contract with
every person who takes the water and every person, by taking the water, shall
be considered to have expressed his or her assent to be bound thereby.  The
principal water rates, rules, regulations and orders for the introduction,
use, and government of the water supply shall be published by being printed
upon the water bills of the Department.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 5)



§ 54.03  DOMESTIC WATER BILL PROCEDURE.



   Domestic water bills shall be billed and payable semi-annually.  There
shall be a fixed minimum rate charged for meter service.  The rate for
manufacturers and other large consumers shall be due and payable quarterly on
the first day of March, June, September and December of each year.  All
water passing through the meter shall be charged for, whether used or
wasted.  If the meter is out of order or fails to register, the average
consumption as shown by the meter when it was in order shall be charged. 
The service pipe from the sidewalk stopcock shall be laid by the section to
the inside of the cellar wall or other place desired and the expense thereof
shall be paid before the pipe is laid. The estate shall in all cases be
chargeable with the expense of the service pipe inside of the sidewalk
stopcock, and also with the water rates and with the payments and penalties
for violation of any rules, regulations or orders relating to the water
supply.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 6)



§ 54.04  LOCATION OF PRIVATE HYDRANTS.



   The construction and location of private hydrants, yard pipe and other
fixtures designed for fire purposes shall be subject to the approval of the
Water Department and no charge shall be made for water used from hydrants,
automatic sprinkler or standpipes in or upon the premises of a manufacturing
establishment for fire purposes exclusively, and no fire pipes shall be used
for any other purpose.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 7)



§ 54.05  WATER CHARGES FOR TOWN DEPARTMENTS.



   Water used by the various town departments, excepting water for fire
purposes, shall be charged to the respective appropriations of the
departments.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 8)



§ 54.06  BILLS COMMITTED TO TOWN COLLECTOR.



   All bills for the use of water shall be committed by the Town Manager
to the Town Collector for collection.



(1982 Code, Ch. VI, § 9)



CHAPTER 55: CURBS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



   55.01   Curbing requirements



   55.02   Sidewalk requirements



Cross-reference:



   Streets and sidewalks, see Ch. 96



§ 55.01  CURBING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Curbing standards.  To provide a barrier between the roadway
and pedestrian sidewalk and its adjacent planting strip, all materials for
curb installation shall conform to the following standards. In areas where
curbing is installed, parking on any portion of the sidewalk or planting
strip will not be permitted.



      (1)   All curbing hereinafter installed for full depth
reconstruction roadway projects shall consist of granite curbing, unless
otherwise directed by the Superintendent of Public Works under § 55.01(D)(3).



      (2)   Curbing for roadway resurfacing projects not included in
division (1) shall consist of asphalt “bread loaf” curb, with a vertical
face and non-mountable, except that sections of the curb at intersections and
adjacent to handicap ramps and sections of existing granite curb shall be
granite, unless otherwise directed by the Superintendent of Public Works
under § 55.01(D)(3).



      (3)   When roadway improvement projects extend for less than a
full block, the installation of new curbing will be at the discretion of the
Superintendent of Public Works under § 55.01(D)(3).



   (B)   Roadway classification.  Curbing will be installed when
adequate lane width is available for each roadway component, based on roadway
classification.  Roadway classification shall consist of the following:



      ARTERIALS are roadways that “service statewide travel as well
as major traffic movements within urbanized areas or between suburban
centers” or “link cities and towns in rural areas and interconnect major
arterials within urban areas”.1    ARTERIALS have high or moderate
mobility and limited points of access.



      COLLECTORS are roadways that “link arterial roadways and
provide connections between cities and towns” or “connect local roads to
major collectors and arterials”.1  COLLECTORS have moderate mobility and
moderate to high access.



      LOCAL STREETS are roadways with low speeds, a high degree of
local circulation and access, and are not intended for regional connectivity.1



   The following table contains a partial listing of Watertown roadways
and their functional classification.  Roadways that are not listed are
assumed to be local roads.  For purposes of this chapter, the Mass Highway
classification shall be used, except as noted.  Changes to the listed
classifications shall be considered, based upon the classification criteria,
and will be brought before the DPW Subcommittee of the Council with a
recommendation from the Superintendent of Public Works.



1Mass Highway, Project Development and Design Guide, p. 3-8



TABLE 1: FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF WATERTOWN STREETS



 


Road

 

DPW Classification

 

AASHTO Classification*

 

Mass Highway Classification





Arsenal Street
 
Arterial
 
Minor Arterial
 

Principal Arterial



Belmont Street
 
Arterial
 
Minor Arterial
 
Principal Arterial


Galen Street
 
Arterial
 
Principal Arterial
 
Principal Arterial


Greenough Blvd. - MDC
 
Arterial
 
Minor Arterial
 
Principal Arterial


Main Street
 
Arterial
 
Principal Arterial
 
Principal Arterial


Mount Auburn Street
 
Arterial
 
Principal Arterial
 
Principal Arterial


North Beacon Street
 
Arterial
 
Principal Arterial
 
Principal Arterial


Pleasant Street
 
Arterial
 
Collector
 
Principal Arterial


Watertown Street
 
Arterial
 
Principal Arterial
 
Principal Arterial


Arlington Street
 
Connector
 
Collector
 
Minor Arterial


Charles  River  Road - MDC
 
Connector
 
Collector
 
Minor Arterial


Common Street
 
Connector
 
Minor Arterial
 
Minor Arterial


Coolidge Avenue
 
Connector
 
Collector
 
Minor Arterial


Howard Street
 
Connector
 
Collector
 
Minor Arterial


Irving Street
 
Connector
 
Local
 
Minor Arterial


Lexington Street
 
Connector
 
Collector
 
Minor Arterial


Nonantum - MDC
 
Connector
 
Minor Arterial
 
Minor Arterial


School Street
 
Connector
 
Collector
 
Minor Arterial


Waverley Avenue
 
Connector
 
Collector
 
Minor Arterial


Acton Street
 
Primary
 
Local
 
Local


Bigelow Avenue
 
Primary
 
Local
 
Local


California Street
 
Primary
 
Collector
 
Collector


Church Street
 
Primary
 
Collector
 
Collector


Coolidge Hill Road
 
Primary
 
Local
 
Collector


Dexter Avenue
 
Primary
 
Collector
 
Collector


Grove Street
 
Primary
 
Local
 
Collector


Highland Avenue
 
Primary
 
Local
 
Collector




 



 


Road

 

DPW Classification

 

AASHTO Classification*

 

Mass Highway Classification





Nichols Avenue
 
Primary
 
Collector
 
Collector


Orchard Street
 
Primary
 
Minor Arterial
 
Collector


Spring Street
 
Primary
 
Local
 
Collector


Summer Street
 
Primary
 
Collector
 
Collector


Sycamore Street
 
Primary
 
Collector
 
Collector


Walnut Street
 
Primary
 
Collector
 
Collector


Waltham Street
 
Primary
 
Collector
 
Collector


Warren Street
 
Primary
 
Local
 
Collector


*Source: MassGIS Data




 



      (1)   Adequate travel lane width is deemed to be 11 feet on
principal and minor arterials, and ten feet on collectors and local roads. 
Adequate parking lane width is deemed to be seven feet in residential areas
along all classes of roads, and eight feet within commercial areas.



      (2)   A principal or minor arterial, or a collector, with
two-way traffic must have a minimum of two separate travel lanes.



      (3)   LOCAL ROADS, which are considered roads not having the
DPW classification of arterial, connector or primary, may have a single
shared travel lane for two-way traffic, provided there are periodic
opportunities for passing.



      (4)   A minimum street width of 18 feet, curb to curb, shall
be adequate for the following roadway configurations:



         (a)   A one-way street with one travel lane and with one
side on-street parking.



         (b)   A two-way local street with one travel lane and
one side of on-street parking, with provision for periodic spaces of
restricted parking at least every 100 feet for vehicles to pull over to the
side.



         (c)   A two-way collector or local road with two travel
lanes and no on-street parking.



      (5)   The curb-to-curb pavement width will then determine if
there is adequate room for on-street parking on one side or both sides of a
street.  Resulting parking issues shall be referred to the Traffic
Commission for consideration.



   (C)   Accommodating a defined curb.  In cases where curbing is
proposed, but no curbing currently exists, and where the resulting street
width is not great enough to allow both adequate travel lanes and parking
shoulder widths per division (B), every effort should be made to accommodate
a defined curb.



   (D)   Curb installation requirements.



      (1)   Whenever the owner of a parcel abutting a public way
desires that curbing be installed abutting such parcel, the property owner
may pay for and install granite curbing at their full expense, subject to the
approval of the Superintendent of Public Works, and subject to the conditions
as herein defined.  Such installation shall also include appropriate
transition to adjoining curbing and walkways, including handicapped ramps and
access as required.



      (2)   Any new development project shall include the
installation of granite curbing and concrete sidewalk with planting strip,
across the entire project's public street frontage at the property owner's
expense, subject to the approval of the Superintendent of Public Works, and
subject to the conditions as herein defined, including the rules and
regulations promulgated by the Superintendent of Public Works.



         (a)   Such installation shall also include appropriate
transition to adjoining curbing and walkways, including handicapped ramps and
access as required.



         (b)   As used in this section, NEW DEVELOPMENT PROJECT
shall mean any project where there is a new building foundation, either
because there was no preexisting building or the previous foundation has been
removed.



      (3)   No curbing shall be installed under this section at
those locations where the Superintendent of Public Works determines that the
installation of curbing is not feasible due to public safety, site
constraints, budget constraints, or conflicts with future plans for the
area.  In such cases, the Superintendent of Public Works shall receive the
concurrence of the Town Manager and provide written notice to the Council.



      (4)   The Superintendent of Public Works is authorized to
promulgate rules and regulations, consistent with the curb and sidewalks
ordinance, which shall implement the provisions of this chapter.



      (5)   In addition to the provisions of this chapter, all curb
installations shall comply with the rules and regulations of the
Superintendent of Public Works.



(Ord. 2010-6, passed 2-9-2010)



§ 55.02  SIDEWALK REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All materials for sidewalk construction or repair shall
consist of concrete unless exempted under divisions  (B), (C) and (E) below.



   (B)   In accordance with DPW regulations, the material used at
street tree locations may include asphalt in order to address tree root
issues.



   (C)   The material used as a temporary utility repair, where deemed
necessary by the Superintendent of Public Works, may include asphalt.  In
accordance with DPW regulations, temporary repairs shall be permanently
replaced with concrete.



   (D)   Sidewalks constructed hereinafter may extend the full length
of the public way at the discretion of the Superintendent of Public Works,
and shall have a preferred clear walking surface of five feet, not including
curbing with a minimum of four feet, and shall conform to Americans
Disability Act (ADA) and Massachusetts Architectural Access Board (MAAB)
guidelines, unless otherwise exempted under division (E).



      (1)   A minimum clearance of three feet shall be provided
around obstructions in the sidewalk such as utility poles, street trees, and
hydrants.



      (2)   In residential areas, the sidewalk width shall be a
maximum of five feet.



      (3)   A minimum width of two feet shall be provided as a
planting strip.



      (4)   Whenever the owner of a parcel abutting a public way
desires that a sidewalk be installed abutting such parcel, the property owner
may pay for and install concrete sidewalk at their full expense, subject to
the approval of the Superintendent of Public Works, and subject to the
conditions as herein defined and in compliance with other DPW regulations.
Such installation shall also include appropriate transition to adjoining
curbing and walkways, including handicapped ramps and access as required.



   (E)   No sidewalks shall be installed under this section at those
locations where the Superintendent of Public Works determines that the
installation of sidewalks is not feasible due to public safety, site
constraints, budget constraints, or conflicts with future plans for the
area.  In such cases, the Superintendent of Public Works shall receive the
concurrence of the Town Manager and provide written notice to the Council.



   (F)    Any new development project shall include the installation of
granite curbing and concrete sidewalk with planting strip across the entire
project's public street frontage at the property owner's expense, subject to
the approval of the Superintendent of Public Works, and subject to the
conditions as herein defined, including the rules and regulations promulgated
by the Superintendent of Public Works.



      (1)   Such installation shall also include appropriate
transition to adjoining curbing and walkways, including handicapped ramps and
access as required.



      (2)   As used in this section, the term NEW DEVELOPMENT
PROJECT shall mean any project where there is a new building foundation,
either because there was no preexisting foundation or the previous foundation
has been removed.



   (G)   The Superintendent of Public Works is authorized to promulgate
rules and regulations, consistent with the curb and sidewalks ordinance,
which shall implement the provisions of this chapter.



   (H)   In addition to the provisions of this chapter, all sidewalk
installations shall comply with the rules and regulations of the
Superintendent of Public Works.



   (I)   In the case of selective sidewalk repairs, where there is no
curb to create a barrier, and addition of a curb is not planned and where
there is currently no grass planting strip, the default treatment is to
create a planting strip, however, the Superintendent of Public Works shall
have discretion on whether to plant grass or restore asphalt (or other
similar treatment) as the border between the sidewalk and the street.



(Ord. 2010-6, passed 2-9-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-58, passed 9-27-2016)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



      Chapter



         70.   TRAFFIC COMMISSION



         71.   PARKING AND STOPPING REGULATIONS



         72.   TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS



CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC COMMISSION



Section



   70.01   Established



   70.02   Membership



   70.03   Compensation



   70.04   Officers



   70.05   Duties and responsibilities



   70.06   Procedures



   70.07   Meetings



§ 70.01  ESTABLISHED.



   A town Traffic Commission is hereby established.



(1982 Code, Ch. XI, § 1)  (Am. Ord. 15, passed 3-13-2001)



§ 70.02  MEMBERSHIP.



   The Traffic Commission shall be composed of members as follows:



   (A)   Chief of the Police Department.



   (B)   Chief of the Fire Department.



   (C)   Superintendent of Public Works.



   (D)   Town Engineer.



   (E)   Director of Community Development and Planning or his or her
designee.



   (F)   Two citizens at large both of whom shall be residents of the
town, and one a representative of town industry.  These members are
appointed by the Town Manager and approved by the Town Council for staggered
terms of 2 years each.



(1982 Code, Ch. XI, § 2)  (Am. Ord. 15, passed 3-13-2001; Am. Ord.
O-2011-26, passed 5-24-2011)



§ 70.03  COMPENSATION.



   The members of the Traffic Commission shall receive no compensation for
their service as commissioners, but all expenses incurred shall be paid by
the town out of an appropriation for those services.



(1982 Code, Ch. XI, § 3)  (Am. Ord. 15, passed 3-13-2001)



§ 70.04  OFFICERS.



   (A)   Chairperson.  The Chief of Police shall act as the
Chairperson of the Traffic Commission.



   (B)   Secretary.  The Traffic Commission shall designate a
Secretary. The Secretary shall arrange meetings, supply records, obtain data,
prepare reports and attend to the other duties as shall be decided by the
Traffic Commission.



(1982 Code, Ch. XI, §§ 4-5)  (Am. Ord. 15, passed 3-13-2001)



§ 70.05  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Traffic Commission shall suggest and advise the Town Manager in
ways and means to regulate traffic in the town with a view towards reducing
accidents, relieving traffic congestion and increasing safety for cars and
alternative modes of transportation.  The Commission shall study and make
recommendations on road design projects and any proposed addition or deletion
of crosswalks, stop signs, traffic signals, signage, parking meters, or
parking spaces; and on any proposed traffic calming measures or traffic
directional changes.



(1982 Code, Ch. XI, § 6)  (Am. Ord. 15, passed 3-13-2001; Am. Ord.
O-2011-26, passed 5-24-2011)



§ 70.06  PROCEDURES.



   All traffic rules and orders, complaints or suggestions relative to
traffic conditions in the town shall first be submitted through the Secretary
of the Traffic Commission to that Commission for study and recommendations
before being acted on by the Town Manager.



(1982 Code, Ch. XI, § 7)  (Am. Ord. 15, passed 3-13-2001)



§ 70.07  MEETINGS.



   The Traffic Commission shall meet periodically  as needed.  When an
agenda item for a meeting of the Traffic Commission is brought forward by a
town resident or directly concerns a town resident, the Traffic Commission
shall make every effort to meet after 6:00 p.m. when it deems appropriate due
to the nature of the issue or upon request by the petitioners or citizens.



(Am. Ord. 15, passed 3-13-2001)



CHAPTER 71: PARKING AND STOPPING REGULATIONS



Section



Handicapped Parking



   71.01   Spaces required



   71.02   Signs



   71.03   Obstructing parking spaces or ramps



   71.04   Registration plates



   71.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Regulation of fire lanes, see § 92.06



Statutory reference:



   For similar provisions, see Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40, §§ 21(23) and
21(24)



HANDICAPPED PARKING



§ 71.01  SPACES REQUIRED.



   Any person or body who has lawful control of a public or private way or
of improved or enclosed property used as off-street parking areas for
businesses, shopping malls, theaters, auditoriums, sporting or recreational
facilities, cultural centers, residential dwellings, including any other
place where the public has a right of access as invites or licensees, shall
reserve parking spaces in the off-street parking areas for any vehicle:



   (A)   Owned and operated by a disabled veteran or handicapped person
whose vehicle bears the distinguishing registration plate or placard
authorized by Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 90, § 2;



   (B)   Transporting a handicapped person and displaying the special
identification plate or placard authorized by Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 90, § 2; or



   (C)   Bearing the official identification of a handicapped person
issued by any other state, or any Canadian Province, according to the
following formula:



 

Number of Parking Spaces
 
Handicapped Spaces Required




More than 15 but less than 25
 
1


More than 25 but less than 40
 
5% (but not less than 2)


More than 40 but less than 100
 
4% (but not less than 3)


More than 100 but less than 200
 
3% (but not less than 4)


More than 200 but less than 500
 
2% (but not less than 6)


More than 500 but less than 1,000
 
1-1/2% (but not less than 10)


More than 1,000 but less than 2,000
 
1% (but not less than 15)


More than 2,000 but less than 5,000
 
3/4% (but not less than 20)


More than 5,000
 
1/2% (but not less than 30)




 



(Ord. 15, passed 2-23-1999)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.02  SIGNS.



   Parking spaces designated as reserved under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be:



   (A)   Identified by the use of above grade signs with white
lettering against a blue background and shall bear the words "Handicapped
Parking: Special Plate Required. Unauthorized vehicles may be removed at
Owner's Expense";



   (B)   As near as possible to a building entrance or walkway;



   (C)   Adjacent to curb ramps or other unobstructed methods
permitting sidewalk access to a handicapped person; and



   (D)   Twelve feet wide or two 8-foot wide areas with 4 feet of cross
hatch between them.



(Ord. 15, passed 2-23-1999)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.03  OBSTRUCTING PARKING SPACES OR RAMPS.



   No unauthorized person shall leave a vehicle within a parking space
which is designated for use by disabled veterans or handicapped persons as
set forth in this subchapter, or in a manner as to obstruct a curb ramp
designed for use by handicapped persons as a means of egress to a street or
public way.



(Ord. 15, passed 2-23-1999)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.04  REGISTRATION PLATES.



   Any vehicle which does not bear the distinguishing registration plate
authorized by Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 90, § 2 for a vehicle transporting a
handicapped person and displaying the special identification plate authorized
by Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 90, § 2 or for a vehicle bearing the official
identification of a handicapped person issued by any other state, or any
Canadian Province, which is left within a parking space which is designated
for use by disabled veterans or handicapped persons as set forth in this
subchapter, or is left in a manner as to obstruct a curb ramp designed for
use by handicapped persons as a means of egress to a street or public way,
may be removed in accordance with the provisions of Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 266,
§ 120D.



(Ord. 15, passed 2-23-1999)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   Parking violations of §§ 71.01 through 71.04 of this chapter may be
enforced pursuant to the authority granted by Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 90, §§
20A, 20A1/2 20C, 20D and 20E as amended, or as set forth in § 36.05 of this
code, except that a warning may not be issued for the first offense. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this section, the fine for each violation of
the provisions of §§ 71.01 through 71.04 shall be $50 or as may be
prescribed from time to time by the Traffic Commission.



(Ord. 15, passed 2-23-1999)



CHAPTER 72: TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS



Section




General Provisions




   72.01   Purpose



   72.02   Applicability



   72.03   Exceptions




Authority and Administration




   72.15   Authority



   72.16   Administration



   72.17   Rules and regulations



   72.18   Annual review



   72.19   Appeals




Transportation Demand Management Program Regulations




   72.30   Components of the transportation demand management program
regulations




Enforcement




   72.45   Enforcement



   72.46   Notices and orders



   72.47   Provision for action to remedy a violation



   72.48   Fines



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 72.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this Transportation Demand Management (TDM)
chapter is to encourage reduction in single occupant vehicle (SOV) trips, and
thus reduce vehicle miles traveled and carbon emissions, alleviate congestion
during peak periods, and improve air quality, all while making better use of
existing transportation infrastructure.



   (B)   This chapter provides the framework for strategies that
increase over-all system efficiency by encouraging a shift from SOV trips to
non-SOV transportation modes and shifting SOV trips out of peak periods.



   (C)   The town's goal is to aid in the town-wide reduction of SOV
trips by 20% over baseline data for residents and employees (U.S. Census
Bureau, American Community Survey, 2006-2010), which identifies that
Watertown residents currently have a SOV mode share of 68% and that Watertown
workers have a mode share of 75%.



   (D)   This chapter also establishes the legal authority to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter through permitting,
inspections, monitoring and enforcement.



(Ord. O-2017-31, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 72.02  APPLICABILITY.



   The following projects shall be required to prepare and implement a
transportation demand management program:



   (A)   New construction or an addition of 10,000 square feet or more,
or ten or more dwelling units; or



   (B)   Any project that requires site plan review or special permit
approval per the Watertown zoning ordinance (as amended) and will generate
more than 150 average daily trips, or more than 15 peak hour trips above the
pre-existing conditions using standards and methodologies promulgated by the
institute of transportation engineers, the Urban Land Institute, or other
appropriate source.



(Ord. O-2017-31, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 72.03  EXCEPTIONS.



   The following are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:



   (A)   Land or structures for the primary, accessory or incidental
purpose of operating a child care facility;



   (B)   Land or structures owned or leased by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, its agencies, subdivisions or bodies politic; and



   (C)   Retail customer trips generated from buildings or structures
used for retail purposes.



(Ord. O-2017-31, passed 5-9-2017)



AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION



§ 72.15  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is adopted under authority granted by the home rule
amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution, and the home rule statutes.



(Ord. O-2017-31, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 72.16  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Watertown Department of Community Development and Planning (DCDP)
shall administer, implement, and enforce this chapter. Any powers granted to
or duties imposed upon the DCDP may be delegated to the Department's
employees or agents.



(Ord. O-2017-31, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 72.17  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Town Manager or his/her designee may adopt, and
periodically amend, rules and regulations relating to the detailed
requirements, procedures, and administration of this chapter, including
application and inspection fees. Prior to adopting or amending rules and
regulations, the Town Manager or his/her designee shall consult with the
DCDP. Such rules and regulations shall be consistent with the criteria set
forth in § 72.30 below.



   (B)   Failure by the Town Manager or their designee to promulgate
such rules and regulations, or a declaration of their invalidity by a court
of law, shall not have the effect of suspending or invalidating the
provisions of this chapter or any permit issued hereunder.



   (C)   Such rules and regulations (or amendments thereto) shall
become effective five days after being filed with the Town Clerk.



   (D)   Prior to amending the rules and regulations which implement
this chapter, the Town Manager or their designee shall notify the Town
Council of such proposed amendments.



(Ord. O-2017-31, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 72.18  ANNUAL REVIEW.



   The Town Manager and/or their Designee shall report to the Town Council
on an annual basis concerning the town's progress toward achieving the
town-wide goal described in § 72.01 including the status of any ongoing TDM
programs in town.



(Ord. O-2017-31, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 72.19  APPEALS.



   A decision of the DCDP with respect to the rules and regulations
promulgated under this chapter shall be final. A request for relief of a
decision of the DCDP may be submitted to the permit granting authority, but
in all cases shall be reviewable in a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. O-2017-31, passed 5-9-2017)



TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT PROGRAM REGULATIONS



§ 72.30  COMPONENTS OF THE TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No project which is subject to this chapter may be granted a
special permit or site plan review unless that project provides the DCDP with
a written Transportation Demand Management.



   (B)   Program that meets the criteria specified below, at a minimum,
and as further specified in the rules and regulations promulgated as part of
§ 72.17, above.



      (1)   Includes program goals and target(s) for trip reduction
based on the project's proposed new trips and baseline transportation impacts.



      (2)   Provides a comprehensive list of TDM measures that will
be used to guide the project's TDM program and achieve the program goals and
trip reductions target(s).



      (3)   Provides a description of post-occupancy TDM monitoring
measures, to determine the project's effectiveness in implementing the TDM
program and achieving the program's goals and trip reduction target(s).



      (4)   Provides a schedule for post-occupancy TDM monitoring
and reporting to the DCDP.



      (5)   Provides a list of corrective measures, including but
not limited to additional TDM measures, additional incentives, or potential
penalties to be applied by the Petitioner of the development/redevelopment to
achieve the program goals and trip reduction target(s).



(Ord. O-2017-31, passed 5-9-2017)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 72.45  ENFORCEMENT.



   The DCDP staff shall have the authority to enforce the TDM regulations,
and shall issue orders, violation notices, and enforcement orders, and may
pursue all available civil remedies for such violations.



(Ord. O-2017-31, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 72.46  NOTICES AND ORDERS.



   The DCDP staff may issue a written order to enforce the provisions of
the TDM regulations, which may include requirements to:



   (A)   Take steps to implement and conform to the components of the
TDM chapter.



   (B)   Take steps to implement and conform to the rules and
regulations which implement the TDM chapter.



   (C)   Comply with the conditions of a special permit, approved site
plan, building permit, and/or certificate of occupancy which include
requirements to implement § 72.30 of the TDM chapter, or the rules and
regulations which implement the TDM chapter.



(Ord. O-2017-31, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 72.47  PROVISION FOR ACTION TO REMEDY A VIOLATION.



   If a person violates the provisions of the TDM chapter, regulations,
permit, notice, or order issued thereunder, or fails to implement an approved
TDM plan, the DCDP staff may seek injunctive relief in a court of competent
jurisdiction restraining the person from activities which would create
further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation.



(Ord. O-2017-31, passed 5-9-2017)



§ 72.48  FINES.



   Pursuant to § 10.99 of the Town Code, any person, Petitioner or
project that violates any provision of the TDM chapter, or order or permit
issued thereunder, may be ordered to correct the violation and/or shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $300 per violation of an order to
implement the TDM plan to address non-compliance. Each day or part thereof
that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate violation.



(Ord. O-2017-31, passed 5-9-2017)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter



         90.   ABANDONED VEHICLES



         91.   ANIMALS



         92.   FIRE PREVENTION



         93.   HEALTH AND SAFETY



         94.   NEWSRACKS



         95.   NOISE REGULATIONS



         96.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



         97.   STORMWATER REGULATIONS



         98.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL



CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED VEHICLES



Section



   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Abandonment prohibited



   90.03   Leaving wrecked non-operating vehicles on street



   90.04   Disposition of wrecked or discarded vehicles



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.



   PROPERTY.  Any real property within the town which is not a street or
highway.



   STREET or HIGHWAY.  The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.



   VEHICLE.  A machine propelled by power other than human power designed
to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides and
transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without
limitation automobile, truck, trailer, motor cycle, tractor, buggy and wagon.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 25(1))



§ 90.02  ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED.



   Except as to vehicles for which other provisions are made under the
laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, no person shall abandon any
vehicle within the town and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place
within the town for such time and under such circumstances as to cause the
vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 25(2))  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  LEAVING WRECKED NON- OPERATING VEHICLES ON STREET.



   Except as to vehicles for which other provisions are made under the
laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, no person shall leave any
partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street
or highway within the town.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 25(3))  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  DISPOSITION OF WRECKED OR DISCARDED VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person in charge or control of any property within the town
whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any
partially dismantled, inoperative, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle to
remain on such property longer than ten  days.



   (B)   No person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within
the town for a longer time than 10 days, except to:



      (1)   A vehicle in an enclosed building;



      (2)   A vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise
operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of
such business enterprise; or



      (3)   A vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository
maintained in a lawful place and manner by the town.



   (C)   This section shall not apply to Class 3 licensees under Mass.
Gen. Laws Ch. 140, § 58.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 25(4))  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in
an amount not exceeding $100.  Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 25(5))



CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS



Section



   91.01   Introduction



   91.02   Definitions



   91.03   Dog licensing



   91.04   Restraint of dogs



   91.05   Restricted areas



   91.06   Removal of dog waste



   91.07   Impoundment



   91.08   Cats



   91.09   Miscellaneous



   91.10   Enforcement of the animal control ordinance



   91.11   Animal Control Fund



§ 91.01  INTRODUCTION.



   Acting under Massachusetts General Law and pursuant to Mass. Gen. Laws
Ch. 140, §§ 136A through 174E inclusive and under any other applicable laws
and regulations, the City of Watertown, known as the Town of Watertown,
hereby adopts this chapter in the interest of protecting the health and
safety of its citizens, dogs, cats and wildlife.



(Ord. O-2017-2, passed 1-24-2017)



§ 91.02  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions shall be defined as written unless context
indicates or requires a different meaning:



   ANIMAL CONTROL AGENT. Any duly authorized employee or agent of the Town
of Watertown who may enforce the provisions of the Watertown Animal Control
Ordinance.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. An appointed, duly authorized employee of the
Town of Watertown whose primary responsibility is to enforce the provisions
of the Watertown Animal Control Ordinance and Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 140, §§
136A through 174E inclusive.



   ANIMALS. All mammals, fowl and reptiles, except human beings.



   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner or keeper and not under the
control of the owner or keeper either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise.



   DANGEROUS CAT. A cat that either:



      (1)   Without justification, attacks a person or domestic
animal causing physical injury or death; or



      (2)   Behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses an unjustified imminent threat of physical injury or death to a
person or to a domestic or owned animal.



   DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that either:



      (1)   Without justification, attacks a person or domestic
animal causing physical injury or death; or



      (2)   Behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses an unjustified imminent threat of physical injury or death to a
person or to a domestic or owned animal.



   DOMESTIC ANIMALS. An animal that has been domesticated by humans so as
to live and breed in a tame condition and depends on humankind for survival;
any animal listed in 321 Commonwealth of Massachusetts Regulations (CMR)
9.02(3), except as provided in 321 CMR 9.02(2)(d).



   FERAL CAT. A domestic cat who has been born and raised without contact
to humans, or a domestic cat who has not had contact with humans for a
significant period of time and has become un-socialized to humans; a feral
cat is fearful of humans, may depend on humans for survival by means of a
caretaker who provides food and a shelter, and is not likely to ever become
an indoor cat.



   IMPOUND. Take into the custody of the animal control officer or animal
control agent.



   INDOOR CAT. A domestic cat that lives in a dwelling or home, has a
litter box, food, shelter, etc. provided by the keeper or owners and is never
allowed outdoors; an indoor cat is dependent on humans for survival.



   KEEPER or OWNER. Any person owning, possessing, controlling, harboring
or having custody of an animal.



   LEASH. A restraint which shall be of an appropriate length and made of
a sturdy, unfrayed material suitable to allow the dog owner or keeper to
maintain control over the dog. A leash is used to restrain the dog when upon
the streets, sidewalk or any public areas or to restrain the dog from
entering these said areas.



   NUISANCE DOG. A dog that:



      (1)   By excessive barking or other disturbance, is a source
of annoyance to a sick person residing in the vicinity;



      (2)   By excessive barking, causing damage or other
interference, a reasonable person would find such behavior disruptive to
one's quiet and peaceful enjoyment; or



      (3)   Has threatened or attacked livestock, a domestic animal
or a person, but such threat or attack was not a grossly disproportionate
reaction under all the circumstances.



   OUTDOOR CAT. A domestic cat that lives in a dwelling or home, has a
litter box, food, shelter, etc. provided by the keeper or owner, but is also
allowed outdoors for any length of time during the day; an outdoor cat is
dependent on humans for survival.



   SERVICE ANIMAL. In accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) 28 C.F.R. Part 36.104, any dog that is individually trained to do work
or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability,
including a physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual, or other mental
disability. Service animals must be harnessed, leashed or tethered, unless
these devices interfere with the service animal's work or the individual's
disability prevents using these devices. In that case, the individual must
maintain control of the animal through voice, signal, or other effective
controls. Service animals are allowed to accompany people with disabilities
in all areas where public is allowed to go. Other species of animals, whether
wild or domestic animals, trained or untrained, are not service animals for
the purpose of this definition. Dogs whose sole function is to provide
comfort, emotional support, well-being or companionship do not qualify as
service animals under the ADA.



   STRAY CAT. A domestic cat who is socialized to humans who has lived as
a pet in a domestic home but has been abandoned, lost, or has left its
domestic home; a stray cat is dependent on humans for survival.



   TOWN. The city known as the Town of Watertown, Massachusetts.



   UNCONFINED. Not securely confined indoors, or in a securely enclosed
and locked pen or dog run area on the premises of the owner or keeper.



   WATERTOWN POLICE OFFICER. Any duly authorized employee of the Watertown
Police Department who may enforce the provisions of the Watertown Animal
Control Ordinance.



   WILD ANIMAL. Any animal not kept as a domesticated animal and is
indigenous to this area of the state, including but not limited to coyotes,
raccoons, beavers, wild turkey, skunks, opossums, fishers, squirrels,
chipmunks, rodents, and more.



(Ord. O-2017-2, passed 1-24-2017)



§ 91.03  DOG LICENSING.



   (A)   Annual dog licensing fee. No person shall own or keep a dog,
six months of age or older, within the town unless an annual license for such
dog is obtained from the Town Clerk. The fee for such a license shall be $10
for each dog. The licensing period shall be from January 1 through December
31. The license fee for each dog owned or kept by persons who are aged 60 or
older shall be $5. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
veterinary establishments that are subject to kennel licensing. Pursuant to
Mass. Gen. Laws, Ch. 140, § 139(C), no licensing fee shall be charged for a
service animal.



   (B)   Rabies vaccination. No dog shall be licensed unless a valid
rabies vaccination certificate is presented to the Town Clerk at the time of
licensing. All dogs shall be vaccinated against rabies in accordance with
Mass. Gen. Laws, Ch. 140, § 145B.



   (C)   Additional requirements. No dog six months of age or older
shall be licensed unless there is presented to the Town Clerk at the time of
licensing either:



      (1)   Proof that the dog has been spayed or neutered;



      (2)   A statement signed by a veterinarian stating a reason
why spaying or neutering has been delayed;



      (3)   A statement signed by the owner or keeper of the dog
that a decision has been made not to spay or neuter the dog; or



      (4)   A statement signed by a veterinarian or the animal
control officer that the animal appears to have been spayed or neutered in
the past.



   (D)   Breeder's license. An annual breeder's license shall be
obtained for any dog with respect to which a statement is presented that a
decision has been made not to spay or neuter. The fee for such a breeder's
license shall be $25 for each dog and such fee shall be in addition to the
fee imposed pursuant to this chapter, § 91.03(A).



   (E)   Number of licensed dogs. Not more than three dogs over six
months of age shall be kept in a household. Any variance to this number of
licensed animals must first be approved by the Board of Health.



   (F)   License tags. All dogs shall display a dog license on their
collar. The dog owner and/or keeper shall present the dog license tag when
request is made by the animal control officer, animal control agent, or
police officer. Dogs not displaying dog licenses are subject to impoundment
until licensure is attained.



(Ord. O-2017-2, passed 1-24-2017)



§ 91.04  RESTRAINT OF DOGS.



   Any person owning or keeping a dog shall not suffer or allow it to run
at large in any of the streets or public ways, or places in the town, or upon
the premises of anyone other than the owner or keeper, unless the owner or
occupant of such premises grants permission. Under no circumstances shall a
dog, even on a leash, be allowed on private property, unless specific
permission has been granted. No dog shall be permitted in any public place or
street within the Town of Watertown unless it is effectively restrained by a
chain or leash, except at a town designated dog park pursuant to § 91.09(E)
of this chapter.



(Ord. O-2017-2, passed 1-24-2017)



§ 91.05  RESTRICTED AREAS.



   (A)   No dog shall be allowed on school property, in cemeteries, or
in public parks maintained by the town. Service animals are exempt from this
provision.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above, dogs on
leashes shall be permitted on marked or paved walking paths on Whitney Hill
Park, Saltonstall Park, Arsenal Park, Linear Park, Filippello Park, Howe Park
and the park behind 552 Main Street, exclusive of athletic tracks and tot lot
surfaces.



   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) and (B), dogs
shall be permitted inside town designated dog parks pursuant to § 91.09(E)
of this chapter.



(Ord. O-2017-2, passed 1-24-2017)



§ 91.06  REMOVAL OF DOG WASTE.



   (A)   Removal of dog waste from public and private property. Each
person who owns or keeps a dog within the town, shall immediately remove and
dispose of any feces left by such dog on any sidewalk, planting strip,
street, park or other public area, or on any private property which is not
owned or occupied by such person. Any such dog is to be accompanied by a
person carrying a device which is suitable for picking up and containing
feces, unexposed to such person and to the general public.



   (B)   Method of dog waste disposal. Dog waste or feces may only be
disposed of in a sanitary manner. Dog waste shall not be disposed of in catch
basins.



   (C)   Exemptions to the removal of dog wastes. Divisions (A) and(B)
shall not apply to a service animal accompanying any individual with a
disability, who, by reason of a disability, is physically unable to comply
with the requirements of said sections.



(Ord. O-2017-2, passed 1-24-2017)



§ 91.07  IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   Notice of impoundment.



      (1)   It shall be the duty of any animal control officer or
his/her designee to apprehend any dog found running at large and/or any
unlicensed dog in any street or public place within the town and to impound
such dog in the place provided therefore.



      (2)   The owner or keeper of any dog so impounded may reclaim
such dog within seven days and upon payment of the license fee, if unpaid,
all outstanding citations, boarding fees for each day the dog was held, all
veterinary costs, and all other associated costs as applicable.



   (B)   Unclaimed dogs. The animal control officer shall make
reasonable efforts to determine the identity of the owner or keeper of any
dog. If any dog is impounded pursuant to this chapter and its owner and/or
keeper cannot be identified within seven days, the dog may be put up for
adoption or humanely euthanized, provided that the Animal Control Officer
determines that all reasonable efforts have been made to locate the owner
and/or keeper and there are no reasonable alternatives to such action.



(Ord. O-2017-2, passed 1-24-2017)



§ 91.08  CATS.



   (A)   Cat licensing fee. No person shall own or keep a cat, six
months of age or older, within the town unless an annual license for such cat
is obtained from the Town Clerk. The fee for such a license shall be $10 for
each cat. The licensing fee for each cat owned or kept by persons who are
aged 60 or older shall be $5.



   (B)   Number of licensed cats. Not more than five cats over six
months of age shall be kept in a household. Any variance to this number of
licensed animals must first be approved by the Board of Health. The
provisions of this chapter shall not apply to veterinary establishments that
are subject to kennel licensing.



   (C)   Rabies vaccination. No cat shall be licensed unless a valid
rabies vaccination certificate is presented to the Town Clerk at the time of
licensing. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies in accordance with
Mass. Gen. Laws, Ch. 140, § 145B.



   (D)   Outdoor cat requirements.



      (1)   All cats allowed or found outdoors for any length of
time shall be outfitted with a microchip. All cats allowed outdoors shall be
spayed or neutered. Any cat found at large that cannot be immediately
identified shall be deemed a stray.



      (2)   Exemptions. This section shall not apply to a cat with a
high likelihood of suffering serious bodily harm or death if spayed,
neutered, or microchipped, due to age or infirmity. The owner or custodian
must obtain written confirmation of this fact from a Massachusetts licensed
veterinarian. If the cat is able to be safely spayed, neutered, or
microchipped at a later date, that date must be stated in the written
confirmation.



   (E)   Stray cats. Any rescue group, humane society or other person
or organization picking up stray cats shall notify the Animal Control Officer
with all relevant information of each cat and the location found.



   (F)   Feral cats. Any person or organization that traps and releases
feral cats shall report such activity to the animal control officer including
information of description and numbers of cats trapped and name of caretaker.
The caretaker is expected to take full responsibility for the duration of the
cat's life. All feral cats shall be ear tipped. All feral cats shall be
spayed or neutered.



   (G)   Dangerous cats. The animal control officer may at any time
issue an order of confinement for any cat deemed a dangerous cat.



(Ord. O-2017-2, passed 1-24-2017)



§ 91.09  MISCELLANEOUS.



   (A)   Animal bite procedure. All bites by dogs, cats or other
domestic animals or wild or exotic animals shall be reported to the Health
Department and the animal control officer as soon as possible by the person
bitten or by the owner or keeper of the animal, or both.



   (B)   Motor vehicle operator responsibility. The operator of a motor
vehicle that strikes, injures, or kills any animal within the town shall
report such incident to the pet's owner or keeper, custodian or to a
Watertown Police Officer.



   (C)   Feeding of wild animals. No person within the town shall feed
any wild animals, including without limitation, ducks, geese and raccoons, or
any homeless dogs or cats, except birds fed within the confines of his /her
private property, provided that no threat to public health or safety is
thereby created. Persons feeding their own domestic animals shall do so only
in a sheltered space inaccessible to wild or roaming animals. This division
(C), shall not apply to the feeding of homeless dogs or cats if done in a
sheltered place inaccessible to wild or roaming animals with the express
purpose of befriending the dog or cat in order to have it vaccinated, spayed,
neutered and ultimately adopted.



   (D)   Wild and exotic animals. No person within the town shall
possess, maintain, propagate, cultivate or deal with wild or exotic animals
within the meaning of Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 131, § 23, unless notice thereof
has been filed with the Board of Health and all permits required by said
Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 131, § 23 or otherwise have been obtained.



   (E)   Town dog parks.



      (1)   Owners and/or keepers using a town dog park must adhere
to posted dog park rules referenced on town website and posted at each town
dog park.



      (2)   Dog park rules are enforced under the provisions of this
chapter. Any change in dog park rules shall be communicated to the Town
Council.



   (F)   Nuisance and dangerous dogs. In accordance with the provisions
of Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 140, § 157, any person may file written complaint to
the Board of Health that a dog owned or kept in the Town is a nuisance or a
dangerous dog. The Board of Health who has been appointed as the hearing
authority shall process the complaint, hold a public hearing and make
decision on the written complaint.



   (G)   General prohibition. No person shall own or keep in the town
any dog, cat or other household pet which by biting, barking, howling,
scratching or crying, or in any other manner, disturbs the peace and quiet of
any neighborhood, destroys private property or endangers the safety of any
person.



(Ord. O-2017-2, passed 1-24-2017)



§ 91.10  ENFORCEMENT OF THE ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Criminal complaint. Any person who violates any provision of
this chapter may be penalized by indictment or on complaint brought in
district court. Each day on which any violation or offense continues shall be
deemed to be a separate violation or offense.



   (B)   Noncriminal disposition.



      (1)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, the
violation of which is subject to a specific penalty, may be penalized by the
non-criminal method



of disposition as provided in Mass. Gen. Laws, Ch. 40, § 21D. Each day on
which any violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.



      (2)   Penalty:



 

First offense
 
$50


Second offense
 
$100


Third offense and thereafter
 
$200



 



   (C)   Enforcing persons.



      (1)   Animal control officer, animal control agent or any
Watertown police officer.



      (2)   Any violations of this chapter that occur within town
parks or recreation areas are also enforceable by the Director of Parks and
Recreation and/or his/her designee.



   (D)   Other. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter
is also subject, at the discretion of the animal control officer, animal
control agent or Watertown police officer to any other legal or equitable
enforcement remedy available.



(Ord. O-2017-2, passed 1-24-2017)



§ 91.11  ANIMAL CONTROL FUND.



   All monies collected under the provisions of this chapter, other than
monies collected as penalties referenced in § 91.10(B), shall be deposited
in a revolving fund to be known as the animal control fund, established
pursuant to the provisions of Mass. Gen. Law Ch. 44, § 53E1/2. This
revolving fund shall be accounted for separately from all other monies in the
town, and expenditures may be made from the revolving fund without further
appropriation. The Director of Public Health with the approval of the Town
Manager shall be authorized to expend money



from the animal control fund, with such expenditures to be used only for
programs and activities within the jurisdiction and authority of the animal
control program. The animal control fund shall be established not later than
the beginning of the fiscal year in which the fund shall begin. The limit on
the total amount that may be expended from the animal control fund shall be
determined by Town Council on or before July 1 of each year.



(Ord. O-2017-2, passed 1-24-2017)



CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION



Section



   92.01   Noxious odors



   92.02   Fee schedule for the keeping or storing of hazardous
materials



   92.03   Permit, inspection and report fees



   92.04   Gasoline pumps



   92.05   Smoke detectors



   92.06   Regulation of fire lanes



   92.07   Testing of underground storage tanks



   92.99   Penalty



§ 92.01  NOXIOUS ODORS.



   No person shall burn anything so as to emit noxious odors to the
discomfort of the neighborhood.



(1982 Code, Ch. IX, § 1)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.02  FEE SCHEDULE FOR THE KEEPING OR STORING OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.



   (A)   The annual fees to be charged for licenses for the storage of
motor vehicles in any building or structure shall be in accordance with the
following schedule:



      (1)   At least 5 motor vehicles but not more than 10 motor
vehicles: $55.



      (2)   Eleven motor vehicles but not more than 20 motor
vehicles: $110.



      (3)   More than 20 motor vehicles: $220.



   (B)   The annual fees to be charged for permits (pursuant to 527
C.M.R. 14.03 - Storage) for the keeping or storing of hazardous materials,
including crude petroleum or any of its products in any building or structure
or in any underground or above ground tank for business or commercial
purposes, shall be in accordance with the following schedule and issued by
the head of the Fire Department:



      (1)   One gallon to 500 gallons: $25.



      (2)   501 gallons to 1,000 gallons: $40.



      (3)   1,001 gallons to 1,500 gallons: $50.



      (4)   1,501 gallons to 5,000 gallons: $75.



      (5)   5,001 gallons to 10,000 gallons: $100.



   (C)   The annual fees to be charged for licenses for the keeping or
storing of hazardous materials, including crude petroleum or any of its
products in building or structure or in any underground or above ground tank
for business or commercial purposes shall be in accordance with the following
schedule and granted by the Licensing Board and issued by the Town Clerk:



      (1)   10,001 gallons to 20,000 gallons: $200.



      (2)   20,001 gallons to 30,000 gallons: $250.



      (3)   30,001 gallons to 40,000 gallons: $300.



      (4)   40,001 gallons to 50,000 gallons: $350.



      (5)   50,001 gallons to 60,000 gallons: $400.



      (6)   60,001 gallons to 70,000 gallons: $450.



      (7)   70,001 gallons to 80,000 gallons: $500.



      (8)   80,001 gallons to 90,000 gallons: $550.



      (9)   90,001 gallons to 100,000 gallons: $600.



      (10)   100,001 gallons to 200,000 gallons: $800.



      (11)   200,001 gallons and over: $2,000.



      (12)   Hearing fee: $80.



      (13)   Renewal fee: $25.



(1982 Code, Ch. IX, § 2)  (Am. Ord. R-94-28, passed 5-10-1994; Am. Ord. 43,
passed 7-15-2003)



§ 92.03  PERMIT, INSPECTION AND REPORT FEES.



   (A)   Permits.



      (1)   Oil burners (all types): $40 per unit.



      (2)   Tanks and containers (installation/removal): $120 per
tank.



      (3)   Smoke detector inspections: $40 per dwelling unit.



      (4)   Smoke detector re-inspections: $40 per dwelling unit.



      (5)   Tar kettle and flame or heat producing devices: $55 per
unit.



      (6)   Blasting permit: $70 for 30 days.



      (7)   Propane gas heater/construction site: $40 per heater.



      (8)    Propane gas cylinder/100 lbs. or more: $30 per 100 lbs.



      (9)   Gun powder/smokeless/black: $40.



      (10)   Acetylene torch: $35 per unit.



      (11)   Tenting: $45 per job.



      (12)   Welding and cutting: $45 per job.



      (13)   Hoods and ducts: $45 per job.



      (14)   Suppression systems: $45 per job.



      (15)   Modification of storage facility: $70 per job.



      (16)   Display of automobiles in covered building: $40 per job.



      (17)   Fire protection equip-systems/alarms, sprinklers: $45
per job.



   (B)   Inspections.



      (1)   Nursing/convalescent homes (under 25 beds): $45 per
inspection.



      (2)   Nursing/convalescent homes (26-100 beds): $70 per
inspection.



      (3)   Motels/hotels: $70 per inspection.



      (4)   Master box - commercial, industrial, private buildings:
$220 per year.



      (5)   Tank truck: $40 per inspection.



      (6)   Plan review: $25 per 1,000 square feet.



   (C)   Reports.



      (1)   Incident reports (5 page): $5.



      (2)   Additional pages: $.50 per page.



(1982 Code, Ch. IX, § 2)  (Am. Ord. R-94-28, passed 5-10-1994; Am. Ord. 43,
passed 7-15-2003)



§ 92.04  GASOLINE PUMPS.



   No gasoline pump or any equipment connected therewith situated in any
retail gasoline station located in the town shall be operated or handled by
any person except the owner of such station or the duly authorized agent or
employee when gasoline is being dispensed into the tank of a motor vehicle or
other approved container provided however, that this section shall not apply
to any person or persons engaged in the business of installing or repairing
such gasoline station equipment.



(1982 Code, Ch. IX, § 3)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.05  SMOKE DETECTORS.



   An approved smoke detector shall be installed outside the sleeping
areas in each dwelling unit.  All smoke detectors should be ceiling mounted
with additional detectors located on each habitable level, including the
basement.



   (A)   In 1-, 2-, and 3-family dwelling homes these smoke detectors
may be battery operated and single station type.



   (B)   In 4- and 5-family dwelling homes the smoke detectors within
the dwelling units may be single station type.  Upon the sale or transfer of
such property, the smoke detectors that are required on all hallway levels or
suitable locations and in the basement shall be permanently wired and shall
be interconnected, so that when one sounds all sound.  It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to install and to maintain these systems
and they shall be tested annually by a competent person who shall notify the
Fire Department in writing of such test.  Plans for these systems shall be
approved by the Head of the Watertown Inspector of Buildings before
installation.



(1982 Code, Ch. IX, § 4)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.06  REGULATION OF FIRE LANES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to obstruct or block a private way with a
motor vehicle or other object so as to prevent access by fire apparatus or
equipment to any building.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to part a motor vehicle under the
cantilever of fire escapes or in such a manner as to block exits or
passageways to the street or sidewalks, or so as to interfere with the means
of egress from buildings.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to obstruct or park any vehicle in any
fire lane, such fire lane to be designated on private property or ways by the
Chief of the Fire Department and the Traffic Commission, and marked as such
by the owner.  The fire lane shall be at a minimum distance of 12 feet from
the curbing at a sidewalk for a mall, shopping center, hotel, home for the
elderly, hospital, nursing home, theater, school, or bowling alley.  Where
there are no sidewalks with curbing, said fire land shall be at a minimum
distance of 18 feet from the building.



   (D)   The building owner of record shall provide, install and
maintain signs and striping as provided in divisions (B) and (C) of this
section.  Such signage and striping shall meet with the approval of the
Traffic Commission.



   (E)   This section shall be enforced by the town in accordance with
Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 90, § 20A-1/2.



   (F)   If, in the opinion of the Chief of the Fire Department, or
such person to whom he delegates his authority, a motor vehicle is parked in
such a manner as to violate this section, he may notify the Police Department
to take necessary steps to remove such motor vehicle at the vehicle owner's
expense.



(Ord. 7, passed 9-11-1984)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.07  TESTING OF UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS.



   (A)   Any person who has lawful control of an underground storage
tank, with a capacity of 500 gallons or more, containing gasoline, waste oil,
toxic chemicals or any hazardous material defined under regulations issued by
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, shall be required to have periodic
testing performed on said tank to determine the fitness and condition for
such storage.



   (B)   Excluded from the requirement for such testing will be storage
tanks containing non-toxic chemicals, No. 1 oil (kerosene), No. 2 oil,
diesel, No. 4, No. 5 and No. 6 heating oil.



   (C)   The test shall be performed using any U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or Fire Department approved testing process.  A
representative of the Fire Department may be present at the time the test is
conducted.



   (D)   The initial testing period will be from January 1, 1985
through January 1, 1986.  All underground storage tanks covered by this
section  must be tested during that period.  After the initial test is
completed, the tank must be tested once every 5 years thereafter.



   (E)   In the event that, after testing, an underground storage tank
covered by this section is found to be defective, the Fire Department shall
issue an appropriate order pursuant to the authority under Massachusetts
General Laws, Massachusetts Fire Prevention Regulations and town Fire
Prevention Regulations.



   (F)   If the product stored in the tanks is different than the
product for which the inflammable storage permit was issued, then a permit or
license covering the existing requirement shall be applied for.



(Ord. 9, passed 11-13-1984)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   The penalty for violation of § 92.06 shall be $15 for the
first offense, $25 for the second offense, and $25 for each subsequent
offense.



(Ord. 7, passed 9-11-1984)



   (B)   The penalty for violation of § 92.07 shall be $200.  Each
day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 9, passed 11-13-1984)



   (C)   Violation of any other provisions of this chapter shall be
punished according to § 10.99 of this code.



CHAPTER 93: HEALTH AND SAFETY



Section



   93.01   Accumulation of refuse and rubbish



   93.02   Smoking prohibited in public buildings



   93.99   Penalty



§ 93.01  ACCUMULATION OF REFUSE AND RUBBISH.



   No person shall place or suffer to accumulate on his premises any
refuse, animal or vegetable matter, rubbish, or filth, whereby any offensive
or noxious stench or effluvia shall be created to endanger the health or
comfort of the neighborhood.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 15)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.02  SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Smoking prohibited in public buildings.



      (1)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         PUBLIC BUILDINGS.  Buildings owned and occupied by the
town, its employees or agents, including any portions of such buildings and
rooms within such buildings.



         SMOKING.  The smoking or carrying of any lighted cigar,
pipe, cigarette, or other tobacco product.



      (2)   Smoking prohibited.  No person shall smoke in public
buildings.



   (B)   Businesses.  Each business with premises located in the town
is hereby required to establish a smoking policy.  Business premises shall
include retail space and office space.



(Ord. 531, passed 5-12-1987; Am. Ord. 85, passed 4-25-1995)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who knowingly violates § 93.02 of this chapter by
smoking in any public building shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $100.



(Ord. 531, passed 5-12-1987; Am. Ord. 85, passed 4-25-1995)



   (B)   Any other violation of this chapter shall be punishable
according to § 10.99 of this code.



CHAPTER 94: NEWSRACKS



Section



   94.01   Definitions



   94.02   Permits and compliance stickers



   94.03   Standards for placement of newsracks



   94.04   Notice of violation



   94.05   Removal of newsracks



   94.99   Penalty



§ 94.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPLIANCE STICKER.  A sequentially numbered sticker issued by the
Superintendent for placement on individual newsracks in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.



   CROSSWALK.  That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of curblines and property lines at intersections,
or at any portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by
lines on the road surface or by other markings or signs.



   CROSSWALK CURB RETURN.  The point at which the crosswalk pavement
markings meet the sidewalk.



   FIRE LANE.  That portion of a public or private parking lot, private
driveway or private road which is designed to provide access for fire trucks.



   NEWSRACK.  Any unstaffed container, box, bin, vending machine,
display, stand, rack or other device used for the purpose of dispensing
printed matter with or without cost to the consumer.



   PARKING METER.  Any mechanical device placed or erected on any public
way or municipal off-street parking area within the town for the regulation
of parking.



   PERSON.  Any individual, corporation, society, association,
partnership, organization or other entity circulating printed matter.



   PRINTED MATTER.  Any newspaper, directory, handbill, advertising
matter, magazine, circular, flyer, book, pamphlet, catalogue or other
publication.



   PUBLIC WAY.  The entire width between property lines of every street
or highway that is open to the public for purposes of travel.



   ROADWAY.  That portion of a public way that is intended for the use of
motor vehicles.



   SIDEWALK.  That portion of a public way that is set aside for
pedestrian travel.



   SUPERINTENDENT.  The Superintendent of Public Works of the Town of
Watertown or their designee.



   TAXI STAND.  An area in the roadway in which certain taxicabs are
authorized and required to park while waiting to be engaged.



   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL.  Any device using colored lights which
conforms to the standards as prescribed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic may
be alternately directed to stop and to proceed.



(Ord. 71, passed 10-27-1998; Am. Ord. 73, passed 10-9-2001)



§ 94.02  PERMITS AND COMPLIANCE STICKERS.



   (A)   Any person who placed a newsrack or caused a newsrack to be
placed upon any sidewalk or public way in the town prior to the effective
date of this chapter and who wishes to maintain said newsrack on and after
said date shall, within 60 days after said date, apply for a permit from the
Superintendent in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Any person who, on or after the effective date of this
chapter, intends to place a newsrack or cause a newsrack to be placed on a
sidewalk or public way in the town, shall apply for a permit from the
Superintendent in accordance with the provisions of this chapter prior to
installing the newsrack.



   (C)   The Superintendent shall provide a permit application form
which shall be completed by every person who places or maintains a newsrack
on a public way in the town.  The form shall require the applicant to
provide the following information:



      (1)   A description and sketch sufficient to show the precise
address and location of each newsrack; the height, width and depth of each
newsrack; and the manner in which each newsrack will be held in place;



      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner of
each newsrack and the name, address and telephone number of a person
responsible for the maintenance and operation of the newsrack who may be
contacted in an emergency; and



      (3)   A statement that the specified location and the newsrack
comply with the provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   Each applicant for a permit or renewal of a permit shall
prepare a single application form upon which all newsracks owned by that
person and located on a public way or sidewalk in the town shall be listed,
together with the information required pursuant to division (C) of this
section.



   (E)   Permits shall be valid for a period of 1 year from the date of
issue and, upon application, may be renewed by the Superintendent on an
annual basis.



   (F)   Any person granted a permit or renewal seeking to alter the
terms of the permit shall provide an amended application prior to making
alterations.



   (G)   All permit applications, amendment applications, and renewal
applications shall be accompanied by a check or money order made out to the
Town of Watertown in the amount of the fee specified from time to time by the
Town Manager for the permit, amendment application, or permit renewal.



   (H)   The Town Manager is authorized to establish reasonable fees
for original permit applications, annual renewal applications, amendment
applications, compliance stickers, and reinspection fees provided that such
fees do not exceed the actual cost of administering this chapter.



   (I)   Within 14 days after receipt of an application for a permit or
renewal of a permit under this chapter, the Superintendent shall either issue
or renew the permit or deny the application by giving written notice and a
statement of reasons to the applicant. A denial shall be based upon the
failure of the applicant to satisfy the requirements set forth in this
chapter.  Proposed locations shall be approved on a first-come, first-served
basis by the Superintendent.  No preference shall be given to applicants who
might have had newsracks in a particular location prior to the effective date
of this chapter.



   (J)   If the Superintendent has not acted on a permit application
within 14 days of receipt thereof, pursuant to division (I) of this section,
the permit will be deemed issued or renewed subject, however, to all other
applicable provisions of this chapter.



   (K)   Within 30 days of issuing a permit, the Superintendent shall
determine the compliance of the newsrack(s) with all provisions of this
chapter.  Based upon such determination, the Superintendent shall issue or
decline to issue a compliance sticker for each newsrack.  Compliance
stickers shall be issued annually for each approved newsrack, which shall
forthwith be affixed by the Superintendent to each newsrack.



   (L)   If the Superintendent denies an application, in whole or in
part, or denies a compliance sticker, the applicant may appeal the
Superintendent's decision to the Town Manager by giving written notice to the
Manager within ten days after receipt of notice of the Superintendent's
decision.



   (M)   The Town Manager or designee shall hold a public hearing on
the appeal no later than 30 days after receipt of said notice by the Manager
and shall, within 14 days after a public hearing, issue an order affirming,
reversing or modifying the Superintendent's decision.  If an order has not
been issued by the Town Manager within 14 days after hearing, the
Superintendent's decision shall be deemed affirmed.



   (N)   During the pendency of an appeal, the newsrack(s) may remain
in place subject to the removal provisions of § 94.05.



   (O)   To be in compliance with this chapter, a newsrack must have an
approved permit and a compliance sticker affixed to it.



(Ord. 71, passed 10-27-1998; Am. Ord. 73, passed 10-9-2001)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.03  STANDARDS FOR PLACEMENT OF NEWSRACKS.



   (A)   No persons shall place, cause to be placed or maintain a
newsrack on any public way or sidewalk:



      (1)   Within 10 feet of a handicapped access ramp;



      (2)   Within or overhanging the roadway;



      (3)   Within 6 inches of a curb;



      (4)   Within 15 feet of the curb return or any marked
crosswalk;



      (5)   Within 5 feet of any fire hydrant or fire hose
connection;



      (6)   Within 5 feet of any manhole, service gate, valve cover,
sewer grate or other access panel or cover located in a public way or
sidewalk;



      (7)   Within 5 feet of a driveway;



      (8)   Immediately adjacent to a designated loading zone, a
handicapped parking space, a zone reserved for emergency vehicles;



      (9)   So as to reduce the width of a sidewalk to less than 4
feet for the passage of travelers unless the width of the sidewalk is
otherwise reduced to less than 4 feet, as determined by the Superintendent,
in which case the newsrack may be installed so as to avoid further reducing
the width of the sidewalk;



      (10)   So as to impede ingress to and egress from legally
parked motor vehicles, buses or other modes of transportation;



      (11)   So as to impede the operation of standard sidewalk snow
plows in use by the Town of Watertown except where said sidewalk snow plows
would be otherwise impeded, as determined by the Superintendent;



      (12)   Within a rectangular area 10 feet in front of any door
of any building and 3 feet to either side of the door;



      (13)   So as to create an imminent danger of harm to persons
or property as demonstrated by specific facts;



      (14)   Directly abutting a public flower bed, tree pit,
memorial or sculpture, or on or within a memorial traffic island, circle or
square designated on a list to be maintained and available during regular
business hours at the Department of Public Works;



      (15)   So that it is attached to town-owned property,
including a town-owned tree, traffic control signal device, police or fire
call box, fire hydrant, sign or parking meter;



      (16)   Directly in front of and on the same side of the street
as any parcel zoned solely for residential use as defined in the town zoning
code, except at designated bus stops, MBTA crossings and parking lots.  This
restriction shall not apply to parcels zoned for a mixed residential and
business use;



      (17)   In a manner that violates any provision of state or
federal law.



   (B)   In addition to the restrictions listed in division (A) of this
section, all newsracks shall meet the following standards:



      (1)   Newsracks may be secured to one another provided that
they are no more than 6 inches apart and provided that the newsracks are
aligned in a row that is parallel to the nearest curb line and no longer than
10 feet in length.  Individual newsracks shall be installed parallel to the
nearest curb line.  Newsracks may not be clustered back-to-back to form two
rows as the open area between them can become a repository of rubbish. 
Newsracks must be placed side by side parallel to and not less that 6 inches
from the edge of the curb.  Newsracks so placed shall face the sidewalk, not
the street.  Newsracks placed near the wall of a building or other structure
must be placed parallel to and not more than 6 inches away from the wall.



      (2)   Newsracks shall not exceed the dimensional requirements
of a height of 4-1/2 feet from the ground, width of 2 feet, and a length of
2  feet.  Newsracks shall be constructed and maintained so that they do not
constitute a hazard or safety problem for travelers and others using the
sidewalks and public ways.  They shall be maintained in good repair and
clean and safe condition and shall be removed if their use is discontinued
for a period of 20 days or longer.



      (3)   No newsrack shall bear any advertising other than that
directly relating to the printed matter dispensed by the newsrack.  A
newsrack may dispense more than 1 publication (printed matter) if it is
published by the owner of the newsrack or an affiliate thereof and the
newsrack may bear advertising directly related to each publication dispensed
by the newsrack.



      (4)   Each newsrack shall clearly display the name, address
and telephone number of the owner of the machine and the person to contact in
connection with the maintenance and operation thereof.



(Ord. 71, passed 10-27-1998; Am. Ord. 73, passed 10-9-2001)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.04  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   No person shall place, cause to be placed or maintain a
newsrack upon any sidewalk or public way in the town in violation of the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   In the event that a newsrack is determined to be in violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter, including the failure to pay in a
timely manner when due any fee imposed in connection with the location and
maintenance of such newsracks, the Superintendent shall provide written
notice to the owner or the owner's agent that the newsrack is in violation of
this chapter.  Such notice shall state the substance of the violation, shall
set a date for compliance which shall not be less than 10 business days after
the date notice is issued, shall state that the owner is subject to a penalty
as specified in § 94.99 of this chapter, and shall state the right of the
Superintendent to initiate removal proceedings pursuant to § 94.05.



   (C)   If the Superintendent determines that the violation has not
been corrected on or after the date for compliance, the Superintendent may
initiate removal proceedings in accordance with the provisions of § 94.05
and may assess a penalty in accordance with the provisions of § 94.99.



(Ord. 71, passed 10-27-1998; Am. Ord. 73, passed 10-9-2001)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.05  REMOVAL OF NEWSRACKS.



   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (C) and (D) of this section,
the Superintendent may remove and store at the owner's expense any newsrack
that remains in violation for more than 30 days after the date for compliance
specified in § 94.04 provided that the Superintendent shall give written
notice of removal to the owner stating the date the newsrack was removed, the
reasons for removal, the storage location, and the procedure for claiming the
machine.  Newsracks removed pursuant to this chapter may be retrieved by the
owner at any time within 30 days of its removal upon payment of a removal fee
and storage fee as set by the Town Manager.



   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) and (D) of this section,
the owner of any newsrack may avoid removal of the newsrack by:



      (1)   Correcting the violation and so information the
Superintendent; or



      (2)   By making a written request for a hearing on the
violation before the Superintendent prior to the date set for compliance in
which case the newsrack may remain in place pending the Superintendent's
decision on the matter.  Said hearing shall be held no later than 10 days
after receipt of a written request for a hearing and a decision shall be
rendered within 10 days thereafter.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, if the
Superintendent or a public safety official determines that a newsrack
constitutes an imminent danger of harm to persons or property, the
Superintendent or a public safety official may remove the newsrack provided
that the owner of the newsrack shall be notified of such removal and provided
that the newsrack shall be stored for a reasonable period of time so that the
owner can retrieve it.



   (D)   If maintenance, repair, or construction of a public way,
sidewalk or public or private property in or adjacent to the public way
cannot be safely accomplished, in the opinion of the Superintendent, without
the removal of a newsrack, the Superintendent shall give written and/or
telephone notice to the newsracks's owner ordering the removal of the
newsrack provided that said notice shall specify the reason for the removal
and the date for compliance which shall not be less than 10 days after the
date of notice.  If the Superintendent determines that delay would cause an
unreasonable risk of harm to persons or property or would cause a delay in
the maintenance, repair or construction work, the Superintendent may remove
the newsrack, provided that the owner of the newsrack shall be notified of
the removal; that the newsrack shall be stored for a reasonable period of
time so that the owner can retrieve it and further provided that the owner
may replace the newsrack when said maintenance, repair or construction is
completed.



   (E)   The Superintendent, with the approval of the Town Manager, is
authorized to establish fees for the removal and storage of newsracks that
are removed at the direction of the Superintendent or public safety officials
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter provided that said fees do
not exceed the actual cost of removal and storage.



   (F)   If a newsrack remains unclaimed for more than 60 days after
notice of removal is sent to the owner or for more than 60 days after the
newsrack is removed if the owner is unknown, then possession of the newsrack
shall be transferred to the Watertown Police Department and the newsrack
shall be disposed of as unclaimed property in accordance with law.



(Ord. 71, passed 10-27-1998; Am. Ord. 73, passed 10-9-2001)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   In the event that a newsrack is not in compliance with any of the
provisions of this chapter as of the date set for compliance under §
94.04(B) of this chapter, then the owner of the newsrack shall be subject to
a fine of $25 per day for each day of non-compliance until the date the
violations are corrected or the newsrack is removed.



(Ord. 71, passed 10-27-1998; Am. Ord. 73, passed 10-9-2001)



CHAPTER 95: NOISE REGULATIONS



Section



   95.01   Prohibition of noise emissions



   95.02   Definitions and measurements of noise



   95.03   Duties and responsibilities of town departments



   95.04   Exceptions



   95.05   Enforcement



   95.99   Penalty



§ 95.01  PROHIBITION OF NOISE EMISSIONS.



   (A)   No person owning, leasing or controlling a source of sound
shall willfully, negligently, or through failure to provide necessary
equipment, service, or maintenance or to take necessary precautions cause,
suffer, allow or permit unnecessary emissions from said source of sound that
may cause noise.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section shall pertain to, but shall not
be limited to, prolonged unattended sounding of burglar alarms, construction
and demolition equipment which characteristically emit sound but which may be
fitted and accommodated with equipment such as enclosures to suppress sound
or may be operated in a manner so as to suppress sound, suppressible and
preventable industrial and commercial sources of sound, and other man-made
sounds that cause noise.



   (C)   All devices employed in construction or demolition shall be
prohibited from use during the hours of:



      (1)   7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. from Monday through Friday;



      (2)   7:00 p.m. on Fridays through 8:00 a.m. on Saturdays; and



      (3)   7:00 p.m. on Saturdays through 8:00 a.m. on Sundays.



(Ord. 6, passed 9-13-1983; Am. Ord. 14, passed 3-12-1996)  Penalty, see §
95.99



§ 95.02  DEFINITIONS AND MEASUREMENTS OF NOISE.



   (A)   The town hereby incorporates into and makes a part of this
chapter the provisions of Chapter 310 Code of Massachusetts Regulations,
Section 7.00 entitled Air Pollution Control Regulations.



   (B)   These regulations shall govern the definitions, measurement
and restriction of sources of noise emission.



   (C)   For the purposes of this chapter, a CONDITION OF NOISE
POLLUTION shall be a noise source which increases noise levels 10 dB or more
above the background noise level.  If the noise level is judged by ear to
have a tonal sound, an increase of 5 dB above background noise level is
sufficient to cause noise pollution.



(Ord. 6, passed 9-13-1983)



§ 95.03  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF TOWN DEPARTMENTS.



   (A)   All town departments and agencies shall, to the fullest extent
consistent with other laws, carry out their programs in such a manner as to
further the policy of this chapter.



   (B)   All town departments and agencies shall comply with Federal
and State laws and regulations and the provisions and intent of this
ordinance respecting the control and abatement of noise to the same extent
that any person is subject to such laws and regulations.



(Ord. 6, passed 9-13-1983)



§ 95.04  EXCEPTIONS.



   This chapter shall apply to the control of all sound originating within
the limits of the Town of Watertown except the following:



   (A)   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to
the existence of an emergency or to the emission of sound in the performance
of emergency work or in training exercises related to emergency activities.



   (B)   Noncommercial public speaking and public assembly activities
as guaranteed by state and federal constitutions.



   (C)   Domestic equipment such as lawn mowers and power saws between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.



(Ord. 6, passed 9-13-1983)



§ 95.05  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Board of Health shall be the primary enforcement agency of the
terms of this chapter. In addition, any Police Department or Fire Department
official or building inspector or their designee, acting within their
jurisdictional area, is authorized to enforce this chapter.



(Ord. 6, passed 9-13-1983)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, if
convicted, shall be fined no less than $50 nor more than $100 for the first
offense and not less than $200 nor more than $500 for each succeeding offense.



   (B)   Each subsequent day or part thereof of violation of this
chapter, whether the violation be continuous or intermittent, shall be
construed as a separate and succeeding offense.



(Ord. 6, passed 9-13-1983)



CHAPTER 96: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



General Provisions



   96.01   Moving buildings



   96.02   Placing articles on public way or sidewalk



   96.03   Use of way to place building materials



   96.04   Reimbursement for unauthorized use of way



   96.05   Placing of ashes and dirt upon public way



   96.06   Opening or obstruction of public way



   96.07   Use of public ways for vehicles



   96.08   Obstruction of public way by vehicles



   96.09   Coasting upon any public way



   96.10   Vehicle removal



   96.11   Obstruction of passage on sidewalks



   96.12   Parades and processions



   96.13   Transportation of liquids or other materials



   96.14   Numbering of houses and buildings



   96.15   Temporary repairs of private ways



   96.16   Erecting barriers during excavations



Snow and Ice Removal



   96.25   Snow and ice on public way



   96.26   Removal of snow and ice by private persons in the business
district



   96.27   Enforcement of snow and ice removal



   96.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Curbs and sidewalks, see Ch. 55



   Placement of newsracks near streets or public ways, see Ch. 94



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 96.01  MOVING BUILDINGS.



   No person shall move or assist in moving any building, over any way
which the town is obliged to keep in repair, without the written permit of
the Town Manager being first obtained; nor, having obtained such permit,
without complying with the restrictions and provisions thereof.



(1982 Code, Ch. VII, § 1)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.02  PLACING ARTICLES ON PUBLIC WAY OR SIDEWALK.



   (A)   No person shall place or cause to be placed upon any public
way or sidewalk, any lumber, iron, wood, coal, trunk, bale, box, crate, cask,
barrel, package or other thing, and allow the same to remain for more than 1
hour, or more than 10 minutes after being notified by a police officer;
provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the placing
of ashes refuse or garbage in proper receptacles for collection under public
authority and provided further that all store waste shall at all times be
kept in suitable covered, metal containers on the store premises and the same
shall not be placed on the street or sidewalk for collection until the day
specified in each week by the Manager or the Superintendent of Highways for
the regular collection of the same in the locality where the store is
situated.



   (B)   No person shall transport or cause to be transported into the
town for the purpose of dumping or depositing the same in any place in the
town any ashes, paper, dirt, waste, garbage, refuse, rubbish or filth of any
kind or any animal or vegetable substance or any abandoned or discarded
material of any name or nature without the written permission of the
Manager.  Such permission shall not be granted by the Manager until
satisfied that such waste or material shall be carried in such a manner and
in such vehicles and shall be deposited in such a place and in such a manner
that the same shall not be likely to become littered or scattered about the
streets or in any private property to cause a nuisance and such permission
may be revoked at any time by the power granting the same.



(1982 Code, Ch. VII, § 2)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.03  USE OF WAY TO PLACE BUILDING MATERIALS.



   Any person who intends to erect, repair, take down or do any work on or
in connection with any building or structure on land abutting on any way
which this town is obliged to keep in repair, and desires to make use of any
portion of said way for the purpose of placing thereon building materials,
equipment or rubbish shall give notice thereof to the Town Manager.  And
thereupon the Town Manager may grant a permit in writing to occupy such
portion of said way to be used for such purpose as in his judgment the
necessity of the case demands and the security of the public allows; such
permit in no case to be in force longer than 90 days, and to be on such
conditions as the Manager may require; and especially in every case, upon
condition that during the whole of every night, from twilight in the evening
until sunrise in the morning, lighted lanterns shall be placed as effectually
to secure all travelers from liability to come in contact with such building
materials or rubbish.



(1982 Code, Ch. VII, § 3)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.04  REIMBURSEMENT FOR UNAUTHORIZED USE OF WAY.



   No person shall use any portion of any way which the town is obliged to
keep in repair for the purposes named in this chapter without the permit, in
writing, of the Town Manager as therein provided, nor having obtained such
permit, shall fail to comply with the conditions thereof.  In addition to
any penalty to which he or she may be subjected under this chapter for such
failures, he or she shall reimburse the town for all expenses and damages
which the town may be  compelled to pay by reason of such unauthorized use,
or for any failure to comply with said conditions.



(1982 Code, Ch. VII, § 4)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.05  PLACING OF ASHES AND DIRT  UPON PUBLIC WAY.



   No person shall, without the written permission of the Town Manager,
place or cause to be placed in or upon any public way, or sidewalk, any
ashes, dirt, rubbish or filth of any kind, or any animal or vegetable
substance.



(1982 Code, Ch. VII, § 6)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.06  OPENING OR OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WAY.



   (A)   No public utility regulated pursuant to Mass. Gen. Laws Ch.
164 shall open the surface, dig up or otherwise obstruct any portion of any
street, sidewalk or way which the town is obligated to keep in repair without
first obtaining a written permit for such activity from the Superintendent of
Public Works, who shall require a nonrefundable permit fee of $25 to cover
the town's administrative cost of the issuance of such permit.



   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, no person
shall open the surface, dig up or otherwise obstruct any portion of any
street, sidewalk or way which the town is obligated to keep in repair without
first obtaining a written permit for such activity from the Superintendent of
Public Works, who shall require a nonrefundable permit fee of not less than
$100.



   (C)   Notwithstanding division (B) of this section, any permit
issued for the construction, reconstruction or repair of a driveway shall be
issued only to the contractor performing the work, and shall require a
nonrefundable permit fee of $25.



   (D)   A person obtaining a permit under divisions (B) or (C) of this
section, prior to the issuance of the permit, shall post a bond of not less
than $10,000  as prescribed by the Superintendent of Public Works, to be
held by the Town Treasurer for a duration of not less than two years past the
estimated completion date for any project for which such permit is granted.



   (E)   The Superintendent of Public Works shall establish, enforce
and perpetually maintain engineering specifications, permit forms and
procedures, fees, performance standards, inspection and remedial regulations
and penalties which shall detail the exact requirements for the application,
performance and acceptance of public way openings and repairs.



   (F)   Any person failing to comply with these conditions, in
addition to any penalty prescribed by the Superintendent of Public Works as
provided above, shall reimburse the town for all expenses and damages which
the town may be compelled to pay by reason of such violation of this
section.  The Superintendent of Public Works shall not, under penalty of
personal liability, waive any permit, fee or bond for any person
notwithstanding work performed under the Superintendent's direction by
employees of the Department of Public Works.



   (G)   For purposes of this section, the word PERSON shall include
any natural person, business, partnership, corporation, association, trust,
committee, club or other organization, entity or group of individuals,
regardless of the manner in which they are organized or named, but shall not
include a public utility subject to Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 164.



(1982 Code, Ch. VII, § 7)  (Am. Ord. 135, passed 6-22-1993; Am. Ord. 25,
passed 5-12-1998)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.07  USE OF PUBLIC WAYS FOR VEHICLES.



   No person shall ride or drive any beast of burden, carriage or draught,
or shall drive or propel or cause to be driven or propelled any bicycle,
tricycle, motor vehicle or any vehicle whatsoever, in or over any crossing in
any public way at such a rate of speed as to endanger the lives and safety of
the public.



(1982 Code, Ch. VII, § 8)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.08  OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WAY BY VEHICLES.



   No person shall permit any vehicle under his or her care or control to
stand across any public way in such a manner as to obstruct the travel over
the same for an unnecessary length of time; no person shall stop with any
vehicle in any public way so near to another vehicle as to obstruct public
travel; and no person shall stop with any vehicle upon or across any crossing
in any public way.



(1982 Code, Ch. VII, § 9)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.09  COASTING UPON ANY PUBLIC WAY.



   No person shall coast upon ice or snow upon any public way, except one
on which the Town Manager or Chief of Police shall by public notice permit
such coasting, and no person shall ride any animal or drive, wheel or draw
any automobile, coach, cart, wheelbarrow, hand cart, velocipede, bicycle, or
any vehicle, except children's carriages, or coast upon any sidewalk in the
town.



(1982 Code, Ch. VII, § 10)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.10  VEHICLE REMOVAL.



   (A)   The Superintendent of Public Works for the purpose of removing
or plowing snow, or removing ice, from any way, may remove or cause to be
removed to some convenient place, including a public garage, any vehicle
interfering with such work.  He shall keep or cause to be kept records of
the registration number of each vehicle so removed and the place to which it
is removed, and shall within 48 hours after the removal of any such vehicle
send notice by mail to the owner of such vehicle, at his address as recorded
at the Registry of Motor Vehicles, of the place to which such vehicle has
been removed.  If the owner of the motor vehicle be unknown or be not on
record at the Registry of Motor Vehicles for this Commonwealth, the
Superintendent of Public Works shall on the business day following the day of
removal publish, at least once in a newspaper published and having a general
circulation in Watertown or Boston, notice of the removal, the registration
number, if any, the type of vehicle and the place to which the same was
removed.



   (B)   Before the owner or his or her agent shall be permitted to
remove a vehicle which has been removed as aforesaid to a public garage or
other convenient place, he shall:



      (1)   Furnish satisfactory evidence to the owner or person in
charge of the public garage or to the Superintendent of Public Works of his
or her identity and ownership or right to possession of the vehicle.



      (2)   To pay for the cost of publishing or sending any notice
required hereunder in such amount as shall be determined by the
Superintendent of Public Works of the town and to pay the cost of removing
the vehicle and all storage charges as authorized by Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40,
§ 22D as provided in the "Town of Watertown Traffic Rules and Orders, as
amended."



(1982 Code, Ch. VII, § 14)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.11  OBSTRUCTION OF PASSAGE ON SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall stand on any sidewalk or in any public place in such a
manner as to obstruct a free passage for foot passengers, after having been
requested by a police officer to move on.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 1)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.12  PARADES AND PROCESSIONS.



   No person or persons shall play or perform on any musical instruments
or sing, parade, march or congregate in any public way or public place,
except in connection with a funeral, without the written permit of the Town
Manager.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 3)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.13  TRANSPORTATION OF LIQUIDS OR OTHER MATERIALS.



   No person shall transport any liquid, substance or material of any kind
in any vehicle on the street within the town in a manner that the liquid,
substance or material leaks, overflows or falls form the vehicle onto the
street.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 9)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.14  NUMBERING OF HOUSES AND BUILDINGS.



   The Town Manager may order numbers to be affixed to or painted on the
building on any street in their discretion.  The Town Manager, in his or her
discretion, may order owners of both residential or business property to
remove and change the numbers on the buildings on any street.  The owner of
every house or building shall comply with the order within 30 days.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 18)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.15  TEMPORARY REPAIRS OF PRIVATE WAYS.



   (A)   The town may make temporary repairs on private ways that have
been previously constructed and open to public use for a period of 5 years or
more, provided the repairs are for the protection of the health and safety of
the persons using such roads, in the opinion of the Town Manager upon the
advice of the Superintendent of Public Works, and provided the repairs are
required by public necessity.



   (B)   The repairs shall include the filling of holes in the
subsurface of such ways and repairs to the surfaces materials thereof. 
Materials for such repairs, where practical, should be the same as, or
similar to, those used for the existing base or surfaces of such ways, in the
judgment of the Superintendent of Public Works.  The repairs may upon the
petition of a reasonably substantial proportion of the abutters in the
judgment of the Town Manager include surfacing or resurfacing the ways with
bituminous materials, including but not limited to bituminous concrete.
However, no betterments or other charges are to be charged or assessed
against the owners of the private way for such repairs done under this
section.



   (C)   Drainage repairs or construction, as determined by the
Superintendent of Public Works, to be necessary as a result of repairs made
pursuant to division (B) of this section may also be done.



   (D)   The town shall not be liable on account of any property damage
or death or personal injury whatsoever caused by such repairs, and Mass. Gen.
Laws Ch. 84, §§ 24 and 25 shall not apply.  Nothing in this section shall
be construed to create an obligation of the town to repair or maintain any
private way, or way open or dedicated to the public but not a public way, to
which any repairs are made.



   (E)   The town may, without petition or the formalities of division
(B) of this section, make temporary minor repairs to private ways not
exceeding $500 in total value at the time made, provided the private way has
been open to public use for a period of 5 years or more.  The repair shall
be limited to minor work such as filling, patching, grading or scraping. 
Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 84, §§ 24 and 25 shall not apply.



   (F)   No actions by the town under this section shall be construed
to either open or dedicate any way in Watertown to public use.



(Ord. 893, passed 6-26-1990)



§ 96.16  ERECTING BARRIERS DURING EXCAVATIONS.



   Owners of land which has been excavated are required to erect barriers
or take other suitable measures within five days after such owners have been
notified in writing by the Town Manager that in his or her opinion such
excavation constitute a hazard to public safety.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 24)  Penalty, see § 96.99



SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL



§ 96.25  SNOW AND ICE ON PUBLIC WAY.



   No person or entity, regardless of its ownership, tenancy, or other
status or relationship to any real property, nor any agent, employee,
contractor, or servant of any such person or entity, shall place, throw, plow
or in any way move, any snow or ice onto any portion of the town's streets
and ways.  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, streets and
ways shall include the vehicular pavement, sidewalks, ramps, islands, and
medians, whether or not used by vehicles or pedestrians.  Notwithstanding
the foregoing, however, this section  shall not be construed to prohibit
owners or lawful occupants of residential premises from placing snow and ice
on the sidewalks immediately adjacent to the driveway opening as long as a
minimum 36 inches wide pathway along the sidewalk is provided for passage
within 24 hours of snow fall.



(1982 Code, Ch. VII, § 5)  (Am. Ord. 90, passed 12-10-1991; Am. Ord. 4,
passed 1-28-1992; Am. Ord. 38, passed 5-13-1997; Am. Ord. 13, passed
3-11-2003)  Penalty, see § 96.99(B)



§ 96.26  REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE BY PRIVATE PERSONS IN THE BUSINESS
DISTRICT.



   (A)   Definitions.  For this purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      BUSINESS DAY.  Any day that an establishment is open for
business.



      BUSINESS DISTRICT.  Every parcel of land which the town zoning
ordinance has classified as a business district, including Neighborhood
Business, Limited Business, and Central Business Districts, or any additional
district hereafter established under the zoning ordinance.



      BUSINESS HOURS.  The hours during which an establishment is open
for business.



      PRIVATE PERSON.  Every person, partnership, corporation,
joint-stock company, or other entity, whether as owner, tenant, occupant,
lessee, or other agent.



      SIDEWALK.  That portion of a street between the curb lines, or
the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for
the use of pedestrians.



   (B)   Snow and ice to be removed from sidewalks by private persons.



      (1)   (a)   Every person in charge or control of any
building or lot of land within a business district and used for business
purposes in the city fronting on or abutting a paved sidewalk, whether as
owner, tenant, occupant, lessee,or otherwise, shall remove and clear away, or
cause to be removed and cleared away, snow and ice from a path of at least 36
inches in width from that portion of the sidewalk which abuts any side of the
building or lot of land.  The cleared path shall extend to the traveled way
of the street at each corner of an intersection of 2 or more streets and at
each intermediate curb cut so as to provide access from the street to the
sidewalk.



         (b)   Except as provided in division (2) of this
division (B), snow and ice shall be removed from sidewalks in all business
districts by 2 hours after the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet, or
freezing rain during business hours or by the beginning of business hours of
the next business day following such fall.



      (2)   In the event that snow and ice on a sidewalk has become
so hard that it cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the
sidewalk, the person or entity charged with its removal shall, within the
time mentioned in this section, cause enough sand or other abrasive to be put
on the sidewalk to make travel thereon reasonably safe, and thereafter, as
soon as weather permits, shall cause a path in said sidewalk of at least 36
inches in width to be cleared of such snow and ice.



      (3)   In the event that snow and ice is not removed from a
sidewalk as provided herein, an initial warning may be issued to the
responsible private person.  If, thereafter, the sidewalk location that was
the subject of the initial warning remains covered with snow and ice 2 hours
after the said warning, a notice of violation may be issued and the
appropriate penalty assessed to said responsible private person.  No more
than 1 penalty shall be assessed with respect to any 1 snowfall within a
24-hour period.



      (4)   In the event of the declaration of a State of Emergency
by the Governor, applicable to an area of the Commonwealth which includes the
Town of Watertown, as a result of snow, sleet or freezing rain, the
provisions of this section shall be suspended for a period of 24 hours after
the cessation of the fall of such snow, sleet or freezing rain or until the
end of the State of Emergency, whichever is the latest to occur.



(Ord. 39, passed 5-13-1997)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.27  ENFORCEMENT OF SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.



   (A)   The Town Manager, the Superintendent of Public Works, the
Deputy Superintendent of Public Works, all Watertown police officers, and any
other town employees from time to time designated by the Town Manager are
empowered and authorized to enforce § 96.25.



(1982 Code, Ch. VII, § 5(C))  (Am. Ord. 90, passed 12-10-1991; Am. Ord. 4,
passed 1-28-1992)



   (B)   Any member of the Watertown Police Department, parking
enforcement officer, or any designee of the Town Manager shall be authorized
to enforce § 96.26.



(Ord. 39, Sec. C(2), passed 5-13-1997; Am. Ord. O-2016-47, passed 8-9-2016)



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   The penalty for violation of § 96.16 shall be $200.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 24)



   (B)   Anyone violating the prohibitions of § 96.25 of this chapter
shall be subject to a specific penalty of a fine in an amount up to $300 for
each offense.  The fine structure is as follows:



      (1)   All first violations: Documented warning.



      (2)   Subsequent violations:



         (a)   Residential (less than 6 dwelling units):



            1.   Manual snow shoveling:



               a.   Second violation: $25 fine.



               b.   Third or more violations: $50 fine.



            2.   Mechanized snow shoveling:



               a.   Second violation: $25 fine.



               b.   Third violation: $100 fine.



               c.   Fourth or more violations: $300 fine.



         (b)   Commercial and 6 or more dwelling units
residential:



            1.   Manual snow shoveling:



               a.   Second violation: $50 fine.



               b.   Third or more violations: $300 fine.



            2.   Mechanized snow shoveling:



               a.   Second violation: $150 fine.



               b.   Third or more violations: $300 fine.



(1982 Code, Sec. 5(B))  (Am. Ord. 90, passed 12-10-1991; Am. Ord. 4, passed
1-28-1992)



   (C)   Anyone violating § 96.26 of this chapter shall be fined as
follows:



      (1)   A fine of $100 shall be imposed for the first violation
for any given snowfall.



      (2)   A fine of $200 shall be imposed for a second violation
during that same winter season.



      (3)   A fine of $300 shall be imposed for a third and
subsequent violation during that same winter season.



      (4)   These penalties may be enforced by non-criminal
disposition procedures pursuant to Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40, § 21D and §
36.05 of this code.



   (D)   Any person violating any other provision of this chapter shall
be punished according to § 10.99 of this code.



(1982 Code, Sec. 5(b))  (Ord. 39, passed 5-13-1997; Am. Ord. 90, passed
12-10-1991; Am. Ord. 4, passed 1-28-1992; Am. Ord. O-2016-47, passed 8-9-2016)



CHAPTER 97: STORMWATER REGULATIONS



Section



   97.01   Purpose and intent



   97.02   Definitions



   97.03   Applicability



   97.04   Authority



   97.05   Responsibility for administration



   97.06   Ultimate responsibility



   97.07   Discharge prohibitions



   97.08   Suspension of MS4 access



   97.09   Industrial or construction activity discharges



   97.10   Monitoring of discharges



   97.11   Watercourse protection



   97.12   Notification of spills



   97.13   Enforcement



   97.14   Regulations



 



   97.99   Penalty



§ 97.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the town through the
regulation of all discharges to the storm drainage system.  This chapter
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with
requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit process.



   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by
stormwater discharges by any user;



      (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the
municipal separate storm sewer system;



      (3)   To establish legal authority to carry out all
inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to
ensure compliance with this chapter;



      (4)   To require the removal of all such illicit connections;
and



      (5)   To comply with state and federal statutes and
regulations relating to stormwater discharges.



(Ord. O-2011-23, passed 5-11-2011)



§ 97.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.  The town Department of Public Works
and its employees and agents designated to enforce this chapter.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs).  Any measure that reduces the
quantity or improves the quality of stormwater runoff including, but not
limited to: schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good
house keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices,
maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce
the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving
waters, or stormwater conveyance systems.  BMPs also include treatment
practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff,
spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials
storage.



   CLEAN WATER ACT.  The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.



   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY.  Activities subject to NPDES construction
permits.  These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance
of 1 acre or more.  Such activities include but are not limited to clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.  Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.



   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.  Either of the following:



      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system
including, but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the
storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement
agency before the effective date of this chapter; or



      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented
in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.



   ILLICIT DISCHARGE.  Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to
the storm drain system, except as exempted in § 97.07 of this code.



   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY.  Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits
as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) or MUNICIPAL STORM DRAIN
SYSTEM.  Publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or
conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered
drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures that together
comprise the storm drainage system owned or operated by the town.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT.  A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable
on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.



   NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE.  Any discharge to the storm drain system
that is not composed entirely of stormwater.



   PERSON.  An individual, partnership, association, firm, company,
trust, corporation, agency, authority, department or political subdivision of
the Commonwealth or the federal government, to the extent permitted by law,
and any officer, employee, or agent of such person.



   POLLUTANT.  Any element or property of sewage, agricultural,
industrial or commercial waste, runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or other
matter, in whatever form and whether originating at a point or major
non-point source, which is or may be discharged, drained or otherwise
introduced into any sewerage system, treatment works, or waters of the
Commonwealth.



   POLLUTION.  The presence in the environment of pollutants in
quantities or characteristics which are or may be injurious to human, plant
or animal life or to property or which unreasonably interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life and property throughout such areas as may be
affected thereby.



   PREMISES.  Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land
whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking
strips.



   STORMWATER.  Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting
entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from
such precipitation.



   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN.  A document which describes the
best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person to
identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance
systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.



   WASTEWATER.  Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.



   WATERCOURSE.  A natural or man-made channel through which water flows
or a stream of water, including a river, brook or underground stream.



   WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH.  All waters within the jurisdiction of the
Commonwealth, including, without limitation, rivers, streams, lakes, ponds,
springs, impoundments, estuaries, wetlands, coastal waters, and groundwater.



(Ord. O-2011-23, passed 5-11-2011)



§ 97.03  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter shall apply to flows entering the municipally owned storm
drainage system, a watercourse, and any waters of the Commonwealth located
within the boundaries of the town.



(Ord. O-2011-23, passed 5-11-2011)



§ 97.04  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is adopted under authority granted by the Home Rule
Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution, the Home Rule statutes, and
pursuant to the regulations of the federal Clean Water Act found at 40 C.F.R.
§ 122.34.



(Ord. O-2011-23, passed 5-11-2011)



§ 97.05  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.



   The town Department of Public Works shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this chapter.  Any powers granted or duties
imposed in compliance with this chapter may be delegated in writing by the
Superintendent of Public Works to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest of or as the authorized agent of the Department of Public
Works.



(Ord. O-2011-23, passed 5-11-2011)



§ 97.06  ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.



   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter
are minimum standards; therefore compliance with the requirements of this
chapter or regulations promulgated thereunder shall not relieve a person from
being subject to such enforcement actions as may be required to correct
contamination, pollution, and/or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.



(Ord. O-2011-23, passed 5-11-2011)



§ 97.07  DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Prohibition of illicit discharges.



      (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into
the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but
not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than
stormwater.



      (2)   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit
discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited.  Discharges or flow
resulting from fire fighting activities are exempt.  The following
discharges are also exempt provided they are not significant sources of
pollution:



         (a)   Water line flushing or other potable water
sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising
ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated
pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active
groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning
condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian
habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (provided the water is left
untreated for 1 week prior to draining), and any other water source not
containing pollutants.



         (b)   Discharges specified in writing by the authorized
enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety or
the environment.



         (c)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but
requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to
the time of the test.



         (d)   Street sweeping activities that use water spray to
suppress dust.



         (e)   The prohibition shall not apply to any
non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority
of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency or the Department of
Environmental Protection, provided that the discharge is in full compliance
with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable
laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for
any discharge to the storm drain system.



   (B)   Prohibition of illicit connections.



      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued
existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.



      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.



      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this
chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the storm drainage
system, or allows such a connection to continue.



(Ord. O-2011-23, passed 5-11-2011)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.08  SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.



   (A)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency
situations.  The town Department of Public Works may, without prior notice,
suspend access to the MS4 when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual
or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent danger to the
environment, the health or welfare of persons, the MS4 or waters of the
Commonwealth.  If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order
issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps
as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the
Commonwealth, or to minimize danger to persons or the environment.



   (B)   Suspension or termination due to the detection of illicit
discharge.



      (1)   Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this
chapter may have their MS4 access suspended or terminated if such action
would abate or reduce an illicit discharge.



      (2)   A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4
access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior
approval of the authorized enforcement agency.



(Ord. O-2011-23, passed 5-11-2011)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.09  INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.



   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit.  Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the town Department of Public Works prior to the allowing of
discharges to the MS4.



(Ord. O-2011-23, passed 5-11-2011)



§ 97.10  MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Applicability.  This section applies to industrial facilities
that are regulated and are required to have a permit to discharge under the
EPA multi- sector general permit (MSGP) and have stormwater discharges
impacting or suspected of impacting on the town MS4.  It also applies to any
person subject to obtaining a NPDES permit for construction activities.



   (B)   Access to facilities.



      (1)   To the extent permitted by state law and if probable
cause exists, or if authorized by the owner or other party in control of the
property, the town Department of Public Works shall be permitted to enter and
inspect facilities subject to regulation under this chapter for the purpose
of performing their duties under this chapter as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter.  If a discharger has security
measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before
entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements
to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.



      (2)   Under the conditions for access stated in division
(B)(1) above, facility operators shall allow the town Department of Public
Works ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling and examination and copying of records that must be kept
under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the
performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.



      (3)   The town Department of Public Works shall have the right
to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the
opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.



      (4)   The town Department of Public Works has the right to
require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary.  The
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times
in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own
expense.  All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.



      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the town Department
of Public Works and shall not be replaced.  The costs of clearing such
access shall be borne by the operator.



      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the town Department of
Public Works access to a permitted facility is a violation of this chapter. 
The operator of a facility required to have a NPDES permit to discharge
stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the
person denies the town reasonable access to the permitted facility for the
purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter.



      (7)   If the town Department of Public Works has been refused
access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and
he or she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be
a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample
as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify
compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the
overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the
authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any
court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. O-2011-23, passed 5-11-2011)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.11  WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.



   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse
within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other
obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow
of water through the watercourse.  In addition, the owner or lessee shall
maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.



(Ord. O-2011-23, passed 5-11-2011)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.12  NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.



   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system,
or waters of the Commonwealth said person shall take all necessary steps to
ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release.  In the
event of such a release of oil or hazardous materials said person shall
immediately notify the town Fire Department and the Massachusetts Department
of Environmental Protection of the occurrence via emergency dispatch
services.  In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person
shall notify the town Department of Public Works in person or by phone or
facsimile no later than the next business day.  Notifications in person or
by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the
town Department of Public Works within 3 business days of the phone notice. 
If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or
industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall
also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken
to prevent its recurrence.  Such records shall be retained for at least 3
years.



(Ord. O-2011-23, passed 5-11-2011)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.13  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Authority.  The town Department of Public Works or an
authorized agent of the Department shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter and any regulations promulgated hereunder and may issue and prosecute
violation notices and enforcement orders and may pursue all civil and
criminal remedies for such violations.



   (B)   Civil relief.  The Department of Public Works may seek
injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction to restrain a person
from continued violations of the provisions of this chapter or the
regulations promulgated hereunder, or any notices, orders or written
approvals or to compel said person to abate or remediate the violations
hereunder.



   (C)   Orders.



      (1)   The Department of Public Works or an authorized agent of
the Department may issue a written order to enforce the provisions of this
chapter and the regulations promulgated hereunder, which may include:



         (a)   Elimination of illicit connections or discharges
to the MS4;



         (b)   Performance of monitoring, analysis, and reporting;



         (c)   That unlawful discharges, practices, or operations
shall cease and desist;



         (d)   Remediation of contamination in connection
therewith;



         (e)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and
remediation costs; and



         (f)   Implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.



      (2)   If the enforcing person determines that abatement or
remediation of contamination is required, the order shall set forth a
deadline by which such abatement or remediation must be completed.  Said
order shall further advise that, should the violator or property owner fail
to abate or perform remediation within the specified deadline, the town
Department of Public Works may, at its option, undertake such work, and
expenses thereof shall be charged to the violator.



   (D)   Appeals.  The decisions or orders of the Superintendent of
Public Works shall be final.  Further relief shall be to a court of
competent jurisdiction.



   (E)   Remedies not exclusive.  The remedies listed in this section
are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable
federal, state or local law.



(Ord. O-2011-23, passed 5-11-2011)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.14  REGULATIONS.



   The town Department of Public Works may promulgate rules and
regulations to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.  Failure to
promulgate such rules and regulations shall not have the effect of suspending
or invalidating this chapter.



(Ord. O-2011-23, passed 5-11-2011)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Criminal penalty.  Any person who violates any provision of
this chapter, the regulations promulgated hereunder, or an order or written
approval issued hereunder shall be subject to a fine after an order or notice
of violation is given, up to $300 per violation.  Each day or part thereof
that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   Non-criminal disposition.  As an alternative to criminal
prosecution or civil action, the town may elect to utilize the non-criminal
disposition procedure set forth in Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40, § 21D and in §
35.05 of this code.



(Ord. O-2011-23, passed 5-11-2011)



CHAPTER 98: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL



Section



   98.01   General provisions



   98.02   Definitions



   98.03   Authority and administration



   98.04   Permit procedures



   98.05   Performance standards



   98.06   Enforcement



§ 98.01  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The purpose of this chapter is to control stormwater
runoff into the Town of Watertown's Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
(MS4) and local water bodies to minimize stormwater runoff and prevent
pollution. Specifically, the objectives are:



         (a)   To protect, maintain, and enhance the public
safety, environment, health, and general welfare by establishing minimum
requirements and procedures to reduce the adverse impacts of soil erosion and
sedimentation and manage stormwater runoff;



         (b)   To control and prevent soil erosion and
sedimentation resulting from construction site stormwater runoff;



         (c)   To promote infiltration and the recharge of
groundwater in order to minimize flooding;



         (d)   To prevent pollutants from entering the town's MS4
and to minimize discharge of pollutants from the MS4;



         (e)   To ensure that stormwater management techniques,
including best management practices, are incorporated into the land
disturbance, development, and redevelopment planning and design process in
order to control soil erosion and sedimentation and stormwater runoff;



         (f)   To ensure that the adequate long-term operation
and maintenance of best management practices (BMPs) is incorporated into the
land disturbance, development, and redevelopment process and implemented in
the future so that they work as designed; and



         (g)   To comply with state and Federal statutes and
regulations relating to stormwater runoff discharges.



      (2)   This chapter establishes the town's legal authority to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter through permitting,
inspection, maintenance, and enforcement.



   (B)   Applicability. A stormwater management and erosion control
permit shall be required prior to undertaking any alteration or land
disturbance activity that:



      (1)   Will result in land disturbances of 5,000 square feet of
total area or more, or smaller activities that are part of a larger common
development plan that will disturb 5,000 square feet or more;



      (2)   Will cause a net increase in site impervious surface
area by more than 500 square feet;



      (3)   Proposes to create or modify a direct connection to the
MS4; or



      (4)   In the opinion of the Department of Public Works, may
result in an adverse impact on the MS4 or water resources of the Town of
Watertown.



   (C)   Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from the
requirements of this chapter, provided that such work must utilize the best
practical measures to avoid any negative impacts on stormwater quality or
runoff rate or volume:



      (1)   Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice that are
deemed necessary by the Department of Public Works.



      (2)   Normal maintenance and improvement of land for the
primary purpose of agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, or viticulture,
or the use, expansion, or reconstruction of existing structures for the
primary purpose of agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, or viticulture,
to the extent protected under the Zoning Act, Mass. Gen. Law Ch. 40A, § 3.



      (3)   Normal maintenance of landscaping, gardens, or lawn
areas.



      (4)   Reclamation and replacement of lawfully located,
existing pavement at single-family or two-family residences, as well as
reclamation and replacement of lawfully located, existing pavement at any
parking lot containing fewer than ten spaces.



      (5)   Overlaying of existing pavement, with no increase in
impervious area.



      (6)   Construction of a fence or wall that does not alter the
existing terrain or drainage patterns.



      (7)   Emergency activities necessary for the protection of the
health and safety of the public, provided that:



         (a)   The work is to be performed by or has been ordered
by an agency of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or a political subdivision
thereof;



         (b)   Advance notice, oral or written, has been given to
the Department of Public Works prior to commencement of work or within 24
hours after commencement;



         (c)   The Department of Public Works or its duly
authorized designee certifies the work as an emergency activity; and



         (d)   The work is performed only for the time and place
certified by the Department of Public Works for the limited purposes
necessary to abate the emergency.



      (8)   Maintenance, repair or replacement of an existing and
lawfully located structure or facility used in the service of the public to
provide electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph or other telecommunication
services, provided that:



         (a)   There is no alteration in the terrain, ground
cover or drainage patterns; and



         (b)   Written notice has been given to the Department of
Public Works prior to commencement of work.



      (9)   Maintenance, repair or replacement of existing drainage
infrastructure, provided that:



         (a)   There is no alteration of the existing terrain or
drainage patterns;



         (b)   There is no increase in the size or capacity of
the pipe;



         (c)   There is no change in the drainage area
contributing to the pipe; and



         (d)   Best practical measures are utilized to avoid any
negative impacts on stormwater quality or runoff rate or volume.



      (10)   Operation and maintenance of stormwater best management
practices, in accordance with an approved operations and maintenance plan.



      (11)   Normal maintenance of town-owned public land,
right-of-ways, public utilities, and appurtenances, including roadway
reconstruction.



   (D)   Simplified permit.



      (1)   The Department of Public Works shall have the authority
to develop a simplified permit for specific types of projects.



         (a)   The purpose of the simplified permit is to
streamline the permitting process under this chapter by waiving certain
submission requirements, provided a set of predetermined design standards are
met.



         (b)   The predetermined design standards shall be
outlined in the rules and regulations authorized in accordance with §
95.03(C) of this chapter.



         (c)   By meeting the predetermined requirements and
performance standards, the proposed project will be presumed to meet the
requirements and intent of this chapter.



   (E)   Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law in whole or
in part. The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum
requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation,
statute or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive
or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment
shall be considered to take precedence.



(Ord. O-2016-7, passed 2-23-2016)



§ 98.02  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions shall apply to this chapter as written unless
context indicates or requires a different meaning:



   ALTER or ALTERATION. Any activity, which will change the ability of a
ground surface to absorb water or will change existing surface drainage
patterns. Alter may also be referred to as “alteration of drainage
characteristics,” and “conducting land disturbance activities.”



   APPLICANT. Any person, as defined in this chapter, who has filed an
application for a stormwater management and erosion control permit.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP). A structural or nonstructural technique
for managing stormwater to prevent or reduce nonpoint source pollutants from
entering surface waters or ground waters. A structural stormwater best
management practice includes a basin, discharge outlet, swale, rain garden,
filter, or other stormwater treatment practice or measure either alone or in
combination, including without limitation any overflow pipe, conduit, weir
control structure that:



      (1)   Is not naturally occurring;



      (2)   Is not designed as a wetland replication area; and



      (3)   Has been designed, constructed, and installed for the
purpose of conveying, collecting, storing, discharging, recharging, or
treating stormwater. Nonstructural stormwater best management practices
include source control and pollution prevention measures.



   CONVEYANCE. Any structure or device, including pipes, drains, culverts,
curb breaks, paved swales and man-made swales, natural and man-made channels,
and ditches designed or utilized to move or direct stormwater runoff or
existing water flow; any impervious surface/sheet flow utilized to remove
rainfall (for example, a parking lot) which drains directly onto a vegetated
surface or public road without any curbing or drainage system to intercept
the flow.



   EROSION CONTROL. The prevention or reduction of the movement of soil
particles or rock fragments due to stormwater runoff.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE OR AREA. Any material or structure on or above the
ground that prevents water from infiltrating through the underlying soil.
Impervious surface is defined to include, without limitation: paved surfaces
(parking lots, sidewalks, driveways, etc.), rooftops, swimming pools, and
patios, as well as paved, gravel, and compacted dirt surfaced roads.



   INFILTRATION. Percolation of water into the subsurface. Also referred
to as “Recharge.”



   LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY. Any activity that causes a change in the
position or location of soil, sand, rock, gravel, or similar earth material.



   LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID). A site design strategy for managing
stormwater by maintaining or replicating the predevelopment hydrologic
functions through the use of design techniques to create a functionally
equivalent hydrologic landscape.



   MAINTENANCE. Maintenance of a stormwater management system means the
work necessary to keep a stormwater management system functional and in good
repair so that it may continue to operate as originally designed. Maintenance
of a stormwater management system does not include work that:



      (1)   Reduces the capacity of the system to treat stormwater,
provide recharge, or attenuate peak flow;



      (2)   Increases the total or peak rate or volume of the
stormwater managed by the system;



      (3)   Directs additional stormwater discharges to the system;
or



      (4)   Results in reduced use of above ground stormwater best
management practices.



   MASSACHUSETTS STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS. The standards issued by
the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), codified in
regulations at 310 CMR 10.05(6)(k)-(q) and further defined and specified in
the Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook, Volumes 1 through 3, issued by the
DEP. The standards address stormwater impacts through implementation of
performance standards that reduce or prevent pollutants from reaching water
bodies and control the quantity of runoff from a site.



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). The system of conveyances
designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road
with a drainage system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain,
pumping facility, retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or
altered drainage channel, reservoir, and other drainage structures that
together comprise the storm drainage system owned or operated by the Town of
Watertown.



   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN. A plan setting up the functional,
financial, and organizational mechanisms for the ongoing operation and
maintenance of a stormwater management system to ensure that it continues to
function as designed.



   OVERLAY OF PAVEMENT. The placement of pavement on top of an existing
impervious surface. The underlying surface is sometimes milled (partially
ground down in thickness) before the overlay is placed.



   OWNER. A person with a legal or equitable interest in land, structures,
or equipment.



   PERMITTEE. The person who is issued a permit by the Watertown
Department of Public Works pursuant to this chapter.



   PERSON. An individual, partnership, association, firm, company, trust,
corporation, agency, authority, department, or political subdivision of the
Commonwealth or the Federal government, to the extent permitted by law, and
any officer, employee, or agent of such person.



   POLLUTANT. Any substance, either man-made or man-induced, that alters
the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water.



   RECLAMATION OF PAVEMENT. A procedure whereby existing pavement is
broken and pounded into small fragments.



   REDEVELOPMENT. Development, replacement, rehabilitation, expansion,
demolition, or phased projects that disturb the ground surface on previously
developed sites.



   SEDIMENT. Mineral or organic soil material that is transported by wind
or water from its origin to another location; the product of erosion
processes.



   SEDIMENTATION. The process or act of depositing sediment.



   SIMPLIFIED PERMIT. A permit issued for an application that meets a set
of predetermined standards adopted by the Department of Public Works in
accordance with § 98.01(B) of this chapter.



   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL PERMIT. A permit issued by
the Department of Public Works, after review of an application, plans,
calculations, and other supporting documents, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.



   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. A plan submitted as part of an application
for a stormwater management and erosion control permit, as required by §
98.04(A) of this chapter.



   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM. The collective system for conveying,
collecting, storing, discharging, recharging, or treating stormwater on-site,
including stormwater best management practices and any pipes and outlets
intended to transport and discharge stormwater to the groundwater, a surface
water, or a municipal separate storm sewer system. Also referred to as
“drainage.”



   STORMWATER RUNOFF. Flow over the ground surface resulting from
precipitation or snow and ice melt or through a drainage system.



(Ord. O-2016-7, passed 2-23-2016)



§ 98.03  AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Authority. This chapter is adopted under authority granted by
the home rule amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution, and the home rule
statutes and pursuant to the regulations of the Federal Clean Water Act found
at 40 CFR 122.34.



   (B)   Administration. The Watertown Department of Public Works shall
administer, implement, and enforce this chapter. Any powers granted to or
duties imposed upon the Department of Public Works may be delegated to the
Department's employees or agents.



   (C)   Rules and regulations. The Town Manager may adopt, and
periodically amend, rules and regulations relating to the detailed
requirements, procedures, and administration of this chapter, including
application and inspection fees. Failure by the Town Manager to promulgate
such rules and regulations, or a declaration of their invalidity by a court
of law, shall not have the effect of suspending or invalidating the
provisions of this chapter or any permit issued hereunder. Such rules and
regulations (or amendments thereto) shall become effective five days after
being filed with the Town Clerk.



   (D)   Appeals. A decision of the Department of Public Works shall be
final. A request for relief of a decision of the Department of Public Works
shall be reviewable in the Superior Court in an action filed within 60 days
thereof.



(Ord. O-2016-7, passed 2-23-2016)



§ 98.04  PERMIT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Permit required. No land disturbance activity that meets the
criteria specified in § 98.01(B) may commence prior to issuance of a
stormwater management and erosion control permit subject to this chapter.



   (B)   Procedures and requirements. Permit procedures and
requirements including but not limited to application, fee schedules,
actions, right-of-entry, stormwater management plan contents, technical
requirements, inspections, and project closeout-shall be included as part of
the rules and regulations promulgated under § 98.03(C) of this chapter.



(Ord. O-2016-7, passed 2-23-2016)



§ 98.05  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   Criteria for stormwater management and erosion control performance
standards shall be defined and included as part of the rules and regulations
promulgated under § 93.03(C) of this chapter.



(Ord. O-2016-7, passed 2-23-2016)



§ 98.06  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Department of Public Works shall have authority to enforce this
chapter and resulting rules and regulations, and shall issue orders,
violation notices, and enforcement orders, and may pursue all available civil
and criminal remedies for such violations.



   (A)   Notices and orders.



      (1)   The Department of Public Works may issue a written order
to enforce the provisions of the stormwater management and erosion control
ordinance or the rules and regulations, which may include requirements to:



         (a)   Cease and desist from construction or land
disturbance activity until there is compliance with the stormwater management
and erosion control ordinance and the stormwater management and erosion
control permit;



         (b)   Repair, maintain, or replace the stormwater
management system or portions thereof in accordance with the approved
operation and maintenance plan;



         (c)   Perform monitoring, analyses, and reporting; and/or



         (d)   Remediate adverse impacts resulting directly or
indirectly from malfunction of the stormwater management system.



      (2)   If the Department of Public Works determines that
abatement or remediation of adverse impacts is required, the order shall set
forth a deadline by which such abatement or remediation must be completed.



      (3)   If a person violates the provisions of this chapter,
regulations, permit, notice, or order issued thereunder, the Department of
Public Works may seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction
restraining the person from activities which would create further violations
or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.



   (B)   Penalties. Pursuant to § 10.99 of the Town Code, any person
who violates any provision of the stormwater management and erosion control
ordinance, or order or permit issued thereunder, may be ordered to correct
the violation and/or shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300 per
violation, excluding the cost of damages. Each day or part thereof that such
violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate violation.



   (C)   Non-criminal disposition.



      (1)   As an alternative to criminal prosecution, the
Department of Public Works may elect to utilize the non-criminal disposition
procedure set forth in Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40, § 21D, which has been adopted
by the town in § 35.05 of the Town



Code, for which purpose the Director of the Department of Public Works and
the Department's employees shall be enforcing persons. The specific penalties
under this provision shall be:



         (a)   Twenty five dollars for the first offense;



         (b)   Fifty dollars for the second offense; and



         (c)   One hundred dollars for the third and any
subsequent offense.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the enforcing person
shall have the discretion to issue a warning in lieu of the citation for $25
for the first offense.



   (D)   Appeals. The decisions or orders of the Department of Public
Works shall be final. Further relief shall be to a court of competent
jurisdiction.



   (E)   Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this chapter
are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable
Federal, state, or local law.



(Ord. O-2016-7, passed 2-23-2016)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter



         110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



         111.   JUNK AND SECOND-HAND DEALERS



         112.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



         113.   RETAIL FOOD STORES



         114.   SERVICE STATIONS



         115.   SINGLE-USE PLASTIC BAG REDUCTION



         116.   BRING YOUR OWN BOTTLE REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 110: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   110.01   Hackney carriages



   110.02   Peddlers and hawkers



   110.03   Motor vehicles for hire



   110.04   Motor vehicle repair license



   110.05   Outdoor vendors



   110.06   Licensing fees



   110.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Duty of businesses to establish a smoking policy, see § 93.02



§ 110.01  HACKNEY CARRIAGES.



   (A)   The Licensing Board may license hackney carriages or motor
vehicles for the conveyance of persons for hire from place to place within
the town and they may license or issue permits to persons who operate the
licensed carriages or motor vehicles and they may revoke the licenses at
their discretion.  A record of all licenses so granted or revoked shall be
kept by the Licensing Board on file in the office of the Town Clerk.  No
person shall set up, use or drive in the town any hackney carriage or motor
vehicle for the conveyance of passengers for hire from place to place within
the town or operate in the town a  carriage or motor vehicle without first
obtaining from the Licensing Board the license or licenses required under
this section.  All licenses under this section shall expire on April 30 next
after the date thereof and shall not be transferred without the consent of
the Licensing Board endorsed thereon.



   (B)   The license fee for each carriage or motor vehicle shall be
$25 and for each operator the fee shall be $10.  These fees shall be paid to
the Chief of Police for the use of the town.  The license granted under this
section shall become void if the applicant neglects or refuses to take out
and pay for his or her license within 10 days after notice that it has been
granted.



   (C)   The Licensing Board may grant to the owner of a carriage or
motor vehicle licensed under this section a license to use a certain portion
of a public way as a carriage or taxi stand for the solicitation of
passengers for hire.  No person shall use any portion of a public way for
this purpose without a license.  The fee for a licensed carriage or taxi cab
stand shall be $15 and the same shall be paid to the Chief of Police for the
use of the town.  All licenses shall expire on April 30 next after the date
thereof.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 8)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.02  PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS.



   No peddler, hawker, or solicitor, whether licensed or unlicenced, in
carrying on the occupation or going from place to place in the town in the
pursuit of the occupation, shall permit or suffer any motor vehicle or other
vehicle used by him or her in connection therewith, to stand or remain in any
1 place, or within 500 feet thereof, longer than 10 consecutive minutes or
more than 10 minutes out of any 60 consecutive minutes, or in front of any
premises for the purpose, for any time, if the owner, lessee or occupant
objects.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 21)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.03  MOTOR VEHICLES FOR HIRE.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the town in the business of
conducting or maintaining an establishment for letting out motor vehicles for
hire, however computed or determined, without a license granted by the
Licensing Board of the town, hereinafter called the Board.



   (B)   The license shall in either case specify all the premises to
be occupied by the licensee for the purpose of conducting the licensed
business.  The fee for each license shall be the amount as may be
established by the Board, and the Board may reasonably classify the licenses
and fees.  Licenses granted hereunder shall expire on January 1 following
the date of issue or on the date as may be specified therein and may be
suspended or revoked by the Board.



   (C)   Licenses granted hereunder shall not be granted until after a
hearing, notice of which shall be sent by the applicant by certified mail to
all owners of abutting property.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 29)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.04  MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR LICENSE.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the town in the business of
conducting or maintaining an establishment for the repairing of motor
vehicles, including, but not limited to, the installation of motor vehicle
radios, alarms, telephones and other equipment commonly referred to as
"after-market merchandise," without a license granted by the Licensing Board
of the town, hereinafter called the Board, approved in all cases by the head
of the Fire Department.



   (B)   The licenses shall in either case specify the premises to be
occupied by the licensee for the purpose of conducting the licensed business,
the maximum storage of motor vehicles for repair and the days and hours of
operation of the business.



   (C)   The fee for each license shall be the  amount as may be
established by the Board and the Board may reasonably classify the licenses
and fees.



   (D)   Licenses granted shall expire on June 1 following the date of
issue or on the date as may be specified therein and may be suspended or
revoked, after hearing, by the Board.



   (E)   Licenses granted shall not be granted until after a hearing,
notice of which shall be sent by the applicant by certified mail to all
owners of abutting property.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 30)  (Am. Ord. 896, passed 7-10-1990)  Penalty,
see § 110.99



§ 110.05  OUTDOOR VENDORS.



   (A)   Every person, whether principal or agent, who sells from a
fixed location outdoors and is not otherwise required to be licensed under
the definition in Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 101 as a transient vendor or hawker and
peddler, or is not specifically exempted thereby, must first obtain a license
from the Licensing Board for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise
otherwise permitted to be sold under the provisions of Mass. Gen. Laws Ch.
101.



   (B)   The Licensing Board shall conduct a public hearing on each
application and may grant a license upon the terms and conditions which are
in the best interest of the town.



   (C)   The fee for each license shall be the amount as may be
established by the Board.



   (D)   Licenses granted shall expire on the date as may be specified
therein and may be suspended or revoked, after hearing, by the Board.



   (E)   This section may be enforced by non-criminal disposition
pursuant to Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40, § 21D, and § 110.99(B) of this chapter.



(Ord. 33, passed 5-12-1992)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.06  LICENSING FEES.



   The following license fees are in effect in the town:



   (A)   Automatic amusement device: $50.



   (B)   Common victualer: $50.



   (C)   Innholder: $50.



   (D)   Liquor license/druggist: $500.



   (E)   Music box: $50.



   (F)   Fortune teller charging for services: $25.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 31)  (Am. Ord. 5, passed 5-10-1983)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever, not being licensed, engages in the town in a business
required to be licensed by this chapter, or, being licensed, engages in a
business in any other place than that designated in his or her license or
after notice to him or her that his or her license has been suspended or
revoked, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, §§ 29 and 30)



   (B)   Any person who violates § 110.05 shall, in the case of
non-criminal disposition, be subject to the specific penalty of a fine in the
amount of $25 for the first offense, $50 for the second offense, and $100 for
the third and any subsequent offense.  Any person who violates § 110.05
shall, in  the case of application for criminal complaint, be subject to a
fine of up to $300.



(Ord. 33, passed 5-12-1992)



CHAPTER 111: JUNK AND SECOND-HAND DEALERS



Section



   111.01   Licensing



   111.02   Record of purchases



§ 111.01 LICENSING.



   (A)   The Licensing Board may license suitable persons to be dealers
in and keepers of shops for the purchase, sale, or barter of junk, old
metals, or second-hand articles in the town.  They may also license suitable
persons as junk collectors, to collect, by purchase or otherwise, junk, old
metals, and second-hand articles from place to place in the town, and they
may provide that collectors shall display badges upon their persons, or upon
their vehicles, or upon both, when engaged in collecting, transporting, or
dealing in junk, old metals, or second-hand articles, and may prescribe the
design thereof.



   (B)   They may also provide that shops and all articles of
merchandise therein, and any place, vehicle or receptacle used for the
collection or keeping of the articles aforesaid, may be examined at all times
by the Licensing Board or by any person by them authorized so to do.  The
aforesaid licenses may be revoked at pleasure, and shall be subject to the
provisions of law.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 16)



§ 111.02  RECORD OF PURCHASES.



   (A)   Every keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of
junk, old metals or second-hand articles, within the limits of the town,
shall keep a book in which shall be written, at the time of every purchase of
any articles, a description thereof, the name, age and residence of the
person from whom and the day and hour when the purchase was made.  The book
shall at all times be open to the inspection of the Licensing Board and of
any person by them authorized to make the inspection. 



   (B)   Every keeper of a shop shall put in a suitable and conspicuous
place in his or her shop a sign having his or her name and occupation legibly
inscribed thereon in large letters.  The shop and all articles of
merchandise therein may at all times be examined by the Licensing Board or by
an person by them authorized to make the examination.  No keeper of a shop
and no junk collector shall, directly or indirectly, either purchase or
receive by way of barter or exchange any of the articles aforesaid of a minor
or apprentice, knowing or having reason to believe him or her to be such. 
No articles purchased or received by a shop keeper shall be sold until at
least 1 week from the date of purchase or receipt has elapsed.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 112: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Section



General Provisions



   112.01   Pasting handbills and advertisements



   112.02   Distribution from hand to hand



   112.03   Distribution of papers and circulars



Door-to-Door Solicitation



   112.20   Purpose



   112.21   Definitions



   112.22   Registration required



   112.23   Registration process



   112.24   Registration fee



   112.25   Registration cards



   112.26   Exceptions



   112.27   Notice regulating solicitation



   112.28   Duties of solicitors



   112.29   Restrictions on methods of solicitation



   112.30   Enforcement; revocation of registration



   112.31   Appeals



   112.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 112.01  PASTING HANDBILLS AND ADVERTISEMENTS.



   It is unlawful to affix by paste or otherwise, any handbill, placard,
notice or advertisement, or paint, draw or stamp the same, or any marks or
figures to or upon any sign board of the town, or to or upon any building,
fence, pole, wall, tree or structure, without the permission of the owner of
the building, fence, pole, wall, tree or structure.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 6)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.02  DISTRIBUTION FROM HAND TO HAND.



   No person shall, without a permit from the Town Manager or the Chief of
Police, distribute free from hand to hand on any street, square, way or other
public place, any card, paper, placard, flyer, hand bill or any other printed
or written matter, except to advertise articles for sale, to promote trade,
to promote or prevent the nomination or election of candidates for public
office, or to disseminate information concerning matters to be voted upon by
referendum.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 7)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.03  DISTRIBUTION OF PAPERS AND CIRCULARS.



   No person shall distribute papers, circulars or advertisements through
the town or any portion thereof in a manner as to make litter or otherwise
cause public annoyance.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 10)  Penalty, see § 112.99



DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATION



§ 112.20  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter, adopted pursuant to Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 43B, § 13 and
Article 89 of the Amendments to the Constitution of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, establishes registration requirements and specific operation
requirements for all persons or organizations intending to engage in
door-to-door canvassing or solicitation in the town, in order to:



   (A)   Protect the town's citizenry from disruption of the peaceful
enjoyment of their residences and from the perpetration of fraud or other
crimes; and



   (B)   To allow for reasonable access to residents in their homes by
persons or organizations who wish to communicate either commercial or
non-commercial messages.



(Ord. 27, passed 4-26-1994)



§ 112.21  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CANVASSING.  Any 1 or more of the following activities:



      (1)   Person-to-person distribution of literature, periodicals
or other printed materials, but shall not include placing or dropping off
printed materials on the premises;



      (2)   Circulation of petitions;



      (3)   Seeking to enlist membership in any organization;



      (4)   Seeking to present, in person, organizational
information or doctrine.



   REGISTERED SOLICITOR.  Any person who has obtained a valid certificate
of registration from the town as required under this subchapter for the
purpose of engaging in soliciting or canvassing activities.



   RESIDENCE.  Every individual dwelling unit occupied for residential
purposes by 1 or more persons.



   SOLICITING.  Any 1 or more of the following door-to-door activities:



      (1)   Selling or seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of
goods or services for any kind of consideration whatever;



      (2)   Selling or seeking to obtain prospective customers for
application or purchase of insurance of any kind;



      (3)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines,
periodicals, newspapers or any other type of publication;



      (4)   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money,
clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any
charitable or non-profit association, organization, corporation or project;



      (5)   Seeking to obtain information on the background,
occupation, economic status, political or religious affiliation, attitudes,
viewpoints, or the like of the occupants of a residence for the purpose of
selling or using the data, wholly or in part, for commercial purposes.



(Ord. 27, passed 4-26-1994)



§ 112.22  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   Except as may be expressly provided herein, it shall be unlawful for
any person or organization to engage in soliciting or canvassing, as those
activities are defined in § 112.21 of this chapter, within the limits of the
town without first registering with the Police Department in accordance with
this subchapter.  The registration requirement of this subchapter shall be
in addition to any requirements for registration imposed by Mass. Gen. Laws
Ch. 101, § 34.



(Ord. 27, passed 4-26-1994)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.23  REGISTRATION PROCESS.



   Every person or organization intending to engage in soliciting or
canvassing door-to-door in the town must register with the Police Department
at least 3 days in advance by filing a registration application form with the
Chief of Police.



   (A)   Organization application forms shall include the following
information:



      (1)   The name and address of the organization applying for
registration, and the names and addresses of the organization's principal
officers;



      (2)   The name, title and telephone number of the person
filing the application form;



      (3)   The names and addresses of the person(s), if any, who
will be directly supervising the solicitation or canvassing operation in the
town;



      (4)   A list of the names, addresses, dates of birth and
Social Security numbers of all individuals who will be employed in
solicitation or canvassing by the applicant;



      (5)   Period of time for which certificate of registration is
needed (no certificate may be granted for longer than a 90-day period);



      (6)   Names of the last 3 communities (if any) in which the
organization has conducted a solicitation or canvassing operation.



   (B)   Individual registration forms shall be required for all
individuals, including those who are affiliated with an organization
registered under division (A) of this section.  Individual registration
forms shall contain the following information:



      (1)   Name and address of present place of residence and
length of residence at that address; if less than 3 years residence at
present address, the address of residence(s) during the past 3 years;



      (2)   Date of birth;



      (3)   Name, address and telephone number of the person or
organization whom the applicant represents and the length of time the
applicant has been associated with or employed by that person or organization;



      (4)   Name and address of employer during the past 3 years if
other than listed in division (B)(3);



      (5)   Period of time for which certificate of registration is
needed (no certificate may be granted for longer than a 90-day period);



      (6)   Names of the last 3 communities (if any) in which the
applicant has solicited or canvassed door-to-door;



      (7)   Social Security number;



      (8)   Recent passport sized photograph of applicant to be
affixed to registration card;



      (9)   Make, model and registration number of any vehicle to be
used by the applicant while soliciting or canvassing.



(Ord. 27, passed 4-26-1994)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.24  REGISTRATION FEE.



   Each individual applicant for registration or re-registration shall pay
a fee of $10, payable to the town.



(Ord. 27, passed 4-26-1994)



§ 112.25  REGISTRATION CARDS.



   (A)   Within 48 hours of the filing of a registration application
form, the Police Chief shall furnish each person registered to engage in
solicitation or canvassing with the registration card which shall contain the
following information:



      (1)   The name of the person;



      (2)   A recent photograph of the person;



      (3)   The name of the organization (if any) which the person
represents;



      (4)   A  statement that the individual has been registered
with the Police Department but that registration is not an endorsement of any
individual or organization;



      (5)   Specific dates or period of time covered by the
registration.



   (B)   Persons engaged in solicitation or canvassing must carry the
registration card at all times and present the card to any person solicited,
or upon request of any police officer.



   (C)   Registration cards are valid only for the specific dates or
time period specified thereon and in no case for longer than 90 days.



   (D)   The Police Chief shall refuse to register an organization or
individual:



      (1)   Who refuses to provide any of the information required
under § 112.23 of this subchapter;



      (2)   Who has been convicted of a felony;



      (3)   Who has been determined by the Police Chief to be a
fugitive from justice; or



      (4)   Whose registration has been revoked for violation of
this subchapter within the previous 2-year period.



(Ord. 27, passed 4-26-1994)



§ 112.26  EXCEPTIONS.



   The registration provisions of this subchapter  shall not apply to:



   (A)   Officers or employees of the town, county, state or federal
governments when on official business;



   (B)   Candidates for public office, representatives of political
parties recognized by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, or persons
disseminating information or obtaining signatures for matters to be voted
upon by the referendum or initiative process;



   (C)   Individual representatives of non-profit charitable
organizations upon registration by the president or treasurer of the
organization with the Chief of Police, on a form to be furnished by the
Chief; or



   (D)   Minors under the age of 18, except in connection with
commercial activity.



(Ord. 27, passed 4-26-1994)



§ 112.27  NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITATION.



   (A)   Every occupant of a residence desiring to secure additional
protection under this subchapter shall exhibit upon or near the main entrance
door to the residence, a weatherproofed card, approximately 3 inches by 5
inches in size, indicating the determination by the occupant as to whether or
not solicitors or canvassers are invited to the residence by the following
applicable words:



"No Solicitors or Canvassers Invited"



or



"No Solicitors or Canvassers Invited Before the Hour of ___ A.M. or After the
Hour of ___ P.M."



   (B)   For the purpose of uniformity, these cards shall be provided,
at cost, by the Police Department to persons so requesting.



(Ord. 27, passed 4-26-1994)



§ 112.28  DUTIES OF SOLICITORS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor or canvasser, upon
going onto any residential premises in the town, to first examine the notice
provided for in § 112.27, if any is exhibited.  If the notice states "No
Solicitors or Canvassers Invited", then the solicitor or canvasser shall
immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.  If, the notice limits
the hours of solicitation, the solicitor or canvasser shall comply with the
limits noted.



   (B)   Any solicitor or canvasser who has gained entrance to any
residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart
from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant.



   (C)   Immediately upon gaining entrance to any residence, each
solicitor or canvasser must do the following:



      (1)   Present his or her registration card for inspection by
the occupant;



      (2)   Request that the occupant read the registration card; and



      (3)   Inform the occupant in clear language of the nature and
purpose of his or her business and, if he or she is representing an
organization, the name and nature of that organization.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of every organization employing
solicitors or canvassers to notify the Police Department daily as to what
area(s) of the town they will be operating in.



(Ord. 27, passed 4-26-1994)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.29  RESTRICTIONS ON METHODS OF SOLICITATION.



   It shall be unlawful for a solicitor or canvasser to do any of the
following:



   (A)   Falsely represent, directly or by implication, that the
solicitation or canvassing is being done on behalf of a governmental
organization.



   (B)   Solicit or canvass at any residence where there is a posted
sign stating "No Solicitors Invited", without express prior permission of an
occupant.



   (C)   Go upon any residential premises and ring the doorbell or rap
or knock upon the door of the residence or create any sound in any manner
calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the residence for the
purpose of soliciting or canvassing in defiance of a notice exhibited at the
residence in accordance with § 112.27.



(Ord. 27, passed 4-26-1994)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.30  ENFORCEMENT; REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.



   (A)   This subchapter shall be enforced by any police officer of the
town in accordance with the provisions contained in § 10.99 and Chapter 35
of this code of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person or organization who is convicted of any crime or
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, any person who violates any provision
of §§ 112.28 and 112.29 of this chapter or who knowingly provides false
information on the registration application, or any person who is determined
by the Police Chief to be a fugitive from justice, shall have his or her or
its registration revoked by the Chief of Police by written notice delivered
to the holder of the registration in person, or sent to the holder by
certified mail at the address set forth in the application.



(Ord. 27, passed 4-26-1994)



§ 112.31  APPEALS.



   Any person or organization who is denied registration or whose
registration has been revoked may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal
with the Town Manager.  The appeal must be filed within 20 days after
receipt of the notice of denial or revocation.  The Town Manager shall hear
and determine the appeal within 30 days after the filing of the written
notice of appeal.



(Ord. 27, passed 4-26-1994)



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates § 112.01 of this chapter shall pay a sum of
$50 for each offense.  If a handbill, placard, notice, advertisement, mark,
or figure is deemed obscene or indecent, the penalty shall be $100.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 6)



   (B)   Any person or organization violating any of the provisions of
§§ 112.20et seq. of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of $300 for
each offense.



(Ord. 27, passed 4-26-1994)



CHAPTER 113: RETAIL FOOD STORES



Section



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   Hours of operation



   113.03   Exceptions



   113.04   Special permit



   113.99   Penalty



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FOOD.  Any article or commodity, however stored or packaged, intended
for human consumption, and shall include alcoholic beverages to be consumed
off the premises at which they are sold, unless any other law or permit or
license granted to the seller of the beverages shall otherwise provide.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 27(3))



§ 113.02  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   No person shall sell any food at retail between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.



   (B)   No store or place of business engaged in the retail sale of
food shall be open for transaction of retail business between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 27(1-2))  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.03  EXCEPTIONS.



   This chapter shall not apply to the sale of food or alcoholic beverages
when the sale is by a common victualer or innholder licensed under Mass. Gen.
Laws Ch. 140, primarily engaged in the sale of food to be consumed on the
premises where sold.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 27(4))



§ 113.04  SPECIAL PERMIT.



   In cases where in their opinion, the public good requires it, the
Licensing Board may issue a special permit allowing a store to remain open
for the transaction of business to an hour, specified in the permit, later
than 1:00 a.m., or to remain open 24 hours a day.  Special permits shall
remain in effect for a period of 1 year.  Application for special permits
shall be made on forms supplied by the Licensing Board.  The fee for this
license shall be $50.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 27(6))



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   Anyone violating any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine of $50 for each violation.  For purposes of this chapter, every
calendar day on which a store shall remain open past the appointed hour shall
be deemed a separate offense, and each separate sale of food shall be deemed
a separate offense.  In the event of a sale of several items at 1 time to 1
customer, only 1 sale shall be deemed to have taken place.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 27(5))



CHAPTER 114: SERVICE STATIONS



Section



   114.01   Definition



   114.02   Hours of operation



   114.03   Special permit



 



   114.99   Penalty



§ 114.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PETROLEUM PRODUCT.  Any article or commodity, however stored or
packaged, which is intended for use in a motor vehicle.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 28(3))



§ 114.02  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   No person shall sell any petroleum product intended for use in
a motor vehicle at retail between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.



   (B)   No service station engaged in the retail sale of petroleum
products shall be open for transaction of retail business between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 28(1-2))  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.03  SPECIAL PERMIT.



   In cases where, in their opinion, the public good requires it, the
Licensing Board may issue a special permit allowing a service station engaged
in the retail sale of petroleum products to remain open for the transaction
of business to an hour specified in the permit, later than 1:00 a.m., or to
remain open 24 hours a day.  The special permits shall remain in effect for
a period of 1 year.  Application for the special permits shall be made on
forms supplied by the Licensing Board.  The fee for this license shall be
$50.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 28(5))



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   Violations of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of $50 for each
violation.  For purposes of this chapter, every calendar day on which a
service station shall remain open beyond the appointed closing time shall be
deemed a separate offense, and each separate sale of a petroleum product
shall be deemed a separate offense.  In the event of sale of several items
at 1 time to 1 customer, only 1 sale shall be deemed to have taken place.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 28(4))



CHAPTER 115:  SINGLE-USE PLASTIC BAG REDUCTION



Section



   115.01   Intent and purpose



   115.02   Definitions



   115.03   Requirements



   115.04   Exemption



   115.05   Enforcement



§ 115.01  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to reduce the commercial use of
single-use plastic bags in Watertown.



   (B)   The Town Council hereby finds that the reduction in the use of
single-use plastic bags by commercial entities is a public purpose that
protects the land and marine environment, advances solid waste reduction, and
protects waterways. Further, single-use plastic bags clog storm drainage
systems, create a burden to solid waste collection and recycling, and require
the use of millions of barrels of crude oil nationally for their manufacture.
This section seeks to reduce the number of single-use plastic bags that are
being used, discarded and littered, and to promote the use of reusable
checkout bags by retail stores located in Watertown.



   (C)   The Town Council notes that several neighboring communities
and the State of Massachusetts have enacted or are considering enacting
similar measures. Furthermore, at the time of enactment of this section, the
Council is aware that 20 million Americans live in communities where bag bans
are in place, including the entire states of Hawaii and California, along
with several major countries including India, China and Italy.



(Ord. 31, passed 6-7-2016)



§ 115.02  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words shall, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, have the following meanings:



   DEGRADABLE PLASTIC BAGS. Plastic bags that are comprised of a material
that is capable of being rapidly decomposed by bacteria or other living
organisms (biodegradable), light (photodegradable) under marine conditions
(marine-degradable) as defined by ASTM or ISO standards.



   DEPARTMENT. The enforcing town department from time to time as
designated by the Town Manager.



   DIRECTOR. The head of that department.



   RECYCLABLE PAPER BAG. A paper bag that is 100% recyclable and contains
at least 40% post-consumer recycled content, and displays the words
“recvclable” and “made from 40% most-consumer recvcled content” in a
visible manner on the outside of the bag.



   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any commercial enterprise selling goods,
articles, food or personal services to the public, including but not limited
to markets, restaurants, bars, take-out food purveyors, merchandise
retailers, florists and galleries.



   REUSABLE BAG. A bag with handles that is specifically designed and
manufactured for multiple use and is at least four mils in thickness.



   SINGLE-USE PLASTIC BAG. A plastic bag made of plastic, including but
not limited to bags made of high-density polyethylene, low-density
polyethylene, “biodegradable,” “compostable” or
“oxo-biodegradable” materials, that are intended for the purpose of
transporting food or merchandise out of a retail establishment. For the
purposes of this section, SINGLE-USE PLASTIC BAGS shall not include:



      (1)   Bags, whether plastic or not, in which loose or bulk
candy, produce or products are placed by a consumer to deliver such items to
the point of sale or check-out area of a retail establishment;



      (2)   Bags used to segregate food or merchandise that could
damage or contaminate other food or merchandise when placed together in a
point-of-sale bag;



      (3)   Laundry or dry-cleaner bags;



      (4)   Bags holding prescription medication dispensed from a
pharmacy;



      (5)   Newspaper bags; or



      (6)   Plastic bags four mil or more thick.



(Ord. 31, passed 6-7-2016)



§ 115.03  REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Beginning July 1, 2017, no single-use plastic bag shall be
distributed, either with or without charge, to a customer at any retail
establishment located in the town, except for degradable plastic bags as
noted in division (B) below.



   (B)   Retail establishments may provide or sell to customers
recyclable paper bags, degradable plastic bags, or reusable bags. Public
information advising customers to wash reusable bags to prevent food-borne
illness must be prominently displayed or communicated at the point of
provision or sale.



   (C)   Public information advising customers on the proper care and
maintenance of reusable bags shall be available through the Public Health
Department.



   (D)   The Department shall have the authority to promulgate
regulations to accomplish any of the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 31, passed 6-7-2016)



§ 115.04  EXEMPTION.



   (A)   The Director may exempt a retail establishment from the
requirements of this section for a period of up to six additional months,
upon a finding by the Director that the requirements of this section would
cause undue hardship to the retail establishment. An “undue hardship”
shall only be found in circumstances where the retail establishment requires
additional time in order to draw down an existing inventory of single-use
plastic bags or paper bags which do not meet the definition of recyclable
paper bags. Any retail establishment receiving an exemption shall file with
the Director monthly reports on inventory reduction and remaining stocks.



   (B)   Any retail establishment may apply for an exemption to the
Director using forms provided by the Department, and shall allow the
Director, or his or her designee, access to all information supporting its
application.



   (C)   The Director may approve the exemption request, in whole or in
part, with or without conditions.



(Ord. 31, passed 6-7-2016)



§ 115.05  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Town employees from time to time as designated by the Town
Manager are empowered and authorized to enforce this section.



   (B)   This section may be enforced through any lawful means in law
or in equity, including, but not limited to, non-criminal disposition
pursuant to Mass. Gen. Law Ch. 40, § 21D the town's ordinances. If
non-criminal disposition is elected, then any retail establishment which
violates any provision of this section shall be subject to the following
penalties:



      (1)   First offense: $100 fine.



      (2)   Second offense:  $200 fine.



      (3)   Third and subsequent offenses: $300 fine each.



   (C)   Each day or portion thereof shall constitute a separate
offense. If more than one, each condition violated shall constitute a
separate offense.



(Ord. 31, passed 6-7-2016)



CHAPTER 116:  BRING YOUR OWN BOTTLE REGULATIONS



Section



   116.01   Intent and purpose



   116.02   Definitions



   116.03   General rules



   116.04   Requirements



   116.05   Enforcement



§ 116.01  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to allow restaurants in Watertown that
do not have an alcohol license to apply for a “Bring Your Own Bottle”
permit, and thereby allow patrons and customers to consume their own
alcoholic beverages at the restaurant's premises.



(Ord. O-2015-57, passed 9-22-2015)



§ 116.02  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words shall, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, have the following meanings:



   ESTABLISHMENT. Any full service commercial enterprise licensed to sell
food to the public.



   FULL SERVICE. A commercial enterprise whose operations include a full
wait staff, sit down and eat-in dining services for the vast majority of
patrons, and any other criteria the License Board deems necessary or
appropriate to be in compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. O-2015-57, passed 9-22-2015)



§ 116.03  GENERAL RULES.



   (A)   No common victualler shall permit alcoholic beverages to be
consumed in an establishment which is owned, operated, leased, maintained, or
otherwise controlled by the common victualler except pursuant to a valid
license issued under the provisions of Mass. Gen. Law Ch. 138 or pursuant to
this chapter.



   (B)   “Bring Your Own Bottle” permits may be issued to an
establishment that has held a common victualler license in good standing for
at least six months prior to application for the permit.



   (C)   No “Bring Your Own Bottle” permit shall be issued to any
establishment with an alcohol license issued under the provisions of Mass.
Gen. Law Ch. 138.



   (D)   No “Bring Your Own Bottle” permit shall be issued to any
establishment that, under the provisions of Mass. Gen. Law Ch. 138, has had
an alcohol license suspended or revoked, or to any person, firm, corporation,
association, or other combination of persons affiliated, directly or
indirectly, with such license through any agent, employee, stockholder,
officer, or other person, or any subsidiary whatsoever.



   (E)   No “Bring Your Own Bottle" permit shall be issued to a fast
food restaurant, defined herein as a restaurant with seating but without full
service.



   (F)   An establishment holding a “Bring Your Own Bottle” permit
must comply with all conditions of the permit and applicable laws with
respect to hours and days during which alcoholic beverages may be sold for
on-premises consumption.



   (G)   The “Bring Your Own Bottle” permit is not transferrable.



   (H)   The “Bring Your Own Bottle" permit must be renewed annually.



   (I)   The cost of the permit will be $1,000, payable as a condition
of issuance and for each renewal.



(Ord. O-2015-57, passed 9-22-2015)



§ 116.04  REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The issuance of a “Bring Your Own Bottle” (BYOB) permit is
subject to and at the sole discretion of the Watertown Licensing Board, which
shall be the issuing authority, and which may adopt such regulations as it
deems reasonable or necessary for administration of this chapter.



   (B)   A condition of the issuance of the permit is compliance with
this chapter, and the Licensing Board may impose such other conditions on a
permit as it deems necessary or appropriate.



   (C)   The alcoholic beverages may only be consumed inside the
premises of the establishment and may not be consumed in any outdoor space.
Alcoholic beverages as permitted by BYOB shall only be consumed by a patron
of the establishment that has been served a food item from the menu. i.e.
appetizers, sides and or entrees as they appear on the menu.



   (D)   Only beer and wine may be consumed pursuant to a BYOB permit.



   (E)   No person under the age of 21 may consume alcoholic beverages
pursuant to a BYOB permit, sale or delivery of alcohol to such a person being
in violation of Mass. Gen. Law Ch. 138, § 34. It is the responsibility of
the establishment to ensure that patrons who consume alcohol are at least 21
years of age. The establishment shall verify age under ABCC guidelines which
allows for six valid forms of identification to be accepted for the purchase
and consumption of alcohol, i.e. a valid MA License, Valid MA Liquor ID,
Valid MA ID, US Passport OR Passport from a country formally recognized by
the US, Passport ID Card, or Valid Military ID.



   (F)   It is the responsibility of the establishment to not permit
alcoholic beverages to be consumed by an intoxicated person.



   (G)   The employees of the establishment who will have
responsibility for the use and exercise of the BYOB permit must obtain
alcohol service training from a third-party training provider, and submit
certification of such training to the Licensing Board.



   (H)   "Corkage" fees or other similar charges are made at the
discretion of the establishment.



   (I)   All alcohol shall be consumed from glasses provided by the
establishment. No alcohol shall be consumed out of original containers. It is
the responsibility of the establishment staff to physically pour all
alcoholic beverages and to dispose of ail empty bottles at their own expense.



   (J)   A patron who wishes to remove a partially consumed bottle of
wine from the establishment must have the establishment securely reseal the
bottle or risk violation of the Massachusetts open container laws. No
partially consumed beer bottles may be removed from the establishment. The
establishment must also post the Massachusetts open container laws in a
visible location on premise.



   (K)   All alcoholic beverages must be removed by the same person who
brought them in.



   (L)   The establishment must provide evidence of alcohol liability
insurance as a condition of issuance of the BYOB permit.



   (M)   An establishment holding a “Bring Your Own Bottle” permit
shall post a sign at the entry area indicating that it is a “Bring Your Own
Bottle” establishment and is subject to all applicable town and state laws
and regulations.



(Ord. O-2015-57, passed 9-22-2015)



§ 116.05  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   This section may be enforced through any lawful means in law
or in equity, including, but not limited to, non-criminal disposition under
Mass. Gen. Law Ch. 40, § 21D pursuant to the town's ordinances. If
non-criminal disposition is elected, then any establishment which violates
any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the following penalties:



      (1)   First offense: $100.



      (2)   Second offense: $200.



      (3)   Third and subsequent offenses: $300 each.



   (B)   Additionally, any offense may result in a temporary or
complete revocation of the “Bring Your Own Bottle” permit, based on the
sole discretion of the Watertown Licensing Board.



   (C)   Each day or portion thereof that a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. If more than one condition of a permit is
violated, each violation shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. O-2015-57, passed 9-22-2015)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter



         130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



   130.01   Disorderly behavior



   130.02   Loitering



   130.03   Throwing objects



   130.04   Discharge of guns, fireworks, and the like



   130.05   Defacing public playgrounds



   130.06   Peeping tom



   130.07   Public intoxication



   130.08   Trespass; delivery personnel to use walkways



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  DISORDERLY BEHAVIOR.



   No person shall behave in an indecent or disorderly manner, or use
profane, indecent, or insulting language in or upon any sidewalk, public way,
or other public place, to the annoyance or disturbance of any other person
there being or passing in a peaceable manner.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 2)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  LOITERING.



   No person shall be or remain on any doorstep, portico, or other
projection from any house or building or upon any wall or fence on or near
any public way or public place, after being requested by the occupant of the
premises or by any police officer to move.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 4)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  THROWING OBJECTS.



   No person shall throw stones, snowballs, sticks, or other missiles, or
kick a football or play at any game in which a ball is used, or fly any kites
or balloons in any public way.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 5)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  DISCHARGE OF GUNS, FIREWORKS, AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall fire, discharge, explode or set off any gun, firearm,
torpedo, firecracker or fireworks in a manner as to disturb the peace or
quiet of any neighborhood.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 11)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  DEFACING PUBLIC PLAYGROUNDS.



   No person shall willfully deface or injure any public playground,
planting space, flower bed, tree, shrub, or grass border.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 12)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.06  PEEPING TOM.



   No person shall enter upon the premises of another with the intention
of peeping into the windows of a house or spying upon any person or persons
therein; provided, however, that officers of the law may enter the premises
in the performance of their duties.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 20)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.07  PUBLIC INTOXICATION.



   (A)   No person shall drink any alcoholic beverages as defined in
Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 138, § 1, while on, in or upon any public way or upon
any way to which members of the public have a right of access, or any place
to which members of the public have access as invitees or licensees, park or
playground or private land or place without consent of the owner or person in
control thereof.



   (B)   All alcoholic beverages being used in violation of this
section shall be seized and safely held until final adjudication of the
charge against the person or persons arrested or summoned before the court,
at which time they shall be returned to the person entitled to lawful
possession.



   (C)   This section shall be enforced on behalf of the town by the
Police Department which shall have the right to arrest any and all persons in
violation of this section.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 26)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.08  TRESPASS; DELIVERY PERSONNEL TO USE WALKWAYS.



   (A)   No person without lawful authority or without the express or
implied consent of the owner or his or her agent:



      (1)   Shall enter any building or enter on any enclosed or
improved real estate, lot or parcel of land in the town;



      (2)   Being upon the land of another, shall fail, or refuse to
leave the same when requested to do so by the person lawfully in possession
thereof, his or her agent or representative; or



      (3)   Shall deposit on the premises of another, or remove
therefrom any material, substance, earth, dirt, ashes, refuse, turf or other
article or thing whatsoever.



   (B)   All delivery personnel, including letter carriers, whether
employed by a private firm or governmental agency or government-supported
corporation, shall use sidewalks and accepted and approved walkways and shall
refrain from traversing lawns or other private property not normally used as
a walkway by the general public in order to effect delivery.



(Ord. 32, passed 6-13-2000)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating § 130.07 of this chapter shall be fined
not less than $100 nor more than $200.



(1982 Code, Ch. VIII, § 26)



   (B)   All other violations of this chapter shall be punished
according to § 10.99 of this code.



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



      Chapter



         150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



         151.   PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT



         152.   HISTORIC DISTRICTS



         153.   DEMOLITION OF HISTORIC BUILDINGS



         154.   WETLANDS



         155.   ZONING CODE



         156.   HISTORIC LANDMARKS



CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



   150.01   Building permits required



   150.02   Stretch Energy Code



 



   150.99   Penalty



§ 150.01  BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED.



   When a building permit is required by the State Building Code, it shall
be unlawful to construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, remove or demolish a
structure, or to change the use or occupancy of a building or structure, or
to install or alter any equipment for which provision is made or the
installation of which is regulated by the State Building Code, without first
filing a written application with the Building Inspector and obtaining the
required permit therefor.



(Ord. 30, passed 3-26-1991)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.02  STRETCH ENERGY CODE.



   (A)   When a building permit is required by the State Building Code,
it shall also be subject to the provisions of the Massachusetts Building Code
780 CMR Appendix 120 AA, entitled "Stretch Energy Code," including amendments
or modifications thereto, for the purpose of regulating the design and
construction of buildings for the effective use of energy.



   (B)   This section shall take effect on January l, 2011, and shall
operate concurrently with the current building code requirements until July
1, 2011.



(Ord. O-2010-78, passed 11-9-2010)



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   Anyone who violates § 150.01 of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine of $300.



(Ord. 30, passed 3-26-1991)



CHAPTER 151: PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT



Section



Department of Community Development and Planning



   151.01   Purpose



   151.02   Powers and duties



   151.03   Transfer of planning; facilities inspection functions



   151.04   Composition



DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND PLANNING



§ 151.01  PURPOSE.



   The Department of Community Development and Planning (hereinafter
called the Department) is hereby created with the general intent and purpose
of providing a coordinating/centralizing function for matters relating to the
planning and development of the community environs, physical plant and
socio-economic features.  This is to be accomplished through the application
of technical skills, the exercise of regulatory controls, the implementation
of program initiatives and the providing of coordinating services to the
various municipal agencies, boards, and authorities which impact upon the
community's growth and development.



(1982 Code, Ch. XIII, § 1)



§ 151.02  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Department of Community Development and Planning shall
have all the powers and duties imposed and conferred by the Massachusetts
General Laws, town ordinances and any special legislative act, upon city
planners, community development block grant administrators, program
coordinators, municipal code enforcement inspectors, building inspectors,
plumbing inspectors, wire/electrical inspectors, gas inspectors, housing code
inspectors and sealers of weights and measures. It shall be responsible for:



      (1)   Federal and state fund coordination;



      (2)   Community development block grant administration;



      (3)   Capital improvement planning;



      (4)   Land use planning;



      (5)   Zoning code research and enforcement;



      (6)   Environmental and long range physical planning and
financing;



      (7)   Transportation systems planning; and



      (8)   Municipal code enforcement pertinent to building,
plumbing, wire, gas, weight/measure and housing code inspection.



   (B)   It shall function to provide direct advisory technical
services and coordinating services to the Planning Board, Zoning Board of
Appeals, Conservation Commission, and Industrial Development Finance
Agency.  In all cases, except where specifically noted herein or contained
in subsequent amendment hereto by ordinance and/or special act, the Planning
Board, Zoning Board of Appeals and Conservation Commission shall retain all
enabling powers and duties as presently conferred.



   (C)   In so much as these or other bodies may be assisted through
the reorganization of agency support personnel and/or activities budget,
within the Department of Community Development and Planning, the Town Manager
shall undertake the administrative actions as noted herein or as subsequently
determined and approved by Town Council.  Advisory, technical, and
coordinating services shall also be provided by this Department, as required
to the Town Council, Town Manager, and any and all other town department,
board or commission.



(1982 Code, Ch. XIII, § 2)



§ 151.03  TRANSFER OF  PLANNING; FACILITIES INSPECTION  FUNCTIONS.



   The positions and functions as conferred by existing ordinance or
agreement of the town planner(s), Building Inspector(s), Plumbing
Inspector(s), Wire Inspector(s), sealer of weights and measure and all
ancillary/support positions(s) to the above personnel categories shall be and
are hereby transferred to and made employees of the Department.  All
existing ordinances in whole or in part, which serve to define and/or limit
those functions noted above as transferred to the Department shall be assumed
incorporated within this subchapter.



(1982 Code, Ch. XIII, § 3)



§ 151.04  COMPOSITION.



   (A)   General.



      (1)   The Department shall be constituted as a municipal
department of the general town government under the supervision and control
of the Town Manager.  For the purpose of Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 68A, the
Department shall be considered a municipal agency, without limiting the power
of the Town Manager, to classify additional special municipal employees
pursuant to this chapter, and any person who performs professional or
personal services for the department on a part-time, intermittent, or
consultant basis, such as those of architect, attorney, engineer, planner, or
real estate or traffic expert, shall be considered a special municipal
employee.



      (2)   The Town Manager, in consultation with the director,
shall appoint officers, employees and special employees as may be determined
necessary to carry out the work of the office, each of whom may have
functions, rights and powers as may be delegated to them by the director. 
Specific administrative support inclusive of personnel and activities budget
will, to the extent determined by the Town Manager, be vested within the
Department's jurisdiction for the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals,
Conservation Commission, and Industrial Development Finance Agency.



      (3)   The town may annually appropriate money sufficient to
fund expenses incurred by the Department in exercising powers and performing
duties under this subchapter.



   (B)   Department head.



      (1)   An officer to be known as the director of the Department
who shall be executive and administrative head of the Department, who shall
serve at the pleasure of the Town Manager.  Qualifications for appointment
as director shall be at minimum, a  bachelor's degree and 5 years of
increasing responsibility in areas of community development administration,
capital improvement and programming, land use, zoning, environmental
analysis, public administration, and facilities planning/construction.  At
least 4 years of experience shall be related to the operation of municipal
government or equivalent qualifications.



      (2)   Subject to the powers exclusively, vested in the Town
Council, Town Manager and/or any other town department, board or commission
by the Town Charter and the statutes of the Commonwealth, the director shall
have cognizance and exercise supervision of:



         (a)   Federal funds coordination;



         (b)   Community development block grant administration;



         (c)   Capital improvement planning;



         (d)   Land use;



         (e)   Zoning;



         (f)   Environmental and long range planning;



         (g)   Rehabilitation, residential, industrial, and
commercial development planning and financing;



         (h)   Transportation planning;



         (i)   Municipal code enforcement pertinent to building,
plumbing, wire, gas and weights and measures, and housing code inspection.



      (3)   The director shall be charged with internal organization
of staff, exercising supervision over staff wherein the director shall
delegate to members of the Department, from time to time, his or her powers
and duties as he or she may consider expedient and proper so as to accomplish
the greatest efficiency of the Department.



(1982 Code, Ch. XIII, §§ 4-5)



CHAPTER 152: HISTORIC DISTRICTS



Section



General Provisions



   152.01   Title



   152.02   Purpose



   152.03   Definitions



   152.04   Historic District established



   152.05   Certification to construct or alter



Application Process



   152.15   Application hearings



   152.16   Evaluation of applications



   152.17   Appeals



Historic District Commission



   152.30   Established



   152.31   Meetings



   152.32   Limitations on authority



 



   152.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Demolition of historic buildings, see Ch. 154



   Historic landmarks, see Ch. 156



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the Watertown Historic District
Ordinance and is adopted pursuant to Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40C, as amended.



(Ord. 16, passed 4-23-2002)



§ 152.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to:



   (A)   Safeguard the educational, cultural, economic and general
welfare of the public through the preservation and protection of distinctive
characteristics of buildings of historic or architectural significance and to
encourage growth, development or improvements to be compatible therewith; and



   (B)   Affect and accomplish the protection, enhancement and
perpetuation of the improvements and features and of districts which
represent or reflect elements of the town's unique cultural, social,
economic, political and architectural history.



(Ord. 16, passed 4-23-2002)



§ 152.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALTERED.  Includes the words "rebuilt", "reconstructed", "restored",
"removed" and "demolished", and the phrase "changed in exterior color".



   BUILDING.  A combination of materials forming a shelter for persons,
animals or property.



   COMMISSION.  The Commission acting as the Historic District Commission
(HDC).



   CONSTRUCTED.  Includes the words "built", "erected", "installed",
"enlarged", and "moved".



   EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE.  The portion of the exterior of a
building or structure as is open to view from a public street, public way,
public park or public body of water, including but not limited to the
architectural style and general arrangement and setting thereof, the kind,
color and texture of exterior building materials, the color of paint or other
materials applied to exterior surfaces and the type and style of windows,
doors, lights, signs and other appurtenant exterior fixtures.



   PERSON AGGRIEVED.  The applicant, an owner of adjoining property, an
owner of property within the same historic district as property within 100
feet of the property lines and any charitable corporation in which one of its
purposes is the preservation of historic structures or districts.



   STRUCTURE.  A combination of materials other than a building,
including a sign, fence, wall, terrace, walk or driveway.



(Ord. 16, passed 4-23-2002)



§ 152.04  HISTORIC DISTRICT ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There is hereby established under the provision of Mass. Gen.
Laws Ch. 40C, a historic district to be known as the Mount Auburn Street
Historic District, which is described on a plan known as "Proposed Mount
Auburn Street Area, Watertown Historic District", dated March 1, 2000, filed
with the Town Clerk and the South Middlesex Registry of Deeds.



   (B)   Ordinances protecting the safety of the public or the users of
a building shall be fully in force and applicable.  Where the safety
ordinances conflict with the historic ordinances, the safety ordinances shall
prevail.



(Ord. 16, passed 4-23-2002)



§ 152.05  CERTIFICATION TO CONSTRUCT OR ALTER.



   (A)   No building or structure within the historic district shall be
constructed or altered in any way that affects exterior architectural
features unless the HDC shall first have issued a certificate of
appropriateness, a certificate of non-applicability or a certificate of
hardship with respect to the construction or alteration.



   (B)   Any person who desires to obtain a certificate from the HDC
shall file with the Commission an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, a certificate of non-applicability or a certificate of
hardship, in the form as the HDC may reasonably determine, together with the
plans, elevations, specifications, material and other information as may
reasonably deemed necessary by the HDC to enable it to make an informed
determination on the application.



   (C)   No building permit for construction of a building or
alteration of an exterior architectural feature within the historic district
shall be issued by the town or any department thereof until the certificate
required by this section has been issued by the HDC.



(Ord. 16, passed 4-23-2002)  Penalty, see § 152.99



APPLICATION PROCESS



§ 152.15  APPLICATION HEARINGS.



   (A)   The Commission shall determine promptly, and in all events
within 14 days after the filing of an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, a certificate of non-applicability or a certificate of
hardship, as the case may be, whether the application involves any exterior
architectural features which are subject to approval by the Commission.  If
the Commission determines that the application involves any features which
are subject to approval by the Commission, the Commission shall hold a public
hearing on the application unless the hearing is dispensed with as
hereinafter provided.



   (B)   The Commission shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing on
any application and shall give public notice of the time, place and purposes
thereof at least 14 days before the hearing in the manner as it may
determine, and by mailing, postage prepaid, a copy of the notice to the
applicant, to the owners of all adjoining property and other property deemed
by the Commission to be materially affected thereby as they appear on the
most recent real estate tax list of the Board of Assessors, to the Planning
Board of the town, to any person filing written request for notice of
hearings, the request to be renewed yearly in December, and to any other
persons as the Commission shall deem entitled to notice.



   (C)   As soon as convenient after the public hearing but in any
event within 60 days after the filing of the application, or within further
time as the applicant may allow in writing, the Commission shall make a
determination on the application.  If the Commission shall fail to make a
determination within the period of time, the Commission shall thereupon issue
a certificate of hardship.



   (D)   A public hearing on an application need not be held if the
hearing is waived in writing by all persons entitled to notice thereof.  In
addition, a public hearing on an application may be waived by the Commission
if the Commission determines that the exterior architectural feature involved
or its category or color, as the case may be, is so insubstantial in its
effect on the historic district that it may be reviewed by the Commission
without public hearing on the application; provided, however, that if the
Commission dispenses with a public hearing on an application, notice of the
application shall be given to the owners of all adjoining property and other
property deemed by the Commission to be materially affected thereby as above
provided and 10 days shall elapse after the mailing of the notice before the
Commission may act upon the application.



(Ord. 16, passed 4-23-2002)



§ 152.16  EVALUATION OF APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   When evaluating an application for a certificate, the HDC
shall determine whether:



      (1)   The proposed work would change, destroy or affect any
exterior architectural feature; or



      (2)   In the case of construction of a new improvement,
whether the construction would affect or not be in harmony with the historic
district.



   (B)   In appraising the effects and relationship, the HDC shall
consider, in addition to any other pertinent matters, the factors of
aesthetic, historic, and architectural values and significance, design,
arrangement, texture, material and color.



   (C)   In the case of a disapproval of an application for a
certificate, the HDC shall place upon its records the reasons for the
determination and shall cause a notice of its determination, accompanied by a
copy of the reasons therefor to be issued to the applicant.  The HDC may
make recommendations of changes which, if made, would make the application
acceptable to the HDC.



(Ord. 16, passed 4-23-2002)



§ 152.17  APPEALS.



   (A)   Persons aggrieved by a decision of the HDC, may, within 20
days after the filing of the notice of the determination with the Town Clerk,
file a written request with the Commission for a review by a person or
persons of competence and experience in these matters, designated by the
Metropolitan Area Planning Council or its successor agency.  If the town is
not a member of a regional planning agency, the Department of Planning and
Community Development shall select the appropriate regional planning agency.



   (B)   The finding of the person or persons making the review shall
be filed with the Town Clerk within 45 days after the request, and shall be
binding on the applicant and the Commission, unless a further appeal is
sought in the Superior Court as provided in Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40C, § 12A.



(Ord. 16, passed 4-23-2002)



HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION



§ 152.30  ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Watertown Historic District
Commission (HDC), consisting of 7 members and vested with all the authority
and responsibility under Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40C.  The HDC shall be
appointed by the Town Manager, approved by the Town Council and shall include
1 member from 2 nominees submitted by the local Historical Society or, in the
absence thereof, by the Society for the Preservation of New England
Antiquities, 1 member from 2 nominees submitted by the chapter of the
American Institute of Architects covering the area and 1 member from 2
nominees of the Board of Realtors, if any, covering the area, and 1 or more
members sought through public solicitation of residents and/or owners of
property in an historic district to be administered by the Commission.



   (B)   If within 30 days after submission of a written request for
nominees to any of the organizations herein named no nominations have been
made, the appointing body may proceed to appoint the HDC without nominations
by the organization.



   (C)   The initial appointments as Commissioners shall be 2 members
for a term of 1 year, 2 members for a term of 2 years, and 3 members for a
term of 3 years.  Successive appointments shall be for 3 years.  Vacancies
shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the
unexpired term.  Each member shall continue in office after the expiration
of his or her term until his or her successor is duly appointed and
qualified.  All members shall serve without compensation.  The commission
shall elect annually a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson from its own number
and a Secretary from within its number.



(Ord. 16, passed 4-23-2002)



§ 152.31  MEETINGS.



   Meetings of the Commission shall be held at the call of the Chairperson
or shall be called at the request of 2 members of the Commission or in any
other manner as the Commission shall determine in its rules.  All regularly
scheduled meetings shall be held on weekday evenings.  A majority of the
members of a Commission shall constitute a quorum.  The concurring vote of a
majority of the members of the Commission shall be necessary to issue a
certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of non-applicability or a
certificate of hardship.



(Ord. 16, passed 4-23-2002)



§ 152.32  LIMITATIONS ON AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Notwithstanding any provision contained in this chapter to the
contrary, the authority of the HDC shall not extend to the review of the
following categories, structures or architectural features:



      (1)   Terraces, walks, sidewalks, driveways, street lighting
and traffic lighting provided that any structure is substantially at grade
level;



      (2)   Storm doors and windows, screens, and window air
conditioners;



      (3)   The color of paint;



      (4)   The color of materials used on roofs;



      (5)   The reconstruction, substantially similar in exterior
design, of a building, structure or exterior architectural feature damaged or
destroyed by fire, storm or other disaster, provided the reconstruction is
begun within 1 year thereafter and carried forward with due diligence;



      (6)   The ordinary maintenance, repair or replacement of any
exterior architectural feature which does not involve a change in design,
material, or the outward appearance thereof or landscaping with plants, trees
or shrubs.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent meeting
the requirements certified by a duly authorized public officer to be
necessary for the public safety, nor construed to prevent any construction or
alteration under a permit issued prior to the effective date of this chapter.



(Ord. 16, passed 4-23-2002)



§ 152.99 PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §§
152.01 through 152.17 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $10 or
more than $100 for each day during which violation occurs or continues.  Any
person charged with a violation may petition the HDC to withdraw or lessen
the fine based on whether the violation is a substantial violation of this
chapter.  Starting work without a permit is a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 16, passed 4-23-2002)



CHAPTER 153:  DEMOLITION OF HISTORIC BUILDINGS



Section



   153.01   Purpose



   153.02   Definitions



   153.03   Permit application



   153.04   Enforcement



   153.05   Emergency demolition



 



   153.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Historic districts, see Ch. 152



   Historic landmarks, see Ch. 156



§ 153.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is enacted for the purpose of preserving and protecting
significant buildings within the town which are outside designated local
Historic Districts and to encourage owners of the buildings to seek out
persons who might be willing to purchase, preserve, rehabilitate or restore
the buildings rather than demolish them.  To achieve these purposes, the
Watertown Historical Commission (the "Commission") is empowered to advise the
Inspector of Buildings with respect to the issuance of permits for demolition
of significant buildings.  The issuance of demolition permits for
significant buildings is regulated as provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 97, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 153.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING.  Any combination of materials forming a shelter for persons,
animals or property.



   COMMISSION.  The Watertown Historical Commission.



   DEMOLITION.  Any act of pulling down, destroying, removing or razing a
building, or commencing the work of total or substantial destruction with the
intent of completing the same.



   SIGNIFICANT BUILDING. 



      (1)   Any building or portion thereof not within an Historic
District but which:



         (a)   Is listed on, or is within an area listed on, the
National Register of Historic Places, or is the subject of a pending
application for listing on the National Register;



         (b)   Is included in an inventory prepared by the
Commission, including those buildings listed for which complete surveys may
be pending; or



         (c)   Has been determined by vote of the Commission to
be historically or architecturally significant in terms of period, style,
method of building construction, or association with a famous architect or
builder, or is importantly associated with 1 or more historic persons or
events, or is within the broad architectural, cultural, political, economic,
or social history of the town or the commonwealth; or



         (d)   Which is 50 years old or older, and found to be
historically significant; or



         (e)   Is located within 150 feet of a federal, state or
local historic district or, is listed within the state, national, or local
historical register.



      (2)   Except that, notwithstanding the foregoing, that portion
of the Watertown Middle School formerly known as the Marshall-Spring School
shall not be considered a significant building subject to this chapter.



(Ord. 97, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 153.03  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   (1)   For any application for a demolition permit of a
significant building, the Inspector of Buildings shall forward a copy thereof
to the Commission within 5 business days of receipt.  No demolition permit
shall be issued at that time.



      (2)   Every application for a demolition permit for a building
shall contain the following information:



         (a)   The applicant's name, address and interest in the
property;



         (b)   The owner's name and address if different than the
applicants;



         (c)   The address or location of the building to be
demolished;



         (d)   A brief description of the type of building and
the condition requiring issuance of a permit; and



         (e)   A brief description of the proposed reuse,
reconstruction or replacement of the premises upon which the building is
located.



   (B)   The Commission shall within 45 days of receipt hold a hearing
on any demolition permit application forwarded to it and shall give public
notice thereof by publishing notice of the time, place, and purpose of the
hearing in a local newspaper at least 14 days before the hearing and also,
within 7 days of the hearing, mail a copy of the notice to the applicant, to
the owners of all property deemed by the Commission to be affected thereby as
they appear on the most recent local tax list, and to the other persons as
the Commission shall deem entitled to notice.



   (C)   If, after the hearing, the Commission determines that the
demolition of the significant building would not be detrimental to the
historical or architectural heritage or resources of the town, the Commission
shall so notify the Inspector of Buildings within 10 business days of the
hearing.  Upon receipt of the notification, or after the expiration of 35
days from the date of the hearing if he or she has not received notification
from the Commission, the Inspector of Buildings may, subject to the
requirements of the State Building Code and any other applicable laws,
by-laws, rules and regulations, issue the demolition permit.



   (D)   If the Commission determines that the demolition of the
significant building would be detrimental to the historical architectural
heritage or resources of the town, the building shall be considered a
preferably-preserved significant building.



   (E)   Upon a determination by the Commission that the significant
building, which is the subject of the application for a demolition permit, is
a preferably-preserved significant building, the Commission shall, within 30
days of the hearing, so advise the applicant and the Inspector of Buildings
by written notice, and no demolition permit may be issued until at least 12
months after the date of the determination by the Commission.



   (F)   Notwithstanding the preceding division (E), the Inspector of
Buildings may issue a demolition permit for a preferably-preserved
significant building at any time after receipt of written advice from the
Commission to the effect that either:



      (1)   The Commission is satisfied that there is no reasonable
likelihood that either the owner or some other person or group is willing to
purchase, preserve, rehabilitate or restore the building; or



      (2)   The Commission is satisfied that for at least 6 months
the owner has made continuing bona fide and reasonable efforts to locate a
purchaser to preserve, rehabilitate and restore the subject building, and
that the efforts have been unsuccessful.



(Ord. 97, passed 10-28-1997; Am. Ord. 57, passed 9-12-2006)  Penalty, see §
152.99



§ 153.04  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Commission and the Inspector of Buildings are each
authorized to institute any and all proceedings in law or equity as they deem
necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements of this
chapter, or to prevent a violation thereof, or to require restoration of the
premises to their condition prior to the violation.



   (B)   No building permit shall be issued with respect to any
premises upon which a significant building has been voluntarily demolished in
violation of this chapter for a period of 2 years after the date of the
completion of the demolition.  As used herein, PREMISES includes the parcel
of land upon which the demolished significant building was located.



   (C)   Upon a determination by the Commission that a building is a
preferably preserved significant building, the owner shall be responsible for
properly securing the building, to the satisfaction of the Inspector of
Buildings.  Should the owner fail to secure the building, the loss of the
building through fire or other cause shall be considered voluntary demolition
for the purposes of division (B) of this section.



(Ord. 97, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 153.05  EMERGENCY DEMOLITION.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to derogate the authority of
the Inspector of Buildings derived from Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 143.  However,
before acting pursuant to this chapter, the Inspector of Buildings shall make
every reasonable effort to inform the Chairperson of the Historical
Commission of his or her intentions to cause demolition before he or she
initiates the same.



(Ord. 97, passed 10-28-1997)



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   Anyone who demolishes a significant building without first obtaining
and complying fully with the provisions of a demolition permit in accordance
with this chapter will be subject to a fine of $300 for each day that the
violation continues, in addition to any fine that may be imposed for failure
to comply with the State Building Code.



(Ord. 97, passed 10-28-1997)



CHAPTER 154: WETLANDS



Section



   154.01   Purpose



   154.02   Definitions



   154.03   Prohibited activities



   154.04   Exceptions



   154.05   Application for permits and requests for determination



   154.06   Filing fee schedule



   154.07   Notice and hearings



   154.08   Burden of proof for a permit



   154.09   Coordination with other boards and offices



   154.10   Permits, determinations and conditions



   154.11   Amendments to permits



   154.12   Rules and regulations



   154.13   Performance guarantee



   154.14   Enforcement



   154.15   Relation to the Wetlands Protection Act



 



   154.99   Penalty



§ 154.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the wetlands, water
bodies, adjoining land areas and related resources of the City known as the
Town of Watertown by regulating activities deemed by the Watertown
Conservation Commission to have a significant or cumulative effect upon their
values and interests, including, but not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Public or private water supply;



      (2)   Groundwater;



      (3)   Flood control;



      (4)   Erosion and sedimentation control;



      (5)   Storm damage prevention;



      (6)   Water quality;



      (7)   Water pollution control;



      (8)   Fisheries and wildlife habitat; and



      (9)   Recreational, aesthetic, agricultural, historical,
archeological or educational values.



   (B)   These values and interests are collectively known herein as
the INTERESTS protected by this chapter.



   (C)   This chapter is intended to utilize the town's Home Rule
authority to protect additional resource areas for additional interests with
additional standards and procedures that are more stringent than those of the
Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act, being Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 131, § 40,
and the regulations promulgated thereunder.



(Ord. 493, passed 2-26-1987; Am. Ord. 67, passed 9-9-2008)



§ 154.02  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   (1)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in
associated regulations of the Conservation Commission, the definitions of
terms and the procedures in this chapter shall be as set forth in the
Wetlands Protection Act (Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 131, § 40) and regulations (310
C.M.R. 10.00).



   ALTER.  Includes, without limitations, the fol lowing actions when
undertaken to, within, or affecting resource areas protected by this chapter:



      (1)   Removal, excavation or dredging of soil, sand, gravel,
or aggregate materials of any kind;



      (2)   Changing of existing drainage characteristics, flushing
characteristics, salinity distribution, sedimentation patterns, flow
patterns, or flood retention characteristics;



      (3)   Drainage or other disturbance of water level or water
table;



      (4)   Dumping, discharging or filling with any material that
may degrade water quality;



      (5)   Placing of fill, or removal of material, that would
alter elevation;



      (f)   Driving of piles or erection of buildings or structures
of any kind;



      (7)   Placing of obstructions or objects in water;



      (8)   Destruction of or significant injury to vegetation,
including cutting or trimming of trees and shrubs;



      (9)   Changing water temperatures, biochemical oxygen demand,
or other physical, biological, or chemical characteristics of any waters;



      (10)    Any activities, changes or work that may cause or
contribute to pollution of any body of water or groundwater;



      (11)   Application of pesticides or herbicides;



      (12)   Destruction or alteration of wildlife habitat; and



      (13)   Incremental activities that have, or may have, a
cumulative adverse impact on the interests protected by this chapter.



   BANK.  Includes the land area which normally  abuts and confines a
water body; the lower boundary being the mean annual flow level, and the
upper boundary being the first observable break in the slope or the mean
annual flood level, whichever is higher.



   PARTIES OF INTEREST.  All abutters as determined from the most recent
records of the Assessors, all owners of land directly across a body of water
including those persons in other municipalities, and all abutters to abutters
within 300 feet of the property line.



   PERSON.  Any individual, group of individuals, association,
partnership, corporation, company, business organization, trust, estate, the
Commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the extent subject to town
ordinances, administrative agency, public or quasi-public corporation or
body, the Town of Watertown, and any other legal entity and its legal
representatives, agents, or assigns.



   POND.  Shall follow the definition contained in 310 C.M.R. 10.04,
except that the size threshold of 10,000 square feet shall not apply.



   VERNAL POOL.  Includes,  in addition to scientific definitions found
in the regulations under the Wetlands Protection Act, any confined basin or
depression not occurring in existing lawns, gardens, landscaped areas or
driveways which, at least in most years, holds water for a minimum of 2
continuous months during the spring and/or summer, contains at least 200
cubic feet of water at some time during most years, is free of adult
predatory fish populations, and provides essential breeding and rearing
habitat functions for amphibian, reptile or other vernal pool community
species, regardless of whether the site has been certified by the
Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife. The boundary of the
resource area for vernal pools shall be the mean annual high-water line
defining the depression.



(Ord. 493, passed 2-26-1987; Am. Ord. 67, passed 9-9-2008)



§ 154.03  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   Except as permitted by the Conservation Commission and as
provided by this chapter, no person shall remove, fill, dredge, alter or
build upon, degrade or discharge into any of the following resource areas:



      (1)   Any river (including perennial streams), lake or pond;



      (2)   Any wetland, marsh, wet meadow, bog, swamp or vernal
pool;



      (3)   Any bank;



      (4)   Any lands bordering on any lake, pond, intermittent
stream, spring, brook or creek;



      (5)   Any land under said waters;



      (6)   Any land subject to flooding or inundation by
groundwater or surface water that substantially promotes the purposes of this
chapter;



      (7)   Any land in the 100 year floodplain as delineated
pursuant to the regulations of the Commission;



      (8)   Any land within 200 feet of any river (including
perennial streams) (known as the RIVERFRONT AREA); or



      (9)   Any land within 150 feet of any wetland, marsh, wet
meadow, bog, swamp, bank, lake, pond or non-perennial stream (known as the
BUFFER ZONE).



   (B)   The BUFFER ZONE resource areas shall be protected regardless
of whether they border surface waters.  The 150-foot buffer zone set forth
in this chapter is necessary because land is a limited resource in
Watertown.  The vast majority of Watertown's land has been previously
developed.  Because of this level of development, a natural riparian buffer
is absent.  There is a high percentage of impervious surfaces, which causes
a greater amount of runoff, and there is less opportunity for natural
recharge and natural processes to attenuate pollutants in the runoff.  Thus,
this buffer zone is needed to help further mitigate activities that may be
detrimental to the resource areas.



   (C)   Without limiting the foregoing, and as an additional local
requirement, no person shall build or enlarge any structure, parking lot or
impervious surface upon or within 50 feet of:



      (1)   Any wetland, marsh, meadow, bog or swamp;



      (2)   Any bank;



      (3)   Any lake, river, pond, stream, spring, brook or creek; or



      (4)   Any land under said waters.



   (D)   The 50-foot no-build zone is in place to protect the habitat
of riverine or wetland biota that are identified as protected interests under
this chapter.  This 50-foot no-build prohibition applies to the
redevelopment of an existing development, unless the redevelopment
significantly improves the existing conditions of the developed site so as to
substantially promote the interests of this chapter.



(Ord. 493, passed 2-26-1987; Am. Ord. 67, passed 9-9-2008)  Penalty, see §
154.99



§ 154.04  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The permit, variance and application required by this chapter
shall not be required for maintaining, repairing or replacing an existing and
lawfully located structure, facility or right-of-way used in the service of
the public to provide electric, gas, water, telephone, transportation or
other telecommunication services, provided that:



      (1)   The structure or facility is not substantially changed,
enlarged or altered;



      (2)   Written notice has been given to the Conservation
Commission prior to commencement of work; and



      (3)   The work conforms to performance standards detailed in
the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act, being Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 131, §
40, the regulations promulgated thereunder, and design specifications
acceptable to the Commission.



   (B)   The application and permit required by this chapter shall not
be required for work performed for normal maintenance or improvement of land
in agricultural use as defined by the Wetlands Protection Act regulations at
310 C.M.R. 10.04(4).



   (C)   (1)   The permit and application required by this chapter
shall not apply to emergency projects necessary for the protection of the
health or safety of the public, provided that:



         (a)   The work is to be performed by or has been ordered
by an agency of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or a political subdivision
thereof;



         (b)   Advance notice, oral or written, has been given to
the Commission prior to the commencement of work or within 24 hours after the
commencement;



         (c)   The Commission's duly authorized designee
certifies the work as an emergency project; and



         (d)   The work is performed only for the time and place
certified by the Commission for the limited purposes necessary to abate the
emergency.



      (2)   Within 21 days of the commencement of an emergency
project, a permit application for the work shall be filed with the Commission
for review as provided in this chapter.  Upon failure to meet these and
other requirements of the Commission, or upon the Commission's decision not
to certify the work as an emergency project, the Commission may, after notice
and a public hearing, revoke or modify an emergency project approval and
order restoration and mitigation measures, as appropriate.



   (D)   Other than as stated in this section, the exceptions provided
in the Wetlands Protection Act, and the regulations promulgated thereunder
shall not apply.



(Ord. 493, passed 2-26-1987; Am. Ord. 182, passed 11-23-1993; Am. Ord. 67,
passed 9-9-2008)



§ 154.05  APPLICATION FOR PERMITS AND REQUESTS FOR DETERMINATION.



   (A)   Any person wishing to perform work regulated by this chapter
shall file a written application for a permit with the Commission.  The
application shall include the data and plans as are deemed necessary by the
Commission to describe proposed activities and their effects on resource
areas and interests protected by this chapter.  The Commission is hereby
authorized to request information from an applicant after the initial
application is filed, including, but not limited to, resource area
delineations and flood-plain delineations based on current, site specific,
data. The Commission may, in its discretion, continue the hearing to a date
certain, to be announced at the hearing, pending the receipt of information
requested by the Commission, or it may deny an application due to incomplete
information. The Commission is authorized to continue the hearing without the
consent of the applicant for the purpose of requesting further information;
for purposes of § 154.07, no application shall be deemed complete until all
information requested by the Commission has been submitted. No work shall
commence until a permit has been issued by the Commission or the Commission
has issued a finding pursuant to this chapter that a permit is not required.



   (B)   A denial of an application "with prejudice" shall be the
Commission's final decision. If the Commission denies an application with
prejudice, the applicant may not submit a new application for the same
property for 1 year.



   (C)   The Commission  may, at its discretion, accept as the
application and plans under this chapter the Notice of Intent and plans filed
under the Wetlands Protection Act, Mass. Gen. Laws Ch.131, § 40.



   (D)   Any person desiring to know whether or not proposed work or an
area is subject to this chapter may, in writing, request a determination of
applicability of this chapter (hereinafter "request for determination") from
the Commission.  The request for determination shall include the data and
plans as are deemed necessary by the Commission.



   (E)   Any resource area delineation set forth in either a request
for determination or an application shall expire 3 years after the date that
the Commission takes action on the request for determination or application.



   (F)   Any person filing an application or request for determination
shall, at the time of filing, pay a filing fee in accordance with the filing
fee schedule contained in the current regulations promulgated by the
Commission in addition to the fee required by the Wetlands Protection Act.



   (G)   The Commission may waive the filing fee for an application or
request for determination filed by a government agency, for a request for
determination filed by a person having no financial connection with the
subject property, for any projects whose sole effect is to substantially
enhance a resource area, or for other reasonable grounds as determined by the
Commission at its discretion.



   (H)   (1)   Pursuant to Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 44, § 53G, the
Commission may, upon receipt of an application or request for determination,
or at any point during the hearing process, impose reasonable fees upon
applicants for the purpose of securing outside consultants, including
engineers, wetlands scientists, wildlife biologists or other experts, in
order to aid in the Commission's review of proposed projects. Such funds
shall be deposited with the Watertown Treasurer, who shall create an account
specifically for this purpose. Additional consultant fees may be imposed
where the requisite review is more expensive than originally calculated or
where new information requires additional consultant services.



      (2)   The consultant fees collected for the Commission's
review of a specific application or request for determination may be used
only for consulting work done in connection with that application or request
for determination, and expenditures may be made at the sole discretion of the
Commission.



      (3)   Any consultant hired under this provision shall be
selected by, and report exclusively to, the Commission. The Commission shall
provide applicants with written notice of the selection of a consultant,
identifying the consultant, the amount of the fee to be charged to the
applicant, and a request for payment of that fee. Notice shall be deemed to
have been given on the date it is mailed or hand-delivered. The applicant may
withdraw the application or request for determination within 5 days of the
date notice is given without incurring any costs or expenses.



      (4)   The entire fee must be received before the initiation of
consulting services. Failure by the applicant to pay the requested consultant
fee within 10 business days of the request for payment shall be cause for the
Commission to declare the application or request for determination
administratively incomplete and to deny the permit, except in the case of an
appeal. The Commission shall inform the applicant and the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection of such a decision in writing.



      (5)   The applicant may appeal the selection of an outside
consultant to the Town Council, who may disqualify the consultant only on the
grounds that the consultant has a conflict of interest or is not properly
qualified. The minimum qualifications shall consist of either an educational
degree or 3 or more years of practice in the field at issue or a
closely-related field. The applicant shall make his or her appeal in writing,
which must be received within 10 days of the date that request for consultant
fees was made by the Commission. The appeal shall extend the applicable time
limits for action upon the application or request for determination.



(Ord. 493, passed 2-26-1987; Am. Ord. 121, passed 4-13-1993; Am. Ord. 67,
passed 9-9-2008)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.06  FILING FEE SCHEDULE.



 

Project Size
 
Fee




Less than 1,000 sq. ft.
 
$50


1,000 to less than 2,000 sq. ft.
 
$100


2,000 to less than 3,000 sq. ft.
 
$150


3,000 to less than 4,000 sq. ft.
 
$200


4,000 to less than 5,000 sq. ft.
 
$250


5,000 to less than 6,000 sq. ft.
 
$300


6,000 to less than 10,000 sq. ft.
 
$400


10,000 to less than 15,000 sq. ft.
 
$500


15,000 to less than 20,000 sq. ft.
 
$650


20,000 to less than 30,000 sq. ft.
 
$750


30,000 to less than 50,000 sq. ft.
 
$850


50,000 sq. ft. or greater
 
$1,000




 



(Ord. 493, passed 2-26-1987; Am. Ord. 67, passed 9-9-2008)



§ 154.07  NOTICE AND HEARINGS.



   (A)   (1)   Any person filing an application or request for
determination with the Commission shall give written notice thereof, at the
same time, by certified mail, returned receipt requested, or hand delivery,
to all parties in interest.



      (2)   For purposes of this section, PARTIES IN INTEREST shall
include all abutters as determined from the most recent records of the Town
Assessors, all owners of land directly across a body of water, including
those persons in another municipality, and all abutters to abutters or other
persons within 300 feet of the property line.



   (B)   The notice shall be on a form supplied by the Commission and
shall state where copies of the application or request for determination may
be examined and obtained by abutters. An affidavit of the person providing
notice, with a copy of the notice, mailed or delivered, shall be filed with
the Commission, prior to or at the first public hearing held by the
Commission.  When a person filing a request for determination is other than
the owner, that person shall ensure that the request for determination, the
notice of the hearing and the determination itself shall be sent to the owner
as well as to the person filing the request for determination.



   (C)   The Commission shall commence a public hearing and issue a
decision on any application or request for determination within 21 days of
its receipt of the completed application or request for determination, unless
an extension is authorized in writing by the applicant.  Notice of the time
and date of the hearing shall be given by the Commission, at the expense of
the person filing the application or request for determination, by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in Watertown not less than
5 working days prior to the hearing, and by posting it in the office of the
Town Clerk for not less than 5 working days prior to the hearing.



   (D)   The Commission at its discretion may combine its hearing under
this chapter with the hearing conducted under the Wetlands Protection Act,
Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 131, § 40, and may combine the public notices thereof.



   (E)   (1)   For reasons announced by the Commission at the
hearing, the Commission shall have authority to continue the hearing to a
certain date to be announced at the hearing.  The reasons may include the
receipt of additional information offered by the applicant or others, or
information or plans required from the applicant or others, deemed necessary
by the Commission at its discretion, or comments and recommendations of
boards and officials listed in § 154.09.  In the event that the applicant
objects to a continuance, the Commission may, in its discretion, close the
hearing and take action on the information as is available. The Commission
may also continue the hearing without the consent of the applicant pending
the submission of requested information, or a date, announced at the hearing,
within 21 days of receipt of a completed notice of intent.



      (2)   The Commission may continue the public hearings with the
consent of the applicant, which may be given in writing or orally at the
hearing, as follows:



         (a)   To an agreed-upon date, which shall be announced
at the hearing; or



         (b)   For a period not to exceed 21 days after the
submission of a specified piece of information or the occurrence of a
specified action.



         (c)   The date, time and place of the continued hearing
shall be publicized in accordance with Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 131, § 40, and
notice shall be sent to any person at the hearing who so requests in writing.



      (3)   A notice of intent shall be presumed to have expired 2
years after the date of filing unless the applicant submits information
showing that:



         (a)   Good cause exists for the delay of proceedings
under 310 C.M.R. 10.00; and



         (b)   The applicant has continued to pursue the project
diligently in other forums in the intervening period; provided, however, that
unfavorable financial circumstances shall not constitute good cause for delay.



(Ord. 493, passed 2-26-1987; Am. Ord. 67, passed 9-9-2008)  Penalty, see §
154.99



§ 154.08  BURDEN OF PROOF FOR A PERMIT.



   The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the credible evidence that the work proposed in the
application will not have a significant or cumulative effect on the interests
protected by this chapter.  Failure to provide adequate evidence to the
Commission supporting that burden shall be sufficient cause for the
Commission to deny a permit or grant a permit with conditions.



(Ord. 493, passed 2-26-1987; Am. Ord. 67, passed 9-9-2008)



§ 154.09  COORDINATION WITH OTHER BOARDS AND OFFICES.



   (A)   Any person filing an application for permit or request for
determination with the Commission shall provide a notice to departments form
at the same time, by certified mail or hand delivery, to the offices of the
Town Council, Town Planning Board and Board of Appeals, Town Board of Health,
Town Building Inspector, Town Manager, Town Department of Public Works and
the Conservation Commissions of any adjoining municipalities of projects
proposed along the borders or within 300 feet of those municipalities.



   (B)   The Commission shall not take final action until those boards
and officials have had 14 days from receipt of notice to file written
comments and recommendations with the Commission, which the Commission shall
take into account but which shall not be binding on the Commission.  Any
written comments and recommendations that are not privileged will be provided
to the applicant and owner when they are filed with the Commission.  The
applicant and owner shall have the right to respond to the written comments
and recommendations at a hearing of the Commission prior to final action.



(Ord. 493, passed 2-26-1987; Am. Ord. 67, passed 9-9-2008)  Penalty, see §
154.99



§ 154.10  PERMITS, DETERMINATIONS AND CONDITIONS.



   (A)   If the Commission, after a public hearing, determines that the
area and activity that are the subject of an application or the water or land
uses which will result therefrom are likely to have a significant individual
or cumulative effect on the interests protected by this chapter, it shall
issue or deny a permit for the work requested within 21 days of the close of
the hearing. If the Commission issues a permit, it may impose conditions
which it deems necessary or desirable to protect the interests of this
chapter, and all activities shall be done in accordance with those
conditions. The conditions may include, but are not limited to, a condition
that portions of the land shall not be altered or built upon. The Commission
shall take into account the cumulative, adverse effects of loss, degradation,
isolation and replication of protected resource areas throughout the
community and watershed, resulting from past activities, permitted and
exempt, and foreseeable future activities.



   (B)   The Commission shall give due consideration to any
demonstrated hardship on the applicant by reason of denial, as presented at
the public hearing. The Commission may waive specifically identified and
requested procedures, design specifications, performance standards, or other
requirements set forth in its regulations, provided that:



      (1)   The Commission finds in writing after a public hearing
that there are no reasonable conditions or alternatives that would allow the
proposed activity to proceed in compliance with the regulations;



      (2)   That avoidance, minimization and mitigation have been
employed to the maximum extent feasible; and



      (3)   That the waiver is necessary to accommodate an
overriding public interest or to avoid a decision that so restricts the use
of the property as to constitute an unconstitutional taking without
compensation. This provision will not authorize a variance that would
conflict with the Wetlands Protection Act.



   (C)   The Commission is authorized to deny a permit for failure to
meet the requirements of this chapter or its regulations; for failure to
submit all necessary information or plans requested by the Commission; for
submission of substantially inaccurate or false information; for failure to
avoid or prevent significant cumulative impacts upon the interests protected
by this chapter; or where no conditions can be imposed that would adequately
protect the interests protected by this chapter.



   (D)   In reviewing activities within the buffer zone, the Commission
shall presume the buffer zone is important to the protection of other
resource areas because activities undertaken in close proximity have a high
likelihood of adverse impact, either immediately, as a consequence of
construction, or over time, as a consequence of daily operation or existence
of the activities. These adverse impacts from construction and use can
include, without limitation, erosion, siltation, loss of groundwater
recharge, poor water quality, and loss of wildlife habitat. The Commission
may establish, in its regulations, design specifications, performance
standards, and other measures and safeguards, including setbacks, no-disturb
areas, no-build areas, and other work limits for protection of such lands,
including without limitation strips of continuous, undisturbed vegetative
cover, unless the applicant convinces the Commission that the area or part of
it may be disturbed without harm to the interests protected by this chapter.



   (E)   In reviewing activities within the riverfront area, the
Commission shall presume the riverfront area is important to all the resource
area interests unless demonstrated otherwise, and no permit issued hereunder
shall permit any activities unless the applicant, in addition to meeting the
otherwise applicable requirements of this chapter, has proved by a
preponderance of the evidence that:



      (1)   There is no practicable alternative to the proposed
project with less adverse effects; and



      (2)   That such activities, including proposed mitigation
measures, will have no significant adverse impact on the areas or interests
protected by this chapter. The Commission shall regard as practicable an
alternative which is reasonably available and capable of being done after
taking into consideration the proposed property use, overall project purpose
(e.g., residential, institutional, commercial, or industrial), logistics,
existing technology, costs of the alternatives, and overall project costs.



   (F)   To prevent resource area loss, the Commission shall require
applicants to avoid alteration wherever feasible; to minimize alteration;
and, where alteration is unavoidable and has been minimized, to provide full
mitigation. The Commission may authorize or require replication of wetlands
as a form of mitigation, but only with specific plans, professional design,
proper safeguards, adequate security, and professional monitoring and
reporting to assure success, because of the high likelihood of failure of
replication.



   (G)   The Commission may require a wildlife habitat study of the
project area, to be paid for by the applicant, whenever it deems appropriate,
regardless the type of resource area or the amount or type of alteration
proposed. The decision shall be based upon the Commission's estimation of the
importance of the habitat area considering (but not limited to) such factors
as proximity to other areas suitable for wildlife, importance of wildlife
corridors in the area, or actual or possible presence of rare plant or animal
species in the area. The work shall be performed by an individual who at
least meets the qualifications set out in the wildlife habitat section of the
Wetlands Protection Act regulations (310 C.M.R. 10.60).



   (H)   The Commission shall presume that all areas meeting the
definition of vernal pools under § 154.02 of this chapter, including the
adjacent area, perform essential habitat functions. This presumption may be
overcome only by the presentation of credible evidence which, in the judgment
of the Commission, demonstrates that the basin or depression does not provide
essential habitat functions. Any formal evaluation should be performed by an
individual who at least meets the qualifications under the wildlife habitat
section of the Wetlands Protection Act regulations.



   (I)   If in its consideration of an application or request for
determination, the Commission determines in its discretion that the area is
deemed not likely to be significant to the interests protected by this
chapter, the Commission shall inform the applicant in writing that the work
does not require a permit.



   (J)   In acting on a request for determination, the Commission may
impose conditions on its determination, and the determination shall be
contingent on compliance with those conditions.



   (K)   Permits shall expire on the date specified by the Commission,
not later than 3 years from the date of issuance. Any permit may be extended
for 1 year at the Commission's discretion, provided that a request for an
extension is received in writing by the Commission 30 days prior to
expiration of the original form. Notwithstanding the above, a permit may
identify requirements which shall be enforceable for a stated number of
years, indefinitely, or until permanent protection is in place, and shall
apply to all present and future owners of the land.



   (L)   For good cause the Commission may revoke or modify any permit,
determination of applicability, or order of resource area delineation (ORAD)
or any other order, determination or other decision issued under this chapter
after notice to the holder, the public, abutters, and town boards, pursuant
to §§ 154.07 and 154.09, and after a public hearing.



   (M)   No work proposed in any application shall be undertaken until
the applicant has recorded the permit, or ORAD issued by the Commission with
respect to such work in the registry of deeds or, if the land affected is
registered land, in the registry section of the land court for the district
wherein the land lies; and until the holder of the permit certifies in
writing to the Commission that the document has been recorded. If the
applicant fails to perform the recording, the Commission may record the
documents itself and require the applicant to furnish the recording fee
therefore, either at the time of recording or as a condition precedent to the
issuance of a certificate of compliance.



   (N)   The Commission may, at its discretion, combine the permit or
determination or other action on an application or request for determination
under this chapter with the order of conditions or determination or other
action issued under the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act.



(Ord. 493, passed 2-26-1987; Am. Ord. 67, passed 9-9-2008)



§ 154.11  AMENDMENTS TO PERMITS.



   (A)   The Commission may amend the conditions contained in the
permit issued under the provisions of § 154.10 of this chapter. Amendments
that may be approved by the Commission shall be limited to the following:



      (1)   Perfecting amendments, including, but not limited to,
the correction of typographical errors and errors of reference; and/or



      (2)   Other amendments approved following notice and public
hearing.



   (B)   The Commission shall not approve any amendments to permit
conditions for work that has been completed in accordance with the provisions
contained in the original permit.



   (C)   The Commission may revoke or modify a permit issued under this
chapter if the applicant and/or his or her successor(s) fail(s) to comply
with the terms of the permit.



   (D)   No revocation or substantial modification shall be voted until
after the Commission has conducted a public hearing on the matter with notice
to the permit holder and any other entity entitled to notice under the
original permit application.



(Ord. 67, passed 9-9-2008)



§ 154.12  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   After public notice and hearing, the Commission may promulgate
rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.  The
regulations will be effective when voted by the Commission and filed with the
Watertown Clerk. Failure of the Commission to promulgate rules and
regulations or a legal declaration of their invalidity by a court of law may
not suspend or invalidate the effects of this chapter. Any regulations in
effect as of the date of the enactment of this chapter may remain in effect
until new regulations are issued, except that any existing regulations that
are inconsistent with this chapter may be superseded by this chapter.



   (B)   Public notice of any public hearing on rules and regulations
may be given at least 3 weeks prior to the hearing by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in Watertown and by posting in the office of
the Town Clerk.



   (C)   At a minimum, these regulations may define key terms in this
chapter not inconsistent with the chapter and procedures governing the amount
and filing of fees. If the regulations do not contain a definition for a term
used in this chapter, the definition of the term contained in 310 C.M.R.
10.00 may apply.



(Ord. 67, passed 9-9-2008)



§ 154.13  PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE.



   As part of a permit issued under this chapter, in addition to any
security required by any other municipal or state board, agency or official,
the Commission may require that the performance and observance of the
conditions imposed thereunder (including conditions requiring mitigation
work) be secured wholly or in part by 1 or more of the methods described
below:



   (A)   By a proper bond or deposit of money or negotiable securities
or other undertaking of financial responsibility sufficient in the opinion of
the Commission, to be released in whole or in part upon issuance of a
certificate of compliance for work performed pursuant to the permit;



   (B)   By accepting a conservation restriction, easement, or other
covenant enforceable in a court of law, executed and duly recorded by the
owner of record, running with the land to the benefit of the town, whereby
the permit conditions shall be performed. and observed before any lot may be
conveyed other than by mortgage deed. This method shall be used only with the
consent of the applicant.



(Ord. 493, passed 2-26-1987; Am. Ord. 67, passed 9-9-2008)  Penalty, see §
154.99



§ 154.14  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   No person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade or
otherwise alter resource areas protected by this chapter, or cause, suffer,
or allow such activity, or leave in place unauthorized fill, or otherwise
fail to restore illegally altered land to its original condition, or fail to
comply with a permit or an enforcement order issued pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   The Commission and its agents, officers and employees shall
have authority to enter upon privately owned land at reasonable times to the
extent consistent with constitutional authority for the purpose of performing
their duties under this chapter, and may make or cause to be made
examinations, surveys or sampling as the Commission deems necessary.



   (C)   The Commission shall have authority to enforce this chapter,
its regulations, and permits issued thereunder by violation notices,
administrative and civil and criminal court actions. The Commission may order
any person who violates provisions of this chapter to restore the property to
its original condition and take other action deemed necessary by the
Commission to remedy the violations, including, but not limited to,
delineating the resource area boundary as it existed prior to the alteration,
or may be fined, or both. Municipal boards and officials, including any
police officer or other officer having police powers, shall have authority to
assist the Commission in the enforcement of this chapter.



   (D)   Upon request of the Commission, the Town Manager and the Town
Attorney shall take legal action for enforcement under the civil law.  Upon
request of the Commission, the Chief of Police shall take legal action for
enforcement under criminal law.



   (E)   In the alternative to criminal prosecution, the Commission may
elect to utilize the non-criminal disposition procedure set forth in Mass.
Gen. Laws Ch. 40, § 21D, which has been adopted by the town in § 35.05.



(Ord. 493, passed 2-26-1987; Am. Ord. 67, passed 9-9-2008)



§ 154.15  RELATION TO THE WETLANDS PROTECTION ACT.



   This chapter is adopted under the Home Rule Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule Statutes, independent of the
Wetlands Protection Act, Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 131, § 40, and regulation
thereunder.  This chapter is intended to provide a greater degree of
protection to the listed resource areas, values and interests than the
Wetlands Protection Act or regulations thereunder.



(Ord. 493, passed 2-26-1987; Am. Ord. 67, passed 9-9-2008)



§ 154.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, regulations
promulgated thereunder, or any permit or finding issued thereunder, shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $300 for each offense.  Each day or
portion thereof during which a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense, and each provision of the chapter, regulations, or permit
or findings violated, shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 493, passed 2-26-1987; Am. Ord. 67, passed 9-9-2008)



CHAPTER 155: ZONING CODE



Section



   155.01   Adoption by reference



§ 155.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The Watertown Zoning Code is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.  A copy of the zoning code may be
obtained from the Watertown Planning Department.



CHAPTER 156: HISTORIC LANDMARKS



Section



   156.01   Purpose



   156.02   Recommendation of the designation of historic landmarks by
the Historical Commission



   156.03   Designation



   156.04   Review of proposed alteration, construction or demolition
of a designated landmark



   156.05   Historical Commission certificates



   156.06   Applicability



   156.07   Additional functions of the Historical Commission



 



   156.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Demolition of historic buildings, see Ch. 154



   Historic districts, see Ch. 152



§ 156.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is enacted under § 6 of the Home Rule Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution, in order to preserve the heritage of the city
known as the Town of Watertown (hereinafter “town”) by identifying and
protecting sites and structures that constitute or reflect important elements
of the architectural, cultural, aesthetic, political, economic or social
history of the town; to encourage and assist property owners to protect and
maintain such sites and structures; to foster public awareness and
appreciation of the town's long and distinguished history; and by furthering
these purposes to promote the public welfare by making the town a better
place in which to live and work.



(Ord. 2, Sec. 1, passed 1-12-2010)



§ 156.02  RECOMMENDATION OF THE DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC LANDMARKS BY THE
HISTORICAL COMMISSION.



   (A)   To be recommended for designation as a Watertown historic
landmark (“landmark”), a property must constitute or contain a place or
structure that is either:



      (1)   Importantly associated with one or more historic persons
or events, or with the broad architectural, cultural, aesthetic, political,
economic or social history of the town or commonwealth; or



      (2)   Historically or architecturally significant in terms of
period, style, methods of construction, or association with a famous
architect or builder.



   (B)   For purposes of this chapter, a STRUCTURE is defined as a
combination of materials, including but not limited to, a building, wall,
bridge, statue or monument.



   (C)   To initiate designation of a landmark, a petition shall be
submitted to the Watertown Historical Commission (“Historical
Commission”) by the property owner.  If the property owner withdraws the
petition at any time prior to the Town Council's vote under § 156.03(A), the
designation process shall not continue.



   (D)   Within 120 days after receiving such a petition, the
Historical Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed designation.



      (1)   The Historical Commission shall not reconsider a
proposed designation that was rejected within the previous year, unless
two-thirds of all its members vote to do so, based on new, significant
information.



      (2)   The Commission shall give public notice of the hearing
at least 14 days before the hearing date, by publishing the time, place and
purpose of the hearing in a local newspaper, and by mailing a copy of the
notice to the owner of record of the proposed landmark, and to the abutting
owners at the addresses listed on the most recent local tax list, and to such
other persons as the Historical Commission shall deem entitled to notice.



   (E)   Prior to the public hearing, the Historical Commission shall
investigate and prepare a report on the proposed landmark's historical,
architectural and other relevant significance, in addition to any information
provided by the petitioner.  If the report recommends designation, the
report shall recommend the proposed boundaries of the landmark for
incorporation into the order of the Town Council designating the landmark.



   (F)   At least 14 days prior to the public hearing, the Commission
shall also transmit copies of the report to the Planning Board and the Zoning
Enforcement Officer for their comments, which shall be advisory only.



   (G)   Following the close of the public hearing, the Historical
Commission may, by majority vote, recommend designation of the proposed
landmark.



   (H)   In deciding whether to recommend designation of a landmark, in
addition to the standards in § 156.02(A), the Historical Commission shall
consider:



      (1)   Whether the historically or architecturally significant
characteristics or associations of the proposed landmark are, for the most
part, original and capable of preservation or restoration; and



      (2)   Whether the location and current or expected use of the
proposed landmark are compatible with its preservation.



   (I)   If the Historical Commission votes to recommend the proposed
landmark, its recommendation shall be transmitted to the Town Council, with a
copy of the report and a statement of the reasons for designation pursuant to
the standards in § 156.02(A) and (H), and § 156.03(B).



(Ord. 2, Sec. 2, passed 1-12-2010)



§ 156.03  DESIGNATION.



   (A)   Designation of a landmark shall be by order of the Town
Council.



   (B)   Unless specifically provided in the order designating a
landmark, based on a finding of its historic or architectural significance,
the authority of the Historical Commission under this chapter shall not
extend to the following categories of features of the landmark, in which
event alteration, construction or demolition of the features so excluded may
be carried out without the need to apply to the Historical Commission for a
certificate:



      (1)   Garages, sheds, walls, fences and other accessory
structures;



      (2)   Storm doors and windows, screens, shutters, trelliswork,
lighting fixtures, signs, antennae and air conditioners;



      (3)   Terraces, walkways and driveways;



      (4)   Temporary structures, lawn statuary, and recreational
equipment, subject to such conditions as to duration of use, dimension,
location, and similar matters as the Commission may reasonably specify;



      (5)   Exterior wall materials that do not involve alteration
of any cornice, fascia, soffit, bay, porch, hood, window, door casing or
other protruding decorative element;



      (6)   Exterior paint color;



      (7)   Roofing materials and color.



   (C)   Amendments to the terms, or rescission, of a previously
designated landmark shall follow the same procedures governing designation. 
In addition, the Historical Commission may, on its own, initiate rescission
of a previously designated landmark, or amendment of the terms of a prior
designation that reduces the scope of its reviewing authority.



   (D)   No designation or amendment of a landmark shall be effective
until a map setting forth the boundaries of the landmark has been recorded
with the Registry of Deeds for the South District of Middlesex County, or, in
the case of a rescission, a copy of the rescission order has been recorded.



   (E)   Starting from the date the Historical Commission receives a
valid petition to designate a landmark, and continuing until the earliest of:
(1) the property owner withdraws the petition; (2) the Historical Commission
votes against recommending designation; (3) the Town Council votes against
the proposed designation; or (4) one year has elapsed, no application for a
permit for alteration, construction or demolition of the proposed landmark
shall be granted until reviewed by the Commission as though the property were
designated a landmark.



   (F)   If any landmark is within the bounds of a municipal historic
district, proposed alterations shall not be reviewed under this chapter but
under the relevant historic district ordinance.  The property shall
nonetheless be a Watertown landmark, but shall not be subject to review by
the Historical Commission.



(Ord. 2, Sec. 3, passed 1-12-2010)



§ 156.04  REVIEW OF PROPOSED ALTERATION, CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION OF A
DESIGNATED LANDMARK.



   (A)   Except as this chapter or the order designating a landmark may
otherwise provide, no structure or exterior architectural feature of a
landmark shall be altered or demolished, nor any permit be issued for
construction, alteration or demolition on a property designated as a
landmark, unless the Historical Commission shall first have issued a
certificate of appropriateness or certificate of hardship.  For purposes of
this chapter, EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE is defined as such portion of
the exterior of a structure as is open to view from a public street, way,
park or body of water.



   (B)   Any person wishing to obtain a certificate from the Historical
Commission shall file an application for a certificate of appropriateness or
a certificate of hardship, as the case may be, in such form as the Historical
Commission may reasonably determine, together with such plans, elevations,
specifications, material and other information as may be reasonably deemed
necessary by the Historical Commission to enable it to make a determination
on the application.



   (C)   Within 45 days after the Historical Commission deems that an
application is complete, the Historical Commission shall hold a public
hearing. The Historical Commission shall give public notice of the hearing at
least 14 days before the hearing date, by publishing the time, place and
purpose of the hearing in a local newspaper, and mailing a copy of the notice
to the applicant, to the owners of all property deemed by the Historical
Commission to be affected thereby, as they appear on the most recent local
tax list, and to such other persons deemed entitled to notice.



   (D)   In reviewing an application for a certificate, the Historical
Commission shall not make any recommendations or requirements except for the
purpose of preserving the historically or architecturally significant
characteristics of a landmark.  Factors the Historical Commission shall
consider include:



      (1)   The historical and architectural significance of the
landmark in general, and of the particular structure or exterior
architectural feature involved in the application;



      (2)   The general design, arrangement, texture, material and
color of the structure or exterior architectural feature involved;



      (3)   The relation of such structure or exterior architectural
feature to properties in the surrounding area;



      (4)   Whether preservation or restoration is structurally,
technologically and economically feasible;



      (5)   In the case of new construction, the appropriateness of
the size, shape and location of the new structure or exterior architectural
feature, in relation both to the existing structures and features of the
landmark, and to properties in the surrounding area.



(Ord. 2, Sec. 4, passed 1-12-2010)  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.05  HISTORICAL COMMISSION CERTIFICATES.



   (A)   In issuing certificates, the Historical Commission may, in
appropriate cases, impose dimensional and setback requirements in addition to
those required by applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance.



   (B)   The Historical Commission shall issue a certificate of
appropriateness to the applicant if:



      (1)   It determines that the alteration, construction or
demolition for which an application has been filed will be appropriate for,
or compatible with, the preservation or protection of the landmark; or



      (2)   The applicant agrees to modify the application to
address any concerns of the Commission, including recommendations as to
appropriateness of design, arrangement, texture, material and similar
characteristics that would make the application acceptable to the Commission,
and, within 14 days of the Commission action, the applicant files a written
modification of the application in conformity with the changes.



   (C)   If a certificate of hardship has been applied for, or if a
certificate of appropriateness has been applied for and the Historical
Commission determines not to issue it, the Historical Commission shall issue
a certificate of hardship to the applicant if all of the following are
satisfied:



      (1)   Owing to conditions especially affecting the structure
or exterior architectural features involved, but not affecting the landmark's
general historic qualities, failure to approve an application will involve a
substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the applicant;



      (2)   The hardship is not due to the owner's avoidable failure
to maintain the landmark or other circumstances within the owner's control;



      (3)   Such application may be approved without substantial
derogation from the intent and purpose of this chapter; and



      (4)   The application may be approved without substantial
detriment to the public welfare.



   (D)   In making its determination on an application for a
certificate, the Historical Commission shall provide a written statement of
its reasons, referencing the factors in § 156.04(D) and the standards in §
156.055(B) or (C), as the case may be.



   (E)   If the Historical Commission fails to make a determination on
an application within 45 days after the public hearing specified in §
156.04(C), it will be deemed to have issued a certificate of appropriateness.



(Ord. 2, Sec. 5, passed 1-12-2010)



§ 156.06  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)       Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent:



      (1)   The ordinary maintenance, repair or replacement of any
structure or exterior architectural feature of a landmark that does not
involve a change in its exterior design, material or outward appearance;



      (2)   The meeting of requirements certified by a duly
authorized public officer to be necessary for public safety because of an
unsafe or dangerous condition;



      (3)   The reconstruction, substantially similar in exterior
design and materials, of a structure or exterior architectural feature
damaged or destroyed by fire, storm or other disaster, provided such
reconstruction is begun within one year thereafter and carried forward with
due diligence.



(Ord. 2, Sec. 6, passed 1-12-2010)



§ 156.07  ADDITIONAL FUNCTIONS OF THE HISTORICAL COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Historical Commission shall promote public awareness and
appreciation of landmarks by maintaining a publicly available list of
landmarks, producing and distributing materials explaining their
significance, and, with the agreement of the property owner, providing
identifying signs and explanatory materials.



   (B)   The Historical Commission shall assist owners of landmarks by
providing preservation guides and other information regarding maintenance,
restoration and rehabilitation.



   (C)   The Historical Commission shall assist owners of landmarks by
providing information about obtaining available tax benefits, grants and
listing on the National Register of Historic Places and similar registers.



(Ord. 2, Sec. 7, passed 1-12-2010)



§ 156.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any alteration, construction or demolition on a property
designated a landmark, without first obtaining and complying fully with the
provisions of this chapter, will be subject to a fine of $300 for each day
that the violation continues, in addition to any fine that may be imposed for
failure to comply with the State Building Code.



   (B)   In addition to the foregoing, no building permit shall be
issued with respect to any property designated a landmark, on which
structures or exterior architectural features have been voluntarily altered,
constructed or demolished other than pursuant to a certificate granted under
the provisions of this chapter, for a period of two years after the date of
such alteration, construction or demolition.



(Ord. 2, Sec. 8, passed 1-12-2010)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



      Table



         I.   ACCEPTANCE OF STATE LAW PROVISIONS



         II.   ZONING MAP CHANGES



TABLE I: ACCEPTANCE OF STATE LAW PROVISIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




472
 
- -
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 59, § 5, Clause 37A, allowing for tax
exemptions for the blind.


97(1)
 
6-8-1982
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 44, § 53E, authorizing the use of anticipated
receipts to offset ordinary expenses.


235
 
6-28-1983
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 32, § 20, subsection C½, allowing for the
compensation of the Town Auditor.


345
 
1-8-1985
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40, § 8D, allowing for the establishment of a
historical commission.


402
 
7-9-1985
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 32, § 99, allowing for retirement advance
payments.


471
 
8-12-1986
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40, § 8G, allowing local communities to enter
into mutual aid agreements in the area of police services.


481
 
11-12-1986
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 44, § 64, permitting the payment of bills
incurred in excess of appropriations from a previous fiscal year.


566
 
8-11-1987
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 32B, § 9F, as amended by Ch. 705 of the Acts
of 1986, allowing the town to provide for its retied employees group life
insurance.


567
 
9-8-1987
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 32B, § 9D, providing for retiree health care
benefits.


582
 
11-10-1987
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 41, § 108L, providing for a career incentive
program.


710
 
1-10-1989
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40, § 57, relating to the granting or renewal
of certain licenses and permits.


796
 
8-8-1989
 
Accepting Ch. 73 of the Acts of 1986, as amended by Ch. 126 of the Acts of
1988, setting the optional additional tax exemptions for fiscal year 1990.


857
 
3-13-1990
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 59, § 57C, relating to quarterly tax payments.


865
 
3-27-1990
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 148, §§ 26G, 26H, and 26I, relating to
automatic suppressant or sprinkler systems.


871
 
4-24-1990
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 360, regulating the rights of certain
firefighters and police officers who were laid-off in the years 1981 and 1982.


888
 
6-12-1990
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 653, § 40, concerning assessment of real
property.


917
 
11-27-1990
 
Accepting Ch. 73 of the Acts of 1986, amended by Ch. 126 of the Acts of 1988,
setting the optional additional tax exemptions for fiscal year 1991.


Res. 13
 
1-8-1991
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 32, allowing the town to lift the cap on
employee earnings used to calculate pension benefits.


29
 
3-26-1991
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40, § 42J, allowing certain owners of real
property to defer charges for water supplied to that property.


36
 
4-9-1991
 
Accepting Ch. 291 of the Acts of 1990, allowing the town to receive enhanced
911 service.


79
 
11-12-1991
 
Accepting Ch. 73 of the Acts of 1986, as amended by Ch. 126 of the Acts of
1988, setting the optional additional tax exemptions for fiscal year 1992.


12
 
1-28-1992
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 32, § 90G¾, allowing town employees who work
past the age of 70 to earn credit toward their retirement for such services.


84
 
11-10-1992
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 133, § 48, providing for an early retirement
incentive.


92
 
12-16-1992
 
Accepting Ch. 336 of the Acts of 1991, relative to the deferral of certain
teachers' compensation in fiscal year 1993.


187
 
12-7-1993
 
Accepting Ch. 73 of the Acts of 1986, as amended by Ch. 126 of the Acts of
1988, setting the additional tax exemption for fiscal year 1994.


5
 
1-25-1994
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40, § 8J, allowing for the creation of a town
commission on disability.


4
 
1-25-1994
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40, § 22G, allowing for the creation of a
disability access fund.


11
 
3-8-1994
 
Accepting Ch. 14, § 2 of the Acts of 1993, allowing for the issuance of
bonds.


41
 
8-16-1994
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 60, § 23B, setting out a certificate of lien
fee schedule.


57
 
11-22-1994
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 32B, § 16, relative to health care service
organizations.


57
 
11-22-1994
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40, § 39J, relative to a water service pricing
system and costs.


57
 
11-22-1994
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40, § 42A, relative to method of collection
for water charges and liens for delinquent charges.


57
 
11-22-1994
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40, § 42B, relative to the effective date of
liens and termination and enforcement.


57
 
11-22-1994
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40, § 42D, relative to unpaid charges and
collection as a part of property taxes.


57
 
11-22-1994
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40, § 42E, relative to abatement of water
charges and appeals therefrom.


57
 
11-22-1994
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 44, § 42F, relative to the recovery of
delinquent charges from tenants.


57
 
11-22-1994
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 44, § 65, relative to advances of vacation pay
for town employees.


57
 
11-22-1994
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 83, § 16A, relative to certificates of
acceptance for sewer charges and the effect and recordation thereof.


57
 
11-22-1994
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 83, § 16B, relative to the effective date of
sewer charge liens.


57
 
11-22-1994
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 83, § 16C, relative to certification of rates
and charges to assessors and commitment of a tax.


57
 
11-22-1994
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 83, § 16D, relative to application of other
law and the power of the tax collector.


57
 
11-22-1994
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 83, 16E, relative to remedies of aggrieved real
estate owners.


57
 
11-22-1994
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 83, § 16F, relative to the recovery of real
estate.


57
 
11-22-1994
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 83, § 16G, relative to deferral of charges.


86
 
4-25-1995
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 140, § 147A, relative to the regulation of
dogs.


136
 
11-28-1995
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 32, § 20, compensation retirement board
members.


Res. 83
 
11-12-1996
 
Accepting Ch. 71 of the Acts of 1996, authorizing certain public employees
creditable retirement service time for service in the armed forces.


Res. 40
 
5-13-1997
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40C, § 3, relating to historic districts.


Res. 10
 
2-24-1998
 
Accepting Ch. 17 of the Acts of 1997, relative to a annual cost of living
increases for retirees.


Res. 30
 
4-27-1999
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 456, relative to cost of living increases for
non-contributory retirees.


Res. 11
 
2-22-2000
 
Accepting Ch. 127, § 51 of the Acts of 1999, allowing the retirement board
to elect increased cost of living adjustments.


Res. 86
 
11-27-2001
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 32, § 9I, allowing for the continuance of
benefits to reservists.


19
 
5-14-2002
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 268A, § 1(n), classifying special municipal
employees.


6
 
2-28-2006
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 32B, § 19, regarding coalition bargaining.


Res. 33
 
6-13-2006
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 59, § 5, allowing for the exemption for
taxation of specified property and establishing $5,000 as the minimum value
of personal property subject to taxation.


Res. 70
 
11-28-2006
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 137 of the Acts of 2003, as amended by Ch. 77
of the Acts of 2005, on wages for municipal employees granted military leaves
of absence.


Res. 005
 
2-13-2007
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 59, § 5 cl. 41A, maintaining the interest rate
on deferred taxes for seniors 65 years of age or older at 8%.


Res. 006
 
2-13-2007
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 59, § 5L, allowing for the deferment of taxes
for a member of the Massachusetts National Guard or reservist and his or her
dependents during a period of active service and for 180 days thereafter.


Res. 47
 
5-13-2008
 
Accepting Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 32, § 9(2)(d)(ii), allowing for the increase
to death benefits for surviving children of members of the Watertown
Contributory Retirement System whose death resulted from injuries sustained
while in the performance of the member's duties.


91
 
11-25-2008
 
Accepting:


 
 
 
 
(1)   The provisions of Ch. 73 of the Acts of 1986, as amended by Ch. 126
of the Acts of 1988, for 2009 fiscal year for all those property owners in
Watertown who are otherwise eligible for exemptions under Mass. Gen. Laws Ch.
59, § 5, cls. 17D, 22, 22A, 22B, 22C, 22D, 22E, 37A and 41C, shall also be
eligible for an additional 100% of the exemption amounts under the clauses of
§ 5 enumerated above for which such owner would otherwise be eligible; and


 
 
 
 
(2)   The provisions of Ch. 184, § 51, of the Acts of 2002 (amending
Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 59, § 5, cl. 41C).


O-2010-17
 
3-9-2010
 
(1)   Accepting the provisions of Chapter 73 of the Acts of 1986, as
amended by Chapter 126 of the Acts of 1988, and setting the additional tax
exemptions for fiscal year 2010; and


 
 
 
 
(2)   Accepting the provisions of Chapter 184, Section 51 of the Acts of
2002 (Amending G.L. Ch. 59 Sec. 5 Clause 41C).


Order O-2010-84
 
12-7-2010
 
(1)   Accepting the provisions of Ch. 73 of the Acts of 1986, as amended
by Ch. 126 of the Acts of 1988, and setting the additional tax exemptions for
fiscal year 2011; and


 
 
 
 
(2)   Accepting the provisions of Ch. 184, Section 51 of the Acts of 2002
(Amending G.L. Ch. 59 Sec. 5 Clause 41C).


Order O-2011-53
 
11-22-2011
 
(1)   Accepting the provisions of Ch. 73 of the Acts of 1986, as amended
by Ch. 126 of the Acts of 1988, and setting the additional tax exemptions for
fiscal year 2012; and


 
 
 
 
(2)   Accepting the provisions of Ch. 184, Section 51 of the Acts of 2002
(Amending G.L. Ch. 59 Sec. 5 Clause 41C).


Order O-2012-6B
 
11-27-2012
 
(1)   Accepting the provisions of Ch. 73 of the Acts of 1986, as amended
by Chapter 126 of the Acts of 1988, and setting the additional tax exemptions
for fiscal year 2013; and


 
 
 
 
(2)   Accepting the provisions of Ch. 184, Section 51 of the Acts of 2002
(Amending G.L. Ch. 59 Sec. 5 Clause 41C).


Order O-2013-73
 
11-26-2013
 
(1)   Accepting the provisions of Ch. 73 of the Acts of 1986, as amended
by Chapter 126 of the Acts of 1988, and setting the additional tax exemptions
for fiscal year 2014; and


 
 
 
 
(2)   Accepting the provisions of Ch. 184, Section 51 of the Acts of 2002
(Amending G.L. Ch. 59 Sec. 5 Clause 41C).


O-2016-66
 
11-24-2015
 
(1)   Accepting the provisions of Ch. 73, of the Acts of 1986, as amended
by Ch. 126 of the Acts of 1988, and setting the additional tax exemptions for
fiscal year 2016; and


 
 
 
 
(2)   Accepting the provisions of Ch. 184, Section 51 of the Acts of 2002
(Amending G.L. Ch. 59, Sec. 5 Clause 41C).


O-2016-65
 
11-9-2016
 
(1)   An order accepting the provisions of Chapter 73, of the Acts of
1986, as amended by Ch. 126 of the Acts of 1988, and setting the additional
tax exemptions for fiscal year 2017; and


 
 
 
 
(2)   Accepting the provisions of Ch. 184, Section 51 of the Acts of 2002
(amending G.L. Ch. 59 Sec. 5 Clause 41C).


Res. R-2017-33
 
5-9-2017
 
A resolution adopting the provisions of G.L. Ch. 41, § 100G1/4 related to
payment of funeral and burial expenses of firefighters and police officers.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II: ZONING MAP CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




7
 
1-28-1992
 
Rezoning from LB to SC parcels of land on Chester Street, Parker Street, and
Phillips Street.


109
 
2-23-1993
 
Rezoning from LB to I-2 a parcel of land known as 123 Water Street.


130
 
5-25-1993
 
Placing the Revitalization Overlay District on the property known as 700
Pleasant Street.


15
 
3-22-1994
 
Extending the S-6 zoning district east to include the properties located on
the eastern side of Hillside Road, from Mt. Auburn Street to Maplewood Street.


67
 
2-14-1995
 
Rezoning from T to LB the parcel of land at 75 Galen Street.


68
 
2-14-1995
 
Rezoning from T to CB the parcel of land at 55-57 Pleasant Street.


69
 
2-14-1995
 
Rezoning from R.75 to CB the parcel of land known as Parcel B.


71
 
2-14-1995
 
Rezoning from T to LB the parcel of land known as 7 and 9 Irma Avenue.


3
 
1-9-1996
 
Rezoning from T to S-6 the parcel of land located at 43 Waltham Street.


5
 
1-28-1997
 
Rezoning from R.75 to CB the parcel of land known as St. Patrick's property
on Church Hill Street.


 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Massachusetts General Laws





References to 1982 Code





Reference to Ordinances





References to Resolutions




REFERENCES TO MASSACHUSETTS GENERAL LAWS



 

Mass. Gen. Laws Cite
 
Code Section




Ch. 7, § 22A
 
34.04


Ch. 7, § 22B
 
34.04


Ch. 7, §§ 38A1/2 – 38O
 
34.05


Ch. 30, § 39M
 
34.06


Ch. 30B
 
Charter Section 7-1, 34.01, 34.02


Ch. 31
 
30.30, 51.01


Ch. 40, § 21(23)
 
Ch. 71


Ch. 40, § 21(24)
 
Ch. 71


Ch. 40, § 21D
 
35.05, 91.10, 96.99, 97.99, 98.06, 110.05, 115.05, 116.04, 154.14


Ch. 40, § 22D
 
96.10


Ch. 40, § 57
 
33.02


Ch. 40A, § 3
 
98.01


Ch. 40C
 
152.01, 152.04, 152.17


Ch. 40C, § 12A
 
152.17


Ch. 41, § 59
 
30.19


Ch. 41, § 99A
 
30.31


Ch. 41, § 108A
 
30.15


Ch. 41, § 108C
 
30.15


Ch. 43B, § 13
 
112.20


Ch. 44, §§ 32 and 33
 
Charter Section 5-3


Ch. 44, § 53E1/2
 
32.08, 91.11


Ch. 44, § 53G
 
154.05


Ch. 44B
 
36.01, 36.04


Ch. 44B, § 5
 
36.04


Ch. 50, § 1
 
Charter Section 7-1


Ch. 51, § 16A
 
Charter Section 7-1


Ch. 59, § 5(41C)
 
T.S.O. Table I


Ch. 68A
 
151.04


Ch. 78
 
30.17


Ch. 84, § 24
 
96.15


Ch. 84, § 25
 
96.15


Ch. 90, § 2
 
71.01, 71.04


Ch. 90, § 20A-1/2
 
92.06


Ch. 90, §§ 20A – 20C
 
71.99


Ch. 90, § 20D
 
71.99


Ch. 90, § 20E
 
71.99


Ch. 101
 
110.05


Ch. 101, § 34
 
112.22


Ch. 111, § 31
 
10.99


Ch. 111, § 31B
 
10.99


Ch. 131, § 23
 
91.09


Ch. 131, § 40
 
154.01, 154.02, 154.04, 154.05, 154.07, 154.15


Ch. 138
 
116.03


Ch. 138, § 1
 
130.07


Ch. 138, § 34
 
116.04


Ch. 140
 
113.03


Ch. 140, § 58
 
90.04


Ch. 140, §§ 136A  – 174E
 
91.01


Ch. 140, § 139(C)
 
91.03


Ch. 140, § 145B
 
91.03, 91.08


Ch. 140, § 157
 
91.09


Ch. 141
 
51.30


Ch. 143
 
153.05


Ch. 149, §§ 44A – 44M
 
34.07


Ch. 164
 
96.06


Ch. 164, § 1
 
51.18


Ch. 164, § 69G
 
51.18


Ch. 164, §§ 70 and 71
 
Charter Section 2-8


Ch. 166
 
Charter Section 2-8, 51.02


Ch. 166, § 32
 
51.05


Ch. 266, § 120D
 
71.04


Ch. 268A
 
36.05


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1982 CODE



 

1982 Code Section
 
2004 Code Section




Sec. 5(B)
 
96.99


Ch. I, § 4
 
35.03


Ch. I, § 6
 
10.99


Ch. I, § 7(a)
 
35.04


Ch. I, § 7(b)
 
35.05


Ch. I, § 8
 
35.02


Ch. I, §§ 10 and 11
 
30.03


Ch. II, § 1
 
31.01


Ch. II, § 2
 
31.02


Ch. II, §§ 3-4
 
31.03


Ch. II, § 5
 
31.04


Ch. II, § 6
 
31.05


Ch. III, § 1
 
30.01


Ch. III, § 2
 
30.02


Ch. III, § 3
 
32.01


Ch. III, § 4
 
32.02


Ch. III, § 8
 
32.03


Ch. III, § 9
 
32.04


Ch. III, § 11
 
32.05


Ch. III, § 12
 
32.07


Ch. IV, § 1
 
31.15


Ch. IV, § 2
 
31.16


Ch. IV, § 3
 
31.17


Ch. VI, §§ 1-2
 
50.01


Ch. VI, § 3
 
52.01


Ch. VI, § 4
 
54.01


Ch. VI, § 5
 
54.02


Ch. VI, § 6
 
54.03


Ch. VI, § 7
 
54.04


Ch. VI, § 8
 
54.05


Ch. VI, § 9
 
54.06


Ch. VI, § 10
 
51.01


Ch. VI, § 11
 
51.02


Ch. VI, § 12
 
51.03


Ch. VI, § 13
 
51.04


Ch. VI, § 14
 
51.05


Ch. VI, § 15
 
51.06


Ch. VI, § 16
 
51.07


Ch. VI, § 17
 
51.08


Ch. VI, § 18
 
51.09


Ch. VI, § 19
 
51.10


Ch. VI, § 20
 
51.11


Ch. VI, § 21
 
51.12


Ch. VI, § 22
 
51.13


Ch. VI, § 23
 
51.14


Ch. VI, § 24
 
51.15


Ch. VI, § 25
 
51.16


Ch. VI, § 26
 
51.30


Ch. VI, § 27
 
51.31


Ch. VI, § 28
 
51.32


Ch. VI, § 29
 
51.17


Ch. VII, § 1
 
96.01


Ch. VII, § 2
 
96.02


Ch. VII, § 3
 
96.03


Ch. VII, § 4
 
96.04


Ch. VII, § 5
 
96.25


Ch. VII, § 5(C)
 
96.27


Ch. VII, § 6
 
96.05


Ch. VII, § 7
 
96.06


Ch. VII, § 8
 
96.07


Ch. VII, § 9
 
96.07


Ch. VII, § 10
 
96.09


Ch. VII, § 11
 
53.01


Ch. VII, § 12
 
53.02


Ch. VII, § 13
 
53.03


Ch. VII, § 14
 
96.10


Ch. VIII, § 1
 
96.11


Ch. VIII, § 2
 
130.01


Ch. VIII, § 3
 
96.12


Ch. VIII, § 4
 
130.02


Ch. VIII, § 5
 
130.03


Ch. VIII, § 6
 
112.01


Ch. VIII, § 6
 
112.99


Ch. VIII, § 7
 
112.02


Ch. VIII, § 8
 
110.01


Ch. VIII, § 9
 
96.13


Ch. VIII, § 10
 
112.03


Ch. VIII, § 11
 
130.04


Ch. VIII, § 12
 
130.05


Ch. VIII, § 15
 
93.01


Ch. VIII, § 16
 
111.01


Ch. VIII, § 17
 
111.02


Ch. VIII, § 18
 
96.14


Ch. VIII, § 19
 
35.01


Ch. VIII, § 20
 
130.06


Ch. VIII, § 21
 
110.02


Ch. VIII, § 24
 
96.16, 96.99


Ch. VIII, § 25(1)
 
90.01


Ch. VIII, § 25(2)
 
90.02


Ch. VIII, § 25(3)
 
90.03


Ch. VIII, § 25(4)
 
90.04


Ch. VIII, § 25(5)
 
90.99


Ch. VIII, § 26
 
130.07, 130.99


Ch. VIII, § 27
 
113.01 – 113.04, 113.99


Ch. VIII, § 28
 
114.01 – 114.03, 114.99


Ch. VIII, § 29
 
110.03


Ch. VIII, §§ 29 and 30
 
110.99


Ch. VIII, § 30
 
110.04


Ch. VIII, § 31
 
110.06


Ch. IX, § 1
 
92.01


Ch. IX, § 2
 
92.02


Ch. IX, § 2
 
92.03


Ch. IX, § 3
 
92.04


Ch. IX, § 4
 
92.05


Ch. XI, § 1
 
70.01


Ch. XI, § 2
 
70.02


Ch. XI, § 3
 
70.03


Ch. XI, §§ 4-5
 
70.04


Ch. XI, § 6
 
70.05


Ch. XI, § 7
 
70.06


Ch. XIII, § 1
 
151.01


Ch. XIII, § 2
 
151.02


Ch. XIII, § 3
 
151.03


Ch. XIII, §§ 4-5
 
151.04


 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




472
 
  -  -
 
T.S.O. Table I


97(1)
 
6-8-1982
 
T.S.O. Table I


5
 
5-10-1983
 
110.06


235
 
6-28-1983
 
T.S.O. Table I


6
 
9-13-1983
 
95.01 – 95.05, 95.99


7
 
9-11-1984
 
92.06, 92.99


9
 
11-13-1984
 
92.07, 92.99


345
 
1-8-1985
 
T.S.O. Table I


402
 
7-9-1985
 
T.S.O. Table I


471
 
8-12-1986
 
T.S.O. Table I


481
 
11-12-1986
 
T.S.O. Table I


493
 
2-26-1987
 
154.01 – 154.10, 154.13 – 154.15, 154.99


531
 
5-12-1987
 
93.02, 93.99


566
 
8-11-1987
 
T.S.O. Table I


567
 
9-8-1987
 
T.S.O. Table I


582
 
11-10-1987
 
T.S.O. Table I


710
 
1-10-1989
 
T.S.O. Table I


711
 
1-10-1989
 
33.01 – 33.05


796
 
8-8-1989
 
T.S.O. Table I


857
 
3-13-1990
 
T.S.O. Table I


865
 
3-27-1990
 
T.S.O. Table I


871
 
4-24-1990
 
T.S.O. Table I


888
 
6-12-1990
 
T.S.O. Table I


893
 
6-26-1990
 
96.15


896
 
7-10-1990
 
110.04


917
 
11-27-1990
 
T.S.O. Table I


29
 
3-26-1991
 
T.S.O. Table I


30
 
3-26-1991
 
150.01, 150.99


31
 
3-26-1991
 
10.99, 35.04, 35.05


36
 
4-9-1991
 
T.S.O. Table I


46
 
6-11-1991
 
51.18


79
 
11-12-1991
 
T.S.O. Table I


90
 
12-10-1991
 
96.25, 96.27, 96.99


4
 
1-28-1992
 
96.25, 96.27, 96.99


7
 
1-28-1992
 
T.S.O. Table II


12
 
1-28-1992
 
T.S.O. Table I


32
 
5-12-1992
 
35.05


33
 
5-12-1992
 
110.05, 110.99


36
 
9-8-1992
 
31.30 – 31.35


84
 
11-10-1992
 
T.S.O. Table I


92
 
12-16-1992
 
T.S.O. Table I


109
 
2-23-1993
 
T.S.O. Table II


121
 
4-13-1993
 
154.05


130
 
5-25-1993
 
T.S.O. Table II


135
 
6-22-1993
 
96.06


182
 
11-23-1993
 
154.04


187
 
12-7-1993
 
T.S.O. Table I


4
 
1-25-1994
 
T.S.O. Table I


5
 
1-25-1994
 
T.S.O. Table I


11
 
3-8-1994
 
T.S.O. Table I


15
 
3-22-1994
 
T.S.O. Table II


27
 
4-26-1994
 
112.20 – 112.31, 112.99


35
 
6-14-1994
 
30.02


40
 
8-16-1994
 
33.01 – 33.05


41
 
8-16-1994
 
T.S.O. Table I


57
 
11-22-1994
 
T.S.O. Table I


67
 
2-14-1995
 
T.S.O. Table II


68
 
2-14-1995
 
T.S.O. Table II


69
 
2-14-1995
 
T.S.O. Table II


71
 
2-14-1995
 
T.S.O. Table II


85
 
4-25-1995
 
93.02, 93.99


86
 
4-25-1995
 
T.S.O. Table I


124
 
9-26-1995
 
52.01


136
 
11-28-1995
 
T.S.O. Table I


141
 
12-19-1995
 
51.18


3
 
1-9-1996
 
T.S.O. Table II


14
 
3-12-1996
 
95.01


5
 
1-28-1997
 
T.S.O. Table II


38
 
5-13-1997
 
96.25


39
 
5-13-1997
 
96.26, 96.99


39, Sec. C(2)
 
5-13-1997
 
96.27


97
 
10-28-1997
 
153.01 – 153.05, 153.99


25
 
5-12-1998
 
96.06


71
 
10-27-1998
 
94.01 – 94.05, 94.99


15
 
2-23-1999
 
71.01 – 71.04, 71.99


32
 
6-13-2000
 
130.08


15
 
3-13-2001
 
70.01 – 70.07


73
 
10-9-2001
 
94.01 – 94.05, 94.99


16
 
4-23-2002
 
152.01 – 152.05, 152.15 – 152.17, 152.31, 152.32, 152.99


19
 
5-14-2002
 
T.S.O. Table I


13
 
3-11-2003
 
96.25


43
 
7-15-2003
 
92.02, 92.03


8
 
3-9-2004
 
34.01 – 34.10


57
 
9-12-2006
 
153.03


46
 
10-23-2007
 
31.50 – 31.53


67
 
9-9-2008
 
154.01 – 154.15, 154.99


91
 
11-25-2008
 
T.S.O. Table I


2
 
1-12-2010
 
156.01 – 156.07, 156.99


2010-6
 
2-9-2010
 
55.01, 55.02


O-2010-17
 
3-9-2010
 
T.S.O. Table I


O-2010-78
 
11-9-2010
 
150.02


Order O-2010-84
 
12-7-2010
 
T.S.O. Table I


O-2011-23
 
5-11-2011
 
97.01 – 97.14, 97.99


O-2011-26
 
5-24-2011
 
70.02, 70.05


Order O-2011-53
 
11-22-2011
 
T.S.O. Table I


Order O-2012-68
 
11-27-2012
 
T.S.O. Table I


O-2013-6
 
1-22-2013
 
31.50


O-2013-15
 
3-26-2013
 
30.03


Order O-2013-73
 
11-26-2013
 
T.S.O. Table I


O-2014-26
 
4-22-2014
 
30.03


O-2015-15
 
4-14-2015
 
30.02


O-2015-57
 
9-22-2015
 
116.01 - 116.05


O-2015-66
 
11-24-2015
 
T.S.O. Table I


O-2016-7
 
2-23-2016
 
98.01  – 98.06


2016-10
 
3-22-2016
 
30.03


31
 
6-7-2016
 
115.01 – 115.05


O-2016-47
 
8-9-2016
 
96.27, 96.99


2016-58
 
9-27-2016
 
55.02


O-2016-65
 
11-9-2016
 
T.S.O. Table I


O-2017-2
 
1-24-2017
 
91.01  – 91.11


O-2017-31
 
5-9-2017
 
72.01  – 72.03, 72.15 – 72.19, 72.30, 72.45 – 72.48


O-2017-47
 
6-27-2017
 
32.08


O-2018-59
 
6-26-2018
 
36.01 – 36.05


 
 
 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




13
 
1-8-1991
 
T.S.O. Table I


94-28
 
5-10-1994
 
92.02, 92.03


83
 
11-12-1996
 
T.S.O. Table I


40
 
5-13-1997
 
T.S.O. Table I


10
 
2-24-1998
 
T.S.O. Table I


30
 
4-27-1999
 
T.S.O. Table I


11
 
2-22-2000
 
T.S.O. Table I


86
 
11-27-2001
 
T.S.O. Table I


33
 
6-13-2006
 
T.S.O. Table I


70
 
11-28-2006
 
T.S.O. Table I


005
 
2-13-2007
 
T.S.O. Table I


006
 
2-13-2007
 
T.S.O. Table I


47
 
5-13-2008
 
T.S.O. Table I


R-2016-66
 
11-9-2016
 
30.03


R-2017-9
 
3-28-2017
 
30.03


R-2017-33
 
5-9-2017
 
T.S.O. Table I


TOWN OF WATERTOWN
ZONING ORDINANCE
Amended as of December 11, 2018

1
ZONING ORDINANCE
Watertown Planning Board
Watertown, Massachusetts
Amended December 11, 2018
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I ..................................................................................................................................................................9
PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION.........................................................................................................................9
SECTION 1.00 PURPOSE OF ZONING ORDINANCE........................................................................... 9
SECTION 1.01 INTERPRETATION......................................................................................................... 9
ARTICLE II .............................................................................................................................................................. 11
DEFINITIONS.......................................................................................................................................................... 11
SECTION 2.00 DEFINITIONS................................................................................................................12
SECTION 2.01 ACCESSORY................................................................................................................12
SECTION 2.02 AGRICULTURE.............................................................................................................12
SECTION 2.03 ADULT STORES...........................................................................................................12
SECTION 2.04 ADULT THEATER.........................................................................................................12
SECTION 2.05 ASSISTED LIVING........................................................................................................12
SECTION 2.06 BASEMENT...................................................................................................................12
SECTION 2.07 BUFFER ZONE.............................................................................................................13
SECTION 2.08 BUILD-TO-LINE ............................................................................................................13
SECTION 2.09 BUILDING .....................................................................................................................13
SECTION 2.10 BUILDING AREA ..........................................................................................................13
SECTION 2.11 BUILDING COVERAGE................................................................................................13
SECTION 2.12 BUILDING FRONT YARD.............................................................................................13
SECTION 2.13 BUILDING, PRINCIPAL ................................................................................................13
SECTION 2.14 BUSINESS ACCESSORY USE, USUAL......................................................................13
SECTION 2.15 CORNER LOT...............................................................................................................13
SECTION 2.16 CONVERSION..............................................................................................................14
SECTION 2.17 DRIVEWAY ...................................................................................................................14
SECTION 2.18 DWELLING....................................................................................................................14
SECTION 2.19 DWELLING UNIT ..........................................................................................................14
SECTION 2.20 ERECT ..........................................................................................................................14
SECTION 2.21 EXEMPT RELIGIOUS OR EDUCATIONAL USE.........................................................14
SECTION 2.22 EXISTING......................................................................................................................15
SECTION 2.23 FAMILY .........................................................................................................................15
SECTION 2.24 FAMILY DAY CARE......................................................................................................15
SECTION 2.25 FAST FOOD ESTABLISHMENT ..................................................................................15
SECTION 2.26 FENCE ..........................................................................................................................15
SECTION 2.27 FLOOD, BASE ..............................................................................................................15
SECTION 2.28 FLOODWAY/100-YEAR FLOODPLAIN .......................................................................15
SECTION 2.29 FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) ........................................................................................15
3
SECTION 2.30 FRONT BUILDING LINE...............................................................................................15
SECTION 2.31 FRONTAGE ..................................................................................................................15
SECTION 2.32 GASOLINE SERVICE STATION..................................................................................16
SECTION 2.33 GROSS FLOOR AREA.................................................................................................16
SECTION 2.34 HEIGHT OF BUILDING.................................................................................................16
SECTION 2.35 HOME OCCUPATION ..................................................................................................16
SECTION 2.36 HOME OFFICE .............................................................................................................16
SECTION 2.37 HOTEL, MOTEL............................................................................................................17
SECTION 2.38 IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE..........................................................................................17
SECTION 2.39 INDUSTRY, HEAVY......................................................................................................17
SECTION 2.40 INDUSTRY, LIGHT .......................................................................................................17
SECTION 2.41 INTERESTED PARTY ..................................................................................................17
SECTION 2.42 LANDSCAPED..............................................................................................................17
SECTION 2.43 LICENSED DAY CARE.................................................................................................17
SECTION 2.44 LODGER .......................................................................................................................17
SECTION 2.45 LODGING HOUSE, LICENSED....................................................................................17
SECTION 2.46 LOT................................................................................................................................18
SECTION 2.47 LOT AREA.....................................................................................................................18
SECTION 2.48 LOT FRONTAGE ..........................................................................................................18
SECTION 2.49 LOT LINE, FRONT........................................................................................................18
SECTION 2.50 LOT LINE, SIDE............................................................................................................18
SECTION 2.51 LOT LINE, STREET OR STREET LINE.......................................................................18
SECTION 2.52 LOT LINE, REAR ..........................................................................................................18
SECTION 2.53 LOT WIDTH...................................................................................................................18
SECTION 2.54 LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT...................................................................................18
SECTION 2.55 MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT......................................................................................18
SECTION 2.56 MOTOR VEHICLE BODY WORK ESTABLISHMENT .................................................19
SECTION 2.57 MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR ESTABLISHMENT ..........................................................19
SECTION 2.58 NON-CONFORMING BUILDING OR LOT ...................................................................19
SECTION 2.59 NON-CONFORMING USE............................................................................................19
SECTION 2.60 OCCUPIED ...................................................................................................................19
SECTION 2.61 OPEN SPACE...............................................................................................................19
SECTION 2.62 OPEN SPACE, PUBLICALY USEABLE.......................................................................19
SECTION 2.63 OPERABLE (MOTOR VEHICLE) .................................................................................20
SECTION 2.64 PRINCIPAL USE...........................................................................................................20
SECTION 2.65 PROFESSION...............................................................................................................20
4
SECTION 2.66 RENEWABLE OR ALTERNATIVE ENERGY...............................................................20
SECTION 2.67 RENEWABLE OR ALTERNATIVE ENERGY RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT OR
MANUFACTURING FACILITIES ..............................................................................................................20
SECTION 2.68 RESEARCH FACILITY .................................................................................................20
SECTION 2.69 RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN; REFRESHMENT STAND, DRIVE-IN; EATING
ESTABLISHMENT, DRIVE-THROUGH....................................................................................................20
SECTION 2.70 RETAIL..........................................................................................................................20
SECTION 2.71 RETAINING WALL........................................................................................................20
SECTION 2.72 SCREENING.................................................................................................................21
SECTION 2.73 SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY ........................................................................21
SECTION 2.74 SETBACK......................................................................................................................21
SECTION 2.75 SIGN..............................................................................................................................21
SECTION 2.76 SIGN, AREA OF............................................................................................................21
SECTION 2.77 SMART GROWTH ........................................................................................................21
SECTION 2.78 SPECIAL PERMIT ........................................................................................................21
SECTION 2.79 STORY, HALF-STORY.................................................................................................21
SECTION 2.80 STREET ........................................................................................................................22
SECTION 2.81 STRUCTURE................................................................................................................22
SECTION 2.82 TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT PLAN (TDM PLAN).........................22
SECTION 2.83 USE...............................................................................................................................22
SECTION 2.84 VARIANCE....................................................................................................................22
SECTION 2.85 WHOLESALE................................................................................................................22
SECTION 2.86 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY.......................................................22
SECTION 2.87 YARD, FRONT..............................................................................................................22
SECTION 2.88 YARD, SIDE..................................................................................................................22
SECTION 2.89 YARD, REAR ................................................................................................................23
ARTICLE III ............................................................................................................................................................. 25
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS ......................................................................................................... 25
SECTION 3.00 DIVISION OF THE TOWN INTO DISTRICTS..............................................................25
SECTION 3.01 CLASSIFICATION OF DISTRICTS ..............................................................................25
SECTION 3.02 BOUNDARIES OF THE DISTRICTS............................................................................26
ARTICLE IV............................................................................................................................................................. 27
GENERAL USE AND DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS......................................................................................... 27
SECTION 4.00 APPLICABILITY OF USE REGULATIONS ..................................................................27
SECTION 4.01 PERMITTED USES.......................................................................................................27
SECTION 4.02 USES SUBJECT TO OTHER REGULATIONS............................................................27
SECTION 4.03 ACCESSORY USES.....................................................................................................27
SECTION 4.04 PROHIBITED USES .....................................................................................................28
SECTION 4.05 CONTINUANCE OF NON-CONFORMING USE..........................................................28
5
SECTION 4.06 ALTERATION OF NON-CONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS/STRUCTURES.... 28
SECTION 4.07 RECONSTRUCTION OF A NON-CONFORMING BUILDING AFTER CATASTROPHE
.......................................................................................................................................29
SECTION 4.08 APPLICABILITY OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS.................................................29
SECTION 4.09 EXCEPTIONS TO LOT SIZE REGULATIONS.............................................................30
SECTION 4.10 EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT REGULATIONS...............................................................30
SECTION 4.11 EXCEPTIONS TO SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.........................................................30
SECTION 4.12 REQUIRED CORNER CLEARANCE FOR VISIBILITY................................................31
SECTION 4.13 TRANSITION REQUIREMENTS ..................................................................................31
SECTION 4.14 SCREENING.................................................................................................................31
SECTION 4.15 DISCOURAGED EXTERIOR CLADDING MATERIALS ..............................................31
ARTICLE V.............................................................................................................................................................. 33
TABLES OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS................................................................................................................ 33
SECTION 5.00 INTERPRETATION.......................................................................................................33
SECTION 5.01 TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS .................................................................................34
SECTION 5.02 TABLE OF ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS .........................................................39
SECTION 5.03 NOTES TO TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS..............................................................41
SECTION 5.04 TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS................................................................44
SECTION 5.05 NOTES TO TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS............................................45
SECTION 5.06 FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT..............................................................................................47
SECTION 5.07 AFFORDABLE HOUSING REQUIREMENTS..............................................................50
SECTION 5.08 REVITALIZATION OVERLAY SPECIAL PERMIT (R0)................................................55
SECTION 5.09 WATERTOWN SQUARE DESIGN OVERLAY DISTRICT...........................................56
SECTION 5.10 LIMITED REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (RD)............................................................57
SECTION 5.11 ASSISTED LIVING OVERLAY DISTRICT (ALOD) ......................................................58
SECTION 5.12 ARSENAL OVERLAY DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (AODD) .......................................58
SECTION 5.13 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES ...................................................63
SECTION 5.14 RELIGIOUS/SCHOOL BUILDING OVERLAY DISTRICT (R/SOD) .............................63
SECTION 5.15 MUNICIPAL REUSE AND DEVELOPMENT................................................................65
SECTION 5.16 PLEASANT STREET CORRIDOR DISTRICT (PSCD)................................................67
SECTION 5.17 DESIGN GUIDELINES..................................................................................................72
SECTION 5.18 REGIONAL MIXED USE DISTRICT (RMUD)...............................................................73
ARTICLE VI............................................................................................................................................................. 81
AUTOMOTIVE AND BICYCLE PARKING REQUIREMENTS................................................................................ 81
SECTION 6.00 INTENT OF REQUIREMENTS.....................................................................................81
SECTION 6.01 REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES ..........................................................81
SECTION 6.02 LOCATION AND DESIGN OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES.............................84
SECTION 6.03 REQUIRED OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES ..........................................................86
6
SECTION 6.04 DESIGN AND LAYOUT OF OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES.............................86
SECTION 6.05 OUTDOOR AUTOMOBILE STORAGE, NEW OR USED VEHICLES.........................87
SECTION 6.06 GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS................................................................................87
SECTION 6.07 BICYCLE PARKING......................................................................................................88
ARTICLE VII............................................................................................................................................................ 89
SIGNS AND ILLUMINATION .................................................................................................................................. 89
SECTION 7.00 INTENT AND PURPOSE..............................................................................................89
SECTION 7.01 DEFINITION OF TERMS..............................................................................................89
SECTION 7.02 APPLICATION AND PROCEDURE .............................................................................90
SECTION 7.03 SIGNS IN ALL DISTRICTS...........................................................................................91
SECTION 7.04 SIGNS IN S-10, S-6, SC, CR, T and OSC DISTRICTS ...............................................93
SECTION 7.05 SIGNS IN R.75 and R1.2 DISTRICTS, AND FOR RESIDENTIAL USES IN THE I-3
and RMUD DISTRICT...............................................................................................................................93
SECTION 7.06 SIGNS IN THE NB, LB, CB, I, RMUD, and PSCD DISTRICTS ...................................94
SECTION 7.07 SIGN SPECIAL PERMIT...............................................................................................95
SECTION 7.08 PERMITTED ILLUMINATION.......................................................................................95
SECTION 7.09 NON-CONFORMANCE ................................................................................................96
SECTION 7.10 WATERTOWN SQUARE DESIGN OVERLAY DISTRICT...........................................96
SECTION 7.11 HOTEL AND MOTEL SIGNS......................................................................................96
SECTION 7.12 EXTERIOR LIGHTING STANDARDS ..........................................................................97
SECTION 7.13 EXTERIOR LIGHTING TECHNICAL SUBMITTALS ....................................................97
ARTICLE VIII........................................................................................................................................................... 99
OTHER REGULATIONS......................................................................................................................................... 99
SECTION 8.00 REGULATION OF SOIL REMOVAL.............................................................................99
SECTION 8.01 OVERHANGING SHRUBS OR EVERGREENS ..........................................................99
SECTION 8.02 SALE OF PRODUCTS ON PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY...............................................99
SECTION 8.03 YARD SALES................................................................................................................99
SECTION 8.04 MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTERS AND ADULT USE MARIJUANA
ESTABLISHMENTS..................................................................................................................................99
Section 8.05 Solar Energy Systems.................................................................................................100
ARTICLE IX........................................................................................................................................................... 103
ENFORCEMENT AND APPLICATION PROCEDURES....................................................................................... 103
SECTION 9.00 ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS.................................................................................103
SECTION 9.01 BUILDING PERMIT.....................................................................................................104
SECTION 9.02 OCCUPANCY PERMIT...............................................................................................104
SECTION 9.03 SITE PLAN REVIEW OF CERTAIN RESIDENTIAL AND NON-RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENTS...................................................................................................................................104
SECTION 9.04 APPLICATION AND HEARING PROCEDURES FOR SPECIAL PERMITS AND
VARIANCES .....................................................................................................................................107
SECTION 9.05 SPECIAL PERMIT: CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL ................................................108
7
SECTION 9.06 SPECIAL PERMIT CRITERIA FOR I-1 and I-2 DISTRICTS......................................108
SECTION 9.07 SPECIAL PERMIT CRITERIA FOR I-3 DISTRICT.....................................................109
SECTION 9.08 SPECIAL PERMIT CRITERIA FOR I-3 DISTRICT - LOT SIZE .................................110
SECTION 9.09 LIMITED APPROVAL OF SPECIAL PERMIT ............................................................110
SECTION 9.10 WITHDRAWAL OF LIMITED SPECIAL PERMIT.......................................................111
SECTION 9.11 SPECIAL PERMIT FOR TEMPORARY STRUCTURES............................................111
SECTION 9.12 SPECIAL PERMIT APPROVAL OF CERTAIN SITE PLANS.....................................111
SECTION 9.13 LAPSE OF SPECIAL PERMIT....................................................................................111
SECTION 9.14 VARIANCES................................................................................................................111
SECTION 9.15 CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL OF A VARIANCE ...................................................112
SECTION 9.16 LAPSE OF VARIANCE...............................................................................................112
SECTION 9.17 SPECIAL PERMITS AND VARIANCES: EFFECTIVE DATES.................................112
SECTION 9.18 SPECIAL PERMITS AND VARIANCES; WITHDRAWAL WITHOUT PREJUDICE;
RECONSIDERATION .............................................................................................................................112
SECTION 9.19 RIGHT OF APPEAL....................................................................................................113
SECTION 9.20 AMENDMENTS TO ZONING ORDINANCE...............................................................113
SECTION 9.21 PUBLIC HEARINGS FOR AMENDMENTS................................................................113
SECTION 9.22 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS FOR AMENDMENTS...........................................114
ARTICLE X............................................................................................................................................................ 115
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS......................................................................................................................... 115
SECTION 10.01 VALIDITY ....................................................................................................................115
SECTION 10.02 EFFECTIVE DATE......................................................................................................115
APPENDIX I .......................................................................................................................................................... 117
LEGISLATIVE CHRONOLOGY............................................................................................................................ 117
8
9
ARTICLE I
PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION
______________________________________________________________________________
1.00 Purpose of Zoning Ordinance 1.01 Interpretation
______________________________________________________________________________
SECTION 1.00 PURPOSE OF ZONING ORDINANCE
The purpose of this Zoning Ordinance is declared to be the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience
and welfare by
(a) encouraging the most appropriate use of land;
(b) preventing overcrowding of land;
(c) conserving the value of land and buildings, including the conserving of natural resources and
the preventing of blight and polluting of the environment;
(d) lessening congestion of traffic including, but not limited to, providing adequate operating area for
bicycles and secure bicycle parking;
(e) preventing undue concentration of population;
(f) providing for adequate light and air;
(g) reducing hazards from fire and other dangers;
(h) assisting in the economical provisions of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and
other public facilities;
(i) encouraging housing for persons of all income levels;
(j) preserving and increasing the amenities of the Town; and
(k) giving effect to policies of the Watertown Master/Comprehensive Plan or other adopted land use
plans that currently apply and may from time to time be amended, and to applicable policies of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts that currently apply and may from time to time be
amended.
SECTION 1.01 INTERPRETATION
In their interpretation and application the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be held to be the minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of its purposes.
10
11
ARTICLE II
DEFINITIONS
2.00 Definitions 2.46 Lot
2.01 Accessory 2.47 Lot Area
2.02 Agriculture 2.48 Lot Frontage
2.03 Adult Stores 2.49 Lot Line, Front
2.04 Adult Theater 2.50 Lot Line, Side
2.05 Assisted Living 2.51 Lot Line, Street or Street Line
2.06 Basement 2.52 Lot Line, Rear
2.07 Buffer Zone 2.53 Lot Width
2,08 Build-to-Line 2.54 Low Impact Development
2.09 Building 2.55 Mixed Use Development
2.10 Building Area 2.56 Motor Vehicle Body Work Establishment
2.11 Building Coverage 2.57 Motor Vehicle Repair Establishment
2.12 Building Front Yard 2.58 Non-conforming Building or Lot
2.13 Building, Principal 2.59 Non-conforming Use
2.14 Business Accessory Use, Usual 2.60 Occupied
2.15 Corner Lot 2.61 Open Space
2.16 Conversion 2.62 Open Space, Publicly Useable
2.17 Driveway 2.63 Operable (Motor Vehicle)
2.18 Dwelling 2.64 Principal Use
2.19 Dwelling Unit 2.65 Profession
2.20 Erect 2.66 Renewable or Alternative Energy
2.21 Exempt Religious or Educational Use 2.67 Renewable or Alternative Energy
2.22 Existing Research Development or
2.23 Family Manufacturing Facilities
2.24 Family Day Care 2.68 Research Facility
2.25 Fast Food Establishment 2.69 Restaurant, Drive-In; Drive-In Refresh.
2.26 Fence Stand, Drive Through Eating Establ.
2.27 Flood Base 2.70 Retail
2.28 Floodway, 100 Yard Floodplain 2.71 Retaining Wall
2.29 Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 2.72 Screening
2.30 Front Building Line 2.73 Self-Service Storage Facility
2.31 Frontage 2.74 Setback
2.32 Gasoline Service Station 2.75 Sign
2.33 Gross Floor Area 2.76 Sign, Area Of
2.34 Height of Building 2.77 Smart Growth
2.35 Home Occupation 2.78 Special Permit
2.36 Home Office 2.79 Story, Half Story
2.37 Hotel, Motel 2.80 Street
2.38 Impervious Coverage 2.81 Structure
2.39 Industry, Heavy 2.82 Transportation Demand Mng (TDM)
2.40 Industry, Light 2.83 Use
2.41 Interested Party 2.84 Variance
2.42 Landscaped 2.85 Wholesale
2.43 Licensed Day Care 2.86 Wireless Telecommunications Facility
2.44 Lodger 2.87 Yard, Front
2.45 Lodging House, Licensed 2.88 Yard, Side
2.89 Yard, Rear
12
SECTION 2.00 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the
plural include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. The word “shall” is mandatory
and not merely directory. The word “building” includes “structure”. The word “lot” includes the word “plot”. The
word “land” includes the words “marsh”, “wetland” and “water”. The following words and phrases (whether
capitalized or not) shall have the meanings given in the following clauses, unless a contrary intention clearly
appears.
SECTION 2.01 ACCESSORY
(a) Accessory building/structure: a building or structure devoted exclusively to a use accessory to the
principal use of the lot.
(b) Accessory use: a use incident to, and on the same lot as, a principal use, including
telecommunication and communication facilities used exclusively for the private residence or
business and not as an independent commercial enterprise.
SECTION 2.02 AGRICULTURE
On more than five acres of land, agriculture includes all branches of farming as defined in M.G.L.c.128, Section
1A. On less than five acres of land, agriculture excludes the raising of livestock, including horses, the keeping
of horses as a commercial enterprise, the keeping and raising of poultry, swine, cattle and other domesticated
animals used for food purposes, bees, or fur-bearing animals.
SECTION 2.03 ADULT STORES
An establishment that has a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines and other
matter or paraphernalia which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis depicting, describing, or
relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement, as defined in M.G.L.Ch.272, S.31.
SECTION 2.04 ADULT THEATER
An enclosed building used for presenting material or live entertainment distinguished by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in M.G.L.Ch.272, S.31.
SECTION 2.05 ASSISTED LIVING
Assisted Living includes several types of housing settings. Assisted Living is a housing setting for individuals
who need assistance with activities of daily living such as bathing, dressing, grooming, eating, and transferring,
and may include instrumental activities of daily living such as housekeeping, shopping, and transportation. It also
includes Independent Living which has units that can function as stand-alone apartments. And it includes
Dementia Care and/or Skilled Nursing, which is a housing setting that involves or includes the planning,
provision, and evaluation of goal-oriented nursing care that requires specialized knowledge and skills acquired
under the established curriculum of a school of nursing approved by a Board of Registration in nursing, and must
be provided by a registered nurse, a licensed practical nurse, or a licensed vocational nurse. In each of these
types of housing settings, each resident may have their own room or rooms which may include a bathroom,
bedroom, living room and kitchen or kitchenette and dining areas.
SECTION 2.06 BASEMENT
A portion of a building partly underground but having more than one-half of its clear height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
13
SECTION 2.07 BUFFER ZONE
Areas of land maintained in a landscaped fashion or in a natural state that are open, unpaved and unbuilt upon;
for the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, crushed stone shall not be considered as an appropriate buffer zone
treatment.
SECTION 2.08 BUILD-TO-LINE
The line with which the exterior of a building must coincide.
SECTION 2.09 BUILDING
A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, having a roof, to form a structure for the shelter of
persons, animals or property. For the purpose of this definition, "roof" shall include an awning or any similar
covering, whether or not permanent in nature. The word "building" shall be construed where the context allows
as though followed by the words "or part or parts thereof."
SECTION 2.10 BUILDING AREA
The total area, expressed in square feet, of all floors of a building or structure measured to the exterior walls
thereof.
SECTION 2.11 BUILDING COVERAGE
The area of a lot that is covered by the footprint of the principal building and accessory structures, including
covered stairways, porches, covered vestibules or porticos, but not including driveways, walkways, attached
chimneys, bulkheads, in-ground and above-ground swimming pools or uncovered decks.
SECTION 2.12 BUILDING FRONT YARD
The area of the Front Yard located between the Front Lot Line and each side of the Principal Building on the Lot.
SECTION 2.13 BUILDING, PRINCIPAL
Any building in which the predominant use of the lot or parcel is contained.
SECTION 2.14 BUSINESS ACCESSORY USE, USUAL
(a) Light manufacturing or preparation of products customarily sold on the premises by the producer to
the consumer, limited to not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the Gross Floor Area of the
business and engaging not more than five (5) employees at one time.
(b) Accessory outdoor storage of commodities or materials for processing or sale upon the premises,
provided that any outdoor storage in a yard adjoining a lot in a residence district shall be screened
as provided in Section 4.14 or as otherwise required by this Zoning Ordinance.
(c) The sale of gasoline and oil accessory to and within a permitted parking garage for more than ten
(10) cars or accessory to a parking lot limited to the employees of the owner, or the making of minor
repairs completely within such parking garage or within a building on such parking lot.
SECTION 2.15 CORNER LOT
A lot at the junction of and fronting on two or more intersecting streets or ways. On a corner lot the Front Yard
setback requirement shall be applied to only one side of the corner lot property. The Zoning Enforcement Officer
shall determine which portion of the lot is the Front Yard for purposes of determining the required Setback.
14
SECTION 2.16 CONVERSION
Any residential building containing one or more dwelling units that is altered by interior and/or exterior changes
so as to increase the number of dwelling units in the building to some number greater than (i) the existing number
of dwelling units or (ii) the number of dwelling units the building was originally designed for. Further, any
commercial building for which a residential or industrial reuse is proposed, or any industrial building for which a
residential or commercial reuse is proposed, shall be considered a conversion and shall be subject to the
appropriate regulations of this Ordinance.
SECTION 2.17 DRIVEWAY
An open space located on a lot, which may be paved, and built for access to a garage or off-street parking or
loading space(s).
SECTION 2.18 DWELLING
A privately or publicly owned permanent structure, whether owned by one or more persons or in condominium,
or any other legal form which is occupied in whole or part as the home residence or sleeping place of one or
more persons. The terms "single-family," "two-family," or "multi-family" dwelling shall not include hotel, lodging
house, bed and breakfasts, bed and breakfast homes, hospital, membership club, mobile home, or dormitory.
Where the following terms appear in this ordinance they shall have the following meanings:
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached residential building designed or intended or used as the home
or residence of one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A detached residential building designed or intended or used exclusively as
the home or residence of two families. For purposes of this ordinance, a two-family dwelling includes (1)
a building containing two dwelling units joined side by side, sharing a common wall for at least fifty (50%)
percent of its height and depth, excluding space used for accessory uses; i.e., in which no part of one
dwelling unit is over any part of the other dwelling unit, or (2) a house containing two dwelling units, in
which all or part of one dwelling unit is over all or part of the other dwelling unit.
DWELLING, THREE-FAMILY: A detached residential building designed or intended or used exclusively
as the home or residence of three families, each in a separate dwelling unit, living independently of each
other and who may have a common right in halls and stairways.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building designed or intended or used as the home or residence of four
or more families, each in a separate dwelling unit, living independently of each other and who may have
a common right in halls and stairways, whether rental or owner occupied, with the number of families in
residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.
DWELLING, ROWHOUSE OR TOWNHOUSE: A row of at least three (3) but not more than eight (8) onefamily
attached dwelling units whose sidewalls are separated from other dwelling units by a fire wall or
walls. Each unit in the row, or townhouse, may be owned by a separate owner and shall have its own at
grade access.
SECTION 2.19 DWELLING UNIT
Living quarters for a single family with cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities independent of any other
unit.
SECTION 2.20 ERECT
To construct or reconstruct or excavate, fill, drain, or conduct physical operations of any kind in preparation for
or in pursuance of construction or reconstruction, or to move a building or structure upon a lot.
SECTION 2.21 EXEMPT RELIGIOUS OR EDUCATIONAL USE
Those uses which are exempt from zoning regulations as specified in Chapter 40A, Section 3 of the General
Laws of Massachusetts, namely the use of land or structures for religious purposes or for educational purposes
15
where educational purposes are pursued or provided by the state or any of its agencies, subdivisions or bodies
politic, or by a nonprofit educational corporation, or as may be later amended.
SECTION 2.22 EXISTING
In existence or as existing at the date of adoption of this Zoning Ordinance in 1926 or any amendment hereto.
SECTION 2.23 FAMILY
An individual, or two or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living together as a single, non-profit
housekeeping unit; provided that a group of five or more persons who are not kindred to each other, as defined
by civil law, shall not constitute a Family.
SECTION 2.24 FAMILY DAY CARE
Family day care home as defined in §9 of M.G.L.c.28A, for not more than ten children. Unless otherwise stated
in this Bylaw, family day care licensed by the Massachusetts Office for Children shall be considered an accessory
use incidental to a residential use.
SECTION 2.25 FAST FOOD ESTABLISHMENT
Any place or premises used for sale, dispensing, or serving of food, refreshments or beverages where the
primary business of the establishment is the sale of said items which are packaged or presented in such a
manner that they can be readily eaten outside the building where it is sold.
SECTION 2.26 FENCE
A man-made barrier intended to divide or mark a boundary between lots or parcels of land not to exceed six (6)
feet in height in a residential district and eight (8) feet in height in non-residential districts, in each case measured
from the existing finished grade of the lot, except for such lower heights as may be required by §4.12. For
purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, fences required around swimming pools shall be treated separately and shall
be governed by the provisions of §4.03(b).
SECTION 2.27 FLOOD, BASE
The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any one year.
SECTION 2.28 FLOODWAY/100-YEAR FLOODPLAIN
A floodway includes the normal channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplains adjoining the
normal channel which are reasonably required to carry off the flood flow. The 100-year floodplain is the area
adjoining a river or stream which has been, or may hereinafter be, covered by flood waters from a 100-year
flood.
SECTION 2.29 FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR)
Gross floor area of all buildings on the Lot measured in square feet, divided by the total square footage of the
Lot.
SECTION 2.30 FRONT BUILDING LINE
The wall of the Principal Building on a Lot which is parallel or most nearly parallel to the Street Line.
SECTION 2.31 FRONTAGE
That part of a lot or lot line abutting on a street or way, to which the front façade of all buildings shall be oriented
and if in question, as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. (See also, §2.48, LOT FRONTAGE).
16
SECTION 2.32 GASOLINE SERVICE STATION
Area of land, including the structures thereon, that is used for the sale of gasoline or motor vehicle fuel, oil and
other lubricating substances, and including the sale of motor vehicle accessories, and which may or may not
include facilities for lubrication, washing, or making minor repairs to motor vehicles, but not including the painting
thereof by any means nor the making of anybody repairs nor major repairs to the mechanical system or motor
vehicles, nor doing any work requiring the use of any torch, forge, fire, or flame.
SECTION 2.33 GROSS FLOOR AREA
The total area, expressed in square feet, of all floors of a building excluding all parking and loading areas, all
parking structures, traditional roof appurtenances such as mechanical penthouses, all other mechanical rooms,
atriums, flagpoles, chimneys and similar structures but including basements and mezzanines to the exterior walls
thereof, and including partitions, stairwells, corridors and porches with permanent roofs.
SECTION 2.34 HEIGHT OF BUILDING
The vertical distance between the highest point of the structure above the existing grade at any given point along
the Front Lot Line as measured every thirty (30) feet linearly; notwithstanding the foregoing, in instances where
the Lot slopes away from the Front Lot Line more than ten (10) feet vertically as measured along a line of
constant elevation perpendicular to the Front Lot Line taken every thirty (30) feet, the height of the Building shall
be the vertical distance between the highest point of the structure above the existing grade and a plane created
by connecting the points every thirty (30) feet linearly along the entirety of the property line.
SECTION 2.35 HOME OCCUPATION
A business, profession, occupation or sale of articles produced on the premises where sold, conducted within a
residential building or accessory structure for gain or support by one or more residents of the dwelling which:
(a) is incidental and secondary to the residential use of the building;
(b) does not change the essential residential character of the use and requires no exterior alterations or
accessory buildings which are not customary with residential use;
(c) is carried on solely by the residents of the dwelling except that no more than 2 non-residential employees
may be allowed;
(d) is confined to no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total floor area of the dwelling;
(e) is not visible from any other residential structure, does not store outside of the dwelling any equipment or
materials used in the home occupation;
(f) does not produce any offensive noise, odor, smoke, dust, heat, glare, excessive traffic or other
objectionable effects;
(g) does not increase the average daily automobile trips generated by the residence in which the home
occupation is located;
(h) the conducting of a clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, restaurant, guest house, animal hospital,
commercial kennel, dancing or musical instruction in groups, barbershop, beauty salon, licensed day care
centers, massage or muscular therapist shall not be deemed to be home occupations.
SECTION 2.36 HOME OFFICE
A business, profession or occupation conducted within a residential building or accessory structure for gain or
17
support by residents of the dwelling that conforms to the definition and requirements of a Home Occupation,
except having no employees, no deliveries, and no customers that visit the site.
SECTION 2.37 HOTEL,MOTEL
(a) A hotel is a building designed or used for ten (10) or more guests, primarily the temporary abode of
persons who have their residence elsewhere.
(b) A motel is a hotel with direct access from each guest room to a parking space.
SECTION 2.38 IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE
The maximum percentage of a lot that may be covered with impervious surfaces, including but not limited to
buildings, impervious driveways and parking areas, access roads, sidewalks, tennis courts, above-ground and
in-ground swimming pools, concrete air conditioner pads, decks that do not allow rain water to be directly
absorbed by the ground, patios, or any other material placed on or above the earth which substantially reduces
or prevents the natural percolation of water.
SECTION 2.39 INDUSTRY, HEAVY
A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted
or raw materials, or a use engaged in manufacturing processes using flammable or explosive materials, or
manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
SECTION 2.40 INDUSTRY, LIGHT
A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or
parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales and
distribution of said products.
SECTION 2.41 INTERESTED PARTY
The petitioner for a variance, special permit or appeal and the abutters of the area or premises which is the
subject of the petition, as well as the owners of the land directly opposite such area or premises on any public
or private street, owners of land that are abutters to abutters of the subject property within three hundred (300)
feet of the property line of such area or premises all as they appear on the most recent applicable tax list, and
the Planning Board, as well as the Planning Boards of every abutting municipality.
SECTION 2.42 LANDSCAPED
Land fully developed and maintained to present a pleasant appearance, provide for stormwater retention and
groundwater recharging, and to stabilize the soil, using primarily non-invasive vegetation and natural features of
the site. Native and drought-tolerant plantings should also be considered where appropriate.
SECTION 2.43 LICENSED DAY CARE
A day care or school-age child care facility as defined in §9 of M.G.L.c.28A and licensed by the Massachusetts
Office for Children.
SECTION 2.44 LODGER
A person who rents space for living or sleeping purposes without separate cooking facilities.
SECTION 2.45 LODGING HOUSE, LICENSED
18
Any dwelling other than a hotel or motel in which living space is let to five(5) or more persons, including
dormitories, fraternity houses and similar uses.
SECTION 2.46 LOT
A parcel of real estate as described in a deed or shown on a plan separate from any other parcel, such deed or
plan being recorded in the registry of deeds or approved by the Planning Board and on file with the Engineering
Department.
SECTION 2.47 LOT AREA
The horizontal area of the lot exclusive of any public or private way open to public uses.
SECTION 2.48 LOT FRONTAGE
The boundary of a lot on land coinciding with a street line if there are both rights of access and potential vehicular
access across that boundary to a potential building site; measured continuously along one street line between
side lot lines. In the case of corner lots, measured between the side lot line and the mid-point of the corner
radius on the street designated as the frontage street by the owner or, failing that, by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer. (See also, §2.31, FRONTAGE).
SECTION 2.49 LOT LINE, FRONT
A line dividing a lot from the street identified as providing frontage (see §2.48) and having building front façade
oriented toward said lot frontage. Where the lot frontage on the street is less than the potential lot width in the
district in which it is located, any lot line or part of a lot line shall be considered to be a front lot line for purposes
of calculating front yard requirements if a straight line drawn from a point on the lot line to and perpendicular to
the street providing potential access to the lot passes across any part of another lot to which it is contiguous.
SECTION 2.50 LOT LINE, SIDE
The portion of the lot boundary that connects the front lot line to the rear lot line; when questioned, as determined
by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
SECTION 2.51 LOT LINE, STREET OR STREET LINE
A line dividing a lot from a street.
SECTION 2.52 LOT LINE, REAR
The lot line opposite the front lot line; when questioned, as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
SECTION 2.53 LOTWIDTH
The distance between the side lot lines along the front yard setback line.
SECTION 2.54 LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT
A site design strategy for managing stormwater by maintaining or replicating the predevelopment hydrologic
functions through the use of design techniques to create a functionally equivalent hydrologic landscape.
Commonly referred to as “LID”
SECTION 2.55 MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT
A development that combines residential with retail or service uses within the same building or on the same
site, in one or more of the following configurations:
19
Vertical Mixed Use: A single structure with the above floors used for residential or office use and a
portion of the ground floor facing the primary public way used for publicly accessible retail/commercial
or service uses.
Horizontal Mixed Use, Attached: A single structure that provides publicly accessible retail/commercial
or service use in the portion fronting the public or private street with attached residential or office uses
behind.
Horizontal Mixed Use; Detached: Two or more structures on a single site, which provide publicly
accessible retail/commercial or service uses in the structure(s) fronting the public or private street, and
residential or office uses in separate structure(s) behind or to the side.
SECTION 2.56 MOTOR VEHICLE BODYWORK ESTABLISHMENT
Area of land, including the structures thereon, that is used for making repairs to, altering in a structural manner,
or painting in any manner, the body of motor vehicles.
SECTION 2.57 MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR ESTABLISHMENT
Area of land, including the structures thereon, that is used for the purpose of repairing, replacing, or altering the
motor system, the muffler and/or exhaust systems, and/or other mechanically moving parts of a motor vehicle,
and including glass installation, upholstery repair, installation of various automotive accessories such as sun
roofs, radios, auto body painting, and similar activities.
SECTION 2.58 NON-CONFORMING BUILDING OR LOT
A building or lot that does not conform to a dimensional regulation prescribed by this Zoning Ordinance for the
district in which it is located or to regulations for signs, off-street parking, off-street loading or accessory buildings
but which Building or lot was in existence at the time the regulation became effective and was lawful at the time
it was established.
SECTION 2.59 NON-CONFORMING USE
A use of a building or lot that does not conform to a use regulation prescribed by this Zoning Ordinance for the
district in which it is located, but which was in existence at the time the use regulation became effective and was
lawful at the time it was established.
SECTION 2.60 OCCUPIED
"Occupied" shall include the words "designed, arranged, or intended to be occupied."
SECTION 2.61 OPEN SPACE
Areas open, and unobstructed to the sky that can be used for active or passive recreation purposes. Amenities
such as a plaza, square, courtyard, paths, or outdoor dining areas, and items such as benches, walkways,
planters, landscaping, swimming pools, kiosks, gazebos, and similar structures shall not be considered as
obstructions. Opportunities should be sought that bring together the open space requirements of adjoining
properties in order to foster a more coherent and continuous landscape network. Parking and loading areas of
any type shall not be allowed in any required open space.
Further, in all residential districts, the minimum required open space shall be contiguous and pervious, and shall
not include any side yard driveway buffer where required by this Ordinance.
SECTION 2.62 OPEN SPACE, PUBLICALY USEABLE
20
Open Space as defined by §2.61 that is designed for and open to the public from dawn to dusk.
SECTION 2.63 OPERABLE (MOTOR VEHICLE)
Legally fit to be driven, except for lack of registration.
SECTION 2.64 PRINCIPAL USE
The primary use of the Building or Lot, as the context may require.
SECTION 2.65 PROFESSION
Architecture, engineering, law, medicine, dentistry, or other activity in which specialized services to clients are
performed by persons possessing a degree from a recognized institution of higher learning demonstrating
successful completion of a prolonged course of specialized intellectual instruction and study, and also
possessing evidence of professional capability such as membership in a professional society requiring standards
of qualification for admission.
SECTION 2.66 RENEWABLE OR ALTERNATIVE ENERGY
The following renewable or alternative energy generation activities, products, or technologies: solar (both
photovoltaic (PV) and thermal); wind; biomass power conversion or thermal technologies, including R&D
related to, or the manufacture of, wood pellets; ultra-low emissions high efficiency wood pellet boilers and
furnaces; low impact hydro (electric or kinetic); ocean thermal, wave or tidal; geothermal; landfill gas; fuel cells
that use renewable energy; advanced bio-fuels; combined heat and power; electric and hydrogen powered
vehicles and associated technologies including advanced batteries and recharging stations.”
SECTION 2.67 RENEWABLE OR ALTERNATIVE ENERGY RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT OR
MANUFACTURING FACILITIES
Facilities used primarily for research, development, manufacturing and/or testing of innovative renewable or
alternative energy information, concepts, methods, processes, materials or products. This can include the
design, development, manufacturing and testing of biological, chemical, electrical, magnetic, mechanical,
and/or optical components in advance of product manufacturing.
SECTION 2.68 RESEARCH FACILITY
A facility that has been licensed as required by state and federal authorities for the testing and development of
various mechanical, electronic, photonic, agricultural, medical, and biotechnological products and services.
SECTION 2.69 RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN; REFRESHMENT STAND, DRIVE-IN; EATING
ESTABLISHMENT, DRIVE-THROUGH
Any premises used for the sale, dispensing or serving of food, refreshments, or beverages in automobiles,
including those establishments where customers may serve themselves and may consume the food,
refreshments or beverages on the premises, when received through a service window.
SECTION 2.70 RETAIL
Establishments used for the sale of a variety of goods at retail and personal and professional services pertaining
to health, beauty, and similar services but not fitness centers.
SECTION 2.71 RETAININGWALL
A structure in the form of a wall for holding in place a mass of earth or the like at the edge of a terrace, excavation
or property line provided that any retaining wall located along a property line and extending more than six (6)
21
feet above the average finished grade of the adjacent lot(s) shall be considered an accessory building and must
conform to the yard and height restrictions for accessory buildings in §4.03.
SECTION 2.72 SCREENING
A natural occurrence or a man-made device which shields from view various land use activities.
SECTION 2.73 SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY
A building consisting of small, individual self-contained units that are leased or owned for the storage of
business and household goods or contractor supplies, but precluding individual storage units that have at
grade and direct vehicular access
SECTION 2.74 SETBACK
The minimum horizontal distance from the lot line or street line to the nearest part of the structure.
SECTION 2.75 SIGN
Sign shall mean and include any permanent or temporary structure or building surface, or part thereof or device
attached thereon or other outdoor surface including billboards or any combination of one or more of the foregoing
containing any word, letter, symbol, drawing, model, banner, picture or design, or any device used for visual
communication which identifies or calls attention to any premises, person, product, activity, service or business,
directing the subject thereof to the attention of the public.
SECTION 2.76 SIGN, AREA OF
(a) For a sign, either free-standing or attached, the area shall be considered to include all lettering,
accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background, whether open or enclosed, on which
they are displayed, but not including any supporting framework and bracing which are incidental to the
display itself.
(b) For a sign painted upon or applied to a building, the area shall be considered to include all lettering,
accompanying designs or symbols together with any backing of a different color than the finish material of
the building face.
(c) Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to or painted on a surface, building, wall or
window, the area shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle or other convex shape which
encompasses all of the letters and symbols.
SECTION 2.77 SMART GROWTH
Collection of land use planning techniques that features walkable, mixed-use, transit-oriented
development with the objective of creating more attractive, livable, economically strong communities while
protecting natural resources.
SECTION 2.78 SPECIAL PERMIT
A permit for certain exceptions specified in this Zoning Ordinance to the zoning regulations contained herein
which may be allowed at the discretion of the Board of Appeals subject to the provisions of §9.04-9.13.
SECTION 2.79 STORY, HALF-STORY
(a) The space between any floor and the floor or roof next above improved for residential occupancy, provided
however that any basement shall not be deemed a story.
(b) A story under a sloping roof (defined as and required to be at least a 6/12 pitch, except dormers, which shall
have at least 3/12 pitch) shall be deemed a half-story if less than fifty percent (50%) of its area has a clear
22
interior height of seven (7) feet or more, improved or intended to be improved for residential occupancy. Any
new construction with ceiling height 4 feet and above shall be included in the floor area, except where a
dormer is required over an existing stairway that has been deemed by the Inspector of Buildings to be a
hazardous means of egress.
SECTION 2.80 STREET
A public or private way, alley, lane, court or sidewalk which is open to the public or dedicated to public use; and
parts of public places which form traveled rights of way.
SECTION 2.81 STRUCTURE
A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location to give support or shelter, such as a building, bridge,
trestle, tower, framework, retaining wall, tank, tunnel, tent, stadium, reviewing stand, platform, bin, fence, sign,
flagpole or the like. The word "structure" shall be construed, where the context allows, as though followed by
the words "or part thereof."
SECTION 2.82 TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT PLAN (TDMPLAN)
To include, but not be limited to, a set of procedures, policies and practices which, when taken as a whole, are
intended to reduce the number of single occupant vehicle trips traveling to or from a site, and which includes
quantifiable goals and a plan for the collection and analysis of data to measure achievement of goals.
SECTION 2.83 USE
The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed, or intended, or for which either land or a building
is or may be occupied or maintained.
SECTION 2.84 VARIANCE
Such relief from the zoning regulations contained in this Zoning Ordinance as may be necessary to avoid unique
and undue hardship to the appellant and which may be granted by the Board of Appeals subject to the provisions
of §9.14-9.17.
SECTION 2.85 WHOLESALE
The storage, sale and/or resale of goods or products in large quantity to retailers or jobbers rather than
consumers.
SECTION 2.86 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY
An apparatus or facility providing telephone, radio, television, or other wireless communications through the
sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves, by means of any of the following:
(a) ANTENNA: An apparatus designed to be mounted on a structure to provide wireless communications.
(b) TOWER: A free-standing structure which may have antennas or monopoles mounted on it.
(c) MONOPOLE: A single, straight pole attached to the ground, on which antennas may be mounted.
SECTION 2.87 YARD, FRONT
An open space between the nearest point of a building and the front lot line extending to the side yard lines.
SECTION 2.88 YARD, SIDE
An open space between a side lot line of a lot and the nearest point of the principal building and extending from
the front lot line to the rear lot line.
23
SECTION 2.89 YARD, REAR
An open space extending along the full length of the rear lot line or lines and between such line or lines and the
nearest point of the building.
24
25
ARTICLE III
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
______________________________________________________________________________
3.00 Division of the Town into 3.01 Classification of Districts
Districts 3.02 Boundaries of the Districts
______________________________________________________________________________
SECTION 3.00 DIVISION OF THE TOWN INTO DISTRICTS
(a) The Town is hereby divided into zoning districts, as specified hereinafter.
(b) Within each district there shall be uniform regulation of use of buildings, structure and land, of height,
and size of building and structures, of size and width of lots, of dimensions of yard and other open
spaces, and of other requirements, as provided in this Zoning Ordinance.
(c) Every parcel of land and every building or other structure in the Town, except as otherwise provided
by law or by this Zoning Ordinance shall be subject to the regulations, restrictions, and requirements
specified for the District in which it is located.
SECTION 3.01 CLASSIFICATION OF DISTRICTS
For the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance the Town is hereby divided into the following use districts:
(a) Residence Districts -
S - Single Family: S-10 and S-6
T - Two Family
SC - Single Family Conversion
R - Residential multi-family: R.75 and R1.2
CR - Cluster Residential
(b) Business Districts -
NB - Neighborhood Business
LB - Limited Business
CB - Central Business
(c) Industrial Districts -
I-1 - Industrial 1
I-2 - Industrial 2
I-3 - Industrial 3
(d) Special Zoning Districts -
ALOD - Assisted Living Overlay District
AODD – Arsenal Overlay Development District
OSC - Open Space and Conservancy
RO - Revitalization Overlay
RD - Limited Redevelopment District
R/SOD - Religious/School Building Overlay District
PSCD – Pleasant Street Corridor District
RMUD – Regional Mixed Use District
26
SECTION 3.02 BOUNDARIES OF THE DISTRICTS
(a) The location and boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on a map entitled
"Zoning Map of the Town of Watertown," as dated January 30, 1989, as amended by the
amendments thereto adopted May 23, 1989 (the "Zoning Map"), as further amended July 8, 2008
August 18, 2015 and, March 2 2016, and on file in the office of the Town Clerk, which map, with all
explanatory matter thereon, is declared to be a part of this Zoning Ordinance.
(b) Any change in the location or boundaries of a district hereafter made through the amendments of
the Zoning Ordinance shall be indicated by the alteration of the Zoning Map, and the Zoning Map
thus altered is declared to be part of the Zoning Ordinance thus amended.
(c) Where a district boundary is indicated as approximately following, or parallel to, the center line or
street line of a street, highway, railroad right of way, or water course, such a district boundary shall
be construed as following, or as being parallel to, such center line or street line. Where a district
boundary is indicated as approximately following a lot line, such line shall be construed to be said
boundary. If no distance is indicated on the Zoning Map for a district boundary running parallel to
the center line or street line of a street or highway, such dimension shall be assumed to be one
hundred (100) feet from the street or, if as determined by the use of the scale shown on said Zoning
Map it is at least twenty (20) feet more or less than one hundred (100) feet, it shall be as so scaled.
When any uncertainty exists as to the exact location of a boundary line, the location of such line shall
be determined by the Planning Board.
(d) When a lot in one ownership is situated in part in the Town of Watertown and in part in an adjacent
city or town, the regulation and restriction of the Zoning Ordinance shall be applied to that portion of
such lot as lies in the Town of Watertown in the same manner as if the entire lot were situated therein.
27
ARTICLE IV
GENERAL USE AND DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
______________________________________________________________________________
4.00 Applicability of Use Regulations 4.08 Applicability of Dimensional
4.01 Permitted Uses Regulations
4.02 Uses Subject to other 4.09 Exceptions to Lot Size
Regulations Regulations
4.03 Accessory Uses 4.10 Exceptions to Height
4.04 Prohibited Uses Regulations
4.05 Continuance of Non- 4.11 Exceptions to Yard
Conforming Use Regulations
4.06 Alteration of a Non- 4.12 Required Corner Clearance
Conforming Uses/Buildings/ for Visibility
Structure 4.13 Transition Requirements
4.07 Reconstruction of a Non- 4.14 Screening
Conforming Building After Catastrophe
______________________________________________________________________________
SECTION 4.00 APPLICABILITY OF USE REGULATIONS
Except as provided by law or in this Zoning Ordinance, in each district no building, structure or land shall be used
or occupied except for the purposes permitted in the district as listed in Article V.
SECTION 4.01 PERMITTED USES
(a) A use listed in Article V is permitted as of right in any district under which it is denoted by the letter
"Y" subject to the applicable definitions in Article II, and the site plan review special permit
requirements of §9.03.
(b) A use listed in Article V is permitted as a special exception in any district under which it is denoted
by the letters "SP" only if the Board of Appeals so determines and issues a special permit therefore
as provided in Article IX subject to the applicable definitions in Article II and to such further restrictions
as said Board may establish.
(c) A use listed in Article V which is denoted by the letter "N" is not permitted, except nonconforming
uses which may be continued under the provisions of §4.05.
SECTION 4.02 USES SUBJECT TO OTHER REGULATIONS
Uses permitted as of right or by special permit shall be subject, in addition to use regulations, to all other
regulations applying to the district or to the use, such as dimensional regulations in Article V, provisions for
off-street parking and loading in Article VI, regulation of signs and illumination in Article VII, and regulations in
Article VIII and elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 4.03 ACCESSORY USES
(a) Permitted and required accessory uses shall be on the same lot of record as the principal use to
which they are accessory and shall be such as not to alter the character of the premises on which it
is located.
(b) No accessory use or uses within a building other than an accessory garage shall occupy more than
a combined total of twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area of the principal building.
28
(c) No accessory building shall occupy part of the required Front Yard, but such building may occupy
not more than thirty percent (30%) of any other minimum required yard setback or existing yard area,
whichever is greater.
(d) No part of an accessory building shall be located nearer than five (5) feet to any side or rear lot line
nor be more than one story or twelve (12) feet in height in the case of a flat roof, or eighteen (18)
feet in height in the case of a pitched, gable, hip, gambrel or mansard roof. Commercial accessory
parking structures may occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of any other minimum required yard
setback or existing yard area, provided that no more than thirty percent (30%) of said yard area is
occupied by the parts of said parking structure extending above the finished grade of the lot.
(e) No accessory use shall be permitted in any district except insofar as it is accessory to a principal use
permitted in the district.
(f) Swimming pools having a water depth of two (2) feet or more when full and ready for use shall be
considered an accessory building for the purposes of interpreting this Zoning Ordinance. Swimming
pools shall be screened by an opaque wall, barrier or uniform fence at least five (5) feet high and
capable of prohibiting unauthorized use. In addition, swimming pools constructed below grade must
be equipped with a permanently installed drainage system. Swimming pools with their associated
walkways, aprons, raised decks, and their associated equipment shall not be located in a Front yard
and shall be setback at least five (5) feet from any side or rear Lot Line, and subject to appropriate
Screening as determined by the Board of Appeals. The above regulations shall not apply to those
swimming pools that are portable in nature.
(g) Accessory structures fronting on a public street or way shall be subject to the Front Yard Setback
requirements of the district in which it is located.
SECTION 4.04 PROHIBITED USES
The following uses shall be prohibited in all districts:
(a) any trade, industry, or other use that is noxious, offensive, or hazardous by reason of vibration or
noise or the emission of odors, dust, gas, fumes, smoke, cinders, flashing or excessively bright light,
refuse matter, or of any other cause;
(b) any use hazardous to the health, safety, and general welfare because of danger of flooding,
inadequacy of drainage or inaccessibility to firefighting apparatus or other protective services;
(c) any advertising sign or device, except as permitted under Article VII.
SECTION 4.05 CONTINUANCE OF NON-CONFORMING USE
Any non-conforming building, structure or use which existed at the time of passage of the applicable provision
of this Zoning Ordinance or any prior Zoning By-law or of any amendment thereto may be continued subject to
the provisions of §4.06 and §4.07 or may be changed to be conforming.
SECTION 4.06 ALTERATION OF NON-CONFORMINGUSES AND BUILDINGS/STRUCTURES
(a) Except as hereinafter provided, this Zoning Ordinance shall not apply to structure or uses lawfully in
existence or lawfully begun, or to a building permit or special permit issued before the first publication
of notice of the public hearing of the Planning Board on such ordinance required by §9.22, but shall
apply to any change or substantial extension of such use, to a building or special permit issued after
the first notice of said public hearing, to any reconstruction, extension or structural change of such
structure and to any alteration of a structure begun after the first notice of said public hearing to
provide for its use or a substantially different purpose or for the same purpose in a substantially
different manner or to a substantially greater extent except where the alteration, reconstruction,
29
extension or structural change to a single or two family residential structure or building does not
increase the non-conforming nature of said structure or building and does not further violate any
other applicable provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. Pre-existing non-conforming uses may be
changed or extended and pre-existing non-conforming structures or buildings may also be extended
as provided by Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, Section 6, provided that no such change,
extension, structural change or alteration shall be permitted unless there is a Special Permit Finding
by the Board of Appeals that such change, extension or alteration shall not be substantially more
detrimental than the existing non-conforming use, structure or building to the neighborhood;
(b) Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, a non-conforming single or two family residential structure
may be altered, reconstructed, extended or changed if the proposed alteration, reconstruction,
extension or change complies with the Table of Dimensional Regulations ( §5.04).
(c) A nonconforming building, structure or use may be extended, altered or changed to make it conform
with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
(d) A nonconforming building, structure or use may be extended, altered or changed as may be ordered
by the Inspector of Buildings to make it safe in accordance with §121 of the State Building Code.
(e) A non-conforming use may be replaced by another non-conforming use, at least as restricted in
Article V as the existing use, subject to the Board of Appeals finding as provided in §4.06(a).
(f) Where a non-conforming use has been changed to a more restricted use, it shall not again be
changed to a less restricted use.
(g) A non-conforming use of a building or land which has been abandoned for a period of two (2) years
shall not thereafter be returned to such non-conforming use. A non-conforming use shall be
considered abandoned when the intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent or when the
premises have been vacant for two (2) years or when the characteristic equipment and/or furnishings
of the non-conforming use have been removed from the premises and have not been replaced by
similar equipment, whichever shall first occur.
SECTION 4.07 RECONSTRUCTION OF A NON-CONFORMINGBUILDING AFTER CATASTROPHE
If a non-conforming building or use shall have been damaged by fire, explosion or other catastrophe, such
building may be rebuilt or restored and used again subject to the following provisions:
(a) no non-conformity shall be increased in area or degree of non-conformity beyond the state existing
prior to the catastrophe, as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, subject to the provisions
of §4.06(a);
(b) such reconstruction or restoration shall commence within twelve months of such catastrophe unless
the Board of Appeals shall extend such period.
SECTION 4.08 APPLICABILITY OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
(a) The regulations for each district pertaining to the size and dimensions of the lot and of the buildings
thereon and to the placement of the buildings and of accessory uses on the lot shall be as specified
in Article V, subject to further provisions of §4.08, 4.09, 4.10, 4.11, and 4.12.
(b) The lot or yard areas required for any building or use shall not include any part of a lot that is required
by any other building or use to comply with any requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
(c) No lot, or buildings or structures thereon, shall be changed in size or shape so as to violate the
provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, except that where there are two or more existing detached
dwellings on a single lot, the lot may be divided into as many lots as there are dwellings, provided
30
each lot complies with the requirements of §4.09.
(d) Land or structures used for religious or educational purposes, as defined by Chapter 40A, Section 3
of the General Laws of Massachusetts, shall be subject to the same regulations concerning the bulk
or height of structures, yard sizes, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking, and building coverage
as those required under any provision of this Zoning Ordinance regulating the foregoing conditions
for the district within which the use is proposed.
SECTION 4.09 EXCEPTIONS TO LOT SIZE REGULATIONS
Lots having lesser area or frontage than the minimum required for the district in Article V and shown on any plan
duly recorded by deed or plan at the Registry of Deeds prior to the date of adoption of this Zoning Ordinance,
may be used for detached single family dwellings otherwise permitted in the district, subject to the Special Permit
provisions of §9.04, 9.05 and 9.09 of the Zoning Ordinance. The applicable dimensions for yards and building
and impervious coverage of §5.04 shall apply.
SECTION 4.10 EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT REGULATIONS
The limitations of height in feet shall not apply to necessary features usually carried above roofs of buildings, but
not used for living purposes, such as water tanks, satellite dishes, chimneys, ventilation systems, bulkheads,
aerials, church towers or spires, elevator penthouses, solar arrays, and reception antennas for the use of the
occupants of the building. If visible, rooftop ventilation systems shall be visually screened in a manner compatible
with the architectural language of the building. Screening of rooftop features shall also be excluded from the
calculation of building height. Such features exceeding the height permitted in the district by fifteen (15) feet or
more shall be allowed only by special permit. Wireless telecommunications facilities are subject to the
requirements in §5.14.
Additional height consistent with the adopted Design Guidelines may be granted by Special Permit where public
amenities are provided in the following four (4) instances, however in no case shall the additional height granted
be more than two (2) stories:
1. At important civic intersections and squares.
2. When defining or terminating important view corridors.
3. When the height of adjacent buildings exceeds those allowed as-of-right.
4. When additional approved public amenities have been incorporated.
SECTION 4.11 EXCEPTIONS TO SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
(a) Cornices, eaves, attached chimneys, and bay windows projecting no more than two (2) feet shall be
permitted. Exterior uncovered stairways, covered and uncovered (but not enclosed, glazed, or
screened) entrance porticoes, stoops, vestibules, bulkheads, first floor open-air porches, and
cantilevered balconies are permitted as long as they project no more than four (4) feet into any
setback. Also, bays less than or equal to twenty percent (20%) of the total façade abutting the Buildto
Line are permitted to project into the Build-to-Line Setback by four (4) feet. Enclosed decks and
porches, attached carports, covered walks and the like shall not be exempted from Setback
requirements, except as provided in §4.03(c) and 4.03(d). Further, in all residential districts air
conditioning equipment/structures and similar equipment/structures shall be permitted within the
required side yard setback if said equipment or structure is no less than five (5) feet from the property
line of the abutting property.
(b) No use other than landscaping outdoor dining, public art, sidewalks, multi-use paths, and permitted
signs shall be permitted in the front yard of any lot subject to the provisions of §6.03 and Article VII.
Parking within the front yard is expressly prohibited.
(c) No use other than landscaping and accessory parking of not more than three (3) cars is permitted
within a required side or rear yard in any residence district except as provided in §4.12 unless
31
screened as provided in Section 4.14 and subject to the provisions of §6.02(k). In LB, CB and I
districts, required side and rear yards may be used for any permitted outdoor accessory use, subject
to the provisions of Articles VI and VII.
(d) Exceptions to build-to-line Requirements
A build-to-line may be increased as specified below for purposes of amenities such as a plaza,
square, courtyard, recessed entrance, sidewalk, multi-use path, raised terrace, façade offsets
pursuant to §5.05(f) or outdoor dining, but not intended for automobile use.
For components of a project in keeping with the adopted Design Guidelines, an increased Build-to
Line may be required by the SPGA or requested by an applicant if it is found that the strict adherence
to the Build-to-Line is inconsistent with adopted Design Guidelines and development pattern, as
determined by the SPGA or is required pursuant to §5.05(f).
The Build-to Line may allow for averaging a building’s setback from the property line to accommodate
changes in building façade and irregular property boundaries, but no area of a building shall
encroach by more than ten percent (10%) of the required setback.
(e) Exceptions to Side Yard Setback Requirements
Developments in the NB, LB, CB, I-1, I-2, I-3, RMUD, and PSCD Districts may be contiguous on a
block: zero (0) lot line and/or shared party wall. Corner lots may be developed with two front yards
with yards determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
SECTION 4.12 REQUIRED CORNER CLEARANCE FOR VISIBILITY
In any district where a street yard setback is required, no structure, fence, planting or sign shall be maintained
between a plane of two and one-half (2-1/2) feet above curb level and a plane seven (7) feet above curb level
as to interfere with traffic visibility across the corner within a triangle bounded by the street lot lines and a straight
line drawn between points on each such lot line twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of said lot lines or
extension thereof. In districts where no street yard setback is required, the Town Ordinances, Chapter 8, §22
shall apply.
SECTION 4.13 TRANSITION REQUIREMENTS
(a) Front Yard: In a LB, CB, NB, or any Industrial district no building shall be erected nearer to the street
line or established building line than is permitted in the adjacent Residence within a distance of fifty
(50) feet from the Residence boundary line, except where such building is separated by a street from
the Residence.
(b) Side Yard: In a LB, CB, NB, or any Industrial district, no building shall be erected within ten (10) feet
of the side lot line of any abutting lot, all or the majority portion of which is a Residence.
SECTION 4.14 SCREENING
All outdoor storage of merchandise or commodities (including motor vehicles) shall be screened from any lot
which is in a residence district by a strip at least four (4) feet wide, densely planted with shrubs or trees which
are of a type that may be expected to form a year-round dense screen at least six (6) feet high within three (3)
years, or by an opaque wall, barrier or uniform fence at least five (5) feet high, but not more than eight (8) feet
above finished grade. Such screening shall be maintained in good condition at all times. Such screening or
barrier may be interrupted by normal entrances or exits, and shall have no signs hung or attached thereto other
than those permitted in the district. In the event that a Special Permit or Site Plan Review approval is required,
the Board of Appeals may impose greater Screening requirements than those set forth in §4.14 if it determines
that additional Screening is necessary or appropriate.
SECTION 4.15 DISCOURAGED EXTERIOR CLADDINGMATERIALS
32
The following materials shall be highly discouraged from use as exterior cladding in all Mixed-Use projects
(Residential and Commercial) along all commercial corridors:
• Vinyl Siding
• Aluminum Clapboard Siding
• Asphalt Panel Siding
• Exterior Insulation Finishing System (EIFS)
33
ARTICLE V
TABLES OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS
______________________________________________________________________________
5.00 Interpretation 5.07 Affordable Housing Requirements
5.01 Table of Use Regulations 5.08 Revitalization Overlay District (RO)
5.02 Table of Accessory Use 5.09 Watertown Square Design Overlay District
5.03 Notes to Table of Use Regulations 5.10 Limited Redevelopment District
5.04 Table of Dimensional Regulations 5.11 Assisted Living Overlay District
5.05 Notes to Table of 5.12 Arsenal Overlay Development District
Dimensional Regulations 5.13 Wireless Telecommunications Facility
5.06 Floodplain District 5.14 Religious/School Building Overlay District
5.15 Municipal Reuse and Development
5.16 Pleasant Street Corridor District (PSCD)
______________________________________________________________________________
SECTION 5.00 INTERPRETATION
(a) Use and dimensional regulations listed in the District Tables are in addition subject to the other provisions in
this Zoning Ordinance, particularly Articles IV, VI and VII.
(b) A use listed in §5.01 and §5.02 is permitted as of right in any district under which it is denoted by the letter
"Y" (Yes). If designated in the Table by the letters "SP" (Special Permit), the use may be permitted as a
special exception only if the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) so determines and grants a special
permit therefore as provided in §9.04 subject to such restrictions as said SPGA may establish. If designated
in the Table by the letters "SR" (Site Plan Review), the use is permitted as of right subject to the procedures
and standards of Site Plan Review as provided in §9.03. If designated in the Table by the letters "SP/SR"
(Special Permit with Site Plan Review), the use may be permitted by special exception only if the SPGA so
determines and grants a Special Permit in accordance with §9.04, 9.05, 9.06, 9.07, and 9.08 subject to the
procedures and standards of Site Plan Review as provided in §9.03. If designated in the Table by the letter
"N" (No), the use is not permitted in the district.
(c) No building or structure shall be built nor shall any existing building or structure be altered or enlarged which
does not conform to the regulations as to maximum ratio of floor area and lot areas, minimum lot sizes,
minimum lot area for each dwelling unit or equivalent, minimum lot width, minimum dimensions of front, side
and rear yards, and maximum height of structures in the districts set forth in §5.04 of this Article, except as
hereinafter provided.
(d) The lot or yard areas required for any new building or use may not include any part of a lot that is required
by any other building or use to comply with any requirements of this Zoning Ordinance, nor may these areas
include any property of which the ownership has been transferred subsequent to the effective date of this
Zoning Ordinance if such property was a part of the area required for compliance with the dimensional
requirements applicable to the lot from which said transfer was made.
(e) In the case of multiple buildings on a lot in single ownership the distance between any portion of such
buildings shall be not less than ten (10) feet.
34
SECTION 5.01 TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS
As a Principal Use S-6 S-10 CR SC T R.75 R1.2 NB LB CB I-1 I-2 I-3 PSCD OSC RMUD
1. Residence
a. Dwelling, Single Family Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N N N N N N N
b. Dwelling, existing one-family converted for
two-families N N Y SP Y (6) Y Y N N N N N N N N N
c. Dwelling, two family N N Y SP Y (6) Y Y N N N N N N N N N
d. Existing dwelling converted for three
families N N Y N N SP SP SP SP N N N N N N N
e. New construction of three family dwelling
structures. N N Y N N SP SP SP SP SP N N N N N N
f. Multi-family 4+ N N SP/SR N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR Y (2) N N SP/SR SP/SR N N
g.
Row houses and townhouses
1. Three units N N SP N N SP SP SP SP N N N SP Y N N
2. Four to eight units N N SP/SR N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N N N SP/SR SP/SR N N
h. Licensed lodging house N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
i. Hotel and Motel Use N N N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR(12) SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N SP/SR
j. Trailer park or mobile home park N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
k.
Mixed-use Development
1. Up to three residential units N N N N N N N SR (7) SR (7) SR (7) N N SP/SR
(8)(13) Y (8) N N
2. Greater than three residential units N N N N N N N SP/SR
(7)
SP/SR
(7)
SP/SR
(7) N N SP/SR
(8)(13)
SP/SR
(8) N SP/SR
(7) (8)
2. Institutional, Transportation, Utility, and Agricultural Uses
a.
Any religious, educational, or licensed day
care use as defined by CH.40A, § 3.
1. All non-conversions; and, new
construction and conversions up to 4,000
s.f. of building area
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
2. New construction or conversion greater
than 4,000 s.f. of building area SR SR SR SR SR SR SR SR SR SR SR SR SR SR SR SR
b. Country club, tennis club, swimming club,
nonprofit club. SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR
c.
Commercial agricultural, nursery garden,
greenhouse, garden supply.
1. On up to 5 acres N N N N N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N SP/SR
2. On more than 5 acres Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
d.
Existing dwellings converted for nonprofit
club, school, clinic (11)
1. All non-conversions; and, new
construction and conversions up to 4,000
s.f. of building area
N N N SP SP SP SP SP SP SP N N N SP N N
35
As a Principal Use S-6 S-10 CR SC T R.75 R1.2 NB LB CB I-1 I-2 I-3 PSCD OSC RMUD
2. New construction or conversion greater
than 4,000 s.f. of building area N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N N N SP/SR N N
e. Cemeteries N N N N N N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N
f.
Recreational facility owned or operated by a
Town agency or other governmental
agencies or public open space.
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
g.
Nursing home, rest home, or convalescent
home provided the lot fronts on a street at
least 65 feet wide.
N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N N N N N N N
h. Assisted Living N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR
(7)
SP/SR
(7)
SP/SR
(7) N N SP/SR
(7) N N SP/SR
(7)
3. Business, Office, and Consumer Service Uses
a.
Business offices, bank, medical and dental
buildings, schools operated for gain.
1. All non-conversions; and, new
construction and conversions up to 4,000
s.f. of building area
N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y
2. New construction or conversion greater
than 4,000 s.f. of building area N N N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N SP/SR
b.
Commercial, recreation, including bowling
alley or skating rink completely enclosed.
1. All non-conversions; and, new
construction and conversions up to 4,000
s.f. of building area
N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y N Y
2. New construction or conversion greater
than 4,000 s.f. of building area N N N N N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N SP/SR
c. Commercial parking, parking lot for gain. N N N N N N N Y (10) Y (10) Y (10) Y (10) Y (10) Y (10) Y (10) N Y (10)
d.
New and used vehicles for sale or lease
and display and storage of operable
vehicles only.
N N N N N N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N N N (15)
e.
Printer, publisher
1. All non-conversions; and, new
construction and conversions up to 4,000
s.f. of building area
N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y
2. New construction or conversion greater
than 4,000 s.f. of building area N N N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N SP/SR
f.
Retail stores including liquor stores.
1. All non-conversions; and, new
construction and conversions up to 4,000
s.f. of building area
N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y (1) Y (1) Y N Y (1)
2. New construction or conversion greater
than 4,000 s.f. of building area N N N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N SP/SR
g.
Personal services, such as barber shop,
beauty parlor, etc.
1. All non-conversions; and, new
construction and conversions up to 4,000
s.f. of building area
N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y(1) Y(1) Y N Y (1)
2. New construction or conversion greater
than 4,000 s.f. of building area N N N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N SP/SR
36
As a Principal Use S-6 S-10 CR SC T R.75 R1.2 NB LB CB I-1 I-2 I-3 PSCD OSC RMUD
h.
Repair and alteration of clothes and
domestic furnishings.
1. All non-conversions; and, new
construction and conversions up to 4,000
s.f. of building area
N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y
2. New construction or conversion greater
than 4,000 s.f. of building area N N N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N SP/SR
i.
Eating place with or without liquor.
1. All non-conversions; and, new
construction and conversions up to 4,000
s.f. of building area
N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y
2. New construction or conversion greater
than 4,000 s.f. of building area N N N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N SP/SR
j.
Bar or other establishment where the
primary purpose is the sale and
consumption of alcoholic beverages.
N N N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N SP/SR
k. Laundry and cleaning, automatic, but not
steam laundry. N N N N N N N SP SP SP SP SP SP SP N SP
l. Gasoline Service Station N N N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR N N N N N N N
m. Undertaker, funeral parlor. N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N N N
n. Adult Stores N N N N N N N N N N SP (5) SP (5) N N N SP (5)
o. Adult Theaters N N N N N N N N N N SP (5) SP (5) N N N SP (5)
4. Open-Air Drive-in Retail and Service
a.
Drive-in Bank
1. All non-conversions; and, new
construction and conversions up to 4,000
s.f. of building area
N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y Y N N Y
2. New construction or conversion greater
than 4,000 s.f. of building area N N N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N N SP/SR
b. Outdoor amusement park, outdoor sports
facility conducted for profit. N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
c. Open-air drive-in theater or other open-air
place of entertainment. N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
d.
Car washing establishment using
mechanical equipment for cleaning
automobiles and other equipment.
N N N N N N N N N N SP/SR N N N N N
e. Drive-in restaurant. Drive-in refreshment
stand, drive-through eating establishment. N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
f. Fast food establishment N N N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N SP/SR
g. Outdoor Storage of Merchandise. N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
5. Light Industry, Wholesale, Laboratory
a.
Light Industry
1. All non-conversions; and, new
construction and conversions up to 4,000
s.f. of building area
N N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y SP N SP
37
As a Principal Use S-6 S-10 CR SC T R.75 R1.2 NB LB CB I-1 I-2 I-3 PSCD OSC RMUD
2. New construction or conversion greater
than 4,000 s.f. of building area N N N N N N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N SP/SR
b.
Non-nuisance manufacturing
1. All non-conversions; and, new
construction and conversions up to 4,000
s.f. of building area
N N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y SP N Y
2. New construction or conversion greater
than 4,000 s.f. of building area N N N N N N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N SP/SR
c.
Office, including but not limited to
administrative, executive, professional, and
similar offices.
1. All non-conversions; and, new
construction and conversions up to 4,000
s.f. of building area
N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y N Y
2. New construction or conversion greater
than 4,000 s.f. of building area N N N N N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N SP/SR
d. Public or bonded warehouse, parcel or
goods distribution. N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
e.
Laboratories engaged in research,
experimental and testing activities, including
but not limited to the fields of biology,
chemistry, electronics, engineering,
geology, medicine, and physics.
1. All non-conversions; and, new
construction and conversions up to 4,000
s.f. of building area
N N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y N Y
2. New construction or conversion greater
than 4,000 s.f. of building area N N N N N N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N SP/SR
f. Motor Vehicle Repair N N N N N N N N N N SP SP SP N N N
g. Motor Vehicle Body Work N N N N N N N N N N SP(4) SP(4) SP(4) N N N
h. Wholesale business, warehouse. N N N N N N N N N N SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR SP/SR N SP/SR
i. Self-Service Storage Facility. N N N N N N N N N N SP (9) SP (9) N N N N
j.
Renewable or alternative energy research,
development or manufacturing facility
1. All non-conversions; and, new
construction and conversions up to 4,000
s.f. of building area
N N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y N Y
2. New construction or conversion greater
than 4,000 s.f. of building area N N N N N N N N N N SR SR SR SR N SR
k. Medical Marijuana Treatment Center (16) N N N N N N N N SP SP SP SP SP SP N SP
l. Adult Use Marijuana Establishment (16) N N N N N N N N SP SP SP SP SP SP N SP
m. Marijuana Testing Laboratories N N N N N N N N N N SP SP SP SP N SP
38
6. Heavy Industry
a. Open-lot storage of junk, scrap, paper, rags,
containers or other salvage waste articles. N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
b.
Truck or bus terminals, yard or building for
storage or servicing of trucks, trailers or
buses, parking lot for trucks.
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
c.
Place for exhibition, lettering or sale of
gravestones or monuments.
1. All non-conversions; and, new
construction and conversions up to 4,000
s.f. of building area
N N N N N N N N N N Y N N N N N
2. New construction or conversion greater
than 4,000 s.f. of building area N N N N N N N N N N SP/SR N N N N N
d.
Heavy Industry
1. All non-conversions; and, new
construction and conversions up to 4,000
s.f. of building area
N N N N N N N N N N Y N N N N N
2. New construction or conversion greater
than 4,000 s.f. of building area N N N N N N N N N N SP/SR N N N N N
e. Storage of flammable gas, liquids, or
explosives (non-accessory) N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
f.
Any trade, Industry, or other use that is
noxious, offensive or hazardous by reason
of vibration or noise or the emission of
odors, dust, gas, fumes, smoke, cinders,
flashing or excessively bright light, refuse
matter or any other cause.
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
39
SECTION 5.02 TABLE OF ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS
Accessory Use Only S-6 S-10 CR SC T R.75 R1.2 NB LB CB I-1 I-2 I-3 PSCD OSC RMUD
a.
Within a dwelling unit that is owner occupied,
renting of not more than two rooms as a
lodging without separate cooking facilities and
for not more than two lodgers
SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP N SP SP N N N
b.
Private greenhouse, tool shed,
Swimming pool and kennel not used as a part
of a business, and not offensive to the
neighborhood by reason of noise, odor or
other cause.
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y SP N SP
c. Accessory parking and garage as permitted in
Article IV Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y
d. Home Occupation SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP N SP
e. Home Office Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y
f. Parking for Occupant’s business truck,
exceeding ¾ ton capacity. SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP Y Y Y Y Y SP N SP
g.
Administrative offices, clubrooms, and
common laundry room reserved for
occupant’s use. Accessory to multi-family
dwellings.
N N N N N Y Y N N N N N N N N Y
h.
Business accessory uses,
usual, not to include outside service window
or outdoor storage of merchandise.
N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y
i.
Outside Service Window as a Business
accessory use, usual, except for outdoor
storage of merchandise.
N N N N N N N SP SP SP SP SP SP SP N SP
j. Outdoor display and storage of new
merchandise subject to screening provisions. N N N N N N N SP SP SP SP SP SP SP N SP
k. Residence for caretaker or janitor. N N N N N Y Y N N Y Y Y Y Y N Y
l. New and used vehicles for sale or lease and
display and storage of operable vehicles only N N N N N N N N SP SP SP SP SP N N N (15)
m.
Business and professional offices, schools
operated for gain, commercial recreation (if
completely enclosed), private clubs, personal
services (such as barber, etc.), retail stores,
eating places (with or without liquor) and
banks, insofar as they do not exceed 5% of
the gross floor area of the apartment
development on the lot.
N N N N N N SP N SP SP N N SP SP N SP
n. Licensed Day Care Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y
o. Family Day Care Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y
p.
To allow residents to garage in a permanent
enclosed structure on their property Antique
Motor Cars as recognized by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Registry of
Motor Vehicles
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y
40
Accessory Use Only S-6 S-10 CR SC T R.75 R1.2 NB LB CB I-1 I-2 I-3 PSCD OSC RMUD
q.
Activities accessory to a
principal use permitted as a right that are
necessary in connection with scientific
research of scientific development or related
production.
N N N N N N N SP SP SP SP SP SP SP N SP
r.
Games of chance or similar
entertainment or amusement, operated either
live or through audio or video broadcast or
close circuit transmission, except at an
establishment that possesses an All Alcoholic
or Wine and Malt License .
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
41
SECTION 5.03 NOTES TO TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS
(1) Commercial uses permitted as described in §5.01(3) (f) and (g) shall be allowed if said uses meet
the following criteria; shall not exceed four thousand (4,000) square feet in a building or buildings
with a Gross Floor Area of less than hundred thousand (100,000) square feet, or exceed five (5) %
of the gross floor area for a building or buildings with a Gross Floor Area hundred thousand (100,000)
square feet or more, except by special permit.
(2) Multi-family uses are allowed in the CB district as of right if at least the first floor of the structure in
which they are located is used for retail or other business purposes. However, not more than the
first two floors may be used for retail or service related purposes in a mixed-use project.
(3) For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, any public property in the OSC District sold to a private
owner or owners shall be deemed to be in the CR District. Buildings that were existing at the time
of the adoption of the OSC Zone may be used, reconstructed or rehabilitated for the uses permitted
in §5.01.
(4) The maximum number of automotive body work shops that shall be permitted in Watertown is
eighteen (18), whether such shops are independent establishments or associated with motor vehicle
repair shops or automotive sales shops. The Board of Appeals may grant a Special Permit for
automobile body repair work only upon the conditions set forth in §9.05 of the Zoning Ordinance
and upon the further condition that the applicant presents evidence satisfactory to the Board of
Appeals that the proposed establishment will be a change of location or a replacement of an existing
establishment, and that the total number of such establishments, including the applicant, does not
exceed eighteen (18).
(5) Adult stores and adult theaters, as defined in §2.00 may be allowed by special permit subject to the
following findings and conditions, and to such additional terms and conditions as the Board of
Appeals may impose:
(a) No merchandise or services prohibited as obscene and indecent not encompassed by the
definition adult stores and theaters shall be disseminated or available therein.
(b) The permitted uses specifically exclude disseminating or offering to disseminate adult matter to
minors, and suffering minors to view the displays or linger in the store shall be deemed evidence
of violation of this section.
(c) No adult store or theater shall be located within the same block or five hundred (500) feet of a
residential zone, dwelling house, school, place of worship, church, park, playground, youth
center or of another adult store.
(d) Parking requirements for adult stores and theaters shall comply with Article VI. of said Zoning
Ordinance.
(6) In the T District, a new two family dwelling and an existing one family detached dwelling converted
into a two family dwelling on lots of less than 7,500 square feet shall be permitted as of right if the
total floor to area ratio (FAR) does not exceed 0.50. In the T district only, FAR does not include
basement and garage area. A new two family dwelling and an existing one family detached dwelling
converted into a two family dwelling on lots of less than 7,500 square feet may exceed an FAR of
0.50 if granted a special permit by the Board of Appeals, but in no instance shall the FAR exceed
0.625. A new two-family dwelling or conversion of a single-family dwelling shall be allowed on lots
that were legally created before May 29, 1996 and that were deeded at 5,000 square feet or more
as of that date.
(7) All residential uses that are part of Vertical mixed-use developments shall be located only on floors
above the ground floor, and in no instance shall more than 15% of any ground floor level that fronts
on a public way be used for the purposes of gaining access to the residential uses.
42
For assisted living, the first floor shall be non-residential in nature and shall be a combination of retail
and service uses, some of which may serve only the residents of the assisted living facility, to be
determined through the site plan review and permitting process.
The surface area of the ground floor level façade along the public way as measured vertically from
ground floor to the underside of the above floor plate and horizontally along the total length of the
building fronting the public way must be composed of a minimum fifty percent (50%) transparent
materials allowing unobstructed views into the building. However, parking areas or parking
structures shall be screened. Commercial pedestrian entrances into these spaces must be no more
than fifty (50) feet apart from one another, or from the corner of the building.
(8) See §9.07 for Mixed-Use in the I-3 Zoning District. Within the RMUD Zoning District, Mixed-Use is
only allowed for projects of two acres or larger that have filed and received an approved Master Plan
Special Permit under §5.18.
(9) Self-Service Storage Facility must be setback 50 feet from all lot lines abutting a residential use.
(10) A parking lot for gain, as a principle use, and for more than 50 parking spaces, shall only be permitted
by Special Permit in accordance with §9.05.
(11) These conversions are only allowed if the lot fronts on a street at least 80 feet wide and new
construction does not increase the existing floor area by more than 25%.
(12) A Hotel Use, which in the Industrial 1 Zoning District fronts along a collector or arterial shall be subject
to the dimensional regulations provided for in §5.04 applicable to the Central Business (CB) District
with the exception that the maximum allowable height shall be 79 feet/7 stories, with a minimum 16
foot first story (ground floor to second floor), and the minimum open space requirement shall be ten
percent (10%) and §5.05 (k) regulating setbacks from Residential Districts shall remain in force. If
this Note conflicts with any other provision of this Ordinance the language of this Note shall control.
(13) Residential units that are part of Mixed-Use developments shall be located primarily on floors above
the ground floor, and in no instance shall more than fifty percent (50%) of the façade of the ground
floor level that directly fronts onto and is adjacent to the primary public way be used for residential
units. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall determine the primary public way and the ground floor
level. The remaining fifty percent (50%) of the ground floor level along the public way must have a
minimum of fifty percent (50%) of its façade as measured vertically from ground floor to the underside
of the above floor plate that faces the primary public way composed of transparent materials that
admit unobstructed light and views into the project. Entrances into the non-residential unit spaces
must be no more than fifty (50) feet apart from one another, or from the corner of the building.
(14) In the PSCD-1 and PSCD-2 sub-categories, residential uses are permitted as described in §5.16 of
the Zoning Ordinance and as indicated with in Table 5.01. Residential uses are not permitted in the
PSCD-3. Mixed Use Development less than 33 feet in height and not located within the buffer areas
require only a Site Plan Review (SR) permit (exempt from Special Permit) prior to obtaining a building
permit. All other zoning requirements shall apply.
(15) As part of a larger multi-tenant development, a retailer may display light duty passenger vehicles as
an advertisement for sale or lease. Franchise automobile dealerships and uses as defined by § 2.56
and §2.57 of the Zoning Ordinance are prohibited
(16) Medical Marijuana Treatment Centers and Adult Use Marijuana Establishments (Section 8.04) are
prohibited from siting such Centers and/or Establishments within a radius of five hundred feet (500
ft.) both between other like marijuana establishments/treatment centers and/or around pre-existing
public or private schools providing education in kindergarten or any of grades 1 through 12,
consistent with State Law. Further, there shall be a 500 foot buffer from public parks, playgrounds,
and the Charles River Reservation, all as identified within the Watertown Open Space Plan. The
distance shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the property line of the
proposed use to the nearest point of the property line of the pre-existing establishment or park.
43
The maximum number of marijuana retailers, as identified within Section 8.04(C) Definitions-
Marijuana Establishments, shall be limited to 20% of the liquor licenses issued pursuant to
M.G.L.Chapter 138 Section 15 (commonly known as package stores).
44
SECTION 5.04 TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
District
Min. Lot Size
Min. Frontage
Front Setback
Side Setback
Rear Setback
Max. Building Coverage
Max. Impervious Coverage
Max. Height
Min. Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit 
Max. FAR
Min. Open Space
S-6 6,000 65 25 12/10 (e) 20 25 85 35/2.5 (j) - - 15
S-10 10,000 80 25 15/10 (e) 20 20 80 35/2.5 (j) - - 20
SC 6,500 50 15 12/10 (e) 20 30 85 35/2.5 (j) - - 15
T-r 5,000 (r) 50 15 12/10 (e) 20 30 85 35/2.5 (j) - 0.5 (r) 15
R-75 5,000 50 (f) 15 20 25 35 80 35 1,500 0.75(g) 20
R-1-2 5,000 50 (f) 15 25 30 50 80 45 1,000 1.2 (h) 20
NB - 50 (f) - 10 (d) 15 50 90 35/2.5 (j)(n) - 0.5 10
LB - 40 (f) - 15 (d) 20 80 90 40/4 (k)(n) - 1.0 10
CB - (f) - - - - 100 55/5 (k)(n) - 4.0 (o) (n)
I-1 - 50(f) 10 Max.
30 (s) 25 (d) 30 50 90 55/5 (k) (n) - 2.0 (i) 10
I-2 - 50(f) 10 Max.
30 (s) 25 (d) 30 50 90 55/5 (k) (n) - 2.0 (i) 10
I-3 - 50(f) 10 Max.
30 (s) 25 (d) 30 50 90 55/5 (k) (n) - 1.0 10
I-3
(Residential
/Mixed Use)
- 50(f) 10 Max.
30 (s) 25 30 50 80 55/5 (k)(n) 800 2.0 (i) 20
PSCD 10,000 - 10 Max.
30 (s)
0/Shared
party
wall or
18 ft
18 50 (t) 80 Min. 24
Max. 55/5(u) 1000
1.0 (v)
Mixed Use
2.0
20
RMUD 10,000
(w) 50 (f) 10 Max
30 (s) (p) 15 (d) 20
(p) 75 85 55/5 (n) N/A 1.0 (i) 20
OSC - 50 50 25 50 15 25 35/2.5 (j) - 0.1 75
CR 40,000 100 50 (m) 30 (m) 50
(m) 15 35 35/2.5 (j) 10,000 - 65
RO 10,000 50 - 15 20 65 85 43/4 - 2.0 (q) 15
Lots Legally Created after 5/29/96
S-6 6,000 65 25 12/10 (e) 20 25 85 35/2.5 (j) - - 15
SC 7,500 50 15 12/10 (e) 20 30 85 35/2.5 (j) - - 15
T 7,500 50 15 12/10 (e) 20 30 85 35/2.5 (j) - - 15
45
SECTION 5.05 NOTES TO TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
(a) Exempt religious and educational institutions may not be more than three (3) stories or forty (40) feet
high.
(b) A dwelling to be erected between two (2) existing dwellings adjacent to the lot need not have a front
yard greater than the average of the yards in front of the two (2) existing dwelling
(c) A rear yard or side yard may contain accessory buildings not over one (1) story high and covering not
more than thirty percent (30%) of the required yard area.
(d) Side yards between buildings without dwelling units may be omitted by Special Permit provided that
the side yard does not adjoin a Residence district, and that the access of emergency equipment to the
rear parking is not rendered inaccessible. For new construction of three (3) or four (4) family dwelling
structures or rowhouses, side yards shall be required at the side lot as at the end of each row of
attached dwelling. When the row of dwellings is facing the street, no single side yard shall be less
than (ten) 10 feet wide. When the row is facing the side yard, no single side yard shall be less than
fifteen (15) feet wide. No row shall consist of more than eight (8) dwellings, and each dwelling shall
be a minimum of twenty (20) feet, measured between the common walls.
(e) The minimum setback for one (1) side yard must be at least the first number listed and for the other
side yard the second number listed. The side yard in which the driveway is located must be at least
twelve (12) feet in width and further, the paved driveway shall be not less than eight (8) feet in width.
At least four (4) feet of the driveway side yard, measured from the lot side boundary, shall be a buffer
zone landscaped with natural, non-invasive plantings. For purposes of §6.02, the driveway side buffer
zone shall not be used for off-street parking. Also, see §4.11, Exceptions to Setback Requirements.
(f) The minimum frontage of the lot shall be one hundred (100) feet for new construction of multi-family
dwelling structures, townhouses, and rowhouses.
For all new construction in the RMUD, NB, LB, CB, I-1, I-2, and I-3 Districts the maximum length of a
contiguous building façade shall be no more than one hundred fifty (150) feet long or up to two hundred
and fifty (250) feet long by Special Permit in keeping with adopted Design Guidelines. Offsets of a
minimum of twenty five (25) feet in depth and fifty (50) feet in length, shall be incorporated for facades
to not be considered contiguous. The maximum linear dimension of a building shall be less than three
hundred (300) feet long, unless a project of greater length, by Special Permit, is determined to be in
keeping with adopted Design Guidelines. Buildings with a substantial, publicly-accessible pass through
at the ground floor that is a minimum of fifty (50) feet across and twenty (20) feet in height, or an
equivalent area, may be considered as separate buildings, as determined by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer.
Exceptions – In the RMUD, both the maximum contiguous wall and the overall length of a building may
be increased through the use of a Master Plan Special Permit, but any increase must be in-keeping
with adopted Design Guidelines and the local context.
(g) In the R.75 district, development shall be allowed by right up to an FAR of 0.75 without a special permit
and without affordable housing requirements if the total number of dwelling units is five (5) or less.
However, if more than five (5) units are developed, a special permit is required under §9.05, and the
project is subject to the affordable housing requirements set out in §5.07.
(h) In the R1.2 district, development shall be allowed by right up to an FAR of 1.2 without a special permit
and without affordable housing requirements if the total amount of dwelling units is five (5) or less.
However, if more than five (5) units are developed, a special permit is required under §9.05, and the
project is subject to the affordable housing requirements set out in §5.07.
(i) No use in the RMUD, I-1, I-2 or I-3 Districts shall exceed an FAR of 1.0 without receiving a special
permit consistent with §9.03-9.15 and in no instance shall the increased intensity of use allowed by
the special permit exceed an FAR of 2.0. In addition, no residential use in the I-3 district shall be
46
allowed without receiving a special permit consistent with the above noted sections and §5.07.
(j) For all residential development in the S-6, S-10, SC, T and OSC zoning districts the height of the
highest eave (intersection of the roof line and wall line) shall not exceed (twenty-six) 26 feet.
(k) For all uses allowed by special permit in the CB, LB, I-1, I-2 and I-3 districts no part of any structure
when abutting a residential zoning district shall be closer than twenty-five (25) feet as measured
perpendicular to the property line of said residential district. At twenty-five (25) feet from said property
line, beginning at a height of twenty-five (25) feet measured from the grade plane described in §2.24,
a structure shall increase in height no more than a ratio of 1:1 (45 degrees) moving perpendicularly
away from the property line, with a maximum height as outlined per §5.04 and § 5.05. Further, in the
required twenty-five (25) foot setback for all structures at least fifteen (15) feet of said area shall be
primarily landscaped or screened by fencing to serve as a year-round visual buffer where the proposed
project abut a residential zoning district.
(l) In the I-1, I-2 and I-3 districts, fences shall have a maximum allowable height of eight (8) feet. In all
other districts, fences shall have a maximum allowable height of six (6) feet. Further, no accessory
recreational structure such as a basketball court, tennis court or similar recreational area shall be
allowed within five (5) feet of any lot line.
(m) The minimum distance between any two (2) structures in the CR zone shall not be less than one-half
the average heights between the two (2) buildings in question, except structures that are used for
allowed accessory purposes.
(n) For Mixed-Use development of any type (Residential and Commercial) the minimum open space
requirement shall be twenty percent (20%).
For office buildings or mixed-use developments in the NB, LB, CB, RMUD, I-1, I-2, and I-3 Districts
greater than or equal to ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet or containing ten (10) or more
residential units, the minimum building height is twenty four (24) feet. For the RMUD see §5.18 (c)5
for minimum and maximum heights.
(o) For mixed-use projects of any type (Residential and Commercial) the Maximum Floor Area Ratio shall
be 4.0.
(p) No residential or mixed commercial residential structure shall be allowed within twenty-five (25) feet of
any OSC district boundary and no industrial or commercial structure within fifty (50) feet of an OSC
district boundary if it is located on a parcel greater than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet; if
less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet the required district setbacks shall apply , except
in the RMUD.
Specifically, in the RMUD, by Special Permit, a project may incorporate publically accessible open
space to offset required setbacks, with reduced setbacks to be no less than existing adjacent buildings
on the same lot or adjacent lots. At a minimum, the allowance for reduced setbacks shall include
consideration of improving adjacent public parkland, with public access and amenities for community
uses in proposed private open space within a project.
(q) See §5.08(d)(1) and §9.06(b). In the RO district, the projects containing only commercial uses, the
maximum FAR is 1.5. For projects that contain any residential units, the maximum FAR is 2.0.
Affordable housing requirements under §5.07 shall apply.
(r) In the T district, a new two (2) family dwelling and an existing one (1) family detached dwelling
converted into a two (2) family dwelling on lots of less than 7,500 square feet shall be permitted as of
right if the total floor area ratio (FAR) does not exceed 0.50. In the T district only, FAR does not include
basement and garage area. A new two (2) family dwelling and an existing one (1) family detached
dwelling converted into a two (2) family dwelling on lots of less that 7,500 square feet may exceed an
FAR of 0.50 if granted a special permit by the Board of Appeals, but in no instance shall the FAR
exceed 0.625. A new two-family dwelling or conversion of a single-family dwelling shall be allowed on
47
lots that were legally created before May 29, 1996 and that were deeded at 5,000 square feet or more
as of that date.
(s) The build-to-line shall be ten (10) feet for commercial and industrial uses and portions of a mixed use
project with commercial on the first floor. A build-to-line of 15 feet shall apply to sites with residential
only uses and/or all portions of buildings not located over a commercial space.
The build-to-line may be increased up to a maximum of thirty (30) feet for purposes of amenities such
as a plaza, square, courtyard, recessed entrance, sidewalk, multi-use path or outdoor dining, but not
intended for automobile use and may be increased above thirty (30) feet to accommodate façade
offsets pursuant to §5.05(f) or as specified in §4.11(d).
In addition, an increased build-to-line up to thirty (30) feet may be required if it is determined that a
strict adherence to the ten (10) foot build-to line is inconsistent with the Pleasant Street Corridor Plan
or adopted Design Guidelines as determined by the SPGA.
In the case of multiple buildings on one lot, at least one building shall comply with the determined buildto-
line, but in no instance shall buildings span less than a minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the
lot frontage at the determined build-to-line.
(t) In the PSCD, the maximum building coverage may be increased to 60% by Special Permit in
accordance with §5.16(h).
(u) In the PSCD, the maximum allowable height may be increased up to 66 feet/6 stories with 15 foot step
back from the buildings front facade by Special Permit in accordance with §5.16(d) & (h).
(v) In the PSCD, the maximum FAR may be increased to 2.0 by Special Permit in accordance with
§5.16(d) & (h).
(w) Existing lots in the RMUD District that are less than 10,000 sf and were established prior to January 1,
2015, shall be deemed to be conforming as to minimum lot size.
(x) Coverage: Solar energy systems shall not be included in calculations for building coverage or
impervious cover as identified in Section 5.04 – Table of Dimensional Regulations.
SECTION 5.06 FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
(a) Intent and Purpose
The purposes of this district are:
1. To provide that lands in the Town of Watertown subject to seasonal or periodic flooding as
described hereinafter shall not be used for residence or other purposes in such manner as to
endanger the health or safety of the occupants thereof.
2. To protect, preserve and maintain the water table and water recharge areas within the Town so
as to preserve the present and potential water supplies for the public health and safety of the
residents of the Town of Watertown.
3. To assure the continuation of the natural flow pattern of the water courses within the Town of
Watertown in order to provide adequate and safe floodwater storage capacity to protect persons
and property against the hazards of flood inundation.
(b) District Delineation
1. The floodplain District is defined as all special flood hazard areas within the Town of Watertown
designated as Zone A and AE, on the Middlesex County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the
National Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the Middlesex County FIRM that are
wholly or partially within the Town of Watertown are panel numbers 25017C0414E,
25017C0418E, 25017C0419E, 25017C0552E, 25017C0556E, and 25017C0557E dated June
48
4, 2010. The exact boundaries of the District may be defined by the 100-year base flood
elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Middlesex County Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) report dated June 4, 2010. The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by
reference and are on file with the Department of Community Development and Planning and the
Conservation Commission office.
2. Base Flood elevation and floodway data – In Zones A and AE, along watercourses that have not
had a regulatory floodway designated, the best available Federal, State, local, or other floodway
data shall be used to prohibit encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase in
flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(c) Permitted Uses
1. The Floodplain District shall be considered as overlying other districts. Any uses permitted in
the portions of the districts so overlaid shall be permitted subject to all the provisions of this
section.
2. The following uses shall be permitted within the Floodplain District as a matter of right.
(A) Conservation of soil, water, plants and wildlife.
(B) Outdoor recreation, including play areas, nature study, boating, fishing and hunting
where otherwise legally permitted but excluding building and structures.
(C) Wildlife management areas, non-commercial signs, foot and bicycle paths and bridges,
provided that such uses do not affect the natural flow pattern on any water course.
(D) Dwellings, buildings and structures lawfully existing prior to the adoption of these
provisions, but not including any enlargement and/or extension thereof.
(E) Retail use in an RD - Limited Redevelopment District for which a final Order of Conditions
has been issued under the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act (G.L. Ch.131, 40)
and which meets the criteria listed on §5.06 (d) 4.a., b. and c. and § 5.06(d)7. No site
plan approval shall be required under §5.06(d)(4) for such use.
3. The portion of any lot within the area delineated in section (b) above may be used to meet the
area and yard requirements for the district or districts in which the remainder of the lot is situated,
provided that the portion does not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the minimum lot area.
(d) Board Action
In the Floodplain District, the special permit granting authority may grant a special permit for any use
and/or structure, subject to the following:
1. The proposed use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
2. The proposed use will comply in all respects to the provisions of the underlying district or districts
within which the land is located.
3. All necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which
approval is required by federal or state law.
4. The provisions of §9.03 or 5.16 if applicable are applied for any use or structure. Specifically,
the provisions of § 9.03(c) are applied in a manner designed to eliminate, minimize or reduce
exposure to flood damage. In addition:
(A) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
(B) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems must be similarly designed. Discharges
from sewage systems into flood waters must be minimized or eliminated.
(C) No new construction, substantial improvement to existing structures, filling, or other land
development shall be permitted unless it is demonstrated by the applicant that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing
49
and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
5. Any proposed new development greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the
lesser, must include base flood elevation data.
6. The elevation in mean sea level to which proposed new or substantially improved structure will
be elevated or flood proofed, whether or not the structure has a basement is required.
7. The Floodplain District is established as an overlay district to all other districts. All development
in the district, including structural and non-structural activities, whether permitted by right or by
special permit must be in compliance with Chapter 131, Section 40 of the Massachusetts
General Laws and with the following:
(A) The Section of the Massachusetts State Building Code which addresses floodplain and
coastal high hazard areas (currently 780 CMR 120.G, “Flood Resistant Construction and
Construction in Coastal Dunes”);
(B) Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) (currently
310 CMR 10.00);
(C) Inland Wetlands Restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 13.00);
(D) Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage, DEP (currently
310 CMR 15, Title 5)
8. Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the above referenced state regulations
may only be granted in accordance with the required variance procedures of these state
regulations.
9. In reference to §5.06 (D), 4, C please note that under the Wetlands Protection Act Regulations,
no rise in water surface elevation is allowed to result from proposed activity in the floodplain.
(e) Other Agency Action
1. The Inspector of Buildings will maintain a record of floodproofing and elevation information as
required by the State Building Code, including:
(A) The elevations, in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor, including basement or
cellar, and whether or not the building has a basement or cellar;
(B) the elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which a building has been flood proofed;
(C) the date when such construction or improvement commenced.
(f) Notification of Watercourse Alteration
In a riverine situation, the Conservation Agent shall notify the following of any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse:
• Adjacent Communities
• NFIP State Coordinator
Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation
251 Causeway Street, Suite 600-700
Boston, MA 02114-2104
• NFIP Program Specialist
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region I
99 High Street, 6th Floor
Boston, MA 02110
50
SECTION 5.07 AFFORDABLE HOUSINGREQUIREMENTS
(a) Intent and Purpose
The purposes of this Section are to encourage the expansion and improvement of the Town of
Watertown’s housing stock; to provide for housing choices for households of all incomes, ages, and
sizes; to prevent the displacement of low- and moderate-income residents; to produce affordable
housing units in order to meet existing and anticipated employment needs within the Town; to provide
opportunities for conventional residential and mixed-use development to contribute to increasing the
supply of affordable housing; and to establish standards and guidelines in order to implement the
foregoing.
(b) Definitions
1. AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM
Collectively, §5.07 and other provisions of the Watertown Zoning Ordinance that pertain to the
development and preservation of affordable housing in the Town of Watertown.
2. AFFORDABLE HOUSING RESTRICTION
A deed restriction, contract, mortgage agreement, or other legal instrument, acceptable in form and
substance to the Town of Watertown, that effectively restricts occupancy of an affordable housing unit
to qualified purchaser or qualified renter, and which provides for administration, monitoring and
enforcement of the restriction during the term of affordability. An affordable housing restriction shall
run with the land in perpetuity or for the maximum period of time allowed by law, and be enforceable
under the provisions of Chapter 184, Sections 26 or 31-32 of the General Laws.
3. AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUND
A fund account established by the Town for the purpose of creating or preserving affordable housing
in the Town of Watertown.
4. AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNIT
A dwelling unit that is affordable to and occupied by a low- or moderate-income household and meets
the requirements of the Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development, Local
Initiative Program, for inclusion on the Chapter 40B Subsidized Housing Inventory.
5. AREA MEDIAN INCOME
The median family income for the metropolitan area that includes the Town of Watertown, as defined
in the annual schedule of low- and moderate-income limits published by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development, adjusted for household size.
6. COVERED DEVELOPMENT
Any development required to provide affordable housing in accordance with §5.07.
7. ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLD
A low- or moderate-income household that purchases or rents an affordable housing unit and occupies
it as their domicile and principal residence.
8. INCLUSION UNIT
An affordable housing unit built on the same site as the market-rate units in a covered development
under §5.07.
9. LOCAL INITIATIVE PROGRAM
A program administered by the Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development
(DHCD) pursuant to 760 CMR 56.00 to develop and implement local housing initiatives that produce
low- and moderate-income housing, with or without a comprehensive permit as defined in Chapter
40B, Section 20 through Section 23 of the General Laws.
10. LOW- OR MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD
A household with income at or below 80% of area median income, adjusted for household size, for the
51
metropolitan area that includes the Town of Watertown, as determined annually by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
11. MARKET-RATE DWELLING UNIT
All dwelling units in a development subject to this §5.07 that are not affordable housing units as defined
herein.
12. MAXIMUM AFFORDABLE PURCHASE PRICE OR RENT
A purchase price or monthly rent that complies with the requirements and Table shown in §5.07(d)(4)
and that complies with the regulations and guidelines of the DHCD Local Initiative Program and the
Watertown Planning Board, except that developments subject to § 5.07(j)(3) shall comply with the
maximum purchase price or rent requirements of that section. For homeownership units, the
maximum affordable purchase price shall account for the monthly cost of a mortgage payment,
property taxes, insurance, and condominium fees where applicable. For rental units, the maximum
affordable rent shall account for the monthly cost of rent and utilities. The household income used to
compute the maximum affordable purchase price or rent shall be adjusted for household size,
considering the household size for which a proposed affordable unit would be suitable under guidelines
of the Local Initiative Program or any successor affordable housing program established by the state.
13. SMALL-SCALE INCLUSION DEVELOPMENT
A covered development that provides 6 or more up to 10 dwelling units.
14. SUBSIDIZED HOUSING INVENTORY
The Department of Housing and Community Development Chapter 40B Subsidized Housing Inventory
as provided in 760 CMR 31.04.
(c) Applicability
(1) §5.07 applies to any development, whether new construction, conversion, adaptive reuse or
expansion of an existing structure, involving the creation of more than five dwelling units, or more than
five (5) Independent or Assisted Living Units, or more than five (5) lots for residential use, Independent
Living and Assisted living, outside of the Assisted Living Overlay Zone, §5.11. Dementia Care or
Skilled Nursing shall be exempt from §5.07.
Developments may not be segmented to avoid compliance with this Section. “Segmentation” shall
mean any development, whether new construction, adaptive reuse or redevelopment, or any division
of land that would cumulatively result in an increase by five or more residential lots or dwelling units
above the number existing on a parcel of land or contiguous parcels in common ownership twentyfour
months prior to the application. Where such segmentation occurs, it shall be subject to this Section
as a covered development. A subdivision or division of land shall mean any subdivision as defined in
the Subdivision Control Law, G.L. c.41, Sections 81K-81GG, or any division of land under G.L. c.41,
§81P, into lots for residential use.
(2) This Section does not apply to the rehabilitation of any building or structure, all of or
substantially all of which is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or a natural disaster;
provided, however, no rehabilitation nor repair shall increase the density, bulk or size of any such
building or structure which previously existed prior to the damage or destruction thereof except in
conformance with this Section.
(d) Basic Requirements
(1) Projects having more than five (5) units: No Special Permit for a development requiring a
Special Permit and no Building Permit for a use permitted as of right, shall be issued for a development
subject to this section unless the Petitioner provides the percentage of the total dwelling units in the
development as affordable housing as described herein, within §5.07(d)(4) and otherwise consistent
with this Section.
(2) Nothing in this Section shall preclude a developer from providing additional affordable units,
or greater affordability, or both, than the minimum requirements. In no instance shall any permit or
Special Permit approval create less than one affordable housing unit, and for purposes of this Section,
52
any calculation of required affordable housing units that results in the fractional or decimal equivalent
of one-half or above shall be increased to the next highest whole number.
(3) Affordable units shall be made available to eligible low- or moderate-income households at
purchase prices or rents that comply with the Massachusetts Department of Housing and
Community Development (DHCD) Local Initiative Program regulations, 760 CMR 56.00, or any
successor program as may be determined by the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) upon
recommendation of the Watertown Housing Partnership (WHP) and as indicated in §5.07(d)(4).
(4) The Rent and Ownership Affordability Requirements are as follows:
Total Project Size Affordable Units Rental Price Ownership Price
1 to 5 units 0 NA NA
6 to 19 units 12.5% 80% AMI 80% of AMI
20 and over units 15.0% No less than 5% of the total units at 65% AMI 80% AMI
10% of total units at 80% AMI 80% AMI
(5) For Projects with Assisted and Independent Living Units Requirements are as follows:
(e) Methods of Providing Affordable Units
(1) A covered development with more than five (5) and up to ten (10) units, shall have the option
of providing an affordable unit on site or making a cash payment in lieu of units on site. A Covered
Development with more than ten (10) units shall provide the affordable units on site. However,
approval for cash payment in lieu of on-site affordable units may be granted by the SPGA in certain
extraordinary circumstances. The SPGA must find that the developer has clearly demonstrated that
providing such unit(s) on-site would create significant hardship and that a cash payment in lieu of onsite
unit(s) is in the best interest of the Town’s affordable housing needs.
Any request for alternative means of compliance shall be reviewed by the WHP, which shall then make
its recommendation to the SPGA.
(2) The SPGA may authorize that an alternative method of compliance be used, in accordance with
the following:
Cash Payment: The SPGA may grant a Special Permit to provide affordable housing through a
cash payment to the Watertown Affordable Housing Fund, in lieu of providing one or more of the
affordable units required under this Section.
The cash payment for housing units, including Independent Living Units, shall be equal to the
most current Total Development Cost as articulated in the MA Department of Housing &
Community Development’s Qualified Allocation Plan for Low Income Housing Tax Credit, for the
areas described as Within Metro Boston/Suburban Area, as adjusted for the type of project and
number of units. The cash payments shall also be in accordance with a schedule of affordable
housing payments as outlined in §5.07(h)(6) and guidelines adopted and amended from time to
time by the SPGA, following a public hearing, in consultation with the WHP and the Watertown
Department of Community Development and Planning (DCDP). The cash payment for Assisted
Living Units shall be not less than $200,000 per unit.
Unit Type Number of Units Percentage Affordable Units Income Restriction
Independent Living (IL) 6-19 12.5% of the IL Units
20 or more 15% of the IL Units 80% AMI or less
Assisted Living* (AL) 10 to 75 5% of AL Units
76 or more 10% of AL Units
Dementia and/or
Skilled Nursing
NA Exempt NA
*For Assisted Living units, the maximum affordable purchase price or rent shall qualify for the SHI, and shall
include base service costs. The base service package shall be indistinguishable between market rate and
affordable units.
53
(f) Location and Comparability of Affordable Units
(1) Affordable units shall be proportionately distributed throughout the building(s) in a Covered
Development.
(2) Affordable units shall be indistinguishable from market-rate units in exterior building materials
and finishes; overall construction quality; and energy efficiency, including mechanical equipment and
plumbing, insulation, windows, and heating and cooling systems, as determined by the Building
Inspector
(3) Affordable units may differ from market-rate units in type of appliances, finishes; however, the
affordable units shall be comparable to the base market-rate units in such instances.
(4) Affordable units shall have the same floor area as the median market-rate units of the same
number of bedrooms within a margin of 20%; provided that units are not less than the minimum square
foot required by DHCD. This criterion shall not apply to Assisted Living Units.
(5) The bedroom mix in the affordable units shall be proportionate to the market-rate units, unless
the SPGA authorizes a different mix by special permit upon the recommendation of the WHP.
(6) The SPGA may adopt regulations or guidelines to further define comparability of the foregoing
requirements.
(7) The WHP shall provide the Petitioner and SPGA as provided in §5.07(i) with its
recommendations with reference to the Petitioner’s proposal in meeting the requirements for affordable
housing.
(g) Affirmative Marketing and Local Preference Policy
Affordable units shall be made available for purchase or rent to eligible low- or moderate-income
households under an affirmative marketing plan that complies with federal and state fair housing laws,
and fair housing and local preference guidelines established by the Watertown Housing Partnership. No
Building Permit for a Covered Development shall be issued unless the Department of Community
Development and Planning (DCDP) has determined that the Petitioner’s affirmative marketing plan
complies with this requirement. The affirmative marketing costs for the affordable housing units shall be
the responsibility of the Petitioner.
(h) Preservation of Affordability
(1) Affordable units provided under this Section shall be subject to an Affordable Housing Restriction
that contains limitations on use, occupancy, resale and rents, and provides for periodic monitoring to
verify compliance with and enforce said restriction. Affordability restrictions shall be contained in
applicable affordable housing restrictions, regulatory agreements, deed covenants, contractual
agreements, land trust arrangements and/or other mechanisms to ensure compliance with the
affordability requirements of this §5.07 (collectively, “Affordable Housing Restriction”).
(2) The Affordable Housing Restriction shall run with the land and be in force in perpetuity or for the
maximum period allowed by law, and be enforceable under the provisions of Chapter 184, Section 26 or
Sections 31-32 of the General Laws.
(3) The Affordable Housing Restriction shall provide that initial sales and rental of affordable housing
units and their subsequent re-sales and re-rentals shall comply with federal, state and local fair housing
laws, regulations and policies.
(4) The Affordable Housing Restriction shall provide that in the event that any affordable rental unit
is converted to a condominium unit, the condominium unit shall be restricted in perpetuity in the manner
provided for by § 5.07(h)(1) above to ensure that it remains affordable to households in the same income
range as prior to the condominium conversion.
(5) For a Covered Development that provides Inclusion Units:
54
(A) No Building Permit shall be issued until an Affordable Housing Restriction has been executed
by the Petitioner and the SPGA and the Petitioner provides evidence acceptable to the Director
of DCDP that the agreement has been recorded at the Middlesex County Registry of Deeds.
(B) For for-sale or homeownership unit, the DCDP shall not authorize or sign off on a Certificate
of Occupancy until the Petitioner submits documentation acceptable to the Director of DCDP
that an affordable housing deed rider has been signed by affordable unit homebuyer and
recorded at the Middlesex County Registry of Deeds.
(6) For a Covered Development that provides affordable housing through a cash payment in lieu of
affordable units:
(A) For a Covered Development having 10 units or less that provides affordable housing through
a cash payment in lieu of affordable units; the following reduced percentage (%) as described in
§5.07(e)(2) shall apply: 10 units – 100%; 9 units- 90%; 8 units – 80%; 7 units – 70% and 6 units
– 60%.
(B) The DCDP shall not sign off on Certificate(s) of Occupancy until the Petitioner pays 100% of
the required cash in lieu payment.
(7) All legal documentation in connection with the affordable housing units shall be in the standard
form provided by the Town of Watertown, as approved by legal counsel to the Town. If the Petitioner
proposes to use documentation other than that provided by the Town, any and all costs associated with
review by legal counsel to the Town shall be paid by the Petitioner.
(i) Submission Requirements and Procedures
Projects requiring the provision of affordable units under this Section must submit a proposal as to the
method of meeting the affordable housing requirements with the application for zoning relief and a copy
to the WHP. The WHP shall, in writing, provide the SPGA with their recommendations no later than forty
(40) days from submission. The SPGA may adopt additional submission requirements and procedures
not inconsistent with this Section, following a public hearing and consultation with the WHP.
(j) Special Regulations for Inclusion Units
(1) Use Regulations: Developments with Inclusion Units shall comply with §5.01, Table of Use
Regulations; provided, however, that a Covered Development with not more than ten (10) multi-family
units shall be a permitted use when at least 12.5% of the units are Inclusion Units as defined hereunder,
in which case the development shall qualify for review as a Small-Scale Inclusion Development.
(2) Small-Scale Inclusion Development Submission Requirements and Procedures: No Building
Permit for a Small-Scale Inclusion Development shall be issued until the SPGA has approved a site plan
in accordance with §9.03 and the provisions of this Section. The SPGA may adopt regulations for
submission requirements and procedures not inconsistent with this Section, following a public hearing.
(3) Cost Offsets and Affordability Requirements: Inclusion Units provided in excess of what is required
in §5.07(d)(4) shall be exempt from the minimum lot area per dwelling unit and/or maximum floor area
ratio, as set forth in §5.04, provided that the Inclusion Units comply with the following affordability
requirements:
Rental Units: For the affordable units, the maximum affordable rent shall be affordable to a
household with income at or below 65% area median income (AMI), adjusted for household size.
(k) Local Initiative Program Requirements. The Petitioner shall be responsible for preparing and complying
with any documentation that may be required by DHCD to qualify affordable units for listing on the Chapter 40B
Subsidized Housing Inventory. The Petitioner shall also be responsible for providing annual compliance monitoring
and certification to the Town, or to cover the costs of the Town for provision of such compliance monitoring.
(i) Severability
55
If any portion of this Section is declared to be invalid, the remainder shall continue to be in full force and
effect.
SECTION 5.08 REVITALIZATION OVERLAY SPECIAL PERMIT (RO)
(a) Intent and Purpose: To assist in accomplishing the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance the Town
Council may from time to time apply a Revitalization Overlay District to specific portions of the Zoning
Map in order to guide the redevelopment of certain tracts of land in a manner that is beneficial to the
Town.
(b) Objectives: The establishment and application of the revitalization overlay special permit is intended
to accomplish the following objectives:
(1) To permit by special permit the orderly redevelopment of a specific area regardless of the various
underlying zoning districts;
(2) To provide for greater flexibility in planning and design;
(3) To provide the opportunity for mixed use developments that will allow for more efficient and
sensitive use of land;
(4) To promote compatibility between adjoining areas and the proposed development site; and
(5) To promote redevelopment of specific portions of the community consistent with adopted land
use plans and policies.
(c) Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted within a revitalization overlay special permit:
(1) Any use permitted in the S-10, S-6, T, R.75 and R1.2 districts, given the site plan requirements
of subsection (e)2 of this §5.08;
(2) Retail establishments, business offices, consumer services, excluding drive-in retail and service
facilities;
(3) Any use permitted by right or special permit in any of the underlying zones.
(d) Dimensional Criteria: The uses noted in subsection (c) above shall be subject to the following
criteria:
(1) Maximum Floor Area Ratio: No commercial project developed by a Revitalization Overlay
special permit shall exceed a Floor Area Ratio of 1.5; and no residential project developed by a
Revitalization Overlay special permit shall exceed a Floor Area Ratio of 2.0.
(2) Maximum Height: No structure built or reconstructed as a result of revitalization overlay special
permit shall be more than forty three (43) feet or four (4) stories;
(3) Building Coverage: The structure or structures of any development within a revitalization overlay
district shall not exceed a total building coverage of sixty-five percent (65%), excluding parking
areas and parking garages, recreation facilities such as swimming pools and tennis courts, and
internal roadways or walkways;
(4) Setbacks: Front No setback required
Side 15 feet
Rear 20 feet
The Board of Appeals shall require that a landscape plan for screening and buffering purposes
be prepared for some or all the required set back areas.
(5) Minimum Lot Size: Ten Thousand (10,000) square feet
(6) Minimum Frontage: Fifty (50) feet
(7) Minimum Open Space: All projects within the Revitalization Overlay District shall have at least
fifteen percent (15%) of the total site area devoted to Open Space; required Setbacks shall be
considered as part of the total area required for Open Space. The required Open Space shall
not be used for parking or loading purposes and shall be open and unobstructed to the sky,
items such as benches, walkways, planters, landscaping, swimming pools, kiosks, gazebos, and
similar structures shall not be considered as obstructions;
(8) Bonus Density: A project developed by a Revitalization Overlay special permit which complies
with the requirements of Section 5.07, except that the allowance for a cash contribution in lieu
of units shall not apply, may increase its Floor Area Ratio to a maximum of 2.0.
56
(e) Minimum Site Plan Requirements
(1) Commercial Developments: Developments that are exclusively commercial in character may be
permitted by special permit given the conditions of the above subsection (d) of this §5.08.
(2) Residential Projects: No developments that are exclusively residential in character shall be
allowed except as provided below. Residential uses shall only be allowed as part of a mixed
use project and shall be subject to the following conditions:
(A) Entrances and exits for residential uses shall be separate and distinct from commercial
entrances and exits.
(B) The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for entirely residential structures in the
instance where the proposed mixed used development would create both wholly but
separate residential and commercial structures on one lot given the following conditions;
structures used wholly for residential purposes shall be at least fifty (50) feet from
structures (within the same lot) used for wholly commercial purposes and the open space
between the residential and commercial structures shall be consistent with the open
space requirements of this section; and that the total FAR for all structures on the lot
does not exceed 1.5, except as allowed by §5.08(d)(8) above; and further, that all other
dimensional requirements are met in accordance with the standards of this section.
(3) All Projects:
(A) The exterior building line of the fourth story shall be setback a minimum of twenty-five (25)
feet from any street line.
(B) For any building that contains a fourth story, the front exterior building line shall be a
minimum distance of twelve (12) feet from the front lot line.
(f) Parking Requirements: The parking requirements for development within the Revitalization Overlay
District shall conform to the parking requirements for each individual use set forth in §6.01 of this
Zoning Ordinance.
(g) Signs: A plan for signs shall be submitted to the Planning Board and the Board of Appeals for
approval. The Board of Appeals shall grant approval of the plan for signs only after it is satisfied with
said plan for signs will not derogate the quality of a residential environment in the mixed use projects.
For guidance, the Board of Appeals shall use §7.05 of this Zoning Ordinance for signs in mixed use
projects. For developments that are exclusively commercial, §7.06 of this Zoning Ordinance shall
apply.
(h) Procedure: Consistent with the procedural requirements provided in §9.04 of this Zoning Ordinance,
the Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for development within a Revitalization Overlay
District if it finds that the conditions for approval for special permits set forth in §9.05(b) of this Zoning
Ordinance have been met.
SECTION 5.09 WATERTOWN SQUARE DESIGN OVERLAY DISTRICT
(a) Intent and Purpose: To assist in accomplishing the purposes of the Zoning Ordinance, the Town
Council hereby applies a Design Overlay District to specific portions of the Zoning Map in order to
regulate building signage and facade alterations within certain districts of the Town in a manner that
is beneficial to the community.
(b) Objectives: The establishment and application of the Design Overlay District is intended to
accomplish the following objectives:
(1) To encourage reinvestment in and stimulate increased economic activity in the Watertown
Square Area.
(2) To improve the appearance of the Watertown Square area over time and to create a more
competitive shopping environment.
(3) To maintain and enhance the scale and quality of Watertown Square's architectural environment
including the Square's existing older buildings and any proposed new construction.
57
(c) Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted within the Design Overlay District: Any Uses
permitted in the Central Business (CB) district.
(d) Dimensional Criteria: The Uses above shall be subject to the following criteria: All dimensional
criteria applying to the Central Business District.
(e) Minimum Site Plan Requirements: Site Plan Requirements shall be the same as those required in
the Central Business district.
(f) Parking Requirements: Parking requirements for the Design Overlay District shall be the same as
those required in the Central Business District.
(g) Regulated Building Facade Alterations
(1) Regulated facades shall include all buildings within the Watertown Square Design District (see
map of area).
(2) A regulated alteration or facade improvement shall be defined as any change in the visual
appearance of the facade including any change in signage, lighting, door or window style, unless
the change consists of an exact replication in terms of size, color, location, and detail of the
replaced element.
(3) All regulated facades shall be subject to the design review process of §7.02 of the Zoning
Ordinance.
(4) In reviewing all proposed facade alterations within the Watertown Square Design Overlay
District, the Planning Board Staff's recommendations shall be based on the Watertown Square
Design Handbook and such guidelines as the Planning Board may adopt.
(h) Signs
(1) Any and all signage changes shall be subject to the design review process of §7.02 of the Zoning
Ordinance.
(2) In reviewing all proposed signage changes within the Design Overlay District, the Planning
Staff's recommendations shall be based on the Watertown Square Design Handbook and such
guidelines as the Planning Board may adopt.
(3) All signage within the Design Overlay District shall conform to the provisions of §7.02 except as
otherwise specified in the Watertown Square Design Handbook.
SECTION 5.10 LIMITED REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (RD)
(a) Intent and Purpose:To encourage the redevelopment of land for retail purposes in order to promote
the revitalization of land and to conserve its value.
(b) Permitted Uses: The RD - Limited Redevelopment District shall be considered as overlaying
other districts and is intended to permit more extensive uses than are permitted in the underlying
zoning districts or in any applicable overlay district as follows: Retail establishments with more than
five thousand (5,000) square feet of Building Area are permitted as of right.
Any use permitted by right or special permit in any of the underlying zoning districts in accordance
with the provisions of §5.01 through 5.04 or in any overlay district applicable to the property located
in the RD - Limited Redevelopment District, as permitted in such district shall not be affected by
virtue of the provisions of this §5.11(b).
(c) Dimensional Criteria: The uses noted in subsection (b) above shall be subject to the
dimensional requirements applicable in the underlying zoning districts.
(d) Parking Requirements: The parking requirements for development within the RD - Limited
Redevelopment District shall conform to the parking requirements for each individual use set forth
in §6.01 of this Zoning Ordinance.
58
(e) Signs: For retail establishments permitted under §5.11(b)(i), the following signs shall be
permitted: one wall sign for each business located in the building and in the case of a business
which has more than a single department, one sign for each department provided such department
occupies no less than 550 square feet of the building and provided the aggregate of all such wall
signs on the building shall not exceed 500 square feet. For other uses, the provisions governing
signs in the underlying zoning district shall be applicable.
SECTION 5.11 ASSISTED LIVING OVERLAY DISTRICT (ALOD)
(a) Intent and Purpose:To encourage and guide the redevelopment of land for residential purposes and
to promote its revitalization and value to the community.
(b) Permitted Uses: Any use permitted in the underlying zone and Assisted Living as defined in
§2.05, subject to special permit provisions under §9.04, 9.05, and 9.09.
(c) Dimensional Criteria:
Min.Lot Size: 10,000 sf Max.Building Coverage: 35%
Min.Frontage: 80 ft Max.Height: 3 stories or the height allowed in the
underlying district, whichever is
greater, provided however that more
than 3 stories may be allowed within
existing structure.
Front Setback: 25 ft Min.Lot/unit: 1,200 sf
Side Setback: 20 ft Max.FAR: 1.0
Rear Setback: 20 ft Min.Open Space: 20%
(d) Parking Requirement: For Assisted Living, one space per every 4 units plus one per employee
on largest shift. All other uses must follow the provisions of §6 of this Zoning Ordinance.
(e) Signage: The provisions of §7.05 of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply.
(f) Affordable Housing Requirements: A total of 10% of the units must be set aside as affordable
pursuant to the provisions of §5.07 of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 5.12 ARSENAL OVERLAY DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (AODD)
(a) Name: Arsenal Overlay Development District (AODD)
(b) Intent and Purpose: To create a zoning overlay district to assist, promote, and guide the orderly
conversion and redevelopment of former US Army Materials Technology Laboratory (AMTL)
property in a manner which is beneficial to Watertown.
(c) Objectives: The establishment of the AODD overlay district is intended to accomplish the following
objectives:
(1) To permit the expeditious and efficient redevelopment of the AMTL property which will enhance
the community’s quality of life and economic well-being;
(2) To provide for compatibility of land uses within the AMTL property and with respect to abutting
properties;
(3) To promote the preservation of the historic resources and character of the property, including
the rehabilitation of existing structures to the maximum extent practicable;
(4) To allow for a density which is appropriate for economic revitalization while not burdening the
surrounding neighborhoods;
(5) To allow for greater flexibility and discretion in planning and design by the Town of Watertown,
in accordance with the “Arsenal on the Charles Signage Guidelines”, prepared by Sasaki
Associates, Inc., dated September 2000, as may be amended; and
59
(6) To facilitate the expansion of retail, restaurant, cultural, and other community amenity uses of
the redeveloped AMTL property to better serve AODD occupants, the nearby neighborhoods,
and other visitors.
(d) Permitted Uses: The following land uses are permitted within the AODD:
Principal Uses:
(1) Commercial:
Bank
Business Offices
Restaurant, with or without liquor
Health & Fitness Club
Medical and Dental Offices
Retail and Consumer Services provided that the total gross floor area used for
such uses (including accessory Retail and Consumer Services serving AODD
occupants) shall not exceed 10% of the total gross floor area within the AODD.
(2) Industrial:
Research and Development
Light Manufacturing
Assembly
(3) Institutional, Community, Cultural:
Museum
Library
Theater
Day Care
Aquarium
Any principal uses permitted or permitted by Special Permit under Article V in an Industrial or Business
district which are not specifically prohibited but which are not listed as a permitted use in (d) may be
allowed by Special Permit by the Planning Board.
Accessory Uses:
(1) Parking, for AODD occupants and visitors
(2) Retail and Consumer Services such as Bank, ATM, Salon, Newsstand, Coffee Shop (limited to
10% of floor area of any building to serve AODD occupants)
(3) Warehousing to service AODD occupants
(4) Hotel
Prohibited Uses:
The following uses are specifically prohibited within the AODD:
Residential (except for Hotel as permitted above)
Heavy Industrial
Wholesale or Warehouse except as specifically permitted above
Auto Sales or Repair
(e) Dimensional Criteria:
(1) Maximum Building Footprint: For any contributing historic structure, the exterior footprint shall
not be expanded beyond the existing area as of the date of this Ordinance (June 8, 2015).
For any new construction, the Planning Board shall determine maximum allowable floor area
based upon criteria determined by on-site and off-site constraints such as parking, traffic, open
space, circulation, and the provisions of the Historic Preservation Memorandum of Agreement,
as amended (MOA).
60
(2) Maximum Height: No AMTL structure to be rehabilitated or renovated shall be raised in height,
except for accessory equipment. In all instances, roof accessory equipment shall have
inconsequential or minimal visual and auditory impact on the surrounding neighborhood.
For any new construction, no structure shall exceed the following:
West of School Street - five (5) feet in elevation above the nearest adjacent existing building within
the AODD as of June 2015. The top façade facing Arsenal Street shall not be higher in elevation
than the top of the northwest corner of Building 311, with the portions of the building taller than the
northwest corner of Building 311 being set back a minimum of 10 additional feet from the new
building’s front façade facing Arsenal Street.
East of School Street – two stories, not to exceed twenty four (24) feet in elevation, above the plane
created by the roofs of the adjacent existing building within the AODD, as of June 2015, excluding
the existing parking garage.
Necessary features that promote sustainable practices may extend up to 15 feet above the roofs of
buildings in excess of the height limits noted above provided the portions exceeding the height limits
are not used for parking or other permitted uses in this Section.
The heights of all new structures shall be consistent with the provisions of the MOA.
(3) Building Coverage: Any new structures shall not result in a total building coverage of more than
fifty percent (50%), excluding parking areas and garages when added to the total square feet of
all buildings on the site.
(4) Setbacks: For any new structures, the following lot line setbacks shall apply, except as specified
below*:
Front: 25 feet
Side: 25 feet
Rear: 25 feet
* For the North Beacon Street frontage west of Charles River Road, no new construction may
extend closer to the street nor higher in elevation than the line established by a 45 degree plane
beginning at the northerly side line of North Beacon Street and extending northward into the AODD.
In no circumstances shall the setback be less than 25 feet (see ** below) nor the height greater than
allowed by §5.12(e)(2). East of Charles River Road, no building shall be permitted within 50 feet of
North Beacon Street.
** By AODD Campus Special Permit with Conceptual Site Plan Review, the Front Setback may
be reduced along Arsenal Street to the front setback of Building 311 to maintain consistent building
lines, provided that any new construction less than 25 feet from Arsenal Street authorized by such a
special permit must include first floor commercial, community, or cultural uses along at least 80% of
the Arsenal Street facade.
*** Any new construction south or west of Building 39 must be screened by a 25 foot wide buffer
along North Beacon Street, landscaped with shrubs and trees, which area may also include a
pedestrian/bicycle path(s), an informational kiosk(s), scattered seating, and similar amenities.
(5) Minimum Lot Size: Ten Thousand (10,000) square feet
61
(6) Minimum Open Space: Fifteen percent (15%) of the lot
(f) Parking Requirements:
AUTOMOBILE
(1) Off-street vehicle parking shall be provided as required by Article 6 of the Watertown Zoning
Ordinance. For the purposes of §6.01(g), the AODD shall be treated as a single lot, without regard
to internal lot lines or divisions of ownership.
(2) By Special Permit, the Planning Board may reduce the otherwise required number of off- street
accessory parking spaces, based on the availability of public transportation alternatives at or near
the AODD, the transportation demand management programs implemented or to be implemented
within the AODD, the ability of uses with peak user demands at different times to share parking
spaces or other factors for which the applicant provides a parking study or analysis prepared under
the direction of a Professional Engineer with the requisite experience in conducting such analysis,
using standards and methodologies promulgated by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, the
Urban Land Institute, or other appropriate source.
BICYCLE
Required off-street bicycle parking shall be provided as follows:
(1) One bicycle parking space for every 20 automobile parking spaces;
(2) Each bicycle parking space shall be sufficient to accommodate a bicycle 7 feet in length and 2
feet in width. Inverted U frame racks that support the bicycle at two or more points above and
on either side of the bicycle's center of gravity are required. An alternative style of rack or bicycle
securing system that, in the opinion of the Planning Board, provides comparable levels of
security and convenience, may be provided. Racks must be secured to the ground.
(3) Where more than 10 bicycle spaces are required, half shall be provided as long term (employee)
parking, secure and protected from the elements. The other half shall be provided as short term
(customer or visitor) parking, visible and convenient to building entrance.
(4) Accommodation of bicycle lockers and showers, which further encourage bicycle transportation,
shall be negotiated during the developer marketing and selection phases in order to meet the
provisions of the Transportation Demand Management (TDM) Plan as stipulated in the
Environmental Impact Report (EIR) to be issued for the redevelopment of the site. A centralized
bicycle facility which includes all of the above provisions is highly desirable.
(g) Siting and Design Guidelines:
Pursuant to the requirements of the MOA, the character defining features of the structures located
on the AMTL property must be preserved. The MOA listed the character defining features as follows:
• Building and Structure Exteriors
• Fenestration
• Scale
• Color
• Use of Material
• Mass
• Views to, from, across the Olmsted-designed landscape
All rehabilitation of existing structures and any new construction must be sensitive to these features
and consistent with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for
Rehabilitating Historic Buildings.
62
(h) Permitting Requirements and Procedures:
All projects within the AODD are subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
(i) AODD Campus Special Permit with Conceptual Site Plan Review:
The continued revitalization and redevelopment of the former AMTL property will involve new uses
and buildings, additional structured parking, enhanced landscaping, and other significant changes.
These will occur over time, likely in phases. An applicant may wish to seek conceptual level approval
of a campus-wide project, with detailed Site Plan Reviews of individual buildings under Section 9.03
of this Zoning Ordinance to occur later, before each new building is constructed. Such an initial,
project-level review would provide an opportunity to consider and address the cumulative effects of
the individual phases and for the holistic consideration of a campus-wide project. The AODD Campus
Special Permit with Conceptual Site Plan Review (AODD Campus Special Permit) process provides
the opportunity and a mechanism for review of a campus-wide project that will be built in phases.
(1) Application: An applicant proposing to construct one or more new buildings (which may include
structured parking and may include alterations to one or more existing buildings) may seek
approval of the overall project through an AODD Campus Special Permit, for which the Planning
Board will be the Special Permit Granting Authority. An application for AODD Campus Special
Permit shall include, at a minimum, for each proposed new building, structural alteration of an
existing building, or principal use outside of a building:
(A) The proposed location, approximate footprint, height, and gross floor area;
(B) Building elevations showing principal building entrances, overall building massing,
rooflines, and general fenestration patterns and will require multiple threedimensional
elevations;
(C) Identification of all principal and accessory uses, other than parking, exceeding
10% of the proposed additional gross floor area;
(D) Vehicle and bicycle parking areas or facilities to be provided; and
(E) Proposed design guidelines establishing a palette of building materials, architectural
elements, and landscaping elements to be finalized for each individual building during
later, detailed Site Plan Reviews.
(2) Prior to a public hearing, the applicant shall hold a minimum of two (2) informal meetings with
abutting residents and neighborhood groups to review the Campus Plan materials.
(3) Review of Application: The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing in accordance with
procedures outlined in §9.04. The Planning Board shall not approve an AODD Campus Special
Permit unless it finds that the four conditions for special permit approval set forth in § 9.05(b) of
this Zoning Ordinance have been met. The applicant’s submission of and the review of the
conceptual site plan component of an AODD Campus Special Permit shall follow the procedures
set forth in § 9.03. The Planning Board shall not approve such a conceptual site plan unless it
finds that the applicant has satisfactorily addressed, at a conceptual level, the ten criteria listed
in §9.03 (c).
(4) Parking Reduction: In granting an AODD Campus Special Permit, the Planning Board may
reduce the number of required accessory parking spaces, as provided for in subsection (f)(2)
above. In addition, the Planning Board may allow the applicant to temporarily further reduce the
amount of accessory parking provided with the AODD during a phase(s) of an approved campuswide
project if existing parking spaces will be eliminated during a phase of implementation, to be
replaced in that or a later phase of implementation, for example if a structured parking facility is
to be built on the location of an existing surface parking lot. In determining whether to grant such
a temporary further reduction of the amount of accessory parking, the Planning Board shall take
into consideration the factors set forth in subsection (f)(2) above and the applicant’s proposals,
if any, to provide substitute off-site parking or other interim measures to reduce the demand for
63
parking within the AODD.
(5) Final Site Plan Review: Prior to the issuance of a Building Permit for any building approved under
an AODD Campus Special Permit, the applicant shall obtain Site Plan Review of the final design
details of the proposed building and any related landscaping or other improvements following
the procedures set forth in §9.03 of this Zoning Ordinance.
(6) Amendments to Conceptual Site Plan: Changes to an approved AODD Campus Special Permit
conceptual site plan that are minor, as determined by the Planning Board, may be approved as
part of the final Site Plan Review for the associated building(s). Changes that the Planning Board
determines are major shall require an amendment to the AODD Campus Special Permit,
following the procedures set forth in § 9.05 of this Zoning Ordinance. In determining whether
changes are major or minor, the Planning Board shall treat as minor any changes that do not
alter by more than 10% a building’s footprint, height, floor area ratio, or setbacks, provided that
the resulting building still complies with applicable dimensional requirements, changes to
building materials, architectural elements, and landscaping elements that are consistent with the
approved AODD Campus Special Permit and conceptual site plan, rearrangement of the
proposed principal and accessory uses, and changes to the alignment of internal streets or
pedestrian corridors, and shall treat as major any changes that increase a building’s footprint,
height, or floor area ratio by more than 25%, that eliminate a proposed internal street or
pedestrian corridor, or that eliminate or add a principal use occupying more than 25% of the
proposed gross floor area.
(7) Exercise of AODD Campus Special Permit: Substantial use of a AODD Campus Special Permit
will be deemed to have occurred for purposes of §9.13 of the Zoning Ordinance and §9 of the
Massachusetts Zoning Act, M.G.L. c. 40A, if, within one year from the date of the filing of the
Planning Board’s AODD Campus Special Permit decision with the Town Clerk, construction of
an approved building or commencement of an approved principal use outside of a building has
begun.
SECTION 5.13 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
(a) No person shall construct a wireless telecommunications facility without a special permit issued by the
Board of Appeals under §9.05. In addition, any facility must:
(1) Be located within these zones (CB, LB, I-1, I-2, I-3, and CR). Wireless telecommunications facilities
shall not be located within the NB (Neighborhood Business) zone.
(2) Not be located on a structure containing any residences, not within fifty (50) feet of a residential zone
or any structure containing a residential use.
(3) In the case of an antenna mounted on a building or structure, not extend more than fifteen (15) feet
above the height of such structure or building.
(4) In the case of a tower, not exceed the height allowed in the zoning district.
(5) Be fully concealed or camouflaged, i.e. disguised, shielded, hidden, or made to appear as an
architectural component of an existing or proposed structure.
(b) Removal of Abandoned Facilities: Any wireless telecommunications facility that is not operated or that
is not in compliance with this ordinance for a continuous period of ninety days shall be considered to be
abandoned, and the Building Inspector may, by written notice order that such facility be removed within
thirty (30) days. At the time of removal, the facility and all associated debris shall be removed from the
premises.
SECTION 5.14 RELIGIOUS/SCHOOL BUILDING OVERLAY DISTRICT (R/SOD)
(a) Intent and Purpose: To assist in accomplishing the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance the Town
Council may from time to time apply a Religious/School Buildings Overlay District to specific portions
of the Zoning Map in order to guide and encourage the reuse and redevelopment of both religious
and school buildings as defined in accordance with c.40A, §3, MGL, throughout the community and
further protecting the historic building structures and preserving architectural features and character
along with its associated tracts of land in a manner that is beneficial to the Town.
64
(b) Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted within a religious/school building overlay district.
(1) Any use permitted in the R.75, R1.2 and NB districts
(2) educational or licensed day care use defined by c 40A, §3, MGL, business offices;
(3) Any use permitted by right or special permit in any of the underlying zones.
(c) Uses Allowed by Special Permit: Other residential and mixed uses shall be allowed by Special
Permit subject to the following criteria:
(1) The project shall promote the orderly redevelopment of specific religious and/or school building
and their associated tracts of land area regardless of the various underlying zoning districts;
(2) The project shall provide for greater flexibility in planning and design;
(3) To project shall provide opportunity for residential and mixed use - limited business
developments that will allow for more efficient and sensitive use of land;
(4) The project shall be compatible between adjoining areas and the proposed development site;
and
(5) The project shall allow for redevelopment of existing church and school structures within the
community consistent with adopted land use plans and policies;
(6) To the maximum extent possible, the project shall preserve significant and desirable architectural
and/or historical buildings and their architectural and/or historical features, and shall incorporate
appropriate architectural and /or historical features into any renovations of or additions to those
buildings and features;
(7) Any public property in the OSC district sold to a private owner or owners shall be deemed to be
in the CR District in accordance with §5.03 (3), Zoning Ordinance.
(d) Dimensional Criteria: The uses noted in subsection (c) above shall be subject to the following
criteria: Existing Buildings: Alterations shall be subject to §4.06(a); Special Permit Finding.
Additions and New structures where projects proposing 10 residential units or less, R.75 dimensional
criteria shall apply; for projects proposing over 10 units, R1.2 dimensional criteria shall apply; for a
residential and mixed use-limited business development, including educational and licensed day
care use, NB dimensional criteria shall apply
(e) Parking Requirements: The parking requirements for development within the Religious/school
buildings overlay district shall conform to the parking requirements for each individual use set forth
in §6.01 of this Zoning Ordinance.
(f) Affordable Housing: All residential projects, including mixed use projects shall adhere to the
provisions of §5.07, Affordable Housing Requirements.
(g) Signs: A plan for signage shall be submitted to the Planning staff for review and submitted to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for approval only after it is determined that said plan for signage will not
derogate the quality of a residential environment in the mixed use projects. For guidance, the Board
of Appeals shall use §7.05 of this Zoning Ordinance for signs in mixed use projects. For
developments that are exclusively commercial, §7.06 of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply.
(h) Bonus Density for Existing Structures: A project developed by a R/SOD special permit and
notwithstanding any provisions of §5.04, Table of Dimensional Regulations, more than the maximum
number of floors/stories permitted in the Dimensional Criteria Zone applicable to the project may be
allowed by the Zoning Board of Appeals within the existing building.
(i) Procedure: Consistent with the procedural requirements provided in §9.04 of this Zoning Ordinance,
the Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for development within a Religious/School Building
Overlay District if it finds that the conditions for approval for special permits set forth in §9.05(b) of
this Zoning Ordinance have been met.
65
SECTION 5.15 MUNICIPAL REUSE AND DEVELOPMENT
(a) Intent and Purpose:
The purpose of this section is to promote and encourage the orderly reuse and redevelopment of
land and structures already owned and used for municipal purposes by the Town of Watertown for
one or more other municipal uses, consistent with the evolving needs of the Town, by establishing
regulations which will allow for greater flexibility in planning and design consistent with both fiscal
responsibility and sound planning and site design principles, and which will maximize compatibility
with the neighborhood in which the land is located.
(b) Applicability:
The provisions of this Section shall apply in all zoning districts to the proposed reuse and
redevelopment of municipally-owned land and structures and to the change from one municipal use
to another municipal use.
(c) Applicable Regulations:
Notwithstanding any provisions of this Ordinance to the contrary, the reuse and redevelopment of
municipally-owned and used land and structures for other municipal uses shall be permitted by right
in all zoning districts of the Town of Watertown, subject only to the following procedures and
requirements.
(d) The Planning Board may in certain circumstances vary dimensional criteria, including parking where
warranted due to the proximity and use of structures on abutting properties and may also require
greater landscape screening and buffering to be installed within some or all of the required set back
areas.
(1) Dimensional Criteria:
(a) Existing Buildings: Alterations shall be subject to paragraph (h).
For New Construction including Additions:
(b) Maximum Floor Area Ratio: No municipal reuse and redevelopment project shall exceed a Floor
Area Ratio of 1.5;
(c) Maximum Height: No new structure built or reconstructed as a part of a municipal reuse and
redevelopment project shall be more than forty-eight (48) feet or four (4) stories in height,
whichever is less;
(d) Lot Coverage: Lot coverage in a municipal reuse and redevelopment project shall not exceed a
total of sixty-five percent (65%), excluding parking areas and parking garages, recreation
facilities such as parks and tennis courts, and internal roadways or walkways;
(e) Setbacks: Front 15 feet Minimum
Side 25 feet Minimum
Rear 50 feet Minimum
(f) Minimum Lot Size: None
(g) Minimum Frontage: Fifty (50) feet
(h) Minimum Open Space: All municipal reuse and redevelopment projects shall have at least
fifteen percent (15%) of the total site area devoted to Open Space; required setbacks shall be
considered as part of the total area required for Open Space. The required Open Space shall not
be used for parking, loading or roadway purposes and shall be open and unobstructed to the sky;
items such as benches, walkways, planters, landscaping, swimming pools, kiosks, gazebos, and
similar structures shall not be considered as obstructions.
66
(2) Parking Requirements: Parking for Municipal Reuse and Redevelopment Projects shall conform to
the parking requirements for each individual use set forth in §6.01 of this Zoning Ordinance.
(3) Signs: A plan for signage shall be submitted to the DCDP staff and Planning Board for approval.
The Planning Board, with the recommendation of the DCDP staff shall grant approval of the plan for
signs only after it is satisfied that said signage will not derogate from the quality of surrounding
residential environment. For guidance, the Planning Board shall use §7.04 of this Zoning Ordinance
and may, if found necessary permit additional signage above that which is allowed in § 7.04.
(4) Accessory Structure(s): Accessory structure(s) shall be permitted and subject to review by the
Planning Board.
(5) Procedures: Consistent with the procedural requirements provided in §9.03 (a) and (b) of this Zoning
Ordinance, the Planning Board together with the Administrative Site Plan Review Committee shall
hold a public hearing to determine and discuss questions and impacts, potential problems with the
development or redevelopment within a Municipal Reuse and Development District. The Planning
Board shall prepare a written report on the proposal considering, among other things, the ten criteria
listed in §9.03 (c) and if it finds that the conditions for approval set forth in §9.05(b) of this Zoning
Ordinance have been met.
67
SECTION 5.16 PLEASANT STREET CORRIDOR DISTRICT (PSCD)
(a) Intent and Purpose:
The Pleasant Street Corridor District (PSCD) has been enacted to encourage the best use of the
Pleasant Street Corridor physically, economically, environmentally, and socially while promoting the best
interests of the residents of the Town.
The PSCD is intended to fulfill the goals and objectives contained in the Pleasant Street Corridor Concept
Plan and Implementation Strategy (herein defined as “the Corridor Plan”). The PSCD zoning is designed
to achieve these goals through sound planning and site design principles.
The major objectives of the Corridor Plan are the following:
1. Define the character of the corridor
2. Facilitate a mix of uses including residential, office, research and development, hotel, retail,
etc.
3. Improve quality of life
4. Develop at an appropriate scale and size
5. Increase real estate investment and maximize development to enhance the Town tax base
6. Promote accessibility to and within the district by improving existing and creating new
roadways, mass transit, pedestrian walkways, bicycle paths
7. Calm Pleasant Street traffic and manage traffic impacts
8. Improve access to the Charles River
9. Encourage Smart Growth and Low Impact Development (LID) to develop in an
environmentally sustainable manner, manage storm water, and protect the riparian habitat
(b) District Delineation:
The Pleasant Street Corridor District (PSCD) replaces the westernmost Industrial-3 (I-3) in its entirety
(Waltham border to Myrtle Street). The provisions of this Section shall apply only to the boundaries of
the Pleasant Street Corridor District. Within this District, there will be sub-categories of PSCD-1,
PSCD-2, which will allow residential mixed use, and PSCD-3, which will allow commercial mixed use.
1. PSCD-1: Any area within the Pleasant Street Corridor District that is not classified as
PSCD-2 or PSCD-3 shall be classified as PSCD-1.
2. PSCD-2 requires projects with a residential component to also include a minimum of 15%
of the gross floor area to be commercial.
3. PSCD-3 allows a mix of retail, commercial, and light industrial uses, and does not allow for
residential uses.
(c) Authority and Procedures:
The Planning Board shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) for all Special Permits
including Site Plan Review in accordance with §9.03 within the PSCD. The Planning Board shall hold a
public hearing in accordance with procedures outlined in §9.04. The Planning Board shall not approve
any such Special Permit unless it finds that the four conditions for approval set forth in § 9.05(b) of this
Zoning Ordinance have been met. For applications requiring Site Plan Review, the Planning Board shall
also consider, among other things, the ten criteria listed in §9.03 (c).
(d) Dimensional Criteria:
(1) For baseline criteria, refer to §5.04 Table of Dimensional Requirements.
(2) Adjustments to baseline dimensional criteria may be granted for certain development incentive
credits as noted in §5.16(h). The maximum allowable adjustments are outlined herein.
68
(3) Alterations, additions, and extensions to nonconforming structures shall be subject to §4.06. Existing
buildings are eligible to receive development incentive credits when creating modifications to the
Floor Area Ratio(FAR), maximum building coverage, height, and parking requirements as outlined
in §5.16(h).
(4) Maximum Floor Area Ratio:
(A) Mixed-Use Development, where a minimum of 15% of the gross floor area is used for
retail/commercial or service use: FAR more than 1.0 and up to 2.0 may be allowed by
Special Permit for achieving development incentive credits in accordance within §5.16(h)
(B) All other development: FAR 1.0. A maximum FAR of 1.5 may be allowed by Special Permit
for achieving development incentive credits in accordance with §5.16(h).
(5) Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit: 1000 square feet per dwelling unit.
(6) Heights:
(A) Minimum height: 24 feet
(B) Maximum height: 33 feet by Site Plan Review only for Mixed-Use Development or 55 feet /5
stories by Special Permit except where noted in §5.16.6(F).
(C) Flat-Roof Development: Projects with a height greater than three stories, which shall be
maximum of 33 feet, shall step-back any subsequent stories (fourth and above) a minimum
of 10 feet from the required build-to-line and Charles River façades such that the sight lines
from the adjoining public way or Charles River pathway will be visually lessened.
(D) Pitched Roof Development: Within 32 feet of the street-facing property line, pitched roof
development shall have a pitched main roof(s) with the roof/wall connection at 26 feet in
height, with a maximum ratio of 1:1 (45 degrees). Dormers may be allowed so long as they
comply with adopted Design Standards and Guidelines.
(E) Heights in Buffer Areas: Buildings abutting the river, wetlands, a T(Two-Family), or S-6
zoning district shall incorporate setbacks, step backs and/or reduced heights to mitigate
potential negative impacts upon these districts and environmentally sensitive areas , as
required within §5.16.d(10). A sectional drawing indicating the relationship between the
development proposal and the adjoining context is required.
(F) Provisions for Increased Height: The maximum allowable height may be increased up to 66
feet/6 stories with a 15 foot stepback from the buildings front facade by Special Permit for
achieving development incentive credits in accordance with §5.16(h).
(7) Building Coverage:
(A) Maximum total building coverage: 50% with a maximum of 60% allowed by Special Permit
in accordance with §5.16(h)
(B) Maximum footprint (per floor) for a single tenant for retail or restaurant use
• 12,000 square feet
• Up to 40,000 square feet with Special Permit
• No limitations on square feet for non-retail commercial uses
(8) Maximum Impervious Surface: 80%
(9) Minimum Open Space:
All new development shall have at least twenty percent (20%) of the total site area devoted to
Open Space and 25% of the required open space must be publically accessible; required
setbacks shall be considered as part of the total area for Open Space. The required Open Space
shall not be used for parking, loading, or roadway purposes and shall be open and unobstructed
to the sky; items such as benches, walkways, planters, landscaping, swimming pools, kiosks,
gazebos, and similar structures shall not be considered as obstructions. Opportunities should be
sought that bring together the open space requirements of adjoining properties in order to foster
a more coherent and continuous landscape network.
69
(10) Setbacks:
(A) Build-to-Line Setback
• Build-to-line setback shall be10 feet from street facing property lines for commercial
uses as described in §5.16 (b). Setbacks may be increased as specified below for
purposes of amenities such as a plaza, square, courtyard, recessed entrance, or outdoor
dining, but not intended for automobile use. A minimum setback of 15 feet shall apply to
sites with residential only uses and/or all portions of buildings not located over
commercial space. In the case of multiple buildings on one lot, at least one building shall
comply with the required build-to-line, but in no instance shall buildings span less than a
minimum of 25% of the lot frontage at the determined build-to-line.
• For components of a project in-keeping with Design Standards and Guidelines, an
increased build-to-line setback, up to 30 feet along Pleasant Street and 50 feet along
other streets within the corridor, may be required by the SPGA or requested by an
applicant if it is found that strict adherence to the 10 foot build-to-line is inconsistent with
adopted Design Standards and Guidelines, the Corridor Plan and development pattern,
as determined by the SPGA.
• The build-to-line may allow for averaging of a building’s setback from the property line
to accommodate changes in building façade and irregular property boundaries, but no
area of a building shall encroach by more than 10% of the required setback.
• Exception - first floor open-air porches, arcades, covered stoops, and/or porticos (no
screening, doors, or windows allowed) extending no more than 50% into the setback
within the build-to-line setback by Special Permit.
(B) Side Yard Setback
• Buildings may be contiguous on a block: zero (0) lot line and/or shared party wall.
• Where a party wall is not possible, setback from property line shall be a minimum of 18
feet. Corner lots may be developed with two front yards with yards determined by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer.
(C) Maximum contiguous building wall:
• Walls shall be no more than 250 feet,
• In instances where a façade is over 100’ feet, techniques to provide variation in the
façade shall be employed, using design guidelines as adopted by the Town.
• Consideration for views to the Charles River should be considered by placing shorter
façades facing the street and longer façades perpendicular to the river.
(D) Rear Yard Setback
• 18 feet minimum for all sites
(E) Waterfront setback (including wetlands):
• No structures shall be permitted within the 50 feet setback from top of bank or to first
road.
(F) Setback adjacent to the S-6 or T Zoning Districts:
• Within 40 feet of the S-6 or T Zoning Districts, flat roof development shall be no taller
than 35 feet to the roofline.
• Within 40 feet of the S-6 or T Zoning Districts, pitched roof development shall have a
pitched main roof(s) with the roof/wall connection at 26’ in height, with a maximum ratio
of 1:1 (45 degrees), and dormers may be allowed so long as they comply with adopted
Design Standards and Guidelines.
• On lots narrower than 100 feet in depth, the basement or first floor of a building may be
extended into the rear yard by 8 feet for the purposes of structured parking so long as
the remaining 10-foot setback is preserved as a vegetated landscape buffer with a mix
of plantings and decorative fencing that provides year round screening.
70
(11) Minimum Lot Area:
• 10,000 square feet.
(12) Minimum Frontage:
• No minimum requirement.
(e) Parking Requirements:
(1) The provision of off-street parking shall comply with the requirements of Article VI.
(2) In addition to the requirements pertaining to the quantity of parking spaces, parking areas shall
comply with the following standards to the maximum extent possible:
• Improve, soften, and visually shield the appearance of parking areas.
• Shade and cool parking areas.
• Reduce the amount and rate of stormwater runoff.
• Reduce pollution and temperature of stormwater runoff.
• Increase the amount of pervious surfaces
(A) Location of Parking:
Any surface parking lot shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be located at the rear or side
of a building, relative to any principal street, public open space, or pedestrian way.
(B) Visual Impact:
In addition to locating parking areas to the rear or side of buildings (or when it is not feasible),
the visual impact of parking areas from sidewalks, streets, the river, and from adjacent
residential zones shall be reduced to the greatest extent possible by screening with living
vegetation, ornamental fencing, or a combination of landscaping and fencing.
(3) Provisions for Parking Requirement Reductions:
Reductions of the required number of parking spaces may be granted by Special Permit in
accordance with §6.01(f), Shared Parking, and §5.16(h)(3), Alternative Transportation Incentives,
of which the total reduction shall not exceed 25% of the required amount.
(f) Design Guidelines:
(1) Purpose:
Design Standards and Guidelines are intended to promote beneficial urban design principles and
physical building characteristics within the Pleasant Street Corridor District. The guidelines are
intended to aid in the review of proposals, but are not intended to discourage innovative architectural
design solutions.
(2) Guidelines:
In general, proposals should seek to satisfy the following and shall also consider other adopted
Design Standards and Guidelines:
(A) Be complementary to and provide for a harmonious transition in scale and character
between adjacent sites.
(B) Provide for high-density quality development consistent with the character of building types,
streetscapes, and other community features traditionally found in densely settled areas of
the Town or in the region.
(C) Maintain streetscape continuity with a strong building presence along the primary street
edge.
(D) The size and detailing of buildings shall be pedestrian oriented and incorporate features to
add visual interest while reducing appearance of bulk or mass. Blank walls should be
avoided.
(E) A distinct “sidewalk” presence with incorporation of elements such as planters, traditional
awnings, signage projecting from building façade (blade signage), etc. to enhance the
pedestrian scale and interest of the street.
71
(F) Avoid prototypical, standardized brand identity-related architecture and signage for
businesses with multiple locations (i.e.: retail “chain” stores and restaurants.)
(g) Environmental Sustainability Guidelines:
(1) Purpose:
The following Environmental Sustainability Guidelines are intended to promote environmentally
responsible site design and green building principles within the PSCD in order to better manage
stormwater, conserve natural resources, and reduce the impact of development on the natural
environment. To provide additional guidance the Town may enact a separate LID and
Stormwater Ordinance.
(2) Guidelines:
In general, proposals should seek to satisfy the following:
(A) To the maximum extent possible, retain stormwater runoff on-site.
(B) Diminish the heat island effect.
(C) Employ energy conscious design with regard to orientation, building materials, shading,
landscaping, window glazing, and other elements.
(D) To the maximum extent possible, retain existing healthy, viable trees and plant additional
trees.
(E) Incorporate Green roofs (vegetated roof covers)
(F) Use permeable paving materials
(G) Use bioretention systems (such as rain gardens) instead of traditional structural
conveyance systems
(H) Comply with current Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) criteria, as
promulgated by the U.S. Green Building Council.
(I) Utilize energy-efficient technology and renewable energy resources
(J) Incorporate best practices in stormwater management and LID techniques.
(h) Development Incentive Credits:
Subject to approval by Special Permit, developmentsmay receive adjustments to the dimensional criteria
and/or parking requirements for achieving one or more of the following:
(1) Enhancing Public Open Space:
(A) Publicly Useable Open Space:
Developments may receive increases to the maximum allowable building coverage, FAR,
and/or height in accordance with §5.16(d) if a minimum of 50% of the required open space
is designated as “publicly useable open space” and open to the public from dawn to dusk.
The purpose of this provision is to provide incentives for the setting aside of lands that are
accessible and useable and designed for the enjoyment of the Public. Larger adjustments
may be allowed where Publicly Useable Open Space is contiguous with other areas of
Publicly Useable Open Space to link sites, encourage walking, and/or provide access to the
Charles River. Opportunities should be sought that bring together the open space
requirements of adjoining properties in order to foster a more coherent and continuous
landscape network.
(B) Charles River Bike Path Connections:
A development that provides a significant contribution to improve, extend, and/or provide
both visual and physical connections to the Charles River bike path as determined by DCDP
Staff may receive increases to the maximum allowable building coverage, FAR, and/or
height in accordance with §5.16(d).
72
(2) Structured/Underground Parking:
Developments that provide the required parking spaces underground or within a structure may
receive increases to the maximum allowable building coverage, FAR, and/or height in accordance
with §5.16(d).
(3) Alternative Transportation Incentives:
Developments that encourage the use of alternative modes of transportation shall be eligible to
receive a reduction of the required amount of automobile parking spaces. This credit may be
achieved by demonstrating a reduced demand for automobile parking by the encouragement of
cycling, walking, car sharing, and use of public transit. Possible methods to reduce parking demand
are the provision of showers for bicycle commuting employees, sheltered bicycle parking, providing
connections to public transit, on-site car sharing services, participation in a Transportation
Management Association or shuttle/transit service, providing for infrastructure like bus stops onsite,
etc. The reduced parking requirement shall correspond to the reduced automobile parking demand,
but in no case shall the reduction exceed 25%.
(4) Conformance with Guidelines:
Development that achieve significant conformance with the Design Guidelines and Environmental
Sustainability Guidelines may receive increases to the maximum allowable building coverage, FAR,
and/or height in accordance with §5.16(d). In determining such increases, the SPGA may seek input,
for advisory purposes, from the Conservation Commission, Environment and Energy Efficiency
Committee, Department of Public Works, and other Town Departments, Boards, and Commissions.
(5) Development of Opportunity Sites:
Development of desirable uses at key opportunity sites as outlined in the Corridor Plan may receive
increases to the maximum allowable building coverage, FAR, and/or height in accordance with
§5.16(d).
SECTION 5.17 DESIGN GUIDELINES
Intent and Purpose Design Guidelines have been adopted to address the design of new buildings along the
major corridors and Watertown and Coolidge Squares. They are intended to enhance building, parking and
the public realm interface, focusing on the following four principles.
(1) ECONOMIC VITALITY: Watertown’s Design Guidelines were created to enhance the economic vitality
of selected commercial areas through attractive, consistent design. By following these Guidelines, each
project will complement another, resulting in a cohesive development over time. The Guidelines were
developed specifically to provide direction for the design of new infill development in commercial areas.
The goal is not to limit creativity, but rather to recognize potential for architectural diversity while adhering
to the overarching principles contained herein. They intend to define expectations for new development
while allowing for flexibility and fostering high quality design.
(2) HISTORIC PRESERVATION: Urban regeneration means more than simply building a new; historic
preservation is an effective economic development strategy. The reuse and regeneration of existing
buildings should be encouraged in addition to new development as they provide a direct connection to
Watertown’s past. Existing buildings that have retained cultural or architectural significance can form the
basis for economic development and growth.
(3) DESIGN AESTHETIC: The Design Guidelines cannot depict every possible building configuration on
each site. Rather, a prototypical building footprint is shown in a manner that accommodates many
conditions that emerge on a project site. The massing is general enough that it can contain a range of
uses, but specific enough to highlight the critical areas of concern. Even when closely following these
guidelines, each project will take its own form that will differ from the example shown. A singular design
aesthetic in Watertown is neither viable nor desirable.
(4) ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE: New development comes with the obligation to implement
sustainable design and construction practices that incorporate technological innovation and green
73
building practices and ecological site design. Development will strive to address the highest sustainable
and ecological principles, using advanced green technologies and materials, and promoting highperformance
buildings. Stormwater management practices must prevent flooding and erosion, and
protect the health of the Charles River and local streams and ponds, using green infrastructure
approaches where feasible. New buildings should be constructed with local, low-embodied energy
materials and constructed with the highest standards for environmental sustainability.
SECTION 5.18 REGIONALMIXED USE DISTRICT (RMUD)
Watertown’s Design Guidelines were created “to enhance the economic vitality of selected commercial
areas through attractive, consistent design.” The commercial corridors and squares of Main Street, Pleasant
Street, Galen Street, North Beacon Street, Mt. Auburn Street and Arsenal Street are being positively
impacted by the Design Guidelines and Standards as they are clarifying expectations about what
development should look like and raising the quality of construction.
As the Town’s primary commercial corridor, the eastern portion of Arsenal Street has some of the largest
retailers in the region. With sufficient private and public infrastructure this area warrants greater density in
light of the size of the geography and its catalytic and transformative potential for the region. The scale of
development in this area merits greater height, massing and signage requirements for new construction
commensurate with its role as a regional attraction and destination.
(a) Intent and Purpose:
The Regional Mixed Use District [RMUD] has been enacted to assist, promote, and guide the orderly
conversion and redevelopment of the Arsenal Street Corridor. The establishment of the RMUD is
intended to accomplish the following objectives:
(1) Facilitate transformative development consistent with Watertown’s goal to promote mixed use
development that includes a mix of larger and smaller scale retail, office, hospitality, multi-family
residential and research and development uses, and that serves regional demand.
(2) Allow development at a density, scale and character appropriate to define a corridor that is a major
gateway for the Town; Additional height may be appropriate in such Gateway Locations where
consistent with Watertown’s economic development goals, and the adopted Design Guidelines, as
they may appropriately apply to development in the RMUD; Additional density and/or reduced
parking space requirements may be appropriate in the District where consistent with the goal of
reducing traffic congestion and improving multi-user transit services and in compliance with any
Transportation Demand Management policy adopted by the Town.
(3) Enhance the quality of life, including promoting the development of a high quality public realm,
o which is aesthetically pleasing and consistent with Watertown’s Design Guidelines
o that provides a well-articulated pedestrian environment which implements Complete Street
concepts and adopted Complete Streets Policies
o that promotes porous frontages which create connections to surrounding neighborhoods and
the Charles River
o which includes public art.
(4) Enhance publically available open space networks by connecting to and integrating with adjacent
state, municipal and privately-owned parcels, where appropriate, encouraging private land owners to
permanently preserve open space, being sensitive to the Charles River reservation, and furthering
private remediation and public access to Sawins Brook and Pond and Williams Pond.
(5) Respect historic assets and architectural features that help define the character of the community
and encourage preservation and restoration of historic buildings.
(6) Incentivize real estate investment that will enhance the diversity and maximize the value of the
Town’s tax base.
74
(7) Use “green” building practices that encourage energy efficiency, manage stormwater, protect the
riparian habitat, and are planned, designed, constructed, and managed to minimize adverse
environmental impacts.
(8) Encourage development that accommodates and promotes multi-modal access, transit between the
Arsenal Corridor and mass transit stops, management of transportation demand to reduce
automobile use, and mitigates deterioration of the level of affected intersection service for all
transportation modes.
(9) Facilitate the development of a continuum of housing options that:
o supports residences within walking or cycling distance to employment and leisure uses,
o promotes and maintains a diverse housing stock and opportunities for lower- and middleincome
households, and
o enhances a transition between Arsenal Street and the abutting residential neighborhoods,
while discouraging residential development as a first floor use with direct frontage on Arsenal
Street.
(b) District Delineation
The boundaries of the Regional Mixed Use District [RMUD] shall be as defined on the Zoning Map of
Watertown, Massachusetts, as amended. The provisions of this section shall apply only to the Regional
Mixed Use District.
(c) Dimensional Criteria
(1) Alterations, additions and extensions of nonconforming structures shall be subject to § 4.06.
(2) No use in the RMUD shall exceed an FAR of 1.0 without receiving a Special Permit or Master Plan
Special Permit pursuant to §9.03-9.05 and 9.09-9.13 and in keeping with the intent and purpose of
the RMUD Ordinance pursuant to §5.18.a, and in no instance shall the increased intensity of use
allowed by Special Permit exceed an FAR of 2.0.
(3) Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit: N/A
(4) Minimum Lot Frontage: 50 feet, subject to § 5.05(f)
(5) Height of Building:
(A) Minimum height of building: For office buildings and mixed-use developments in the RMUD
greater than or equal to ten thousand (10,000) gross square feet or containing ten (10) or more
residential units, the minimum building height is twenty four (24) feet.
(B) Maximum height of building: 55 feet, or 79 feet by Master Plan Special Permit, or 130 feet by
Master Plan Special Permit within a defined mixed-use project, using adopted Design Guidelines
provided the project includes a diversity of building heights and furthers the intent and purpose
(§5.18.a) of the RMUD.
(C) In granting a Master Plan Special Permit, and in granting a Special Permit, for a project which
includes a building listed on the National or Massachusetts State Register of Historic Places, the
SPGA shall determine that the height and roof ridge line of such historic structure shall not be
increased.
(6) Maximum Total Building Coverage: Seventy-five percent (75%).
75
(7) Minimum Open Space: All new developments shall have at least 20 percent (20%) of the total site
area devoted to Open Space; required setbacks shall be considered as part of the total area for
Open Space. The required Open Space shall not be used for parking, loading, or roadway purposes.
Fifty percent (50%) of the required Open Space shall be publicly accessible.
There shall be a 100-foot wide open space area parallel to Greenough Boulevard. Except as set
forth in this §5.18.c.7, no structure shall be built within this 100-foot area. Through a Master Plan
Special Permit, buildings which existed within this 100-foot area as of September 25, 2015, may be
expanded within this 100-foot area but in no instance may an addition encroach closer to Greenough
Boulevard than the existing structure.
(8) Setbacks:
(A) Front: Build-to-line of ten (10) to thirty (30) feet as specified in §5.04 and 5.05(s); per §5.05(p),
the front build-to-line may be reduced to be consistent with surrounding existing buildings by
Special Permit.
(B) Side: 15 feet; per §5.05(d), side yards may be omitted by Special Permit provided that the side
yard does not adjoin a Residential District or a Residential Use in existence on September 25,
2015, and that access to the rear is appropriate.
(C) Rear: 20 feet; per §5.05(p), rear yards may be reduced to be consistent with surrounding
existing buildings by Special Permit.
(D) Special setbacks and stepbacks: Any structure within fifty (50) feet of Open Space/Conservancy
(OSC) zoned land, and the façade of any structure which fronts on a public way, shall be
required to incorporate appropriate setbacks, stepbacks, and/or other techniques, in keeping
with adopted Design Guidelines, to mitigate potential adverse impacts on environmentally
sensitive areas and public ways, as determined by the SPGA.
(9) Minimum Lot Size: 10,000 square feet; Existing lots per §5.05(w).
(d) Parking Requirements:
(1) Off-street parking shall comply with the requirements of Article VI of the Watertown Zoning
Ordinance.
(2) Separation of Parking Costs: Any parking spaces offered to residents of the residential component of
a new development should, to the greatest extent practicable, be offered as a fee-based option
distinct from charges established for renting, leasing, or purchasing primary-use space within the
development. These fees should reflect a reasonable representation of the market value of the
parking space(s).
(3) Smart Parking Technology: For projects with structured parking of over 100 spaces, it is required
that said structured parking install and employ smart parking technology (e.g. equipment to count the
number of vehicles entering and exiting the parking area, availability of spaces, etc.).
(e) Signs and Illumination:
Signage shall comply with the requirements of Article VII of the Watertown Zoning Ordinance.
76
(f) Design Guidelines:
Per §9.03(d), developments in the RMUD with four or more residential units or 10,000 square feet of
new development or greater are subject to review according to the Town of Watertown’s adopted Design
Guidelines.
(g) Affordable Housing:
An application for a Master Plan Special Permit shall provide at least fifteen percent (15%) of the total
dwelling units as affordable housing and otherwise be consistent with the requirements of §5.07.
(h) Authority and Procedure:
Any project requiring relief per §5.01 of the Ordinance shall be subject to §9.03 and §9.05 of the
Watertown Zoning Ordinance, or a Petitioner/Project may seek, as an alternative approval process, a
Master Plan Special Permit under §5.18(g), if a project encompasses a minimum of two (2) acres.
Master Plan Special Permit with Site Plan Review:
The revitalization and redevelopment of property in the RMUD may involve new uses and buildings,
additional structured parking, enhanced landscaping, and other significant changes. The projects may
occur over time, and in phases.
In order to ensure that nearby and Town-wide traffic, infrastructure, density, connectivity and visual
impacts, etc., from such projects are identified and coherently planned to include appropriate mitigation,
the Petitioner may seek conceptual Master Plan level approval of a large scale project. This approval
shall be followed by detailed Final Site Plan Review Approvals of individual projects or buildings under §
9.03 that are to occur later, before issuance of any Building Permits.
A Master Plan-level review provides the Petitioner with the benefit of advance conceptual approval for
multiple projects to be implemented over time. It also provides both the Petitioner and the Town with the
opportunity and mechanism to consider and address the cumulative impacts of all individual phases and
for the holistic consideration and mitigation planning for the entire larger-scale project(s) that may be
built in phases.
(1) Procedure: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary within the Watertown Zoning Ordinance or
more specifically within Article IX, in the RMUD, the Planning Board shall be the Special Permit
Granting Authority (SPGA) for all Master Plan Special Permits and Amendments in accordance
with §9.03.
(2) Application: A Petitioner proposing to construct one or more buildings (which may include
structured parking and may include alterations to one or more existing buildings) may seek
approval of the overall project through a Master Plan Special Permit. An application for a Master
Plan Special Permit shall include, at a minimum, for each proposed new building, structural
alteration of an existing building, or principal use outside of a building:
(A) The proposed location, approximate footprint, height, and gross floor area.
(B) Building elevations showing principal building entrances, overall building massing, rooflines,
and general fenestration patterns and will require multiple three-dimensional elevations;
Applications for one or more buildings greater than 79’ in height shall include design details
for such building(s) sufficient to enable a decision whether height above 79’ is appropriate
given the massing of the proposed building(s) and the location in relation to other buildings,
streets and open spaces, including public open spaces adjacent to the site.
77
(C) Cross section drawings indicating the relationship of the building or buildings to nearby
buildings, buildings on adjoining properties, streets open spaces, and parklands. Both aerial
and pedestrian level 3D views shall be included to fully depict the visual impact of the design
from both public ways and from several key view points within the project development area.
(D) Identification of all principal and accessory uses, other than parking and any alterations or
demolition of existing structures, with care given toward protecting historic resources that help
define and contribute to the character of the Arsenal Street Corridor.
(E) Vehicle and bicycle parking areas or facilities to be provided.
(F)Proposed design criteria establishing a palette of building materials, architectural elements,
and landscaping elements to be finalized for each individual building during later, detailed
Site Plan Reviews.
(G) Shadow Analysis depicting internal and external impacts of morning, mid-day and evening
shadows at both solstices and equinoxes.
(H) Traffic Impact Assessment (TIAS) of traffic generation and onsite/offsite impacts including a
Transportation Demand Management Plan with a reporting mechanism to the Town;
(I) Verification that adequate sewer capacity is available or that the project will suitably increase
capacity as required.; and
(J)Complete, conceptual level stormwater management plan demonstrating the development’s
approach to onsite Stormwater Management and adequacy of connections to regional mains.
(K) Open Space Plan, including location, size, characteristics (pervious vs impervious), uses and
public accessibility of all open space areas. Conceptual wayfinding signage for paths, access
to parks, and transit, at a minimum, with detailed plans to be submitted within a signage
packet as part of a Building Permit.
(L)List of required Federal, Massachusetts, or Watertown environmental licenses, permits,
filings, or restrictions, currently in effect or anticipated.
(3) Review of Application:
The SPGA shall hold a public hearing in accordance with procedures outlined in § 9.04. The
SPGA shall not approve a Master Plan Special Permit unless it finds that the four conditions for
Special Permit approval set forth in § 9.05(b) of this Zoning Ordinance have been met and that
the proposed development will be in-keeping with the intent and purpose of the RMUD as set
forth in §5.18(a).
The Petitioner’s submission of and the review of the conceptual level plan component of a
Master Plan Special Permit shall include two public information meetings and shall otherwise
follow the procedures set forth in §9.03. The SPGA shall not approve such a Master Plan Special
Permit unless it finds that the Petitioner has satisfactorily addressed, at a conceptual level, the
ten criteria listed in §9.03(c).
78
(4) Parking Reduction:
In granting a Master Plan Special Permit, the SPGA may reduce the number of required parking
spaces, based on the availability of public transportation alternatives at or near the RMUD
master-planned project, the transportation demand management programs implemented or to be
implemented as part of the RMUD Master Plan, compatibility with any transportation policy
adopted by the Town, the ability of uses with peak user demands at different times to share
parking spaces or other factors for which the Petitioner provides (i) a parking study or analysis
prepared under the direction of a Professional Engineer or Architect with the requisite
experience in conducting such analysis, using standards and methodologies promulgated by the
Institute of Transportation Engineers, the Urban Land Institute, or other appropriate source, and
(or including) (ii) a transportation demand management plan prepared to best practices
standards for such plans in Massachusetts.
In addition, the SPGA may allow the Petitioner to temporarily further reduce the amount of
parking provided as part of a master-planned project during a phase(s) of an approved largescale
mixed-use project if existing parking spaces will be eliminated during a phase of
implementation, to be replaced in that or a later phase of implementation, for example if a
structured parking facility is to be built on the location of an existing surface parking lot. In
determining whether to grant such a temporary further reduction of the amount of parking, the
SPGA shall take into consideration the factors set forth above in this subsection and the
applicant’s proposals, if any, to provide substitute off-site parking or other interim measures to
reduce the demand for parking within the master-planned project.
(5) Final Site Plan Review:
Prior to the issuance of a Building Permit for any building approved under a Master Plan Special
Permit, the Petitioner shall obtain Final Site Plan Review of the final design details of the
proposed building(s) and any related landscaping or other improvements following the
procedures set forth in §9.03 of this Zoning Ordinance.
(6) Amendments to an approved Master Plan Special Permit:
Changes to an approved Master Plan Special Permit site plan that are Minor, as determined by
the SPGA or Director of the Department of Community Development and Planning (Director),
may be approved as part of the Final Site Plan Review for the associated building(s).
(7) Lapse of a Master Plan Special Permit: A Master Plan Special Permit will be required to include
a phasing plan for implementing the Master Plan Special Permit.
(A) The Permit shall be deemed to have been exercised for purposes of §9.13 of the Zoning
Ordinance and Section 9 of the Massachusetts Zoning Act, M.G.L. c. 40A, if, within one year
from the date of the grant of the SPGA’s Master Plan Special Permit, the Petitioner has
applied for Final Site Plan Approval of a building or outdoor use, and if within two years of
such date, construction of an approved building or commencement of an approved principal
use outside of a building has begun, in either case except for good cause. A Master Plan
Special Permit will expire ten years from the grant of approval if construction of all phases
have not commenced, as described above, except for good cause. A petitioner may request
extensions of the phasing plan and/or implementation through a request to the SPGA prior to
permit expiration, and if the SPGA does not grant a request for extension, a petitioner will be
required to submit for an amendment or new permit. The time periods referenced above shall
79
not include such time required to pursue or await the determination of any appeal under
M.G.L. c. 40A, §17.
(i) Circulation:
(1) Special attention shall be given to infrastructure and design that will create direct public
bicycle and pedestrian path connections with adjacent public bicycle or pedestrian paths,
and that minimizes barriers separating such paths.
(2) When appropriate, a conceptual wayfinding signage proposal for paths, access to parks, and
transit, at a minimum, with detailed plans shall be submitted within a signage package as
part of a Building Permit.
80
81
ARTICLE VI
AUTOMOTIVE AND BICYCLE PARKING REQUIREMENTS
____________________________________________________ _________________________
6.00 Intent of Requirements 6.04 Design and Layout of Off-
6.01 Required Off Street Street Loading Facilities
Parking Spaces 6.05 Outdoor Automobile Storage,
6.02 Location and Design of Off- New or Used Vehicles
Street Parking Spaces 6.06 Gasoline Service
6.03 Required Off- Stations
Street Loading Spaces 6.07 Bicycle Parking
______________________________________________________________________________
SECTION 6.00 INTENT OF REQUIREMENTS
It is the intent of this Zoning Ordinance that any use of land involving the arrival, departure, storage, or entry
upon the land of motor vehicles be so designed and operated as to reduce hazard to pedestrians upon the
public sidewalks, to protect the use of adjoining property from nuisance caused by the noise, fumes and
glare of headlights which may result from the operation of cars parking off the street, and at the same time
to reduce congestion in the streets and contribute to traffic safety by assuring adequate places for the
standing and storing off the street of motor vehicles and allow for the reasonable use of the land for the
purposes intended as allowed by this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 6.01 REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKINGSPACES
(a) In order that all structures and land uses eventually be provided with sufficient off-street parking to
meet the needs of persons employed at or making use (e.g.: customers, visitors, patrons, patients,
occupants, etc.) of such structures or land, no land shall be used and no building shall be erected,
enlarged or used unless off-street parking spaces meeting the requirements of this Section are
provided. Said off street parking space requirements shall not apply to the storage and/or display of
motor vehicles which shall be provided in accordance with §6.05 hereof.
(b) The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for particular uses of land (hereinafter
called "required off-street parking spaces") is set forth in the following table:
PRINCIPAL USE UNIT
One and two family house 2 per dwelling unit
3 per dwelling unit if more than 4 bedrooms
Minimum Maximum
Town and Rowhouse 2.0/unit 2.5/Unit
Multi-Family 0.75/studio 1.00/Studio
1.00/1 bedroom 1.25/1 Bedroom
1.50/2 bedrooms 1.75/2 Bedroom
2.00/3+ bedrooms 2.25/3+ Bedroom
Mixed Use The sum of commercial and residential requirements
consistent with this Ordinance; except in CB district, 1
space per dwelling unit and commercial uses
consistent with §6.01(f) may be reduced by SP.
Hotels, motels, licensed lodging houses - 1 per employee on shift at peak occupancy plus
0.75 per guest room plus 1 per table or 5 seats in
a restaurant plus 1 per 250 square feet of space
in function rooms not designed for eating
82
Accessory home occupations 1 per 2 rooms used for a home occupation
Accessory lodgings 1 per 2 rooms offered for rent
Other places of public 1 per 5 fixed seats or 10 linear feet
assembly such as for of bench floor area open to public
meetings, entertainment, assembly where no seats or benches
recreation, adult education are provided.
Retail with Accessory Food 1 per table or 4 seats plus 1 per 250
or Beverages square feet of function rooms not designed
for eating.
Restaurants 1 per 4 seats and 1 per every 4 linear feet
of standing table space
Funeral parlor, undertaker 1 per 5 seats or
1 per 50 sq. ft in parlor, whichever is greater
Bowling alleys 2 per bowling alley
Hospitals, and Nursing Home 1 per staff plus 1 per 4 patient beds
Assisted Living See § 5.11(d)
Veterinary Clinic 1 per 350 square feet
Schools 1 per staff member
plus 1 per 3 students driving age
(unless car usage is prohibited)
or 1 per 8 seats in largest place of
assembly, whichever is greatest
Other institutions, 1 per 600 square feet of Gross
such as museum, private, Floor Area
professional or trade school
Retail Sales/Service and Office 1 per 350 square feet of Gross Floor Area
1 per 400 square feet of Gross Floor Area
Above the Ground Floor
Fitness Center 1 per 400 square feet of Gross Floor Area
Bank 1 per 300 square feet of Gross Floor Area
Bank Kiosks (with no staff) 5 spaces per automatic teller
Industrial, including also 1 gasoline service 1 per 600 square feet of Gross Floor Area
station, printing and publishing
Warehouse, public utility stations 1 per 1,200 square feet of Gross Floor Area
Research and Development 1 per 600 square feet of Gross Floor Area
Auto repair garage, and similar uses 1 per 200 square feet of Gross Floor Area
Kennels 1 per 300 square feet of Gross Floor Area
83
Auto sales, leasing and 1 per 600 square feet of space devoted to
Rentals display (new and used) showrooms for customer use. For automobile
display or storage lots, there shall be 150 square
feet of total land area in said lots for each
automobile stored or displayed.
Self Storage facility 2 spaces per 10,000 s.f. of Gross Floor Area with
a minimum requirement for 6 parking spaces
Drive-ins (exclusive of food) 1 per 350 square feet of Gross Floor Area
(c) The Planning Board shall be the determining authority in the event of a conflict in interpretation as
to the category of the principal use, or as to the gross floor (or open lot) area in a given use.
(d) Where the computation of required spaces results in a fractional number, a fraction of one-half or
more shall be counted as one.
(e) The aggregate number of spaces required for each of several uses separately may be provided on
a common parking lot serving all of these uses. Projects in close proximity to one another are
encouraged to provide shared parking plans that meet the individual requirements per § 6.01(b)
across multiple properties by special permit. Developers are also encouraged to “unbundle” parking
by separating the cost of parking from the cost of ownership or rental.
(f) Where it can be demonstrated that the combined peak parking needs of all the uses sharing the lot
will, because of differences in peak hours or days, be less than required by §6.01(b), the number of
parking spaces to be provided may be reduced accordingly by Special Permit.
Developments that encourage the use of alternate modes of transportation may be eligible to receive
a reduction of the required amount of automobile parking spaces by Special Permit. This credit may
be achieved by demonstrating a reduced demand for automobile parking by the encouragement of
cycling, walking, car sharing, and use of public transit. The reduced parking requirement shall
correspond to the reduced automobile parking demand, but in no case shall exceed 25%.
(g) Required off-street parking areas shall be provided on the same lot they serve, except that the SPGA
may grant a special permit for off-street parking areas to be provided on another lot; and any such
parking lot shall not be otherwise used or diminished in size unless the SPGA finds the lot is no
longer required by the principal use it serves.
(h) For projects subject to a special permit, the SPGA may permit the applicant to indicate on an
approved site plan where up to 20% of the required parking can legally be built but not be required
to be built (shadow parking) to receive an occupancy permit. All or portions of said shadow parking
may be required to be built out as shown if at any time the SPGA by a majority vote, deem it
appropriate to do so. All allowed shadow parking areas shall be designed and maintained as
naturally vegetated open space.
(i) Residential and mixed-use developments required to provide fifty (50) or more parking spaces per
§6.01(b) are required to provide a minimum of one (1) parking space with an additional one (1)
parking space per fifteen (15) spaces, up to a maximum of three (3) spaces, designated for a car
sharing program. In all developments requiring more than one hundred (100) parking spaces per §
6.01(b), two (2) electric vehicle charging stations shall be provided, with an additional one (1)
charging station per fifty (50) additional parking spaces thereafter up to a maximum of five (5)
charging stations. These parking spaces shall be counted towards the total number required by §
6.01(b). These requirements may be met through an approved shared parking plan with an adjacent
property per Special Permit.
(j) No structure constructed, or use instituted, prior to 1988 shall be required to meet the off-street
parking requirements per §6.01(b) unless there is a substantial change in the structure or in the use
84
of the structure or land.
For purpose of this section, “change” means any enlargement, conversion or alteration in structure
or use. A “substantial change” means more than a forty percent (40%) difference between (a) and
(b) as follows: (a) the number of parking spaces required under the current Zoning for the structure
or use, as it existed in 1988, and (b) the number of parking spaces required under the current Zoning
for the proposed structure or use. [Substantial change: b - a = c, if c/a > .40 (40%)]
1. If the change is not a substantial change, no additional off-street parking is required.
2. If the change is a substantial change, the use must comply with the net increase in parking demand
of the entire structure or use.
SECTION 6.02 LOCATION AND DESIGN OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
(a) Areas of required Off-street parking may be open or enclosed in a structure provided that if open,
such areas shall be graded, drained and surfaced in conformance with currently applicable
engineering standards as determined and promulgated by the Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works. Permeable paving or other stormwater techniques should be employed to allow for
natural groundwater recharging. In no instance shall surface drainage be permitted to drain into land
of adjacent property owners or the Town right of way except in the case of single and two-family
homes.
(b) Except as provided in §6.02(n) below, each required off-street parking space shall be marked and
shall not be less than eight and one-half (8 1/2) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length for angle
parking or twenty-two (22) feet in length for parallel parking, exclusive of drives, walks and
maneuvering space. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to show on the site plan for the
proposed development the provision of adequate automobile maneuvering space acceptable to the
Planning Board. In addition to the above requirements, the applicant may reduce the width of not
more than ten percent (10%) of the required parking spaces, and not more than ten percent (10%)
of any parking spaces in excess of the required amount which he may choose to provide, to eight
(8) feet.
(b) Except as required in §s 6.02 (d), (e), (f) or (n) below, each required off-street parking space shall
have direct access to an aisle or driveway having a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet in the
case of two-way traffic or the following widths in the case of one-way traffic only:
Angle of Parking Minimum Aisle Width
Parallel 12 feet
30 11 feet
45 13 feet
60 18 feet
90 20 feet
(d) For one and two family houses, the off-street parking requirements of §6.01 may be satisfied with
the use of stacked parking configuration to the extent that all other applicable provisions for parking,
driveway and area lay-out are met. For the purpose of this §6.02(d), stacked parking shall mean a
parking layout where spaces are provided one vehicle directly behind another vehicle, including an
enclosed garage parking space, with a maximum limit of four (4) in number.
(e) For three and four family houses, upon the granting of a special permit, parking space requirements
of §6.01 may be satisfied with the use of stacked parking configuration to the extent that all other
applicable provisions for parking, driveway and area layout are met. For the purpose of this §6.02(e),
stacked parking shall mean the parking of one vehicle directly behind another vehicle, limited to a
total of three (3) vehicles in a stack in all instances inclusive of where vehicle space may be provided
as an enclosed garage parking space.
(f) For row houses, the off-street parking requirements of §6.01 may be satisfied with the use of stacked
85
parking configuration to the extent that all other applicable provisions for parking, driveway and area
layout are met. For the purpose of this §6.02(f), stacked parking shall mean a parking layout where
spaces are provided with one vehicle directly behind another vehicle, limited to a total of two (2)
vehicles in a stack in all instances inclusive of where vehicle space may be provided as an enclosed
garage parking space.
(g) In no instance may the open space required for each Lot be used for the provision of required
off-street parking spaces.
(h) No driveway or sidewalk opening providing access to an area of required off-street parking spaces,
measured at the street lot line may be more than twenty-four (24) feet, except as allowed in § 6.02(i)
below. In addition, no such driveways or sidewalk openings shall have shrubs, walls, signs or fences
in excess of thirty (30) inches in height from the entrance of the driveway to a point fifteen (15) feet
into such driveway or in excess of thirty six (36) inches along the front lot line.
(i) For a site upon which new construction is proposed; to which an increase in the number of existing
bedrooms or units is sought; or to which modifications to existing construction of driveways or parking
areas are proposed for either one, two, three, or four family dwellings or row houses, the following
design standards shall apply: There shall be allowed a maximum of two curb cuts per site at a
maximum of eleven (11) foot width, with a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet between curb cuts.
No curb cut, or combination of curb cuts shall exceed a maximum of forty percent (40%) of the lot
frontage, or twenty-two (22) feet, whichever is less.
(j) No area of the required Building Front Yard shall be used for parking or driveway area. In cases
where there is a garage attached to a single-family dwelling and is located in the building front yard
area, driveway and parking in front of the garage shall be allowed provided access is via one 12’
curb cut. Driveway must maintain 5’ front setback, be at least 18’ in depth and then permitted to
flare out to the width of the garage door. A Special Permit is required in cases where there is a
garage attached to a two-family dwelling located in the building front yard area, provided the
driveway maintain 5’ front setback and be at least 18’ in depth for parking in front of the garage(s).
For one, two, three, four family and/or row houses, no driveway and/or parking area shall be closer
than four (4) feet from the side lot line, ten (10) feet from the rear lot line, or five (5) feet from the front
lot line. No setbacks from structures on the lot shall be required. All other stated dimensional
requirements shall prevail.
(k) Except as set forth in §6.02(j) and 6.02(n), the surfaced area of off-street parking areas shall be set
back a minimum of five (5) feet from all buildings and lot lines except as allowed in §6.02(e). Such
setback areas, except for entrance and exit drives, shall be properly landscaped with grass, trees,
shrubs, flowers, or other landscaping materials of adequate height and density so as to visually
obscure parked vehicles from view. In addition, at least five (5) percent of the interior of any parking
area with twenty (20) or more parking spaces shall be landscaped and continuously maintained.
This landscaping shall be distributed in islands and shall include one or more shade trees of a
species as approved by the Watertown Tree Warden with a 3-inch caliper or greater per island. The
location of trees within parking areas shall maximize shade on vehicles and pavement to reduce the
“heat island” effect. In addition, landscaping shall use non-invasive species and should consider
drought-tolerant and native plantings where appropriate. Where feasible, landscaped islands shall
be built below the grade of the impermeable parking surfaces so that runoff from the site is directed
into them. Planting along the perimeter of a parking area whether for required screening or general
landscaping, shall not be considered as part of this five (5) percent landscaping.
(l) No reduction in the number of off-street parking spaces which are required by this Article shall be
allowed and no existing off-street parking spaces shall be eliminated by the replacement or
enlargement of an existing building or structure; provided, that this subsection shall not operate to
prevent the elimination of existing parking spaces which are in excess of the number required by this
article.
(m) Any outdoor lighting designed for the purpose of illuminating outdoor areas such as walks,
driveways, doorways, outdoor recreational facilities and all accessory uses shall be continuous non86
flashing, indirect and installed and shielded in such a manner that will prevent direct light from shining
upon any other property in a residence district.
(n) In the Business Zones and Industrial Zones, PSCD and RMUD, the off-street parking requirements
of §6.01 may be satisfied with the use of a stacked parking configuration. For the purposes of this
§6.02(n) stacked parking shall mean a parking space, including enclosed garage parking spaces,
where within a parking space vehicles may be parked with one (1) vehicle behind another, with a
maximum two (2) vehicles in each stack. Notwithstanding the provisions of §6.02(b) above, each
parking space shall be marked and shall not be less than eight (8) feet in width and seventeen (17)
feet in length for angle parking or twenty-two (22) feet in length for parallel parking, exclusive of
drives, walks and maneuvering space. One (1) of the two vehicles in each stack shall have direct
access to an aisle or drive-way having a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet in the case of twoway
traffic or in the case of one-way traffic the minimum aisle width provided in §6.02(c). The
surfaced area of off-street parking areas shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from all buildings
and lot lines. Such setback areas, except for entrance and exit drives, shall be properly landscaped
with grass, trees, shrubs, flowers and other landscaping materials.
SECTION 6.03 REQUIRED OFF-STREET LOADINGSPACES
(a) Off-street loading facilities shall be provided for new structures and new additions in accordance with
the following table:
Type of Use Number of Loading Bays Required by Gross
Floor Area of Structures (in 1000's of sq ft)
For each
2-15 15-50 50-100 100-150 add'l 150
Retail trade, 1 2 3 4 1
wholesale, storage
industry, communications
and utilities
Office building, 1 1 1 1 1
hotel, dormitory,
institution, recreation
and education
(b) The Planning Board shall be the determining authority in the event of a conflict in interpretation as
to the category of the principal use, or as to the Gross Floor Area (or open lot) in a given use.
(c) Where the computation of required off-street loading spaces results in a fractional number, a fraction
of one-half or more shall be counted as one.
(d) The aggregate number of spaces required for each of several uses separately may be provided on
a common lot serving all of these uses.
SECTION 6.04 DESIGN AND LAYOUT OF OFF-STREET LOADINGFACILITIES
(a) Each required space shall be no less than twelve (12) feet in width, fourteen (14) feet in height and
thirty (30) feet in length in a Business District and fifty (50) feet in length in an Industrial District
(except for entirely residential projects in the I-3 District and Hotels in the I-1 District), exclusive of
drives and maneuvering space, and located entirely on the lot being served.
(b) There shall be appropriate means of access to a street or alley as well as adequate maneuvering
space.
(c) The maximum width of driveways and sidewalk openings measured at the street lot line shall be
87
thirty (30) feet; the minimum width shall be twenty (20) feet.
(d) Loading spaces may be enclosed in a structure and must be so enclosed if located within fifty (50)
feet of a residence district where the use involves regular night operation.
(e) All accessory driveways and entrance-ways shall be graded, surfaced, drained, to the satisfaction of
the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works, to the extent necessary to prevent nuisances
of dust, erosion, or excessive water flow across public ways, or onto adjacent properties.
(f) Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner as at no time to constitute a nuisance,
or a hazard or unreasonable impediment to traffic.
SECTION 6.05 OUTDOOR AUTOMOBILE STORAGE, NEW OR USED VEHICLES
(a) All storage of motor vehicles in connection with any permitted use, including new and used
automobile sales and display, and motor vehicle service, repair and auto body work shall be
regulated by the provisions of this §6.05, except for gasoline service stations, which shall be
regulated by §6.06 below.
(b) Storage of motor vehicles may be provided in a stacked configuration. For purposes of this §6.05,
a stacked configuration shall mean placing vehicles one directly behind another and/or directly
beside another.
(c) Any layout of an area for the storage of motor vehicles shall be designed to provide sufficient
pedestrian access to all stored vehicles and the storage area of the lot by emergency vehicles and
equipment to maintain adequate safety standards.
(d) Any layout of an area for the storage of motor vehicles shall be designed to provide adequate space
for the movement and maneuvering of the vehicles on the lot as to minimize the use of public ways
for the maneuvering of vehicles.
(e) The maximum width of driveways and sidewalk openings measured at the street lot line shall be
twenty-four (24) feet; the minimum width shall be twenty (20) feet.
(f) All accessory driveway and entrance ways shall be graded, surfaced, and drained to the satisfaction
of the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works and to the extent necessary to prevent
nuisances of dust, erosion or excess water flow across public ways or onto adjacent properties.
(g) All areas used for the storage of motor vehicles shall be designed and used in such a manner as at
no time to constitute a nuisance, hazard, or unreasonable impediment to traffic.
(h) All storage of motor vehicles shall be screened as provided in §4.14.
(i) Any outdoor lighting designed to illuminate any outdoor areas used for the storage of motor vehicles,
or areas related thereto such as walks, driveways, or doorways shall be continuous, non-flashing,
indirect and installed and shielded in such a manner that will prevent direct light from shining upon
any other property in a residence district.
(j) The storage of non-garaged unregistered motor vehicles for more than sixty (60) days on parcels
not authorized by this Zoning Ordinance for the storage or repair of said motor vehicles is prohibited,
and shall constitute a violation of this ordinance.
SECTION 6.06 GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS
(a) The use of a lot as a gasoline service station permitted by this Zoning Ordinance shall be regulated
by the provisions of this §6.06.
(b) No driveway shall be permitted to any street that carries traffic at such speed or in such quantity that
88
the Board of Appeals deems that access to or egress from a gasoline service station at such a
location will create hazardous conditions.
(c) The maximum width of driveways and sidewalk openings measured at the street lot line shall be
twenty-four (24) feet; the minimum width shall be twenty (20) feet.
(d) The minimum distance of driveways, measured at lot line, shall be used as follows: from corner lot
line, twenty (20) feet; from interior side lot line, ten (10) feet; from other driveway on same lot, twenty
(20) feet.
(e) The minimum setback of gasoline pumps from all street lot lines shall be twelve (12) feet.
(f) A raised curb at least six (6) inches in height shall be constructed along all lot lines except at driveway
openings.
(g) Unless located in an I-1 District, all major repairs, including bodywork and all washing and lubricating,
shall be carried on inside the building.
(h) The area of the lot not landscaped and so maintained shall be graded, surfaced with asphalt or other
suitable material, and drained to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works to the extent necessary to prevent nuisances of dust, erosion, or excessive water flow across
public ways or onto adjacent properties.
(i) All vehicles on a lot used as a gasoline service station shall be screened from any lot which is in a
residence district as required by § 4.14 or as may be otherwise required by the Board of Appeals.
SECTION 6.07 BICYCLE PARKING
(a) Off street bicycle parking shall be provided as follows:
(1) One bicycle parking space for every 15 automobile parking spaces in commercial/office mixeduse
developments, and one bicycle parking space for every five (5) automobile parking spaces
in residential/mixed use developments, a minimum of six (6) must be provided.
(2) Each bicycle parking space shall be sufficient to accommodate a bicycle 7 feet in length and 2
feet in width. Inverted U or Ring and Post style frame racks that support the bicycle at two or
more points above and on either side of the bicycle's center of gravity are required. An
alternative style of rack that, in the opinion of the Zoning Board of Appeals, provides a
comparable level of security and convenience may be provided. Racks must be secured to the
ground.
(3) It is recommended that half be provided as long term parking, safe and secure from vandalism
and theft, and protected from the elements. The other half shall be provided as short term
(customer or visitor) parking, and it is recommended that these spaces be visible and convenient
to building entrance.
(4) Any property owner required to have bicycle parking may elect to establish a shared bicycle
parking facility with any other property owner within the same block to meet the combined
requirements.
(5) The following uses are exempt from these requirements: Funeral parlor, undertaker, automobile
repair or body shop, gas station, and car wash.
(6) These requirements may be varied by the Board of Appeals by Special Permit, based upon a
determination that the proposed bicycle parking facilities will adequately address the purposes
of this section.
89
ARTICLE VII
SIGNS AND ILLUMINATION
______________________________________________________________________________
7.00 Intent and Purpose 7.06 Signs in NB, LB, CB, RMUD & PSCD Districts
7.01 Definition of Terms 7.07 Sign Special Permit
7.02 Application and Procedure 7.08 Permitted Illumination
7.03 Signs in All Districts 7.09 Non-Conformance
7.04 Signs in S-10, S-6, SC, 7.10 Watertown Square Design Overlay District
CR, T and OSC Districts 7.11 Hotel and Motel Signs
7.05 Signs in R.75, R1.2, & for 7.12 Exterior Lighting Standards
Residential Uses in the I-3 & 7.13 Exterior Lighting Technical Submittals
RMUD Districts
______________________________________________________________________________
SECTION 7.00 INTENT AND PURPOSE
A sign is a unique type of accessory structure, which because of its potential impact on adjacent lots and on
adjacent public street and land, warrants the regulation contained in this Zoning Ordinance. It is recognized that
signs perform important functions in communicating messages which are essential for public safety and general
welfare, provide information about types of goods and services available at permitted uses, and provide
orientation. Therefore, it is hereby found and declared that regulation of signs is necessary to promote the
health, safety and general welfare by:
(a) lessening hazards to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
(b) preventing unsightly and detrimental development which is a potential blighting influence upon
residential, institutional, public business and industrial uses, and detrimental to property value;
(c) preventing signs from becoming so excessive in number, size, intensity, brilliance, or impact that they
obscure or distract from 1) public signs essential to the orderly and safe movements of goods and
persons in the Town, or 2) one another to the detriment of all concerned;
(d) facilitating easy recognition and immediate legibility of permitted signs; and
(e) securing certain fundamentals of good design for the Town.
The provisions of this article are complementary to, and shall not be construed as inconsistent with, or in
contravention of, Sections 29 to 33 of Chapter 93 of the General Laws of Massachusetts.
SECTION 7.01 DEFINITION OF TERMS
(a) Accessory sign: any sign relating to business, service, or products including national brand products,
supplied on the premises on which the sign is located.
(b) Animated or Flashing Sign: any sign or attention-catching device which in part or whole moves or flashes
or contains traveling lights or gives the impression of any movement or flashing whether such effect is
generated by natural or artificial forces.
(c) Area, Flood, or Up-Lighting: Area, Flood Light: Any luminaire that is designed to direct the output of a
lamp in a specific single direction utilizing reflective elements external to the lamp. Such luminaires may
be manufactured with or without mounting hardware that can be swiveled, and are not equipped to be
aimed straight down. Up-Lighting - Any luminaire that is aimed or capable of being aimed above the
horizontal plane. Excluded from the definition of Up-Lighting is any luminaire aimed upwards into an
enclosed space.
90
(d) Banner Sign: any piece(s) of fabric displaying a distinctive insignia, identifying wording and/or symbolic
representation of a business, service or activity.
(e) Directional Sign: any sign whose only purpose is to direct traffic to proper entrance or exit.
(f) Emergency Egress Lighting: Luminaires designed to illuminate emergency egress doors and where such
luminaires are connected to and activated by the emergency activation/fire alarm system.
(g) Freestanding Sign: Any sign not attached to a building or other improvement but instead permanently
erected upon or standing in the ground and usually supported from the ground by one or more poles,
columns, uprights, braces or cement anchors. Freestanding signs include monument signs but do not
include portable signs.
(h) Identifying Sign: any permanent structure or building surface, or part thereof or device attached thereon
or other outdoor surface or any combination of one or more of the foregoing containing any word, letter,
symbol, drawing, model, banner, picture or design, or any device used for visual communication which
identifies or calls attention to any premises, person, product, activity, service, or business, directing the
subject thereof to the attention of the public. Signs do not include non-commercial murals.
(i) Illuminated Sign: any sign which is lighted by artificially generated light, either directly or indirectly.
(j) Marquee Sign: an identifying sign hanging from or supported by a permanent marquee or overhang.
(k) Non-accessory Sign: any billboard; or any sign or advertising device advertising a business, service,
product or activity at other locations.
(l) Projecting Signs: any non-translucent sign which is affixed at a right angle to the building wall, which
include fin, blade, and symbol signs.
(m) Symbol Sign: any non-translucent sign which is a three-dimensional representation or illustration of the
activity of the business or service.
(n) Temporary Sign: any sign constructed of light material which is intended to be displayed for a short
period of time only. A Temporary Accessory Sign is one which is accessory to an activity on the
premises, such as the temporary sign of a real estate agent, architect, contractor, painter or other artisan
or advertising a sale or other temporary activity in progress, and such sign may be placed on the ground
or attached to a wall. A Temporary Non-Accessory Sign refers to an event not related to the premises
and may also be in the form of a placard or banner attached to posts or trees on private property only.
A Temporary Identifying Sign is one which identifies the business at the location where it is, or will be,
erected during the period of construction, or alteration, or during the replacement of an obsolete or
inapplicable sign.
(o) Translucent Sign: any sign illuminated from the interior by an even light.
(p) Walkway Accent Lighting: Luminaires that are up to 42 inches tall in total height, and are used to
illuminate walkways, curbs, or similar situations, but not landscaping.
(q) Wall Sign: a sign painted on or attached and parallel to the wall of a building, but not including signs
attached to fences unless set back from all lot lines as required for a building in a district.
SECTION 7.02 APPLICATION AND PROCEDURE
(a) Application for a construction permit shall be made in writing to the Building Inspector, subject to review
by the Department of Community Development and Planning (DCDP), for all permanent signs. Said
applications shall contain the following information:
91
(1) name, address and telephone number of applicant;
(2) location and position of sign;
(3) drawings and plans showing the building facade and the proposed sign, with specifications,
and in the case of symbol or banner signs, section plans are required;
(4) written consent of the owner of the building and land;
(5) such other information as the Building Inspector, Zoning Enforcement Officer or Planning
Board may require;
(6) In the case of any projecting, symbol or banner sign, liability insurance in an amount to
be determined by the Town to be appropriate (which in no case shall be less than
$250,000/$500,000 personal injury and $50,000 property damage) shall be carried by the
owner of said sign and a certificate of same shall be filed with the application.
(b) Within five working days, the Building Inspector shall refer the application and accompanying material to
the DCDP.
(c) After receipt of the application and all required material, the DCDP staff shall review the application. The
DCDP staff shall submit its recommendations in writing to the Building Inspector. The recommendations
shall be based on such sign design booklets and such design guidelines as the Planning Board may
adopt.
(d) Upon receipt of the DCDP'S report or the lapse of fifteen (15) working days from his referral to the DCDP
without such report, the Building Inspector may issue a permit for a sign which conforms to the DCDP'S
recommendations, if any, the regulations in the Zoning Ordinance, and such technical requirements as
are within the Building Inspector's jurisdiction.
(e) A second review may be requested with the following procedure:
(1) If an applicant is aggrieved by the determination of the Building Inspector, he may seek an
advisory opinion by the Planning Board. Such action is to take place by the Planning Board
not more than 45 days following a request for a hearing before the Planning Board.
(2) If the Building Inspector requests an advisory opinion of the Planning Board prior to issuance
of the necessary permits for the sign, the Building Inspector or the Zoning Enforcement
Officer may submit the matter to the Planning Board within a 45 day period.
(3) Neither of the above two actions shall exclude the applicant from formally requesting a
decision of the Board of Appeals.
SECTION 7.03 SIGNS IN ALL DISTRICTS
(a) Placement of Signs
(1) Any building or tenant occupancy with more than one occupancy frontage may have attached
signage on each occupancy frontage facing a street, parking lot, or in each yard facing a
street, and/or free-standing signage for each street frontage of the lot. A building may also
have separate identifying signage. In no instance shall any signage directly front on or be
directed to face Greenough Boulevard.
(2) A sign, other than traffic control and route signs authorized by public agencies, shall not be
placed within a public right of way, except permitted wall sign, banner projecting and symbol
signs adjacent to a sidewalk.
(3) A sign shall not be designed or colored or so placed as to endanger, obscure, confuse, blind
92
by glare or otherwise create a hazardous condition to motor vehicle traffic.
(4) Directional signs necessary to give clear direction to a parking lot or building entrance on the
premises are permitted. Such signs shall not exceed three (3) feet in any dimension nor
more than (4) feet high on a pole or pylon unless placed on a permitted wall or building.
(5) A free standing pole or pylon, or wall sign or any part thereof, shall not exceed twenty (20)
feet in height above ground level, and any ground mounted monument sign shall not exceed
four (4) feet in height, except by Special Permit and adhering to the adopted Design
Guidelines.
(6) Roof signs of any type, in any district, are prohibited.
(b) Projection of Signs
(1) A wall or building mounted sign or symbol shall not project above the building wall to which it
is attached, and shall not obscure any part of the roof of the building except when integral to
the design and character of the sign, in which case it will be allowed by Special Permit only
and adhering to the adopted Design Guidelines.
(2) A sign, except for a projecting sign such as a symbol, accessory, marquee, or banner, shall
not project more than six (6) inches from the building wall.
(3) A projecting sign and support thereof, must be set back at least two (2) feet from the curb line
and be at least nine (9) feet above ground level.
(4) A projecting banner sign must be set back at least two (2) feet from the curb line and be at
least nine (9) feet above ground level. The total area of a banner may not exceed fifty (50)
square feet. In no instance shall the vertical length of a Banner Sign exceed fifty (50) percent
of the total height of the structure to which it is attached and the width of a Banner Sign shall
not exceed fifteen (15) percent of its height.
(5) Permanent awnings on store fronts shall be at least 9 feet above any public walkway; any
information on said awning which is consistent with the definition of the term Accessory Sign
shall be considered as Accessory Signs.
(c) Conditions of temporary signs
One temporary sign is permitted, as follows:
(1) A temporary identifying sign, not exceeding the permitted size for a permanent sign, may be
erected for not more than sixty (60) days.
(2) A temporary accessory sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet and shall be removed from
public view by those responsible for its erection within seven (7) days after the activity
advertised has ceased or after substantial damage to the sign, whichever comes first.
(3) A temporary non-accessory sign is limited to a period of forty-five (45) days preceding and
not over seven (7) days after the relevant event and may not exceed fifty (50) square feet..
(d) Calculation of sign area
(1) For a wall or marquee sign, the calculation of sign area in the NB, LB, CB and I districts shall
be a percentage of the building facade. The dimensions used in calculating this percentage
shall be the horizontal measure of the frontage of the business and the vertical measure not
exceeding the top of the second story of a building.
93
(2) For a monument, pole or pylon sign, the calculation of sign area shall use the dimensions of
one surface only to comply with the limits of §7.03 through 7.07.
(e) Gasoline station signs
Regulations governing the size of identifying signs and the size of accessory signs for gasoline stations
may be reversed. If the regulations are reversed, the identifying sign must comply with the regulations
for accessory signs and the accessory sign must comply with the regulations for identifying signs.
(f) Maintenance of signs
It shall be the responsibility of sign owners to provide proper and continual maintenance for their sign(s)
and sign structure(s).
(g) Prohibited signs and conditions
(1) No animated or flashing signs or attention-catching devices shall be permitted.
(2) No non-accessory signs other than permitted temporary non-accessory signs shall be
permitted.
(3) No interior and/or supporting infrastructure of a sign shall be exposed to public view other
than permitted projecting symbol signs. No exposed conduit, junction boxes, or transformers
shall be exposed to public view.
SECTION 7.04 SIGNS IN S-10, S-6, SC, CR, T AND OSC DISTRICTS
In any S-10, S-6, SC, CR, T and OSC district, no sign or advertising device shall be permitted except as follows:
(a) One identifying sign displaying the street number or name of the occupant of the premises, or both, not
exceeding two (2) square feet in area. Such sign may include identification of a permitted accessory
professional use and identify other permitted accessory uses including a customary home occupation.
(b) One identifying sign for permitted non-conforming use, not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area.
(c) Two identification signs are permitted on each building for churches and institutions, one not exceeding
twenty (20) square feet in area and one not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area.
SECTION 7.05 SIGNS IN R.75 AND R1.2 DISTRICTS, AND FOR RESIDENTIAL USES IN THE I-3 AND
RMUD DISTRICT
In the R.75 or R1.2 Districts, or with respect to any residential use in the I-3 District and the RMUD, no sign or
other advertising device shall be permitted except as follows:
(a) As permitted in S-10, S-6, SC, CR, T and OSC Districts.
(b) For multiple unit developments, including the residential component within a mixed-use project, up to
two attached signs or two free-standing signs, or a combination of one attached sign and one freestanding
sign may be allowed. The size of such signage shall be limited to one (1) square foot per unit
up to a maximum of 100 square feet, and in no instance shall a building mounted sign exceed 30 feet in
height.
(c) One identifying sign in connection with a lawfully maintained non-conforming use, not exceeding twenty
(20) square feet in area.
94
SECTION 7.06 SIGNS IN THE NB, LB, CB, I, RMUD, AND PSCD DISTRICTS
In any NB, LB, CB, I, RMUD, and PSCD district, no on premise sign or advertising device shall be permitted
except as follows:
(a) As permitted in S-10, S-6, SC, CR, T, OSC, R.75 and R1.2 districts.
(b) One identifying sign for each building or tenant occupancy frontage facing a street, parking lot, or public
way. In addition, one free standing sign may be allowed on a lot for each street frontage of the lot,
provided it is set back to at least one half the depth of the required setback in that district. In the case of
a free standing pole or pylon sign, said identifying sign may be up to sixteen (16) square feet or thirtytwo
(32) square feet in the case of a monument sign. If a wall or marquee sign, said identifying sign may
be up to five (5) percent of the area of the wall or building facade. The dimensions used in calculating
this percentage shall be the horizontal measure of the occupancy frontage of the business and the
vertical measurement of the building not exceeding the top of the second story of the building facade
(also see (d)). The accessory signage calculation shall be based upon the five (5) percent of the wall
area or building façade allowed for an identifying sign.
RMUD Exceptions:
(1) In the RMUD, the number and size of all building mounted (wall or marquee) signage shall be limited to
no more than one and one-quarter (1.25) square feet of signage for each linear foot of building for the first
story and no more than three-quarters (0.75) of a square foot for each linear foot of building for a second
story, but any use above a second story may be allocated a portion of the first story or second story
signage allocation. Building mounted signage may be located adjacent to entrances, along first and
second floor occupancy frontages, or in other locations, including at heights greater than 20 feet, so long
as the location is in keeping with adopted Design Guidelines. In no instance may a single occupant be
allowed more than 100 square feet of building mounted identifying signage, subject to the size limitations
set forth in Section 7.06e.
(2) In addition to the wall-mounted signage allowed above, lots in the RMUD may have up to one (1) freestanding
sign for each two hundred (200) linear feet of street frontage along a public or private way,
provided that the total number of free-standing signs allowed on any lot shall not exceed a total maximum
of four (4) free-standing signs and shall be a maximum of twenty (20’) feet in height and thirty-two (32)
square feet in sign area. Two of the allowed free standing pole or pylon signs may be consolidated and
those consolidated signs shall have no more than 150 square feet of signage area each, subject to size
limitations set forth in §4.12, 6.02.h and 7.06.b, and in keeping with adopted Design Guidelines.
(c) One building mounted accessory projecting sign such as a marquee, awning, fin, blade, symbol sign or
banner sign for each 50 linear feet of tenant occupancy facing a private or public way or parking lot.
(d) In the case of a single story structure, paragraphs (b) and (c) above or the following may be applied.
One identifying wall or marquee sign may be up to ten (10) percent of the area of the wall or building
facade. The dimensions used in calculating this percentage shall be the horizontal measure of the
frontage of the business and the vertical measure to the roof or parapet line. This option excludes the
use of any accessory sign(s).
(e) In no instance may the gross area of all signs including accessory signs on one building exceed 200
square feet in area on a single lot, except in the case of multiple buildings where each building may have
up to a maximum of 200 square feet including accessory signs on each building.
Notwithstanding the above, any non-residential or mixed use site with cumulative building footprints in
excess of 100,000 square feet may not exceed 350 square feet of signage per building, except in the
RMUD, where the maximum identifying signage shall be limited to one-hundred (100) square feet of
building mounted signage per tenant. Further, an increase in the total building signage may be permitted
by Special Permit and adhering to the adopted Design Guidelines.
Exceptions: Freestanding and directional signs shall not reduce signage otherwise allowable under
§7.06(e) above, but shall be subject to limitation identified in §7.03(a) and 7.05(b).
95
(f) Temporary signs may be attached or lettered on the interior of the window. Such signs shall not be
included in the aggregate sign area in paragraphs (b) and (c), or paragraph (d) above. The aggregate
area of all signs in any window, either permanent or temporary, shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of
the area of such window. All neon signs and permanent graphics and their dimensions shall be listed
on the sign permit application. All temporary signs are subject to regulations in §7.03(c).
(g) Projecting signs may be considered as accessory signs and shall be permitted if they are not more than
sixteen (16) square feet in total area. Further, projecting signs shall be placed at a right angle to the
building wall. Illumination from the interior of all projecting signs shall be prohibited and other forms of
illumination shall be consistent with this Ordinance.
(h) One free standing or wall-mounted sign may be permitted for the purpose of a business directory per
shared entrance provided that no more than three (3) square feet shall be permitted thereon for each
use except by special permit. The aggregate sign area shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
SECTION 7.07 SIGN SPECIAL PERMIT
The Planning Board shall be SPGA for Sign Special Permits. In the RMUD district, no on-premise sign or
advertising device shall be permitted except as follows:
(a) As permitted in §7.05 or as allowed by this section for Master Plan Special Permit projects under §5.18.
(b) Timing: A project may choose to request the approval of a sign master plan as part of a requested Master
Plan Special Permit, or a sign master plan may be submitted as a separate request once a Master Plan
Special Permit has been granted.
(c) In order to approve a sign master plan, the SPGA review would include a comprehensive review of the
requested signage in context of the Special Permit, considering the uses proposed and the site and
surrounding context.
(1) Design Requirements: Sign Master Plan:
(A) Signage shall be sized and placed to reinforce, rather than compete with, the architectural elements
and proportions of a building.
(B) A wall sign shall not project beyond the ends of the walls to which it is mounted.
(C) Wall signs and projecting signs shall not extend above the roof line or parapet of the building to which
it is mounted.
(D) No part of a projecting sign shall extend into vehicular traffic areas or in any way interfere with
vehicular site lines.
(E) All free-standing signs must be protected from vehicular damage by a curb or planter.
(F) Signs may be erected in required setback areas but in no instance shall signs directly front on or be
directed to face Greenough Boulevard.
SECTION 7.08 PERMITTED ILLUMINATION
(a) In all districts, any lighting of a sign or advertising device shall be continuous and installed in a manner
that will prevent direct light from shining onto any street or adjacent property.
(b) In residential districts, all signs or advertising devices shall be stationary and may not contain any visible
moving or movable parts; no sign or advertising device shall be of neon type or exposed gas-illuminated
tube type; no sign or advertising device shall be illuminated during hours when the establishment is
closed to the public.
(c) In NB, LB, CB, I, and PSCD districts, the following signs, in addition to the above are permitted:
(1) translucent
96
(2) signs of neon or exposed gas-illuminated tube type.
SECTION 7.09 NON-CONFORMANCE
(a) Any sign erected after the date that this Article VII was originally adopted (June 30, 1982) which because
of a change in occupancy ceases to refer to a permitted business being conducted, or product sold, on
the premises, shall be removed at the expense of the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use
of the building or property upon which the sign is located within sixty (60) days after written notification
from the Inspector of Buildings or within such longer period not exceeding one year as the Inspector of
Buildings may determine.
(b) Any signs legally erected before the date that this Article VII was originally adopted (June 30, 1982) may
continue to be maintained, provided however, that no such sign shall be permitted if, after such date, it
is enlarged, or altered in any substantial way, except to conform to the requirements of this Zoning
Ordinance. Notwithstanding this, the panels of such sign may be changed to reflect a changed product
line. Further, any such sign which has deteriorated to such an extent that the cost of restoration would
exceed thirty-five (35) percent of the replacement cost of the sign at the time of the restoration shall not
be repaired or rebuilt or altered except to conform to the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. Any
exemption provided in this §7.09(b) shall terminate with respect to any sign that:
(1) shall have been abandoned,
(2) advertises or calls attention to any products, businesses or activities which are no longer sold
or carried on, whether generally or at the particular premise, or
(3) shall not have been repaired or properly maintained within thirty (30) days after notice to that
effect has been given by the Inspector of Buildings.
(c) The erection of non-accessory signs is prohibited.
SECTION 7.10 WATERTOWN SQUARE DESIGN OVERLAY DISTRICT
Signs in the Watertown Square Design Overlay District shall conform to all provisions of Article VII except as
otherwise specified in §5.09.
SECTION 7.11 HOTEL AND MOTEL SIGNS
This section controls signage for hotels and motels within zoning districts where hotels and motels are allowed
under Article V. Signage for hotels and motels shall comply with this section. No sign or advertising device shall
be permitted except as follows:
(a) Wall Signs for Hotels and Motels. One or more wall signs accessory to a hotel or motel shall not exceed
two hundred (200) square feet in total area or one hundred (100) square feet for any individual sign.
(1) Wall Signs shall not exceed five (5) percent of the area of the wall or building façade on which it
is placed. The dimensions used in calculating this percentage shall be same as outlined in
§7.03(d)(1).
(2) Wall Signs or any element thereof, shall not be placed or project above the building wall or
parapet to which it is attached.
(b) Projecting Banner Signs for Hotels and Motels. One or more Banner Signs accessory to a hotel or motel,
not exceeding two (2) percent of the area of the wall or building façade on which it is placed, may be
allowed, and not be subject to the limitations of §7.03, paragraphs (a)(5) and (b)(4) and shall not be
included in any calculation for gross area of all signs, provided the following conditions are met:
(1) Banner Signs shall be set back at least 2 feet from the curb line and be at least nine (9) feet
above ground level.
97
(2) The vertical length of each Banner Sign shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total height of
the structure to which it is attached.
(3) The width of each Banner Sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of its height.
(c) Monument Ground Sign: A sign that is anchored directly to the ground, not exceeding 32 square feet in
gross area, nor four (4) feet in height and which shall be externally illuminated.
SECTION 7.12 EXTERIOR LIGHTINGSTANDARDS
The following section lays out Exterior Lighting Standards for any residential development of four (4) or greater
residential units, and all non-residential and Mixed-Use projects.
(1) The light source shall be Light Emitting Diode, metal halide or high pressure sodium. Mercury vapor and
low pressure sodium are prohibited. Other sources may be considered, particularly for decorative, flush
mounted or recessed luminaires.
(2) Pole-mount or wall-pack luminaires shall be “shoe-box” type or decorative in nature (with interior
directional shields), consistent with the architectural theme of the development. Area, Flood, and Uplighting
is strictly prohibited.
(3) All luminaires, regardless of their intended use, mounting height, or configuration shall have a total cutoff
of all light at less than ninety (90) degrees from vertical. Luminaires with a drop lens are prohibited.
(4) Reflectors and shielding shall provide total cutoff of all measureable light at the property lines of the
parcel to be developed.
(5) Developments that abut residential areas or are visible from public roadways shall not utilize parking lot
lights exceeding 20’-0” in height (base + pole + head).
(6) Developments that do not abut residential areas shall not utilize parking lot lights exceeding 25’-0” in
height (base + pole + head).
(7) Developments with parking garages that use pole mounted fixtures to illuminate the upper-most level of
parking shall not use lights exceeding 20’-0” in height (base + pole + head).
(8) Lights utilized for walkway lighting shall not exceed 12’-0” in height (base + pole + head).
(9) The location of on-building mounted wall-pack luminaires shall not exceed 20’-0” in height. Decorative
on-building mounted fixtures may be used to illuminate balconies or similar amenities above 20’-0” in
height.
(10) All luminaires except for Walkway Accent Lighting and Emergency Egress Lighting shall be equipped
with a mechanism such that they will deactivate and turn off not more than two hours after the stated
closing time, and in all cases, shall deactivate during daylight hours. Excluded from the requirement to
deactivate not more than two hours after the stated closing time are any luminaires used in residential
developments, or exclusively for the residential portion of Mixed Use projects.
SECTION 7.13 EXTERIOR LIGHTING TECHNICAL SUBMITTALS
The following section lays out Exterior Lighting Standards for any residential development of four (4) or greater
residential units, and all non-residential and Mixed-Use projects:
(a) A site lighting design drawing or drawings.
(b) Electrical site plan indicating the location of each and every exterior luminaire to be installed. The fixtures
shall be labeled as to the type of luminaires specified. Where pole-mounted fixtures are to be used, a diagram
98
shall be included of such proposed lights, including walkway lights that show height of the base, pole and fixture
head. Where wall-mounted luminaires are specified, the mounting heights of fixtures shall be indicated on the
plan.
(c) A lighting fixture schedule that designates the type of luminaires specified including the following information:
a. The number and type of lamps to be used in each luminaire;
b. A description of the luminaire and light pole if applicable; and
c. The manufacturer’s name and catalog numbers of the specified equipment;
(d) Manufacturers’ specification sheets shall be provided for all proposed luminaires and poles to be used (where
poles are used). Manufacturers’ specification sheets should indicate the shape and dimensions of the luminaires
and poles.
(e) Manufacturers’ computer-generated point-to-point printouts shall be submitted indicating the horizontal initial
and maintained foot-candle levels at grade, within the property to be developed and twenty-five (25) feet beyond
the property lines. Computer-generated printouts shall indicate the locations and type of luminaires analyzed.
Maintained foot-candle levels should be calculated, using IES recommended procedures. Light loss factors used
to calculate maintained foot-candle levels shall be indicated on the computer-generated printouts. Pertinent data,
such as building outline, building entrances and exits, loading areas, landscaping, walkways, roadways,
bikeways, parking areas, curbs and property lines shall also be shown.
99
ARTICLE VIII
OTHER REGULATIONS
______________________________________________________________________________
8.00 Regulation of Soil Removal 8.02 Sale of Products on Public Rights of Way
8.01 Overhanging Shrubs or Evergreens 8.03 Yard Sales
8.04 Medical Marijuana Treatment Centers and Adult
Use Marijuana Establishments
______________________________________________________________________________
SECTION 8.00 REGULATION OF SOIL REMOVAL
In no district shall any sod, loam, gravel, sand or quarried stone be removed from a lot, except when incidental
to and in connection with the construction of a building or a parking or loading area for which a permit has been
issued, except in an Industrial district by special permit. The foregoing shall not prohibit the replacement of
existing sod or loam by fresh sod or loam for landscaping purposes.
SECTION 8.01 OVERHANGING SHRUBS OR EVERGREENS
For purposes of public safety and to facilitate snow removal, shrubs or evergreens from any public or private
parcel shall not be allowed to intrude onto public sidewalks more than six (6) inches, except above a height of
eight (8) feet.
SECTION 8.02 SALE OF PRODUCTS ON PUBLIC RIGHTS OFWAY
The open display of foods or other products on public rights of way for purposes of display or sale may be allowed
only upon the issuance of a Special Permit by the Board of Appeals.
SECTION 8.03 YARD SALES
To insure the tranquility of residential zoning districts, the number of yard sales permitted on any residential
parcel, in any residential district, shall be limited to three (3) per year; and said yard sales shall be subject to all
other permits and regulations required by the Town.
SECTION 8.04 MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTERS AND ADULT USE MARIJUANA
ESTABLISHMENTS
(a) No person shall operate or allow the operation of, a Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or a Adult
Use Marijuana Establishment without full compliance with all of the applicable provisions and
conditions of 105 CMR 725.100 and 935 CMR 500 Massachusetts General Law, respectively,
including definitions, siting, signage, and operations; provided, however, that if there is a conflict
between the provisions of this section and the provisions of any other applicable state or local law, the
most restrictive law shall govern. Nothing herein, exempts such uses from this or other applicable local
regulations, ordinances, and/or policies.
(b) In addition to the requirements set forth in § 8.04(a) above, no person shall operate or allow the
operation of, a Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or a Adult Use Marijuana Establishment until such
time as a Special Permit has been duly applied for and granted by the Special Permit Granting
Authority (SPGA), which Special Permit confirms full conformance with Massachusetts General Law
and all of the applicable locational siting requirements of this Article. The application for such Special
Permit shall be filed pursuant to the requirements and processes set forth in Article IX of this
Ordinance.
(c) Definitions: As used throughout this Ordinance the following words shall be defined as indicated.
100
Marijuana: shall be as defined under Chapters 94C, 94G and 94I of the Massachusetts General Laws,
105 Code of Massachusetts Regulations 725.004, and 935 Code of Massachusetts Regulations
500.002 and 935 CMR 501.003.
Medical Marijuana: Marijuana that is designated and restricted for use by, and for the benefit of,
qualifying patients in the treatment of debilitating medical conditions.
Marijuana Establishment: this term shall include licensed marijuana establishments as defined in
M.G.L. c. 94G, sec, 1, and other applicable law, which include a marijuana cultivator, craft marijuana
cooperative, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer (store-front or delivery only),
marijuana social consumption establishment (primary or mixed use), marijuana transporter (third party
or existing licensee), marijuana micro-business, or any other type of licensed marijuana related
business.. Marijuana testing laboratories shall be defined as found in M.G.L. 94G and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Registered Marijuana Dispensary: shall mean an entity
as defined by Massachusetts law only, registered with and licensed by the Department of Public
Health, the Cannabis Control Commission, or any other successor agency that acquires, cultivates,
possesses, processes (including development of related products such as edible cannabis, tinctures,
aerosols, oils or ointments), transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or administers
marijuana, products containing marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials to qualifying
patients or their personal care-givers.
SECTION 8.05 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
(a) Definitions:
1. Solar Energy System: A device or structural design feature, a substantial purpose of which
is to provide for the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for space heating or cooling,
electricity generation, or water heating.
a. Solar Energy System, Active: A solar energy system whose primary purpose is to
harvest energy by transforming solar energy into another form of energy or transferring
heat from a collector to another medium using mechanical, electrical, or chemical means.
b. Solar Energy System, Ground-Mounted / Canopy: An Active Solar Energy System that
is structurally mounted to the ground and is not roof-mounted.
c. Solar Energy System, Roof-Mounted: An Active Solar Energy System that is
structurally mounted to the roof of a building or structure.
2. Solar-ready zone: The solar-ready zone area is 50% of the roof area that is either flat or
oriented between 110 degrees and 270 degrees of true north, exclusive of mandatory access or set
back areas as required by the MA Fire Code.
(b) Requirements: Development requiring site plan review approval under section 9.03 in the NB, LB, CB, I-
1, I-2, I-3, RMUD, and PSCD Districts greater than or equal to ten thousand (10,000) gross square
feet or containing ten (10) or more residential units shall include a solar energy system that is
equivalent to a minimum of 50% of the roof area of all buildings. In cases where a site includes an
uncovered parking structure the structure shall also have a solar energy system installed to cover a
minimum of 90% of its top level.
(c) Solar Energy System Assessment: A solar assessment shall be submitted and the assessment must
include, at a minimum:
1. An analysis for solar energy system(s) for the site detailing layout and annual production.
2. Include the maximum feasible solar zone area of all structures and potential ground-mounted
canopies.
3. An initial solar energy system assessment shall be submitted with the required application for Site
Plan Review under section 9.03
101
4. A final solar installation plan must be reviewed and approved by the Department of Community
Development and Planning, prior to the issuance of a Building Permit
(d) Exemptions: A project will not be required to install a solar energy system on the roof when there is no
solar ready zone, or the solar-ready zone is shaded for more than 50 percent of daylight hours
annually, or for building conversions with insufficient structural load capacity. Further, in the case of
a mixed or ground mounted installation the requirement may be reduced or waived if the assessment
determines there is not a viable location to meet the solar requirement.
(e) Safety and Locations Guidelines:
1. Emergency Access - Solar energy systems shall be located in such a manner as to ensure
emergency access to the roof, provide pathways to specific areas of the roof, provide for smoke
ventilation opportunities, and provide emergency egress from the roof, as required by the MA Fire
Code, as updated.
2. Safety – No roof-mounted solar energy system shall be located in a manner that would cause the
shedding of ice or snow from the roof into a porch, stairwell or pedestrian travel area.
102
103
ARTICLE IX
ENFORCEMENT AND APPLICATION PROCEDURES
_____________________________________________________________________________
9.00 Enforcement; Violations 9.11 Special Permit for
9.01 Building Permit Temporary Structures
9.02 Occupancy Permit 9.12 Special Permit Approval
9.03 Site Plan Review of of Certain Site Plans
Certain Residential and 9.13 Lapse of Special Permit
Non-Residential 9.14 Variances
Developments 9.15 Conditions for Approval
9.04 Application and Hearing of a Variance
Procedures for Special 9.16 Lapse of Variance
Permits and Variances 9.17 Special Permits and
9.05 Special Permit: Variances: Effective Dates
Conditions for Approval 9.18 Special Permits and
9.06 Special Permit Criteria Variances; Withdrawal Without
for Industrial Districts Prejudice; Reconsideration
9.07 Special Permit Criteria for 9.19 Right of Appeal
I-3 District 9.20 Amendments to Zoning Ordinance
9.08 Special Permit Criteria for 9.21 Public Hearings for Amendments
i-3 District – Lot Size 9.22 Notice of Public Hearings
9.09 Limited Approval of for Amendments
Special Permit
9.10 Withdrawal of Limited Special
Permit
_______________________________________________
SECTION 9.00 ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS
(a) This Zoning Ordinance shall be enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Whenever the provisions
of this Zoning Ordinance are not clear, the Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Inspector of Buildings is
authorized and directed to submit the matter to the Planning Board for the expression of its opinion. A
decision shall not be made by the Inspector of Buildings or Zoning Enforcement Officer until the Planning
Board has allowed thirty (30) days to elapse without rendering an opinion or has rendered the requested
opinion, whichever is earlier.
(b) If the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be informed, or have reason to believe, that any provision of this
Zoning Ordinance has been, is being, or may be violated, he or is agent shall investigate the facts and
inspect the property in question. If he or she shall find such violation he or she shall give notice thereof
in writing to the owner or to his duly authorized agent and to the occupant of the premises, and order
that any use of any building or premises contrary to the provision of this Zoning Ordinance shall
immediately cease.
(c) If the Zoning Enforcement Officer is requested in writing to enforce any provision of the Zoning Ordinance
against any person allegedly in violation of the same and the Zoning Enforcement Officer declines to
act, he or she shall notify, in writing, the party requesting such enforcement of any action or refusal to
act, and the reasons therefore, within fourteen (14) days of receipt of such request.
(d) Penalty for non-compliance with any lawful order of the Zoning Enforcement Officer pertaining to the
Zoning Ordinance shall be punished by a fine, to be determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, of
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) per violation;
provided that nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit a determination by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer that each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
104
SECTION 9.01 BUILDING PERMIT
(a) The Inspector of Buildings shall not issue a building permit for the erection or alteration of any building
or part thereof unless the plans, specifications and intended uses of such building, lot and open spaces
on the lot are in all respects in conformity with this Zoning Ordinance and have been approved by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer. Where special permits or variances are required under this Zoning
Ordinance, the Inspector of Buildings shall not issue a building permit until so directed in writing by the
Board of Appeals.
(b) Applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plan of the lot in duplicate, and certified by
a registered land surveyor showing the actual dimensions of the lot and the exact location and size of
the buildings already upon the lot, of any structures within eight (8) feet of the line on the adjoining lot,
and of the building or structure to be erected, altered or moved, together with the streets, and alleys and
easements on and adjacent to the lot and such other information as the location and dimensions of
required parking as may be required for the enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance. The lot corners and
bounds shall be indicated by such stakes and bounds as shall be required by the Inspector of Buildings.
SECTION 9.02 OCCUPANCY PERMIT
(a) No premises, building or structure, altered or in any way changed as to construction, use, or number of
dwelling units under a building permit or otherwise, shall be occupied or used without an occupancy
permit signed by the Inspector of Buildings, which permit shall not be issued until the buildings, structure,
or premises and its uses comply in all respects with this Zoning Ordinance and have been approved by
the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
(b) A temporary occupancy permit may be issued in appropriate cases.
SECTION 9.03 SITE PLAN REVIEW OF CERTAIN RESIDENTIAL AND NON-RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENTS
No Special Permit, Variance or Building Permit for construction, exterior alteration, relocation, or change in use,
except where noted, shall be granted for any use requiring Site Plan Review under §5.01 until the provisions of
this section have been fulfilled and an application is approved by the Special Permit Granting Authority. Uses for
which Site Plan Review is required are designated by an SR (“Site Plan Review”) or SP/SR (“Special Permit with
Site Plan Review” in §5.01, Table of Use Regulations. Site Plan Review shall be used to judge the
appropriateness and impacts of the site development characteristics of a proposed development. All proposed
developments subject to §9.03 shall conform with all appropriate provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
(a) A Petitioner using the Site Plan Review checklist available in the Department of Community
Development & Planning (DCDP), shall complete packets, to be included as part of the preliminary and
formal application, which include all necessary plans and a statement responding to the Site Plan Review
standards set forth in subsection (c) below. Complete packets for the preliminary meeting will be hand
delivered prior to the submission deadline, with three (3) copies of the preliminary site plan packet for
the proposed development submitted to the DCDP; and, one copy each submitted to Conservation and
Preservation Agent, Inspector of Buildings, Zoning Enforcement Officer, Superintendent of Public Works,
Chief Fire Inspector, Chief of Police, Health Department, Commission on Disabilities, Bicycle and
Pedestrian Committee, Watertown Housing Partnership, Assessor’s Department, and, when
appropriate, other entities as identified by the Director of DCDP.
Unless waived by the Director of Community Development & Planning because of development scale,
said site plan shall be at a scale of 1"=10' or 1"=20'. Vertical scale shall be at 1/8"=1' or 1/4"=1'. Said
site plan shall show, among other things, all existing and proposed building structures, existing and
proposed grades, automobile and bicycle parking spaces, driveway openings, service areas, open space
and other uses, site engineering and all facilities for water, drainage, sewage, refuse, and landscape
features (such as fences, walls, planting areas, type, size and location of planting materials, methods to
be employed for screening, and walks), fire suppression and access detail, preliminary traffic counts and
assessment, schematic elevations at the above scales, the location of any wetlands within one hundred
fifty (150) feet, other information as required in §9.01(b).
105
Development in the NB, LB, CB, I-1, I-2, I-3, RMUD, and PSCD Districts greater than or equal to ten
thousand (10,000) gross square feet or containing ten (10) or more residential units shall complete a
Solar Energy System Assessment, as required under Section 8.05. The Petitioner shall indicate, in
writing, what actions/outcomes will be taken with a copy of the assessment, to DCDP.
(b) The Planning Board shall hold a hearing on the proposal to examine the standards set forth in subsection
(c) below as part of the formal application process. Prior to said hearing, a Preliminary Developer's
Conference shall be held with representatives of the developer and Town Departments and Committees
listed in subsection (a) above, to determine and discuss questions, impacts, potential problems, etc.,
with said site plan, and to provide guidance to the developers in completing the formal application and
site plan submission. Each department shall submit an analysis of the formal application and site plan
to the Director of DCDP within thirty (30) days.
For projects with four (4) or greater residential units, or for non-residential projects with 10,000 square
feet of new development or greater, the Petitioner will conduct a public information meeting no less
than ten (10) days prior to submission for Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals approval. The
meeting will provide an opportunity for the public to understand and comment on the specifics of the
project, the details of such project shall be made available to the public, through submission to the
Department of Community Development & Planning, no less than fourteen (14) days prior to the public
information meeting. The Petitioner shall coordinate planning this meeting with the Department of
Community Development & Planning and the Town Councilor who represents the district where the
project would be built. The meeting shall be announced by the Petitioner no less than two weeks prior
to the meeting. The required advertising by the Petitioner shall include a notice distributed to abutters
and abutters to abutters within 300’ of the site. Upon confirmation of the meeting time and place with
the Department of Community Development and Planning, said Department will also announce the
meeting by posting an announcement on the Town website, with the Town Council and using the Town
Email notification system. Within one week of the meeting, the Petitioner shall submit a summary of what
was discussed at the meeting to the Department of Community Development & Planning. At the
discretion of the Director of Community Development & Planning, a second public information meeting
may be required in instances of large projects with a community impact, or a project with circumstances
that would necessitate a second meeting.
No application shall be complete, shall be accepted by the Director of DCDP, nor be submitted to the
Planning Board for consideration unless and until all information specified in §9.03(a) is submitted in a
form deemed to be sufficient and complete by the Director of DCDP, and until reports on the application
are received from all relevant Town Departments and Committees as defined in subsection (a) above;
provided, however, that if a department fails to provide such analysis within said fifteen (15) day period,
the DCDP's review shall proceed without the report of such department, and the Director of DCDP may
determine such application to be complete notwithstanding the failure of such department to submit its
report. Said reports shall be incorporated into the submission to the Planning Board.
(c) The Planning Board shall review the formal application and site plan and then prepare a written report
on the proposal considering, among other things, the ten criteria listed below. When a proposal requires
a Variance or Special Permit with Site Plan Review in accordance with §5.01 and the Board of Appeals
is the SPGA, this report of the Planning Board shall be submitted to the Board of Appeals in accordance
with the provisions set forth below. The Board of Appeals shall not grant the Special Permit or Variance
until this report has been submitted. When a proposal requires a Special Permit with Site Plan Review
and the Planning Board is the SPGA or when a proposal only requires Site Plan Review in accordance
with §5.01, the Planning Board shall make a final determination as to whether that proposal sufficiently
meets the criteria listed below and whether the proposal shall be approved. Revisions to any site plan
must be approved in the same manner as the original plan.
1. Landscape: The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by
minimizing tree and soil removal, and any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general
appearance of neighboring developed areas. Adequate landscaping shall also be provided,
including screening of adjacent residential uses, provision of street trees, landscape islands in the
parking lot and a landscape buffer along the street frontage.
106
2. Relation of Buildings to Environment: Proposed development shall be integrated into the terrain and
the use, scale and architecture of existing buildings in the vicinity and shall be in accordance with
the Comprehensive Plan or other plans adopted by the Town guiding future development. The
Planning Board may require a modification in massing so as to reduce the effect of shadows on
abutting property in all districts or on public open space.
3. Open Space: All open space required by this Zoning Ordinance shall be so designed as to maximize
its visibility for persons passing the site, encourage social interaction, maximize its utility, and
facilitate its maintenance.
4. Circulation: Special attention shall be given to traffic circulation, parking areas and access points to
public streets and community facilities in order to maximize convenience and safety of vehicular,
bicycle and pedestrian movement within the site and in relation to adjacent streets. Special
consideration shall be given to infrastructure and design that will enhance public transit, such as bus
shelters, on-site transportation demand management measures, and participation in a Transit
Management Association.
5. Surface Water Drainage: Special attention shall be given to proper site surface drainage so that
removal of surface waters will not adversely affect neighboring properties or the public storm
drainage system. Proposed developments shall seek to retain storm water runoff on site to the
maximum extent possible, incorporating best practices in storm water management and Low Impact
Design techniques. In cases where storm water cannot be retained on site, storm water shall be
removed from all roofs, canopies and paved areas and carried away in an underground drainage
system.
6. Utility Service: Electric, telephone, cable TV and other such lines and equipment shall be
underground. The proposed method of sanitary sewage disposal and solid waste disposal from all
buildings shall be indicated.
7. Environmental Sustainability: Proposed developments shall seek to diminish the heat island
effect; employ passive solar techniques and design to maximize southern exposures, building
materials, and shading; utilize energy-efficient technology and renewable energy resources; and
minimize water use.
All new developments requiring Site Plan Review in the NB, LB, CB, I-1, I-2, I-3, RMUD, and PSCD
Districts must meet LEED Silver Certifiable requirements as outlined by the United States Green
Building Council’s Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (current edition as
applicable) as a minimum. Design documentation shall be provided by the Petitioner to the Town
to verify that the project could achieve the minimum number of LEED points to achieve
certification. Such documentation may include but not be limited to a project narrative describing
how the project design intends to achieve selected LEED credits, and a LEED checklist with criteria
(or points) which shows the project will achieve a minimum of 50 points.
8. Screening: Screening, such as screen plantings, shall be provided for exposed storage areas,
exposed machinery installations, service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings and structures,
and similar accessory areas and structures in order to prevent their being incongruous with the
existing or contemplated environment and the surrounding properties.
9. Safety: With respect to personal safety, all open and enclosed spaces shall be designed to facilitate
building evacuation and maximize accessibility by fire, police, and other emergency personnel and
equipment.
10. Design: Proposed developments shall seek to protect abutting properties from detrimental site
characteristics resulting from the proposed use, including but not limited to air and water pollution,
noise, odor, heat, flood, dust vibration, lights or visually offensive structures or site features.
107
(d) Design Guidelines
(1) For projects with between four (4) and nine (9) residential units, and for any non-residential or Mixed-
Use project between 4,000 square feet and up and up to 10,000 square feet, Watertown’s adopted
Design Guidelines will be considered as part of the Site Plan Review/Special Permit review.
(2) For projects with ten (10) or greater residential units, or for non-residential projects with 10,000
square feet of new development or greater, or any Mixed-Use project, the Petitioner’s/Developer’s
proposed project shall be subject to a formal consultant design review according to Watertown’s
adopted Design Guidelines.
Prior to submittal for Board review, any project as defined in (d)(2) shall undergo a formal design
review subject to Watertown’s most current adopted Design Guidelines. The review will be
conducted with representatives of the Petitioner/Developer, the DCDP staff, and Watertown’s Design
Consultant to determine and discuss the proposed project’s conformance to the most current
adopted Design Guidelines.
Within fourteen (14) calendar days of the design review, Watertown’s Design Consultant will submit
to the Director of DCDP or his/her designee a written report analyzing the proposed project’s
conformance with Watertown’s most current adopted Design Guidelines.
The Petitioner/Developer may, in consultation with the Director of DCDP, have his/her proposed
project undergo a second design review with the Town of Watertown’s Design Consultant after
completion of the required public information session noted above.
Petitioners/developers for projects subject to review under Watertown’s most current adopted
Design Guidelines shall, in accordance with Chapter 44 of the Massachusetts General Laws, Section
53(G) and in accordance with §5.2 of the Zoning Board of Appeals Rules of Practice, be required to
make payment to Watertown’s Design Review Fund to compensate the Design Consultant. The
base payment into the Design Review Fund shall be a not to exceed amount of $10,000 as
determined by the Director of DCDP. Funds collected in the Design Review Fund shall be used to
pay for the services of Watertown’s Design Consultant for the Petitioner’s/developer’s proposed
project. Any funds not expended for this purpose at the conclusion of Watertown’s review of the
proposed project shall be returned to the Petitioner/Developer.
SECTION 9.04 APPLICATION AND HEARING PROCEDURES FOR SPECIAL PERMITS AND
VARIANCES
(a) Each application for a special permit or variance shall be on forms supplied by the Board of Appeals and
shall be filed in triplicate with the Town Clerk who shall transmit one copy to the Zoning Enforcement
Officer, the Planning Board, and the Board of Appeals respectively within three (3) days of receipt of
them (Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays excluded). Each application for a variance shall also
include the written statement required by §9.14(b) demonstrating that the conditions of a grant of a
variance under Chapter 40A, Section 10 of the General Laws of Massachusetts are met.
Where any application for a special permit or variance requires site plan review under §9.03, the
restrictions on filing and hearing provided in subsection (b) below shall govern the time when the
application may be accepted for filing by the Town Clerk or scheduled for public hearing by the Board of
Appeals.
(b) Where an application for a special permit or variance requires site plan review under §9.03, the
application may be filed any time after a complete set of site plan materials under §9.03(a) has been
submitted to the Planning Board.
(c) Prior to the public hearing of the Zoning Board of Appeals as provided in §9.04(d), the Planning Board
shall hold a public hearing and transmit to the Board of Appeals a report based, among other things, on
the conditions set forth in §9.05 in the case of an application for a special permit, or in §9.14(b) in the
case of an application for a variance, and, in the case of an application requiring site plan review, based
also on the conditions set forth in §9.03(c), accompanied by such materials, maps or plans as will aid
108
the Board of Appeals in judging the application and in determining special conditions and safeguards.
The Board of Appeals shall not render any decision on an application for a special permit or variance
before one of the following has taken place:
(1) The Planning Board submits written notification that it does not intend to submit a report; or
(2) The report of the Planning Board has been received by the date of the public hearing.
(d) The Board of Appeals shall, at the expense of the applicant, give public notice of the application in the
manner provided in Chapter 40A, Section 9 and Section 11 of the General Laws, which requires, among
other things, publication of a notice of a hearing not less than 14 days prior to the date of the hearing in
a newspaper of general circulation in Watertown, and by posting such notices in a conspicuous place in
the Town for a period of not less than fourteen days before the day of such hearing, and by mail to all
interested parties, according to Chapter 40A, Section 9.
Public hearings shall be held within sixty-five (65) days after the filing of an application.
(e) In the case of an application for a special permit, the decision of the Board of Appeals must be made
within the deadline described in §9.05(c). In the case of an application for a variance, the Board of
Appeals decision must be made within the deadline described in §9.15(e). Failure to take final action
within the appropriate time limit shall be deemed to be a grant of the application. The Board of Appeals
shall cause to be made a detailed record of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each
question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and setting forth clearly the reason or reasons
for its decisions, and of its other official actions, copies of all which shall be filed within fourteen (14) days
in the office of the Town Clerk and in the office of the Planning Board and shall be mailed forthwith to
parties of interest, as designated in Section 11 of Chapter 40A, and to each person present at the hearing
who requests that notice be sent to him and states the address to which notice is to be sent.
(f) The period within which final action shall be taken may be extended in writing for a definite period by
mutual consent of the Board of Appeals and the applicant, provided that such written agreement is
recorded with the Town Clerk. In the event the Board of Appeals determines that the evidence presented
to it at the public hearing is inadequate to permit the Board to make a necessary finding or determination,
or to permit the Planning Board the proper amount of time to conduct site plan review or file its report,
instead of denying the application the Board may, in its discretion, adjourn the hearing to a later date to
permit the applicant to submit additional evidence or the Planning Board additional time to file its report,
provided however, that such adjournment shall not extend the applicable deadlines for final action by
the Board unless the deadline is extended to a day certain by mutual consent of the Board and the
applicant.
SECTION 9.05 SPECIAL PERMIT: CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL
(a) A special permit shall be required for all uses and for all exceptions to dimensional regulations which are
designated in this Zoning Ordinance as requiring a special permit before the Inspector of Buildings may
issue a building permit or occupancy permit.
(b) The Board of Appeals shall not approve any such application unless it finds that in its judgment all of the
following conditions are met:
(1) The specific site is an appropriate location for such a use, structure or condition;
(2) The use as developed will not adversely affect the neighborhood;
(3) There will be no nuisance or serious hazard to vehicles or pedestrians;
(4) Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the proper operation of the proposed use.
(c) The decision of the Board of Appeals must be made within ninety (90) days following the public hearing.
Failure to take final action within said ninety (90) days shall be deemed to be a grant of the special permit
unless the deadline is extended in accordance with §9.04(f).
SECTION 9.06 SPECIAL PERMIT CRITERIA FOR I-1 AND I-2 DISTRICTS
109
(a) Applicability: In addition to the conditions described in §9.03, 9.04 and 9.05 special permits for increased
intensity of use above an FAR of 1.0 in the I-1 and I-2 districts shall also be subject to the conditions set
forth in this section as applicable.
(b) Open Space Requirements: Applicants in the I-1 and I-2 Districts shall show that designs have been
prepared indicating that a percentage of the total site area has been set aside for open space. The
method of calculating the required open space shall be as follows: The minimum open space
requirement shall be between twenty percent (20%) and forty percent (40%) of the total site area,
depending on the FAR of the project; the minimum open space requirements shall increase on a directly
proportional basis from FAR of 1.0 to FAR of 2.0. For example, a proposed project with an FAR of 1.5
shall be required to have thirty percent (30%) of the total site area as open space. For the purposes of
this special permit no more than fifty percent (50%) of the wetlands located on the site can be calculated
as part of the required open space. However, projects with a total lot area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less shall be exempted from the open space requirements of this § 9.06(b).
(c) Traffic Safety and Infrastructure Maintenance Fund: Applicants for a special permit for increase
intensity of use in the I-1 and I-2 districts shall be required to make a payment into the Traffic Safety and
Infrastructure Maintenance Fund if the Planning Board determines that the boundaries of the proposed
project are within a half mile radius of an intersection in Watertown with a preexisting level of service
(LOS) of D or lower that accommodates at least three hundred (300) vehicles during either the A.M. or
P.M. peak hour. For the purposes of this section, LOS shall be defined by the National Transportation
Research Board, Highway Capacity Manual (current and future applicable additions); The LOS shall be
measured at the 50th highest design hour (DHVSO) at relevant intersections.
If a finding is made by the Planning Board that the proposed project is within a half mile radius of an
intersection with an LOS of D or below and consistent with the other criteria cited above, the Planning
Board may grant a special permit for increased intensity of use and shall require the applicant to make
a payment into the Traffic Safety and Infrastructure Maintenance Fund. Said payment shall be required
only for that portion of the project that exceeds the FAR of 1.0.
The rate of contribution shall be five dollars ($5.00) per square foot of applicable gross floor area. Funds
contributed by an applicant for a special permit shall be spent on Town services related to the proposed
development and/or in the immediate geographical area which is most directly impacted by the proposed
project, said services shall include, but shall not be limited to, land takings for public right of way
improvements; road widenings; reconfiguration of intersections, access lanes, traffic islands; and similar
improvements.
Payments into the Fund shall be made in accordance with a schedule approved by the Planning Board:
The amount of the initial payment shall be determined by the Planning Board at the time of the granting
of the Special Permit, but shall not exceed one-third of the total payment. At the time of the granting of
the special permit the applicant shall provide an irrevocable letter of credit for the balance. If the applicant
fails to make any scheduled payments, the Planning Board may draw upon the Letter of Credit. The
entire amount shall be paid prior to the issuance of the permanent occupancy permit. If the permanent
occupancy permit is never issued, all amounts, together with any accrued interest thereon, shall be
returned to the applicant. The applicant may, at any time, make a lump sum payment of the entire
required payment. All payments made into the Fund shall be expended within a ten (10) year period
and in accordance with the criteria established in this subsection. Funds unexpended after ten (10)
years shall be returned to the applicant or assignees with all accrued interest.
(d) Residential Use and Hotel Use. In the I-2 zone applicants for a special permit for an increased intensity
of use shall be permitted to include residential uses on floors above the ground floor if said residential
use has separate and distinct points of access from all other uses and that said residential use does
not comprise more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross floor area of the building, excluding all
space below grade.
SECTION 9.07 SPECIAL PERMIT CRITERIA FOR I-3 DISTRICT
(a) Commercial Uses: Applicants for a special permit for mixed-use development in the I-3 district shall be
110
permitted to use up to twenty percent (20%) of the total gross floor area for general retail or service
purposes, provided, however, that no rive-in facility of any kind is permitted. The commercial space
shall be limited to the first floor but may be located in one or more buildings located on the Lot.
SECTION 9.08 SPECIAL PERMIT CRITERIA FOR I-3 DISTRICT - LOT SIZE
(a) General: In addition to the conditions described in §9.03, 9.04 and 9.05, special permits for residential
use in the Industrial 3 District shall be subject to the requirements set forth in subsections (b) through (d)
below.
(b) Open Space Requirements: For special permit projects on lots less than twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet, the open space requirements of the R.75 district shall apply; for projects between twenty
thousand (20,000) and eighty thousand (80,000) square feet, the requirements of the R1.2 district shall
apply and for projects over eighty thousand (80,000) square feet, the requirements of the R1.2 district
shall also apply, subject to the provisions of § 5.05(h). Also, for purposes of this special permit, no more
than fifty percent (50%) of the wetlands located on the site may be calculated as part of the required
open space.
(c) Density Requirements: Parcels less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet may have a maximum
FAR of 0.75; parcels between twenty thousand (20,000) and eighty thousand (80,000) square feet may
have a maximum FAR of 1.2; and parcels over eighty thousand (80,000) square feet may have a
maximum FAR of 2.0.
(d) Minimum Setbacks: For special permit projects on lots less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet,
the setback requirements of the R.75 district shall apply; for lots between twenty thousand (20,000) and
eighty thousand (80,000) square feet the setbacks of the R1.2 district shall apply; for lots over eighty
thousand (80,000) square feet the setbacks of the I-1 district shall apply, except that the front yard
setback shall not be less than 10 feet or more than 40 feet and that only drop off, delivery, handicapped
or emergency service parking spaces may be provided in the front of the building. Further, the first 10
feet of the required setback from the public right of way into the lot shall be landscaped with plant
materials.
(e) Mixed use Development: For developments containing commercial uses open to the public and in
accordance with §9.07(a) the minimum setbacks shall be consistent with the setbacks required in the I-
1 District, except that the front yard setback shall not be less than 10 feet as set forth in §5.04(s).
A Mixed Use development project that has received a Special Permit pursuant to §5.01(1)(k)(2) may be
constructed in accordance with the dimensions, or variations there from, allowed by §5.05(f) without
obtaining a separate Special Permit under §5.05(f).
SECTION 9.09 LIMITED APPROVAL OF SPECIAL PERMIT
In approving a special permit, the Board of Appeals may attach such conditions and safeguards as are deemed
necessary to protect the district and the Town. No such limited or conditional special permit shall take effect
until such notice is recorded in the Middlesex South Registry of Deeds. Said conditions and safeguards shall
also be made part of the building permit. They may include but are not limited to the following:
(a) Requirement of street, side or rear yards greater than the minimum required by this Zoning Ordinance.
(b) Requirement of screening of parking areas or other parts of the premises from adjoining premises or
from the street, by walls, fences, planting or other devices as specified by the Board of Appeals;
(c) Modification of the exterior features or appearances of the structure;
(d) Limitation of size, number of occupants, method or time of operation, or extent of facilities;
(e) Regulation of number, design and location of access drives or other traffic features;
111
(f) Requirement of off-street parking or other special features beyond the minimum required by this Zoning
Ordinance or other applicable Ordinances.
SECTION 9.10 WITHDRAWAL OF LIMITED SPECIAL PERMIT
The Board of Appeals may, after a hearing and proof of violation of any limitations or conditions in the special
permit or any misuse of the terms of the permit, withdraw the same, after which the use shall be discontinued.
SECTION 9.11 SPECIAL PERMIT FOR TEMPORARY STRUCTURES
(a) The Board of Appeals may authorize issuance of permits, subject to proper conditions to protect the
district for temporary structures and uses for development purposes.
(b) No such permit shall be for more than an one-year period, subject to renewal as needed for the special
purposes.
(c) Upon expiration of such permit, the structure shall be removed and the use cease.
SECTION 9.12 SPECIAL PERMIT APPROVAL OF CERTAIN SITE PLANS
In the case of two or more buildings on one site designed and intended to remain under the same ownership
and management, the Board of Appeals may, after examination of the standards listed in §9.03(c), grant a special
permit as provided in §9.04 approving the site plan so long as it is demonstrated that the design will result in
standards of light, air, safety or circulation and amenity, both on the site and in the neighborhood, which are no
lower than would result from the application of required dimensional and parking standards to each building
separately.
SECTION 9.13 LAPSE OF SPECIAL PERMIT
A special permit granted under § 9.04 shall lapse one year from the grant thereof if substantial use thereof has
not sooner commenced except for good cause, or, in the case of a permit for construction, if the construction
has not begun by such date except for good cause.
SECTION 9.14 VARIANCES
(a) Where a building or occupancy permit is not applied for or is refused because of nonconformance to the
terms of this Ordinance, the applicant may apply or appeal to the Board of Appeals for the authorization
of a variance, subject to the provisions of §9.15 of this Zoning Ordinance.
(b) Each application or appeal for a variance from the specific terms of this Zoning Ordinance shall include
a written statement justifying the appeal on the basis that all of the following conditions are met, as
required by Chapter 40A, Section 10 of the General Laws of Massachusetts.
(1) The variance is sought because of circumstances relating to the soil conditions, shape, or
topography of such land or structures, and especially affecting such land or structures but not
affecting generally the zoning district in which it is located.
(2) Literal enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance would involve a substantial hardship, financial or other,
to the appellant.
(3) Desirable relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good.
(4) Desirable relief may be granted without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent of this
Zoning Ordinance.
112
SECTION 9.15 CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL OF A VARIANCE
(a) Before a variance may be authorized, the Board of Appeals shall, as required by Chapter 40A, Section
10 of the General Laws of Massachusetts, find that all of the conditions of said section, as summarized
in §9.14(b) of this Zoning Ordinance have been met.
(b) The Board of Appeals shall impose such limitations on time and use or such other conditions as it may
deem desirable to protect the public interest and to ensure that the variance granted is not greater in
degree or duration than is justified by the hardship to be relieved.
The Board of Appeals shall not impose conditions, safeguards or limitations based upon the continued
ownership of the land or structures to which the variance pertains by the applicant, petitioner or any
owner.
(c) The Board of Appeals shall record its findings regarding each of the conditions in Paragraphs (a) and
(b) of this §9.15.
(c) Variances granted prior to the effective date of any provision of this Zoning Ordinance but limited in time
may be extended on the same terms and conditions that were in effect for such variance upon said
effective date.
(d) The decision of the Board of Appeals shall be made within one hundred (100) days after the date of filing
with the Town Clerk of an application for a variance. Failure of the Board of Appeals to act within one
hundred (100) days shall be deemed to be a grant of the petition, unless the deadline is extended in
accordance with §9.04(f).
SECTION 9.16 LAPSE OF VARIANCE
If the rights authorized by a variance are not exercised within one (1) year of the date of grant of such variance
they shall lapse and may not be re-established except after notice and a new hearing under §9.04.
SECTION 9.17 SPECIAL PERMITS AND VARIANCES: EFFECTIVE DATES
No variance or special permit, or any extension or notification or renewal thereof, shall take effect until a copy of
the decision bearing the certification of the Town Clerk that twenty (20) days have elapsed and no appeal has
been filed or that if such appeal has been filed, that it has been dismissed or denied, is recorded in the registry
of deeds for the southern district of Middlesex County and indexed in the grantor index under the name of the
owner of record or is recorded and noted on the owner's certificate of title.
SECTION 9.18 SPECIAL PERMITS AND VARIANCES; WITHDRAWAL WITHOUT PREJUDICE;
RECONSIDERATION
(a) Any application for a variance or special permit which has been transmitted to the Board of Appeals may
be withdrawn by the petitioner without prejudice prior to the publication of notice of a public hearing
thereon, but thereafter may be withdrawn without prejudice only with the approval of the Board of
Appeals.
(b) No application for a special permit or a variance which has been unfavorably acted on by the Board of
Appeals shall be reconsidered on its merits within two (2) years of such action, unless the Board of
Appeals finds, by an affirmative vote of four of its five members , specific and material changes in the
conditions upon which previous unfavorable action was based, and describes such changes in the
records of its proceedings, and unless all but one of the members of the Planning Board consents thereto
and after notice is given to parties in interest of the time and place of proceedings when the question of
such consent will be considered.
113
SECTION 9.19 RIGHT OF APPEAL
(a) Any person aggrieved by the order or decision of the Inspector of Buildings or the Zoning Enforcement
Officer may appeal to the Board of Appeals under the provisions of Chapter 40A, Sections 8, 13, 15, 16,
and 17 and amendments thereto of the General Laws.
(b) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Appeals or of any municipal officer or board, may
appeal to the Superior Court within twenty (20) days after the decision has been filed in the office of the
Town Clerk under the provisions of Chapter 40A, §17 of the General Laws of Massachusetts.
SECTION 9.20 AMENDMENTS TO ZONING ORDINANCE
(a) This Zoning Ordinance may be amended from time to time by vote of the Town Council in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 40A, §5 of the General Laws of Massachusetts.
(b) The Town Council shall within fourteen (14) days of receipt of such proposed Zoning Ordinance submit
it to the Planning Board for review.
(c) No amendment to this Zoning Ordinance shall be adopted until after the Planning Board has held a
public hearing thereon and has submitted a final report with its recommendations to the Town Council
or until twenty-one (21) days shall have elapsed after such hearing without the submission of such a
report.
(d) Construction or operations under a building permit or special permit shall conform to any subsequent
amendment of this Zoning Ordinance unless the use or construction is commenced within six (6) months
after the issuance of the permit and in cases involving construction is continued through to completion
as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable.
(e) Except as provided in Chapter 40A, Section 6, of the General Laws of Massachusetts amendments to
this Zoning Ordinance shall not apply to structures or uses lawfully begun, or to a building or special
permit issued before the first publication of notice of the public hearing on such ordinance required by
Article IX, but shall apply to any change or substantial extension of such a use, to a building or special
permit issued after the first notice of said public hearing, to any reconstruction, extension, or structural
change of such structure and to any alteration of structure begun after the first notice of said public
hearing to provide for its use for a substantially greater extent except where alteration, reconstruction,
extension or structural change to a single or two-family residential structure does not increase the nonconforming
nature or said structure.
SECTION 9.21 PUBLIC HEARINGS FOR AMENDMENTS
(a) It shall be the duty of the Planning Board to hold public hearings on any proposed amendments to this
Zoning Ordinance within sixty-five (65) days after the proposed zoning amendment is submitted to the
Planning Board by the Town Council.
(b) Adoption or change of any provision of the Zoning Ordinance may be initiated by submission to the
Town Council of a proposed amendment to the Zoning Ordinance by the Town Council, Board of
Appeals, by an individual owning land to be affected by change or adoption, by ten registered voters, by
the Planning Board, a regional planning agency, or other method as provided by the Town Charter.
(c) If the Town Council fails to vote to adopt any proposed amendment to the Zoning Ordinance within ninety
(90) days after the Town Council’s public hearing, no action shall be taken thereon until after a
subsequent public hearing is held with notice and report as provided in §9.20.
114
SECTION 9.22 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS FOR AMENDMENTS
Notice of the time, place and subject matter of the public hearing to be held by the Planning Board on any
proposed amendment to the Zoning Ordinance shall be given as follows:
(a) By publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town once in each of two successive weeks,
the first publication being not less than fourteen (14) days before the day of such hearing; and by posting
such notice in a conspicuous place in the Town Hall for a period of not less than fourteen (14) days
before the day of said hearing.
(b) By regular mail, to the owners of all property sharing a common property line with the property proposed
to be rezoned, as well as those deemed to be affected, to be mailed not less than ten (10) days before
the hearing.
(c) Notice of the public hearing to be held by the Planning Board shall also be sent by mail, postage prepaid
to the Department of Community Affairs, the Metropolitan Area Planning Council and to the planning
boards of all the abutting cities and towns.
(d) A separate, conspicuous statement shall be included with property tax bills sent to nonresident property
owners, stating that notice of hearings under this section shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any
such owner who files an annual request for such notice with the Town Clerk no later than January first,
and pays a fee of one (1) dollar.
(e) In cases involving boundary or use changes within a district, notice shall be sent to any such
nonresidential property owner who has filed such request with the Town Clerk and whose property lies
in the district where the change is sought.
(f) All costs incurred in connection with the notice requirements set forth in subsections (a) through (e)
above shall be borne by the person or persons proposing the amendment to the Zoning Ordinance.
115
ARTICLE X
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
______________________________________________________________________________
10.00 Provision for Board 10.01 Validity
of Appeals 10.02 Effective Date
__________________________________________________________________________
SECTION 10.00 PROVISION FOR BOARD OF APPEALS
(a) The Board of Appeals shall consist of five (5) members and two (2) alternate members to be appointed
by the Town Manager, subject to the approval of the Town Council.
(b) One member shall be appointed each year for a term of five (5) years, and one alternate member shall
be appointed each year for a term of two (2) years. Additional members and alternate members may be
appointed during any one year to fill vacancies and serve the unexpired terms. The terms shall be so
arranged that the terms of one member and one alternate member shall expire each year.
(c) The Board of Appeals in existence up to the date of adoption of this Zoning Ordinance shall be deemed
to continue in office for the balance of the terms to which originally appointed.
(d) The Board of Appeals shall exercise its powers as granted in Chapter 40A, Section 14 of the General
Laws of Massachusetts.
SECTION 10.01 VALIDITY
(a) The invalidity of any section or provision of this Zoning Ordinance shall not render invalid any other
section or provision of this Zoning Ordinance.
(b) In general this Zoning Ordinance is supplementary to other ordinances affecting the use and dimensions
of buildings, structures and premises. Where this Zoning Ordinance imposes greater restrictions than
that imposed by other ordinances, the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall control.
(c) Nothing in this Zoning Ordinance shall be construed as establishing regulations or restrictions which are
not uniform for each class or kind of buildings, structures or land, and for each class or kind of use in
each district.
SECTION 10.02 EFFECTIVE DATE
(a) The adoption of this Zoning Ordinance shall have the force and effect of repealing all presently existing
Zoning Ordinances and regulations and amendments thereto, heretofore adopted by the Town of
Watertown. This Zoning Ordinance and the repeal of all presently existing Zoning Ordinances and
regulations heretofore in force shall not affect any act done, any right accrued or any penalty or liability
incurred or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time this Zoning Ordinance becomes
effective.
(b) The effective date of the regulations and restrictions of this Zoning Ordinance and of the establishment
of the respective districts shall be deemed to be February 16, 1989. The date when each such
amendment or change was made is shown by an appendix to this Zoning Ordinance on file in the office
of the Town Clerk.
116
WATERTOWN PLANNING BOARD MEMBERS
Jeffrey Brown., Chairman
Janet Buck
Jason Cohen
Gary Shaw
Payson Whitney
Attest: Town Clerk
117
APPENDIX I
LEGISLATIVE CHRONOLOGY
Watertown Zoning By-Law/Ordinance
Date of Date of
Town Meeting Legal Notice
Action Approval
First Enactment of Zoning By-Law 3/29/37 3/22/37
Highland Avenue Down zoning 10/18/37 10/11/37
Langdon Avenue Down zoning 3/21/38 3/14/38
Comprehensive By-Law Revision 11/29/48 11/14/48
Lexington Street-New Apartment Zone 11/29/48 11/14/48
Watertown Street-New Business Zone 11/29/48 11/14/48
Comprehensive By-Law Revision 6/15/64 7/30/64
(Current Use Districts Introduced) (effective date)
Dimensional Changes-to Accessory Uses,
Non-conforming Uses, Exceptions, Lot
Coverage, Lot Size 3/29/65 2/25/65
Revisions to Table of Uses-Cemetery,
Crematory 3/29/65 2/25/65
Revisions to Variance Review Proc. 3/29/65 2/25/65
Soil Removal 3/29/65 2/25/65
Winter Street Rezoning-(to A3) 3/29/65 2/25/65
Main Street Rezoning (LB to I) 3/29/65 2/25/65
Waverly Avenue Rezoning (LB to T) 3/29/65 2/25/65
Spring Street Rezoning (to A3) 3/29/65 2/25/65
Revision of Automotive Requirements
for Row House & Apartment Use 4/11/66 2/26/66
New Apartment Zone - A25 4/11/66 2/26/66
Coolidge Avenue Rezoning (I to A25) 4/11/66 2/26/66
Pleasant Street Rezoning (T to I) 4/11/66 2/26/66
118
Date of Date of
Town Mtg/Council Legal Notice
Action Approval
New Apartment Zone - A8 12/4/67 11/18/67
Waverly Avenue Rezoning (to A8) 12/4/67 11/18/67
Revision of Automotive Requirements 12/4/67 11/18/67
(Elderly Housing)
Dimensional Changes-Minimum Lot Size/
Dwelling Unit 4/4-4/25/68 2/24/68
New multiple Use (M) Zone 4/5/71 2/28/71
Coolidge Avenue Rezoning (to M) 4/5/71 2/28/71
New A-20 Zone 4/5/71 2/28/71
Spring, Summer St Rezoning (to A20) 4/5/71 2/28/71
Addition to Table of Use (Cemetery) 5/24/71 2/28/71
New Multi-use Arsenal Zone (MA) 5/5/75 4/17/75
(Rezoning of Arsenal)
Comprehensive By-Law Revisions 11/14/77 10/20/77
Floodplain Ordinance 5/21/79 4/19/79
Revisions to Table of Uses 5/21/79 4/19/79
(Auto Body Shops, Condominium
Deleted, Exemption of Religious/
Educational Uses)
New Definitions - Sign 5/21/79 4/19/79
Dimensional Changes 5/21/79 4/19/79
(Row House & T Zone)
Revision of Automotive Requirements 5/21/79 4/19/79
(Parking, Row & Apartment House)
Site Plan Review Process 5/21/79 4/19/79
King Street Rezoning (S6 to T) 5/29/79 4/19/79
Ashland Street Rezoning (T to LB) 5/29/79 4/19/79
Charter Reform 7/1/81
119
Date of Date of
Town Mtg/Council Legal Notice
Action Approval
Change of Government to City Form 7/1/81
Comprehensive Ordinance Revisions -
Sec. 7, Signage 8/10/82 6/30/82
New Definitions-Motor Vehicle Establishments,
Signs 8/10/82 6/30/82
Floodplain District Amendments 8/10/82 6/30/82
Revisions to Table of Uses 8/10/82 6/30/82
(Warehouses, Motor Vehicle Repair)
Dimensional Changes-Height Limits 8/10/82 6/30/82
Exceptions to Dimensional Regulations 12/14/82 10/20/82
Non-Conforming Lots
Lot Width Definition 2/12/85 11/29/84
Front Yard Parking 4/9/85 1/31/85
Section 4.31 (c) 7/9/85 3/28/85
Section 5.2(j) Typographical
Correction 9/18/85
Section 5.3 Typographical
Correction 10/23/85
Section 5.2(j)(k) Typographical
Correction 11/14/85
Section 5.30 Table of Dimensional Reg 3/11/86 1/17/86
Section 5.0(f) 3/11/86 1/17/86
Section 6.11(e) 3/11/86 1/17/86
Section 9.03 3/11/86 1/17/86
Section 9.03(c)2. 3/11/86 1/17/86
Section 5.31(j)(l) 3/11/86 1/17/86
Section 6.12 4/22/86 2/3/86
120
Date of Date of
Town Council Legal Notice
Action Approval
Section 6.11(e) 4/22/86 2/3/86
Section 10.3(3) 5/1/86 7/8/86
Section 5.01 10/14/86 8/5/86
Section 5.1.1(h) 12/9/86 10/9/86
Section 5.1.3(a) 12/9/86 10/9/86
Section 5.2(h) 12/9/86 10/9/86
Section 6.10(h) 12/9/86 10/9/86
Section 6.10(i) 12/9/86 10/9/86
Section 6.30 12/9/86 10/9/86
Section 2.30 12/9/86 10/9/86
Section 5.31(i) 12/9/86 10/9/86
Section 5.31(p) 12/9/86 10/9/86
Section 9.03(a) 12/9/86 10/9/86
Section 10.3(4) 3/24/87 2/27/87
Section 5.1.3(e) 5/12/87 4/2/87
Section 5.1.5(f) 5/12/87 4/2/87
Section 9.03(a) 6/9/87 4/30/87
Section 9.03(b) 6/9/87 4/30/87
Section 9.00(a)(b)(c)(d) 7/14/87 5/29/87
Section 9.01(a) 7/14/87 5/29/87
Section 9.02(a) 7/14/87 5/29/87
170-174 Main St. Rezoning (to CB) 10/27/87 10/9/87
Section 4.30 12/22/87 11/27/87
Section 4.31 12/22/87 11/27/87
Section 4.32 12/22/87 11/27/87
121
Date of Date of
Town Council Legal Notice
Action Approval
Section 4.33 12/22/87 11/27/87
Section 10.0(a) 1/26/88 11/27/87
Section 10.0(b) 1/26/88 11/27/87
Section 6.11(e) 2/23/88 1/2/88
Section 6.11(f) 3/10/88
Section 6.11(g) 3/10/88
Section 6.11(h) 3/10/88
Section 6.11(i) 3/10/88
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance
Revision (Growth Management Plan) 5/23/89 2/16/89
Section 5.09 9/26/89 8/31/89
Section 6.02(j) 9/26/89 8/31/89
Zoning Map - Assessor's Map Section 9 9/26/89 8/31/89
Block 6 Lots 7,8,10,11,12,49,50,51,52,53,54
Zoning Map - Assessor's Map Section 1 9/26/89 8/31/89
Block 6, Lot 7
Section 7.07(e) 9/26/89 8/31/89
Section 2.30 10/11/89 8/31/89
Section 5.02 10/11/89 8/31/89
Section 4.03(d) 8/21/90 7/25/90
Zoning Map - 19&21 Church Hill Lane 5/28/91 3/ 6/91
Section 5.01(3)(l) 1/28/92 12/4/91
Zoning Map - 7-9 Chester Street 1/28/92 12/4/91
Zoning Map - 8-10 Chester Street 1/28/92 12/4/91
Zoning Map - 7 Parker Street 1/28/92 12/4/91
Zoning Map - 8 Parker Street 1/28/92 12/4/91
122
Date of Date of
Town Council Legal Notice
Action Approval
Zoning Map - 6-8 Phillips Street 1/28/92 12/4/91
Section 5.10 Accessory Apartment 6/23/92 4/1/92
Zoning Map - 123 Water Street 2/23/93 1/27/93
Section 9.04(c) 2/23/93 1/27/93
Zoning Map - 700 Pleasant Street 5/25/93 5/5/93
Section 5.10(c) 10/26/93 10/7/93
Section 3.01(d) 11/23/93 11/4/93
Section 5.06(c)(2)(e) 11/23/93 11/4/93
Section 5.11 11/23/93 11/4/93
Zoning Map - 700 Pleasant Street 11/23/93 11/4/93
Section 5.02 3/ 8/94 2/17/94
Zoning Map - Hillside Road 3/22/94 2/17/94
Section 2.00 9/27/94 9/8/94
Section 5.01 9/27/94 9/8/94
Section 5.03 9/27/94 9/8/94
Zoning Map - 7-9 Irma Ave 2/14/95 1/26/95
Zoning Map - 75 Galen St 2/14/95 1/26/95
Zoning Map - 55-57 Pleasant St 2/14/95 1/26/95
Section 5.11(e) 2/14/95 1/26/95
Section 5.02(q) 11/14/95 8/30/95
Zoning Map - 43 Waltham St 1/9/96 11/29/95
Section 2.33 10/8/96 9/18/96
Section 4.06(b) 10/8/96 9/18/96
Section 5.01(3)(d) 10/8/96 9/18/96
Section 5.02(f) 10/8/96 9/18/96
123
Date of Date of
Town Council Legal Notice
Action Approval
Section 5.02(l) 10/8/96 9/18/96
Section 5.02(n) 10/8/96 9/18/96
Section 5.01(2)(a) 10/8/96 9/18/96
Section 5.03(1) 10/8/96 9/18/96
Section 5.04 10/8/96 9/18/96
Section 5.05(s) 10/8/96 9/18/96
Section 6.02(j) 10/8/96 9/18/96
Section 7.06(c) 10/8/96 9/18/96
Section 7.09 10/8/96 9/18/96
Zoning Map - 267-269 Boylston St 10/8/96 9/18/96
Zoning Map - 279-283 Mt.Auburn St 10/8/96 9/18/96
Zoning Map - 12-14,18,24,26-28,34, 10/8/96 9/18/96
38-40 Marshall St
Zoning Map - 16 Dexter Ave 10/8/96 9/18/96
Zoning Map - 11,13,16,17,19,21,22,23,38-40, 10/8/96 9/18/96
42-44,47,53,57,63,67,73-75 Waltham St
Zoning Map - 36-38 Brandley Rd 10/8/96 9/18/96
Section 2.03 4/29/97 3/20/97
Section 3.01(d) 4/29/97 3/20/97
Section 5.12 4/29/97 3/20/97
Zoning Map-Lots 1,8,9 of Block 11,Section 10 4/29/97 3/20/97
(First Baptist Church & Rectory)
Section 5.13 9/23/97 9/11/97
Section 6.07 3/10/98 1/15/98
Section 9.03 3/10/98 1/15/98
Section 2.33 6/22/99 5/5/99
124
Date of Date of
Town Council Legal Notice
Action Approval
Section 2.71 6/22/99 5/5/99
Section 5.01(1)(k) 6/22/99 5/5/99
Section 5.01(3)(m) 6/22/99 5/5/99
Zoning Map – 7 French St 6/22/99 5/5/99
Zoning Map – 3-5 Ladd St 6/22/99 5/5/99
Zoning Map – 116 Nichols Ave 6/22/99 5/5/99
Zoning Map – 6-8, 0, 12, 15 Melendy Ave 6/22/99 5/5/99
Zoning Map – 107-109, 111-115 Waverley Ave 6/22/99 5/5/99
Zoning Map – 9-17 Quirk St 6/22/99 5/5/99
Zoning Map – 80-82, 86-88, 112, 114 Forest St 6/22/99 5/5/99
Zoning Map—Change to OSC land known as 7/27/99 6/27/99
the Watertown Branch of the B&M Railroad
Section 5.03(6) 12/30/99 11/19/99
Section 5.05 4/11/00 3/23/00
Section 5.07 4/11/00 3/23/00
Section 5.08 4/11/00 3/23/00
Section 9.07 4/11/00 3/23/00
Section 2.78 5/23/00 5/4/00
Section 4.10 5/23/00 5/4/00
Section 5.14 5/23/00 5/4/00
Section 5.04 5/23/00 5/4/00
Section 5.05(p) 5/23/00 5/4/00
Section 5.08(d)(2) 5/23/00 5/4/00
Section 5.08(e)(2)(3) 5/23/00 5/4/00
Section 5.14(1) 8/8/00 7/20/00
Section 5.10(c) 8/8/00 7/20/00
Section 5.10(c)(1) 12/12/00 11/23/00
Zoning Map – Lots 1, 8, 9 of Block 11 Section 10 12/11/01 11/22/01
(First Baptist Church & Rectory)
Section 5.13 (d)(3) 10/27/02 10/4/02
Zoning Map – Lot 19A 4/22/03 4/4/03
(684 Mt.Auburn Street)
Zoning Map – Lot 18B 4/22/03 4/4/03
(694 Mt.Auburn St)
Zoning Map – Lots 175 & 166 4/22/03 4/4/03
(16&18&22 Prentiss Street)
Section 5.15 8/10/04 7/23/04
Zoning Map Section 11, Block 26 8/10/04 7/23/04
(St.Theresa Church/248 School St)
125
Date of Date of
Town Council Legal Notice
Action Approval
Section 1.00 12/13/05 10/7/05
Section 2.00
Section 2.01.1
Section 2.09.1
Section 2.14
Section 2.16
Section 2.17
Section 2.20
Section 2.22
Section 2.24
Section 2.29
Section 2.36
Section 2.37
Section 2.40
Section 2.44.1
Section 2.45
Section 2.46
Section 2.48
Section 2.49
Section 2.54
Section 2.60
Section 2.71
Section 2.72
Section 2.74
Section 2.81
Section 5.01
Section 5.03
Section 5.04
Section 5.05
Section 2.04 3/28/06 3/10/06
Section 2.16
Section 2.35.1
Section 2.49.1
Section 2.64
Section 2.65.2
Section 2.69
Section 2.74
Section 2.79
Section 2.80
Section 4.01
Section 4.03
Section 4.06
Section 4.11
Section 5.00
Section 5.01
Section 5.03
Section 5.04
Section 5.05
Section 9.07
Section 9.08
126
Date of Date of
Town Council Legal Notice
Action Approval
Section 2.62 5/8/07 4/24/07Section 2.71
Section 4.01
Section 4.03
Section 4.11
Section 4.13
Section 5.03
Section 5.04
Section 5.05
Section 5.08
Section 5.10
Section 5.13
Section 6.01
Section 6.02
Section 7.00
Section 7.01
Section 7.02
Section 7.03
Section 7.04
Section 7.05
Section 7.06
Section 9.06
Section 5.01.1(j) 11/13/07 10/19/07
Section 5.07
Section 9.06(d)
Section 5.16 PSCD 7/8/2008 6/20/08
Section 5.01.3(c) 4/13/10 3/26/10
Section 5.03
Section 5.06 6/1/10 5/13/10
Section 2.00 10/26/10 10/8/10
Section 2.18
Section 5.00
Section 5.01
Section 5.03
Section 5.07
Section 7.03(d)(1)
Section 7.06
Section 9.03
Section 2.50 12/06/11 11/18/11
Section 5.01.2.h
Section 5.03 (7)
Section 5.07.c.1
Section 6.02
Section 5.01.1.i 2/11/14 01/24/14
Section 5.03(12)
127
Date of Date of
Town Council Legal Notice
Action Approval
Section 6.01(b); Section 6.02(n); Section 6.03; Section 6.04
Section 8.04 & Section 5.01.5.k 7/15/14 06/27/14
Section 9.03
Section 5.07 10/14/14 9/26/14
Section 7.11 (Hotel/Motel Signage) 4/7/15 3/20/15
Section 5.12 (AODD) 6/08/15 5/22/15
Design Standards 6/30/15 6/12/15
Article II, Definitions; New Sections 2.34; 2.42; 2.55
Article IV, General Use and Dimensional Regulations; Sections 4.10; 4.11(a) and 4.11(b)
Article V, Tables of District Regulations; Sections 5.03(2); 5.03(7); 5.04; 5.05(f); 5.05(k); 5.04(s) & 5.05(n)
Article VI, Automotive and Bicycle Parking Requirements; Sections 6.01(b); 6.01(e); 6.01(f); 6.01(g); 6.02(a);
6.02(k) and 6.07(a.1)
Article VII, Signs and Illumination; Sections 7.01(h); 7.01(j); 7.01(k); 7.03(a.1); 7.03(a.5); 7.03(b.1); 7.03(b.2);
7.03(b.4); 7.03(d.2); 7.03(g.3); 7.06(b) and 7.06(e)
Article IX, Enforcement and Application Procedures; Sections 9.03(c.7) and 9.08(e)
New Sections:
Article IV, General Use and Dimensional Regulations; 4.11(d); 4.11(e) and 4.15
Article V, Tables of District Regulations; Sections 5.03(12); 5.05(w) and 5.17
Article VI, Automotive and Bicycle Parking Requirements; 6.01(i) and 6.01(j)
Article VII, Signs and Illumination; Sections 7.01(e); 7.01(p); 7.01(q); 7.06(h); 7.12 and 7.13
Article IX, Enforcement and Application Procedures; Sections 9.03(a) and 9.03(d)
PSCD Amendments: 8/18/2015 7/31/2015
Zoning Map –PSCD-1, 2, & 3, OSC, T
Section 5.16 PSCD
Section 5.01
Section 5.03 note (14)
Section 5.04
Section 5.05 note (u) & (v)
RMUD Amendments: 3/2/2016 2/12/2016
Zoning Map – Add RMUD Zoning District
Article II, Definitions; Sections 2.61 (Open Space) & add Section 2.82 (TDM)
Article III, Establishment of Zoning Districts, Section 3.01(d)
Article IV, General Use and Dimensional Regulations; Sections 4.11(e)
Article V, Tables of District Regulations; Sections 5.01; 5.02; 5.03(8); 5.04; 5.05(f); 5.05(i);
5.05(n); & 5.05(p); add Sections 5.03 (15); 5.05(w); & Sections 5.18 Regional Mixed Use District
Article VI; Automotive and Bicycle Parking Requirements; Sections 6.02(n)
Article VII; Signs and Illumination; Sections 7.03(a.1); 7.03(b.2); 7.03(b.3); 7.03(b.4); 7.03(c.3);
7.05; 7.05(b); 7.06(b); 7.06(c); 7.06(e); 7.06(g); 7.06(h) & add: Section 7.07 Sign Special Permit
Article IX, Enforcement and Application Procedures; Sections 9.03 (a) & 9.03(c.7)
Article IX, Section 9.03 (Site Plan Review) 6/14/2016 5/27/2016
Article V Section 5.03(6) & 5.05(r)
Article IX, Section 9.21(c) (Public Hearings)
Affordable Housing
Article V, §5.07, & §5.08 & Article IX §9.07 12/13/2016 11/25/2016
128
Date of Date of
Town Council Legal Notice
Action Approval
Article V, §5.01 Table of Use – Assisted Living 7/11/2017 6/23/2017
Article VI §6.01 Required Off-Street Parking 1/9/2018 12/22/2017
Marijuana - Article V & VIII - §8.04 Marijuana 11/27/2018 9/21/2018
LEED - §9.03 Site Plan Review 11/27/2018 9/21/2018
Solar Energy Systems - §9.03 & new §8.05 11/27/2018 9/21/2018
Affordable Assisted Living §2.05 & § 5.07 12/11/2018 9/21/2018
89
ARTICLE VII
SIGNS AND ILLUMINATION
______________________________________________________________________________
7.00 Intent and Purpose 7.06 Signs in NB, LB, CB, RMUD & PSCD Districts
7.01 Definition of Terms 7.07 Sign Special Permit
7.02 Application and Procedure 7.08 Permitted Illumination
7.03 Signs in All Districts 7.09 Non-Conformance
7.04 Signs in S-10, S-6, SC, 7.10 Watertown Square Design Overlay District
CR, T and OSC Districts 7.11 Hotel and Motel Signs
7.05 Signs in R.75, R1.2, & for 7.12 Exterior Lighting Standards
Residential Uses in the I-3 & 7.13 Exterior Lighting Technical Submittals
RMUD Districts
______________________________________________________________________________
SECTION 7.00 INTENT AND PURPOSE
A sign is a unique type of accessory structure, which because of its potential impact on adjacent lots and on
adjacent public street and land, warrants the regulation contained in this Zoning Ordinance. It is recognized
that signs perform important functions in communicating messages which are essential for public safety and
general welfare, provide information about types of goods and services available at permitted uses, and
provide orientation. Therefore, it is hereby found and declared that regulation of signs is necessary to promote
the health, safety and general welfare by:
(a) lessening hazards to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
(b) preventing unsightly and detrimental development which is a potential blighting influence upon
residential, institutional, public business and industrial uses, and detrimental to property value;
(c) preventing signs from becoming so excessive in number, size, intensity, brilliance, or impact that they
obscure or distract from 1) public signs essential to the orderly and safe movements of goods and
persons in the Town, or 2) one another to the detriment of all concerned;
(d) facilitating easy recognition and immediate legibility of permitted signs; and
(e) securing certain fundamentals of good design for the Town.
The provisions of this article are complementary to, and shall not be construed as inconsistent with, or in
contravention of, Sections 29 to 33 of Chapter 93 of the General Laws of Massachusetts.
SECTION 7.01 DEFINITION OF TERMS
(a) Accessory sign: any sign relating to business, service, or products including national brand products,
supplied on the premises on which the sign is located.
(b) Animated or Flashing Sign: any sign or attention-catching device which in part or whole moves or
flashes or contains traveling lights or gives the impression of any movement or flashing whether such
effect is generated by natural or artificial forces.
(c) Area, Flood, or Up-Lighting: Area, Flood Light: Any luminaire that is designed to direct the output of a
lamp in a specific single direction utilizing reflective elements external to the lamp. Such luminaires
may be manufactured with or without mounting hardware that can be swiveled, and are not equipped
to be aimed straight down. Up-Lighting - Any luminaire that is aimed or capable of being aimed above
the horizontal plane. Excluded from the definition of Up-Lighting is any luminaire aimed upwards into
an enclosed space.
90
(d) Banner Sign: any piece(s) of fabric displaying a distinctive insignia, identifying wording and/or
symbolic representation of a business, service or activity.
(e) Directional Sign: any sign whose only purpose is to direct traffic to proper entrance or exit.
(f) Emergency Egress Lighting: Luminaires designed to illuminate emergency egress doors and where
such luminaires are connected to and activated by the emergency activation/fire alarm system.
(g) Freestanding Sign: Any sign not attached to a building or other improvement but instead permanently
erected upon or standing in the ground and usually supported from the ground by one or more poles,
columns, uprights, braces or cement anchors. Freestanding signs include monument signs but do not
include portable signs.
(h) Identifying Sign: any permanent structure or building surface, or part thereof or device attached
thereon or other outdoor surface or any combination of one or more of the foregoing containing any
word, letter, symbol, drawing, model, banner, picture or design, or any device used for visual
communication which identifies or calls attention to any premises, person, product, activity, service, or
business, directing the subject thereof to the attention of the public. Signs do not include noncommercial
murals.
(i) Illuminated Sign: any sign which is lighted by artificially generated light, either directly or indirectly.
(j) Marquee Sign: an identifying sign hanging from or supported by a permanent marquee or overhang.
(k) Non-accessory Sign: any billboard; or any sign or advertising device advertising a business, service,
product or activity at other locations.
(l) Projecting Signs: any non-translucent sign which is affixed at a right angle to the building wall, which
include fin, blade, and symbol signs.
(m) Symbol Sign: any non-translucent sign which is a three-dimensional representation or illustration of
the activity of the business or service.
(n) Temporary Sign: any sign constructed of light material which is intended to be displayed for a short
period of time only. A Temporary Accessory Sign is one which is accessory to an activity on the
premises, such as the temporary sign of a real estate agent, architect, contractor, painter or other
artisan or advertising a sale or other temporary activity in progress, and such sign may be placed on
the ground or attached to a wall. A Temporary Non-Accessory Sign refers to an event not related to
the premises and may also be in the form of a placard or banner attached to posts or trees on private
property only. A Temporary Identifying Sign is one which identifies the business at the location where
it is, or will be, erected during the period of construction, or alteration, or during the replacement of an
obsolete or inapplicable sign.
(o) Translucent Sign: any sign illuminated from the interior by an even light.
(p) Walkway Accent Lighting: Luminaires that are up to 42 inches tall in total height, and are used to
illuminate walkways, curbs, or similar situations, but not landscaping.
(q) Wall Sign: a sign painted on or attached and parallel to the wall of a building, but not including signs
attached to fences unless set back from all lot lines as required for a building in a district.
SECTION 7.02 APPLICATION AND PROCEDURE
(a) Application for a construction permit shall be made in writing to the Building Inspector, subject to
review by the Department of Community Development and Planning (DCDP), for all permanent signs.
Said applications shall contain the following information:
91
(1) name, address and telephone number of applicant;
(2) location and position of sign;
(3) drawings and plans showing the building facade and the proposed sign, with specifications,
and in the case of symbol or banner signs, section plans are required;
(4) written consent of the owner of the building and land;
(5) such other information as the Building Inspector, Zoning Enforcement Officer or Planning
Board may require;
(6) In the case of any projecting, symbol or banner sign, liability insurance in an amount
to be determined by the Town to be appropriate (which in no case shall be less than
$250,000/$500,000 personal injury and $50,000 property damage) shall be carried by the
owner of said sign and a certificate of same shall be filed with the application.
(b) Within five working days, the Building Inspector shall refer the application and accompanying material
to the DCDP.
(c) After receipt of the application and all required material, the DCDP staff shall review the application.
The DCDP staff shall submit its recommendations in writing to the Building Inspector. The
recommendations shall be based on such sign design booklets and such design guidelines as the
Planning Board may adopt.
(d) Upon receipt of the DCDP'S report or the lapse of fifteen (15) working days from his referral to the
DCDP without such report, the Building Inspector may issue a permit for a sign which conforms to the
DCDP'S recommendations, if any, the regulations in the Zoning Ordinance, and such technical
requirements as are within the Building Inspector's jurisdiction.
(e) A second review may be requested with the following procedure:
(1) If an applicant is aggrieved by the determination of the Building Inspector, he may seek an
advisory opinion by the Planning Board. Such action is to take place by the Planning Board
not more than 45 days following a request for a hearing before the Planning Board.
(2) If the Building Inspector requests an advisory opinion of the Planning Board prior to
issuance of the necessary permits for the sign, the Building Inspector or the Zoning
Enforcement Officer may submit the matter to the Planning Board within a 45 day period.
(3) Neither of the above two actions shall exclude the applicant from formally requesting a
decision of the Board of Appeals.
SECTION 7.03 SIGNS IN ALL DISTRICTS
(a) Placement of Signs
(1) Any building or tenant occupancy with more than one occupancy frontage may have
attached signage on each occupancy frontage facing a street, parking lot, or in each yard
facing a street, and/or free-standing signage for each street frontage of the lot. A building
may also have separate identifying signage. In no instance shall any signage directly front
on or be directed to face Greenough Boulevard.
(2) A sign, other than traffic control and route signs authorized by public agencies, shall not be
placed within a public right of way, except permitted wall sign, banner projecting and
symbol signs adjacent to a sidewalk.
(3) A sign shall not be designed or colored or so placed as to endanger, obscure, confuse,
92
blind by glare or otherwise create a hazardous condition to motor vehicle traffic.
(4) Directional signs necessary to give clear direction to a parking lot or building entrance on
the premises are permitted. Such signs shall not exceed three (3) feet in any dimension
nor more than (4) feet high on a pole or pylon unless placed on a permitted wall or building.
(5) A free standing pole or pylon, or wall sign or any part thereof, shall not exceed twenty (20)
feet in height above ground level, and any ground mounted monument sign shall not
exceed four (4) feet in height, except by Special Permit and adhering to the adopted Design
Guidelines.
(6) Roof signs of any type, in any district, are prohibited.
(b) Projection of Signs
(1) A wall or building mounted sign or symbol shall not project above the building wall to which
it is attached, and shall not obscure any part of the roof of the building except when integral
to the design and character of the sign, in which case it will be allowed by Special Permit
only and adhering to the adopted Design Guidelines.
(2) A sign, except for a projecting sign such as a symbol, accessory, marquee, or banner, shall
not project more than six (6) inches from the building wall.
(3) A projecting sign and support thereof, must be set back at least two (2) feet from the curb
line and be at least nine (9) feet above ground level.
(4) A projecting banner sign must be set back at least two (2) feet from the curb line and be at
least nine (9) feet above ground level. The total area of a banner may not exceed fifty (50)
square feet. In no instance shall the vertical length of a Banner Sign exceed fifty (50)
percent of the total height of the structure to which it is attached and the width of a Banner
Sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of its height.
(5) Permanent awnings on store fronts shall be at least 9 feet above any public walkway; any
information on said awning which is consistent with the definition of the term Accessory
Sign shall be considered as Accessory Signs.
(c) Conditions of temporary signs
One temporary sign is permitted, as follows:
(1) A temporary identifying sign, not exceeding the permitted size for a permanent sign, may
be erected for not more than sixty (60) days.
(2) A temporary accessory sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet and shall be removed from
public view by those responsible for its erection within seven (7) days after the activity
advertised has ceased or after substantial damage to the sign, whichever comes first.
(3) A temporary non-accessory sign is limited to a period of forty-five (45) days preceding and
not over seven (7) days after the relevant event and may not exceed fifty (50) square feet..
(d) Calculation of sign area
(1) For a wall or marquee sign, the calculation of sign area in the NB, LB, CB and I districts
shall be a percentage of the building facade. The dimensions used in calculating this
percentage shall be the horizontal measure of the frontage of the business and the vertical
measure not exceeding the top of the second story of a building.
93
(2) For a monument, pole or pylon sign, the calculation of sign area shall use the dimensions of
one surface only to comply with the limits of §7.03 through 7.07.
(e) Gasoline station signs
Regulations governing the size of identifying signs and the size of accessory signs for gasoline stations
may be reversed. If the regulations are reversed, the identifying sign must comply with the regulations
for accessory signs and the accessory sign must comply with the regulations for identifying signs.
(f) Maintenance of signs
It shall be the responsibility of sign owners to provide proper and continual maintenance for their
sign(s) and sign structure(s).
(g) Prohibited signs and conditions
(1) No animated or flashing signs or attention-catching devices shall be permitted.
(2) No non-accessory signs other than permitted temporary non-accessory signs shall be
permitted.
(3) No interior and/or supporting infrastructure of a sign shall be exposed to public view other
than permitted projecting symbol signs. No exposed conduit, junction boxes, or
transformers shall be exposed to public view.
SECTION 7.04 SIGNS IN S-10, S-6, SC, CR, T AND OSC DISTRICTS
In any S-10, S-6, SC, CR, T and OSC district, no sign or advertising device shall be permitted except as
follows:
(a) One identifying sign displaying the street number or name of the occupant of the premises, or both, not
exceeding two (2) square feet in area. Such sign may include identification of a permitted accessory
professional use and identify other permitted accessory uses including a customary home occupation.
(b) One identifying sign for permitted non-conforming use, not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area.
(c) Two identification signs are permitted on each building for churches and institutions, one not exceeding
twenty (20) square feet in area and one not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area.
SECTION 7.05 SIGNS IN R.75 AND R1.2 DISTRICTS, AND FOR RESIDENTIAL USES IN THE I-3 AND
RMUD DISTRICT
In the R.75 or R1.2 Districts, or with respect to any residential use in the I-3 District and the RMUD, no sign or
other advertising device shall be permitted except as follows:
(a) As permitted in S-10, S-6, SC, CR, T and OSC Districts.
(b) For multiple unit developments, including the residential component within a mixed-use project, up to
two attached signs or two free-standing signs, or a combination of one attached sign and one freestanding
sign may be allowed. The size of such signage shall be limited to one (1) square foot per unit
up to a maximum of 100 square feet, and in no instance shall a building mounted sign exceed 30 feet
in height.
(c) One identifying sign in connection with a lawfully maintained non-conforming use, not exceeding
twenty (20) square feet in area.
94
SECTION 7.06 SIGNS IN THE NB, LB, CB, I, RMUD, AND PSCD DISTRICTS
In any NB, LB, CB, I, RMUD, and PSCD district, no on premise sign or advertising device shall be permitted
except as follows:
(a) As permitted in S-10, S-6, SC, CR, T, OSC, R.75 and R1.2 districts.
(b) One identifying sign for each building or tenant occupancy frontage facing a street, parking lot, or
public way. In addition, one free standing sign may be allowed on a lot for each street frontage of the
lot, provided it is set back to at least one half the depth of the required setback in that district. In the
case of a free standing pole or pylon sign, said identifying sign may be up to sixteen (16) square feet or
thirty-two (32) square feet in the case of a monument sign. If a wall or marquee sign, said identifying
sign may be up to five (5) percent of the area of the wall or building facade. The dimensions used in
calculating this percentage shall be the horizontal measure of the occupancy frontage of the business
and the vertical measurement of the building not exceeding the top of the second story of the building
facade (also see (d)). The accessory signage calculation shall be based upon the five (5) percent of
the wall area or building façade allowed for an identifying sign.
RMUD Exceptions:
(1) In the RMUD, the number and size of all building mounted (wall or marquee) signage shall be limited to
no more than one and one-quarter (1.25) square feet of signage for each linear foot of building for the
first story and no more than three-quarters (0.75) of a square foot for each linear foot of building for a
second story, but any use above a second story may be allocated a portion of the first story or second
story signage allocation. Building mounted signage may be located adjacent to entrances, along first
and second floor occupancy frontages, or in other locations, including at heights greater than 20 feet, so
long as the location is in keeping with adopted Design Guidelines. In no instance may a single
occupant be allowed more than 100 square feet of building mounted identifying signage, subject to the
size limitations set forth in Section 7.06e.
(2) In addition to the wall-mounted signage allowed above, lots in the RMUD may have up to one (1) freestanding
sign for each two hundred (200) linear feet of street frontage along a public or private way,
provided that the total number of free-standing signs allowed on any lot shall not exceed a total
maximum of four (4) free-standing signs and shall be a maximum of twenty (20’) feet in height and
thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area. Two of the allowed free standing pole or pylon signs may be
consolidated and those consolidated signs shall have no more than 150 square feet of signage area
each, subject to size limitations set forth in §4.12, 6.02.h and 7.06.b, and in keeping with adopted
Design Guidelines.
(c) One building mounted accessory projecting sign such as a marquee, awning, fin, blade, symbol sign or
banner sign for each 50 linear feet of tenant occupancy facing a private or public way or parking lot.
(d) In the case of a single story structure, paragraphs (b) and (c) above or the following may be applied.
One identifying wall or marquee sign may be up to ten (10) percent of the area of the wall or building
facade. The dimensions used in calculating this percentage shall be the horizontal measure of the
frontage of the business and the vertical measure to the roof or parapet line. This option excludes the
use of any accessory sign(s).
(e) In no instance may the gross area of all signs including accessory signs on one building exceed 200
square feet in area on a single lot, except in the case of multiple buildings where each building may
have up to a maximum of 200 square feet including accessory signs on each building.
Notwithstanding the above, any non-residential or mixed use site with cumulative building footprints in
excess of 100,000 square feet may not exceed 350 square feet of signage per building, except in the
RMUD, where the maximum identifying signage shall be limited to one-hundred (100) square feet of
building mounted signage per tenant. Further, an increase in the total building signage may be
permitted by Special Permit and adhering to the adopted Design Guidelines.
Exceptions: Freestanding and directional signs shall not reduce signage otherwise allowable under
§7.06(e) above, but shall be subject to limitation identified in §7.03(a) and 7.05(b).
95
(f) Temporary signs may be attached or lettered on the interior of the window. Such signs shall not be
included in the aggregate sign area in paragraphs (b) and (c), or paragraph (d) above. The aggregate
area of all signs in any window, either permanent or temporary, shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of
the area of such window. All neon signs and permanent graphics and their dimensions shall be listed
on the sign permit application. All temporary signs are subject to regulations in §7.03(c).
(g) Projecting signs may be considered as accessory signs and shall be permitted if they are not more
than sixteen (16) square feet in total area. Further, projecting signs shall be placed at a right angle to
the building wall. Illumination from the interior of all projecting signs shall be prohibited and other forms
of illumination shall be consistent with this Ordinance.
(h) One free standing or wall-mounted sign may be permitted for the purpose of a business directory per
shared entrance provided that no more than three (3) square feet shall be permitted thereon for each
use except by special permit. The aggregate sign area shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
SECTION 7.07 SIGN SPECIAL PERMIT
The Planning Board shall be SPGA for Sign Special Permits. In the RMUD district, no on-premise sign or
advertising device shall be permitted except as follows:
(a) As permitted in §7.05 or as allowed by this section for Master Plan Special Permit projects under §5.18.
(b) Timing: A project may choose to request the approval of a sign master plan as part of a requested Master
Plan Special Permit, or a sign master plan may be submitted as a separate request once a Master Plan
Special Permit has been granted.
(c) In order to approve a sign master plan, the SPGA review would include a comprehensive review of the
requested signage in context of the Special Permit, considering the uses proposed and the site and
surrounding context.
(1) Design Requirements: Sign Master Plan:
(A) Signage shall be sized and placed to reinforce, rather than compete with, the architectural elements
and proportions of a building.
(B) A wall sign shall not project beyond the ends of the walls to which it is mounted.
(C) Wall signs and projecting signs shall not extend above the roof line or parapet of the building to which
it is mounted.
(D) No part of a projecting sign shall extend into vehicular traffic areas or in any way interfere with
vehicular site lines.
(E) All free-standing signs must be protected from vehicular damage by a curb or planter.
(F) Signs may be erected in required setback areas but in no instance shall signs directly front on or be
directed to face Greenough Boulevard.
SECTION 7.08 PERMITTED ILLUMINATION
(a) In all districts, any lighting of a sign or advertising device shall be continuous and installed in a manner
that will prevent direct light from shining onto any street or adjacent property.
(b) In residential districts, all signs or advertising devices shall be stationary and may not contain any
visible moving or movable parts; no sign or advertising device shall be of neon type or exposed gasilluminated
tube type; no sign or advertising device shall be illuminated during hours when the
establishment is closed to the public.
(c) In NB, LB, CB, I, and PSCD districts, the following signs, in addition to the above are permitted:
(1) translucent
96
(2) signs of neon or exposed gas-illuminated tube type.
SECTION 7.09 NON-CONFORMANCE
(a) Any sign erected after the date that this Article VII was originally adopted (June 30, 1982) which
because of a change in occupancy ceases to refer to a permitted business being conducted, or
product sold, on the premises, shall be removed at the expense of the owner, agent, or person having
the beneficial use of the building or property upon which the sign is located within sixty (60) days after
written notification from the Inspector of Buildings or within such longer period not exceeding one year
as the Inspector of Buildings may determine.
(b) Any signs legally erected before the date that this Article VII was originally adopted (June 30, 1982)
may continue to be maintained, provided however, that no such sign shall be permitted if, after such
date, it is enlarged, or altered in any substantial way, except to conform to the requirements of this
Zoning Ordinance. Notwithstanding this, the panels of such sign may be changed to reflect a changed
product line. Further, any such sign which has deteriorated to such an extent that the cost of
restoration would exceed thirty-five (35) percent of the replacement cost of the sign at the time of the
restoration shall not be repaired or rebuilt or altered except to conform to the requirements of this
Zoning Ordinance. Any exemption provided in this §7.09(b) shall terminate with respect to any sign
that:
(1) shall have been abandoned,
(2) advertises or calls attention to any products, businesses or activities which are no longer
sold or carried on, whether generally or at the particular premise, or
(3) shall not have been repaired or properly maintained within thirty (30) days after notice to
that effect has been given by the Inspector of Buildings.
(c) The erection of non-accessory signs is prohibited.
SECTION 7.10 WATERTOWN SQUARE DESIGN OVERLAY DISTRICT
Signs in the Watertown Square Design Overlay District shall conform to all provisions of Article VII except as
otherwise specified in §5.09.
SECTION 7.11 HOTEL AND MOTEL SIGNS
This section controls signage for hotels and motels within zoning districts where hotels and motels are allowed
under Article V. Signage for hotels and motels shall comply with this section. No sign or advertising device
shall be permitted except as follows:
(a) Wall Signs for Hotels and Motels. One or more wall signs accessory to a hotel or motel shall not
exceed two hundred (200) square feet in total area or one hundred (100) square feet for any individual
sign.
(1) Wall Signs shall not exceed five (5) percent of the area of the wall or building façade on which
it is placed. The dimensions used in calculating this percentage shall be same as outlined in
§7.03(d)(1).
(2) Wall Signs or any element thereof, shall not be placed or project above the building wall or
parapet to which it is attached.
(b) Projecting Banner Signs for Hotels and Motels. One or more Banner Signs accessory to a hotel or
motel, not exceeding two (2) percent of the area of the wall or building façade on which it is placed,
may be allowed, and not be subject to the limitations of §7.03, paragraphs (a)(5) and (b)(4) and shall
not be included in any calculation for gross area of all signs, provided the following conditions are met:
97
(1) Banner Signs shall be set back at least 2 feet from the curb line and be at least nine (9) feet
above ground level.
(2) The vertical length of each Banner Sign shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total height of
the structure to which it is attached.
(3) The width of each Banner Sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of its height.
(c) Monument Ground Sign: A sign that is anchored directly to the ground, not exceeding 32 square feet
in gross area, nor four (4) feet in height and which shall be externally illuminated.
SECTION 7.12 EXTERIOR LIGHTINGSTANDARDS
The following section lays out Exterior Lighting Standards for any residential development of four (4) or greater
residential units, and all non-residential and Mixed-Use projects.
(1) The light source shall be Light Emitting Diode, metal halide or high pressure sodium. Mercury vapor
and low pressure sodium are prohibited. Other sources may be considered, particularly for decorative,
flush mounted or recessed luminaires.
(2) Pole-mount or wall-pack luminaires shall be “shoe-box” type or decorative in nature (with interior
directional shields), consistent with the architectural theme of the development. Area, Flood, and Uplighting
is strictly prohibited.
(3) All luminaires, regardless of their intended use, mounting height, or configuration shall have a total
cutoff of all light at less than ninety (90) degrees from vertical. Luminaires with a drop lens are
prohibited.
(4) Reflectors and shielding shall provide total cutoff of all measureable light at the property lines of the
parcel to be developed.
(5) Developments that abut residential areas or are visible from public roadways shall not utilize parking lot
lights exceeding 20’-0” in height (base + pole + head).
(6) Developments that do not abut residential areas shall not utilize parking lot lights exceeding 25’-0” in
height (base + pole + head).
(7) Developments with parking garages that use pole mounted fixtures to illuminate the upper-most level
of parking shall not use lights exceeding 20’-0” in height (base + pole + head).
(8) Lights utilized for walkway lighting shall not exceed 12’-0” in height (base + pole + head).
(9) The location of on-building mounted wall-pack luminaires shall not exceed 20’-0” in height. Decorative
on-building mounted fixtures may be used to illuminate balconies or similar amenities above 20’-0” in
height.
(10) All luminaires except for Walkway Accent Lighting and Emergency Egress Lighting shall be equipped
with a mechanism such that they will deactivate and turn off not more than two hours after the stated
closing time, and in all cases, shall deactivate during daylight hours. Excluded from the requirement to
deactivate not more than two hours after the stated closing time are any luminaires used in residential
developments, or exclusively for the residential portion of Mixed Use projects.
SECTION 7.13 EXTERIOR LIGHTING TECHNICAL SUBMITTALS
The following section lays out Exterior Lighting Standards for any residential development of four (4) or greater
residential units, and all non-residential and Mixed-Use projects:
98
(a) A site lighting design drawing or drawings.
(b) Electrical site plan indicating the location of each and every exterior luminaire to be installed. The fixtures
shall be labeled as to the type of luminaires specified. Where pole-mounted fixtures are to be used, a diagram
shall be included of such proposed lights, including walkway lights that show height of the base, pole and
fixture head. Where wall-mounted luminaires are specified, the mounting heights of fixtures shall be indicated
on the plan.
(c) A lighting fixture schedule that designates the type of luminaires specified including the following
information:
a. The number and type of lamps to be used in each luminaire;
b. A description of the luminaire and light pole if applicable; and
c. The manufacturer’s name and catalog numbers of the specified equipment;
(d) Manufacturers’ specification sheets shall be provided for all proposed luminaires and poles to be used
(where poles are used). Manufacturers’ specification sheets should indicate the shape and dimensions of the
luminaires and poles.
(e) Manufacturers’ computer-generated point-to-point printouts shall be submitted indicating the horizontal
initial and maintained foot-candle levels at grade, within the property to be developed and twenty-five (25) feet
beyond the property lines. Computer-generated printouts shall indicate the locations and type of luminaires
analyzed. Maintained foot-candle levels should be calculated, using IES recommended procedures. Light loss
factors used to calculate maintained foot-candle levels shall be indicated on the computer-generated printouts.
Pertinent data, such as building outline, building entrances and exits, loading areas, landscaping, walkways,
roadways, bikeways, parking areas, curbs and property lines shall also be shown.
Re-paving of an existing
driveway requires a permit from
the Department of Public Works
(DPW) by a bonded contractor
prior to commencement of work.
Extension/expansion of an
existing driveway or any new
driveway requires approval by
the Zoning Enforcement Office
prior to the issuance of the permit
from DPW.
Inspections. Final Inspections
of the public way are required by
DPW for repaving, modifications,
and new driveways. Final
Inspections are also required for
extensions or new driveways by
the Zoning Enforcement Office.
Trees. The removal, relocation,
or pruning of any public trees to
accommodate a new or
expanded driveway require
clearance by the Tree Warden
prior to commencement of any
work.
Enforcement. It is important to
ensure all clearances and
permits are approved/issued prior
to any construction activity in
order to avoid fines/penalties.
Minimum size of a parking space
is 8½’ wide x 18’ long for
each car.
Maximum of two 11’ curb cuts per
site, with a minimum distance
of 20’ between curb cuts. The
Maximum curb cut or
combination of curb cuts is
22’ or 40% of the lot frontage,
whichever is less.
No area of the building front
yard shall be used for
parking or driveway area. The
Building Front Yard is the
boxed area located between
the front of the house, the front
lot line and each side of the
house.
4’ landscaped buffer between
the edge of the driveway and
the side lot line is required.
10’ landscaped buffer between
the end/edge of the driveway
and the rear lot line is
required.
5’ setback from the front lot line,
before the first parking space,
is required.
Examples of typical driveway layouts
are provided on the back pages of this
brochure.
DRIVEWAY
PERMITTING PROCESS
DRIVEWAY
DIMENSIONAL
REGULATIONS §6.02
REDUCING
IMPERVIOUS
SURFACES
Impervious lot coverage also applies.
Maximum impervious coverage in the
S-6, SC, & T Districts is 85% and a
maximum of 80% in the S-10 Zoning
District.
Find out what zoning district your
property is located in, by going to
www.mapsonline.net/watertown
Watertown strongly encourages
minimizing the amount of impervious
surfaces to prevent pollutants from
reaching our rivers and creeks,.
Driveways constructed of permeable
pavers, grasscrete and the like are
ways of providing for a new driveway
while still being environmentally
friendly.
Below are some additional resources
which provide alternatives to the concrete,
impervious driveway:
 Low Impact Development Center
www.lowimpactdevelopment.org
 Storm water Manager’s Resource
Center www.stormwatercenter.net
 LID Urban Design Tools
www.lid-stormwater.net
 National Association of Home
Builders www.toolbase.org/indextoolbase.
asp
Residential
Driveway
Regulations
TOWN OF WATERTOWN
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT AND PLANNING
Zoning Enforcement Office
149 Main Street, 2nd Floor
Watertown, MA
Telephone: 617-972-6427
Facsimile: 617-926-7778
www.watertown-ma.gov
Department of Community
Development and Planning
Example of Corner Lot driveway
located at the rear of the property.
NOTES:
Sec 4.03 (a) - Permitted and required accessory uses shall be on the same lot of record as the principal use to which
they are accessory and shall be such as not to alter the character of the premises on which it is located.
(b) - No accessory use or uses within a building other than an accessory garage shall occupy more than a
combined total of twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area of the principal building.
(c) - No accessory building shall occupy part of the required Front Yard, but such building may occupy not
more than thirty percent (30%) of any other minimum required yard setback or existing yard area, whichever is
greater.
(d) – Maximum height of an accessory structure can be increased to 18 feet when such structure has a
gabled, pitched, and/or sloped roof.
(e) - No accessory use shall be permitted in any district except insofar as it is accessory to a
principal use permitted in the district.
(g) - Accessory structures fronting on a public street or way shall be subject to the front yard
setback requirements of the district it is located in, despite the orientation of said lot/structure.
Sec 5.00(e) – Buildings must maintain a distance of 10 feet between each other when located on the same lot.
* Additional requirements may apply depending on site specific information.
Development Regulations for Accessory
Structures/Buildings
Date: June 5, 2011
5 ft. minimum
10 ft. from the rear lot line, if a detached garage
For additional information contact the Zoning Office at 617-972-6427 or visit us at
149 Main Street, 2nd Floor, Watertown MA 02742
Hours: 8:30am-5pm, M-F
Board of Zoning Appeals
RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
TOWN OF WATERTOWN
Date of Adoption: December 27, 1984
Date Last Edited: December 28, 2011
Printed: January 2012
TOWN OF WATERTOWN
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
Section 1: Adoption of Rules
Section 2: Definitions
Section 3: The Zoning Board of Appeals
Section 4: Application Process
Section 5: Fees for Public Hearings
Section 6: Public Hearings
Section 7: Rules of Procedure at Hearings
Section 8: Adjournments, Postponements and Withdrawals
Section 9: Deliberation Meetings (Decisions)
Section 10: Decisions of the Board
Section 11: Reconsideration
Section 12: Recording of Decision
Section 13: Amendment and Revision of Decisions
Section 14: Records
Section 15: Conflict with General Law and Zoning Ordinance
Section 16: Amendment
2
TOWN OF WATERTOWN
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
These Rules of Practice and Procedure are adopted by the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of
Watertown pursuant to Section 12 of Chapter 40A, Massachusetts General Laws and Article 10.00,
Section 10.00 of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Watertown.
SECTION 1 - ADOPTION OF RULES
1.1 These Rules shall become effective upon adoption by a majority of the Full Board composed of
the five (5) members and the two associate members at a deliberation meeting and upon the filing
of a copy thereof with the Town Clerk of Watertown.
1.2 Copies of the Rules as adopted, and as amended from time to time, shall be furnished to the
Town Building Inspector/Zoning Enforcement Officer, the Planning Board, the Town Manager and
to such other Town Departments as the Board may decide .
1.3 Copies of these rules shall be kept available by the Clerk of the Board for inspection by any other
person at reasonable times.
SECTION 2 - DEFINITIONS
As hereinafter used, the following words shall have the following meanings for the purpose of these rules:
2.1 BOARD shall mean the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Watertown as appointed under
the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
2.2A BUILDING INSPECTOR shall mean the Inspector of Buildings or Building Inspector, Town of
Watertown, Department of Community Development and Planning Facilities, Inspection Division.
2.2B ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall mean Zoning Enforcement Officer, Town of
Watertown, Department of Community Development and Planning Facilities, Inspection Division.
2.3 APPLICANT OR PETITIONER, used interchangeably, shall mean a person or persons appealing
to the Board or seeking relief therefrom pursuant to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
2.4 MEMBER shall mean a member of the Board who, in conformance with Town Charter provisions,
is serving a five-year term or unexpired portion thereof. ASSOCIATE MEMBER shall mean an
Associate or Alternate member serving a two year term.
3
SECTION 3 - THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
3.1 - MEMBERSHIP
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five members and two associate members, appointed and
serving terms as provided in Article 10, Section 10.00 of the Zoning Ordinance and Charter of the Town
of Watertown.
3.2 - OFFICERS
The Board Members and Associated Members shall elect at its first meeting in September of each year,
or at the earliest possible meeting thereafter when a majority of the full Board is present, a Chairperson
and Vice Chairperson/Clerk to serve for two consecutive years or until their successors are elected.
3.3 - DUTIES OF OFFICERS
(A) Chairperson:
The Chairperson shall be the presiding officer of the Board and shall officiate at all public hearings
and deliberation meetings of the Board; and as provided in Section 12 of the Massachusetts
General Laws Chapter 40A, may administer oaths, summon witnesses, and call for the production
of papers.
(B) Vice Chairperson/Clerk:
In the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson shall carry out the duties of Chairperson
and shall have all the powers of Chairperson.
(C) Acting Chairperson: In the event that both the Chairperson and Vice Chairperson/Clerk are absent
because of incapacity or disqualification because of personal interest, the member of the Board
senior by date of appointment shall be designated as Acting Chairperson by the Chairperson with
all the duties and powers of Chairperson. In the event said senior member shall be unable or
unwilling to serve as Chairperson, the Chairperson shall name one of the other members as
Acting Chairperson.
(D) It shall be the responsibility of individual Board Members to visit each site prior to participating in
the hearing.
4
3.4 - ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS
(A) Members and Associate Members shall attend all public hearings and deliberation meetings.
Associate Members shall be designated by the Chairperson to sit and vote in the place of any
member incapacitated by personal interest or absence.
(B) No hearing shall be conducted at any time with less than four members/associate members
present and qualified to vote, but such hearing shall be adjourned to such time as four qualified
members are available and present.
(C) A member who will be incapacitated by absence or personal interest from attending any public
hearing shall notify the Chairperson as soon as practicable but not later than forty-eight (48) hours
before the hearing. An associate member shall then be designated by the Chairperson to sit in
his/her place. In the absence of a member at a deliberation meeting at which a vote is to be taken
on a matter which was heard by the said absent member, the Chairperson may designate an
associate member who was present and participating in the hearing to vote in place of the absent
member and the minutes shall so show.
3.5 - CONFLICT OF INTEREST
(A) Any member who disqualifies himself/herself for personal interest from participating and voting
upon any matter shall notify the Chairperson of his/her intent to so disqualify himself/herself as
soon as practicable but not later than forty-eight(48) hours before the hearing at which the said
matter is to be heard. When the said matter is reached for hearing, the Chairperson shall state
the fact of disqualification for the record and shall designate an associate member to sit in the
place of the disqualified member who shall thereupon leave the Board table and shall not
participate in any manner in the hearing or at any deliberation meeting of the Board at which the
matter upon which the member disqualifies himself is discussed.
(B) No member or associate member shall represent any party of interest in any matter pending
before the Board.
(C) Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 268A, Section 17 of the General Laws (the so-called
"Conflict of Interest Law") nothing in these rules shall prevent any member or associate member
from appearing before the Board in favor of or in opposition to any matter in which he/she has a
direct personal interest or from acting before the Board, with or without compensation, as agent or
attorney for, or otherwise aiding or assisting in any such matter, members of his immediate family
or any person for whom he/she is serving as guardian, executor, administrator, trustee or other
personal fiduciary; provided that said member has disqualified himself.
5
SECTION 4 - APPLICATION PROCESS
4.1 - APPLICATION FORM
Every application for a Special Permit or Variance shall be made on the official form included in the
Appendix of this document or available from the Board of Appeals Clerk in the Zoning Office or from the
Town’s website: www.watertown-ma.gov. No other application form shall be accepted or
processed by the Town. Any communication purporting to be an application shall be treated as mere
notice of intention to file a petition with the Town of Watertown, Board of Appeals. All information called
for by the form shall be furnished by the applicant in the manner therein prescribed.
4.2 - FILING PROCEDURE
(A) Application for a Variance, Special Permit or Renewal of a Special Permit: Completed application
shall be initially reviewed by the Board's Clerk to determine if the required documentation is
included in accordance with the Board's rules. However, it shall be the responsibility of the
petitioner and/or his representative to assure required documentation is both complete and of
appropriate standards for Board submission as specified herein; and submission of an application
shall be considered representation that the application is complete. Upon submission of the
documentation, three copies of a complete application, in accordance with the Meeting/Hearing
Dates and Filing Deadlines schedule prior to the next hearing date, shall be filed with Town Clerk
with a cover form signed by the Board of Appeals Clerk, and thereupon distributed for hearing
mark-up and support agency review. All material submitted to the Board of Appeals, including
plan sets, shall be retained for the record, regardless of the outcome of petition filed.
(B) Appeals from Decision of Zoning Enforcement Officer: File with Town Clerk with copies to the
Board and Building Inspector.
(C) All plans, revisions or supplemental information must be submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals
office not less than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the public hearing in order to be considered at
the public hearing.
(D) A site visit/release (Indemnification) form (Exhibit A) should be signed by Petitioner and submitted
to the Clerk of the Board of Appeals by the filing deadline, to permit members of the Board of
Appeals to visit a subject site during the time when the case is before the Board.
(E) Pursuant to Mass. General Laws, Chapter 40, Sec. 8 and 15, a person aggrieved by an Order
from the Zoning Enforcement Officer or Building Inspector may appeal to the Watertown Zoning
Board of Appeals by filing a Notice of Appeal. Said notice shall consist of: the application to
appeal the order of the Zoning Enforcement Officer completed in triplicate; a completed and
certified abutter’s list, a check or money order made payable to the Town of Watertown. All of the
above components of the Notice of Appeal must be received by the Clerk of the Zoning Board of
Appeals within 30 days of the date of the Order letter which is the subject of the appeal. Blank
forms and additional information are available from the Clerk of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
6
4.3 - PLAN OF LAND ACCOMPANYING PETITION
(A) Each application for a Variance or Special Permit shall be accompanied by twenty(20) copies of
the following described plan set, dated, signed and bearing the seal of a registered land surveyor
and, where applicable, Registered Professional Engineer, registered landscape architect, and/or
registered architect. If required to do so, the petitioner(s) or representative shall, at the time of
filing an application for a Special Permit, Variance or request for modification take a set of plans to
the Inspector of Buildings, Fire Inspector and Planning Office (except where plans have already
been submitted for Site Plan Review and remain unchanged). Additional copies may be
requested for departmental review.
(B) The size of the plan shall be no smaller than 8.5" x 11" nor larger than 24" x 36", drawn to scale.
It shall have a north point, names of streets, zoning districts, names of owners of adjoining
properties, property lines, and location of buildings on adjacent properties. The location of
buildings and distances from adjacent buildings and property lines shall be verified in the field and
shown on the plan. The dimensions of the lot, the percentage of the lot covered by the principal
and accessory buildings, the required parking spaces, entrances, exits, driveways, landscaping,
etc., shall be shown when pertinent to the granting of the relief requested. The application shall
not be deemed complete if the plans do not show the information required. The Board of
Appeals may seek withdrawal of any petition that is deemed incomplete.
(C) In appropriate instances, the Board, upon written request by the applicant or their representative,
with copies to the Planning Board and Inspector of Buildings, may waive or modify these plan set
requirements. This request must be submitted to and formally acted upon by the Board prior to
the filing of petition.
(D) Consistent with the Zoning Ordinance, documentation submitted to the Planning Staff and
accepted in satisfaction of the requirement for Site Plan Review (Section 9.03) shall be acceptable
for the Board's review for special permit and/or variance wherein the above reference standards
for plan documents are also met.
(E) Where the request for special permit made to the Board is also subject to site plan review (Sec.
9.03), the applicant, to enable the Board to make a finding and determination as to the effects of
traffic created by the development on adjacent streets, shall in addition to the above referenced
plan documentation submit, the following information in a separate report:
1. The amount of gross floor area in square feet in the proposed building or buildings; and, if
this is an addition to an existing building, the gross floor area in the existing building.
2. The number of employees and/or occupants projected for the proposed building; and, if
this is an addition to an existing building, number of employees and/or occupants in the
existing building or buildings.
3. If the proposed construction is a restaurant, the number of proposed seats; and, if the
construction is an addition to an existing restaurant, the number of seats in the existing
restaurant.
4. The hours of operation of all facilities to be located in the proposed building.
7
5. An analysis within this report prepared by a traffic engineer who has certified that he/she
qualifies for the position of member of the Institute of Transportation Engineers. The
Applicant shall also provide:
(i) Traffic counts on arterial streets that provide access to the site showing data on
Average Daily Traffic with a.m. and p.m. peak periods (conducted for two hours
divided into fifteen minute segments).
(ii) Intersection turning movement counts on intersections likely to be affected by the
proposed development showing two hour counts for the a.m. and p.m. peak
periods divided into fifteen-minute time segments.
(iii) An inventory of roadway characteristics showing the width of the principal approach
streets, and the presence or absence of curbing and its condition.
(iv) Estimated trip generation showing the projected inbound and outbound vehicular
trips for the a.m. and p.m. peak periods and a typical one-hour off-peak trip
generation.
(v) The estimated distribution of new trips by approach streets.
(vi) The effect of additional traffic generated by the development on traffic "levels of
service" on each approach street. The term "level of service" means by the
Highway Capacity Manual issued by the Highway Resource Board of the U.S.
Department of Transportation.
(vii) Estimated off-street parking and loading requirements and time of peak
accumulation.
4.4 - NARRATIVE ACCOMPANYING PETITION
(A) In addition to the above plan documentation each application shall be accompanied by a written
memorandum having the following elements:
1. A text that includes a statement naming the applicable section of the Zoning Ordinance
from which relief is being sought, a statement as to the requirements for which relief may
be granted from the Zoning requirements, and a precise statement as to the extent of relief
being sought.
2. Arguments in response to required conditions for approval as contained within the Zoning
Ordinance specific to Section 9.05(b), the four conditions for the granting of a special
permit and/or Section 9.14(b), the four conditions for the granting of variance relief.
(B) The Petitioner may also include a suggested format for decision prepared by legal counsel, at
his/her option, having the following elements for Board consideration:
8
1. Suggested "Findings of Fact" specific to the locus identified within the petition.
2. Suggested "Findings of Law" specific to those areas of the ordinance for which relief has
been granted.
4.5 - ABUTTERS
The applicant shall notify the Clerk to the Board of Appeals that a petition is forthcoming. The Clerk will
prepare a list of "parties in interest" as defined by Chapter 40A, Section 11. This list shall include the
petitioner; abutters; owners of land directly opposite the on any public or private street or way; abutters to
the abutters within 300 feet of the property line of the petitioner, including those in other towns; the
Planning Board; and the Planning Board of every abutting city or town. Where the parties in interest
include a Condominium Association, the list shall include each unit/member if the association has twenty
(20) or fewer units/members; otherwise, the Association’s Trustees shall be listed. This list shall be
prepared in the format required by the Assessor's Department and submitted no later than five (5) days
prior to the ZBA filing deadline and thereafter certified by the Assessor(s) and submitted with any petition
filed with the Board of Appeals. No application shall be considered without having a certified copy of
abutters attached to the petition and other supporting documentation.
4.6 - REVIEW OF CONDITIONS
Where the Board of Appeals conditions an approval for either a Special Permit or Variance and seeks to
review the condition(s) annually or on another regular basis, the applicant shall submit a written request
to the Board, with copies to the Zoning Enforcement Officer, Planning Board, and DCD&P staff, fortyfive(
45) days prior to the anniversary of the effective date of the decision; and the matter will be put on
the Board's next meeting agenda. If evidence is received to suggest the terms of the condition(s) may
continue to be applicable or that they have been breached, the matter will be scheduled for a public
hearing, subject to the provisions of these regulations. Should the Board determine that the condition or
conditions no longer apply or have been satisfied, then a Certificate of Compliance will be issued.
4.7 – COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS
See addendum attached to the end of this document
9
SECTION 5 - FEES FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS
A. VARIANCES
1. USE..........................................................Discontinued
2. DIMENSIONAL
a. Residential.........................................$150 + $20 per 100 s.f. of relief requested
b. Commercial .......................................$150 + $20 per 100 s.f. of relief requested
3. PARKING.................................................$ 75 per space ($150 min)
4. SIGNS ......................................................$150 per sign + $1 per s.f. of relief requested
5. OTHER.....................................................$150 or the cost of the hearing notice and
........................................................... notice to abutter, whichever is greater
B. SPECIAL PERMITS
1. Residential, new Construction .................$150 + $75 per Dwelling Unit
conversion to add D.U.
2. Non-res. new construction or...................$150 + amount from Sec. 5.1
conversion to non-res.
3. Accessory Uses .......................................$150
4. Non-conforming Use................................$150 + amount from Section 5.1
5. Off-site Parking ........................................$150 + .05 per s.f.
6. Other ........................................................$150
C. COMPREHENSIVE PERMITS (See Section 4.7)
D. APPEAL OF ZONING ENFORCEMENT DECISION $150
E. LEGAL NOTICE FEE
Publication of Legal Notice is required by MGL c. 40A, §11. The fee associated with the
publication of the legal notice for two consecutive weeks will be billed to the petitioner directly
from the newspaper in which it is published.
SECTION 5.1
5.1.2b, e&f................Institutional
5.1.3b .......................Commercial Office
5.1.3c .......................Commercial Recreation
5.1.3d .......................Commercial Parking 1 – 4,000 sf = $150
5.1.3gC ....................Commercial Retail 4,001 – 10,000 sf = 250
5.1.3 .........................Personal Service 10,001 – 15,000 sf = 500
5.1.3j ........................Restaurants 15,001 – 25,000 sf = 750
5.1.3m......................Gasoline Service Station 25,001 – 50,000 sf = 1,000
10
5.1.4f ........................Fast Food Restaurant 50,001 – 100,000 sf = 1,500
5.1.5a-c ....................Light Industry over 100,000 sf = 2,000
5.1.5e .......................Light Industry Laboratory
5.1.5f&g....................Auto Repair
5.1.5h .......................Wholesale Business
5.1.6d .......................Heavy Industry
Projects requesting relief in more than one of the above categories shall be required to pay a total of the
fees from each applicable category.
Fees are based on the magnitude of the relief requested and not that which is ultimately granted.
SECTION 5.2
The Board of Appeals may itself or at the request of the Planning Board impose additional reasonable
fees on an application for the employment of outside consultants. When necessary, independent
technical consultants may be contracted by the Board to assist with the further review of plans and
studies, legal assistance, monitoring compliance, testing and engineering, etc.
Said fees must be deposited in a special segregated account consistent with the terms and provisions of
G.L. c. 44, §53G established by the Town Treasurer. The special account, including any accrued
interest, shall be expended at the direction of the Board of Appeals without further appropriation provided
that such funds are to be expended by it only in connection with carrying out its responsibilities under the
law. Any excess amount in the account attributable to a specific project including any accrued interest, at
the completion of said project shall be repaid to the applicant or to the applicant's successor in interest
and a final report of said account shall be made available to the applicant or the applicant's successor in
interest.
An appeal by the applicant from the selection of said consultant may be made to the Town Council. The
grounds for such an appeal shall be limited to claims that the consultant selected has a conflict of interest
or does not possess the minimum required qualifications. The minimum qualifications shall consist either
of an educational degree in or related to the field at issue or three or more years of practice in the field at
issue or a related field. The required time limits for action upon an application by the Board of Appeals
shall be extended by the duration of the appeal. In the event that no decision is made by the Town
Council within one month following the filing of the appeal, the selection made by the Board shall stand.
Such an administrative appeal shall not preclude further judicial review, if otherwise permitted by law, on
the grounds provided for in this section.
The Board may require that the Applicant make an initial deposit of $20,000 into a special account
established to retain consultants. In the event that such sum is insufficient to fund the necessary
consulting services, the Board may require additional deposits.
SECTION 5.3
Notwithstanding the above schedule of application fees, Town Agencies and non-profit Institutions
established for the welfare of citizens of the Town of Watertown shall be subject to a maximum fee of
$150.00 or the actual cost of advertisement and notification of the Zoning Board of Appeals’ hearing,
whichever is greater. For Comprehensive Permits, See Section 4.7.
11
SECTION 5.4
Those structures and uses begun in advance of obtaining necessary relief from the Board shall be
subject to an additional charge of ten percent of the applicable application fee for corrective hearing
before the Zoning Board of Appeal.
SECTION 5.5
In each instance where re-notification and/or re-advertisement shall be required for the continuation of a
case pending before the Board of Appeals; a case voluntarily or with authorization withdrawn from and
later re-filed with the Board of Appeals; a hearing pursuant to Section 4.6 "Rules and Procedure"; or a
hearing seeking permit/variance extension, a $150 fee or the actual cost of said advertisement and/or renotification
of the Boards’ hearing whichever shall be greater will be required of the Petitioner. Where
said Petitioner's request for re-advertisement and/or re-notification is withdrawn prior to such actual
notice, said supplemental fee will be reimbursed to the Petitioner.
SECTION 5.6
In no case shall the application fee for a hearing before the Board exceed Four Thousand Dollars
($4,000).
SECTION 5.7
The foregoing application fee schedule may be waived and the fee for a given case established by the
Board.
SECTION 5.8
All Board decisions predicated on the fulfillment of certain conditions assigned by the Board shall be
subject to certification for compliance with those conditions on annual or other appropriate basis. The fee
for such written certification shall be $50.00.
SECTION 5.9
Whether a case is formally withdrawn before or after notice of the hearing, the fee shall be nonrefundable.
SECTION 6 - PUBLIC HEARINGS
6.1 - TIME AND PLACE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS
(A) Public Hearings shall be held by the Board generally on the fourth Wednesday of each month
unless another date shall be set by the Chairperson. The hearings shall commence at 7:00 p.m.
or at such other time as may be set by the Chairperson and shall continue until all matters on the
agenda have been heard or the hearing is adjourned or tabled by a majority vote of the Board.
12
(B) Hearings shall be held in the Watertown Administration Building, 149 Main Street unless another
place is designated by the Chairperson.
(C) A petitioner desiring a public hearing before the Board shall submit a completed application in
accordance with the Meeting/Hearing Dates and Filing Deadlines schedule prior to the hearing
date.
6.2 - CASE LOAD
It is noted that a case may consist of either or both the Special Permit or Variance petitions for a single
locus.
6.3 - NOTICES OF HEARINGS
(A) Notices of all hearings shall be posted, published, and mailed in such form and manner and to
such owners and other parties as is required by Section 11 of the Chapter 40A Massachusetts
General Laws and to such other owners or persons as the Board may deem to be affected.
(B) If a petitioner requests that notice be sent to owners or other parties not among those
enumerated in Section 11, Chapter 40A G.L. and who are not deemed by the Board to be
affected, it shall be the responsibility of the petitioner to furnish to the Clerk a list of names and
addresses of such additional owners or other parties; and the Clerk shall thereupon send such
notices at the expense of the petitioner.
(C) Notice of each meeting, including deliberation meetings of the Board, other than a public hearing
advertised pursuant to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance or a deliberation meeting held
within twenty-four hours of such public hearing, shall be filed with the Town Clerk with a copy
thereof to the Planning Board and the notice, or a copy thereof, shall, at least forty-eight hours
prior to the meeting, including Saturdays but not Sundays or holidays, be publicly posted in the
office of the Town Clerk or on the principal official bulletin board of the Town of Watertown.
6.4 - PUBLIC HEARINGS
(A) All public hearings and deliberation meetings of the Board shall be open to the public and to the
press unless the Board shall vote to go into Executive Session.
(B) Executive Session shall be held by the Board in closed session only in accordance with the Open
Meeting Law Chapter 39, Sec. 23B, for the purpose of discussing, deliberating, or voting upon
these matters which by general or specific statute or other requirements, cannot be made public.
SECTION 7 - RULES OF PROCEDURE AT HEARINGS
All Public Hearings shall be called to order by the Chairperson and cases shall be called for hearing in
numerical order. Cases, however, may be heard out of turn by majority rule of the Board for cause
shown. Any case not ready for hearing when reached shall be dropped to the end of the hearing list.
Requests for continuance, postponement, or withdrawal of petition must be presented to the Secretary
before the hearing.
13
SECTION 7.2
(A) Any person, whether entitled to notice of a petition or not, may appear in person or by agent or
attorney at any hearing or may submit a statement in writing to the hearing. Every person
appearing before the Board or submitting a statement in writing must identify him/herself for the
record by full name and current residence address.
(B) The Petitioner and the property owner or their duly appointed representatives must be present at
the public hearing at which their case is being heard. Condominium Associations shall be
represented by the President of the Trustees. Changes in representatives, change in applicant or
change in the make-up of the trustees shall be brought to the attention of the Board at the start of
the public hearing/meeting. In any case all who testify must take the oath.
SECTION 7.3
The petitioner shall first present his case either personally or through his attorney or other agent. He
shall have the right to present such witnesses, experts, exhibits, documents, charts, plans, models, and
displays as he/she may feel necessary to properly present his case. Petitioner shall present information
as required by the Board contained in forms approved by the Board hereafter. The applicant shall
produce at the hearing all records bearing upon the lot or lots which is the subject of the application. The
Board may retain any documents or plans which have been introduced in evidence for reference in
consideration of the case. Briefs may be filed at the public hearing or within such time thereafter as may
be fixed by the Board, but in no event later than ten days after the public hearing. Petitioner shall have
present the users, operators, lessees, or proposed future owners under agreement of the parcel.
Petitioner shall make known the actual beneficiaries of any Special Permit or Variance and said person
or persons shall be present.
SECTION 7.4
Copies of recommendations of any other Town agency, board, and/or Commission submitted to the
Board on any matter shall be furnished at the hearing to the petitioner who shall be given an opportunity
to comment thereon.
SECTION 7.5
Representatives of neighborhood associations and attorneys representing groups of owners or other
interested parties, who wish to be recorded as speaking in the name of such entities wherein a formal
action/expression was made and have notified the secretary before the hearing that they wish to be
heard either on the petition, shall be given priority in presenting statements.
SECTION 7.6
All Board members shall have the right during a hearing to question any petitioner or any other person
appearing before the Board and to request additional information.
SECTION 7.7
14
After all persons appearing in favor of a petition have been heard, the Board shall hear all persons
appearing either in person or by written statements in opposition. There shall be no cross examination of
the petitioner; any and all questions directed to the petitioner shall be directed through the Chairperson.
Upon completion of all testimony in opposition, the petitioner shall, at the discretion of the Chairperson,
be given an opportunity to rebut any testimony given in opposition. After such rebuttal, if there are no
other persons desiring to be heard either in favor of or in opposition to a petition, the Chairperson shall
declare the hearing closed and the matter taken under advisement.
SECTION 7.8
The Chairperson shall have the power and discretion to rule any person appearing at the hearing out of
order and to exclude or limit any testimony which in his/her opinion is redundant, repetitive, improper, or
immaterial. Nothing in this section, however, shall deny any person the right to appear at a hearing and
to be recorded verbally or in writing in favor of or in opposition to any petition.
SECTION 7.9
The Board by majority vote may continue a hearing to a date certain announced prior to adjourning the
hearing to enable a petitioner or any other interested person to present such further evidence, exhibits,
revised plans, financial statement, or other documents which the Board may, at its discretion, request.
SECTION 7.10
If a petitioner presents at a hearing revised plans which differ substantially from the plans originally
submitted with the petition at the time of application, the Board, by majority vote, may refuse to hear the
petition and shall require that the petition be re-filed and re-advertised and a new filing fee paid.
Substantial modification shall not be inferred to mean changes to architectural features and detailing or
finish materials
selection.
SECTION 8 - ADJOURNMENTS, POSTPONEMENTS AND WITHDRAWALS
SECTION 8.1
If a hearing is not completed, or if by a majority vote the Board requests that a petitioner or other
interested party present further evidence, the hearing shall be adjourned either to a date certain or sine
die. If the hearing is adjourned to a date certain, no further notice, other than that provided in Section
6.3(c), shall be required. If a hearing is adjourned sine die, the Chairperson shall notify the Secretary of
the date on which the hearing is to be resumed and notice thereof shall be mailed by the secretary to all
owners and parties who received notice at the original hearing or who requested that they be given notice
at the original hearing.
SECTION 8.2
At the request of a petitioner, a scheduled hearing may be postponed to a later date by majority vote of
the Board; provided that, if the Board deems it necessary and proper, the petition may be ordered readvertised
and all interested parties and owners re-notified and a new filing fee paid.
15
SECTION 8.3
A petition for a variance or a special permit may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time after filing and
before advertising. After a petition has been advertised, an applicant may withdraw only by written
motion for leave to withdraw as provided in Article 9, Section 9.18(a), of the Zoning Ordinance. Said
notice must also be received by the Board at least twenty-four(24) hours prior to the scheduled hearing.
Any interested party who is present at the hearing shall have the right to be heard on the motion to
withdraw.
SECTION 9 - DELIBERATION MEETINGS (Decisions)
SECTION 9.1
Deliberation meetings of the Board will take place immediately prior to or following the public hearing.
SECTION 9.2
Any matter to be considered by the Board, other than at a public hearing, shall be forwarded to the Clerk
at least forty-eight(48) hours prior to a meeting. The material shall be a written document clearly stating
what is being sought. No item shall be considered by the Board if it has not previously been presented to
the Board in writing.
SECTION 10 - DECISIONS OF THE BOARD
SECTION 10.1
The concurring vote of at least four of five members of the Board shall be necessary to the granting of
requested relief and/or special permit. The record shall show the vote of each member upon each
question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact.
SECTION 10.2
Decision of the Board on a petition for a Variance shall be made within one-hundred(100) days of the
date of filing or extended time, if applicable; for a Special Permit, within ninety(90) days of the date of
public hearing or extended time, if applicable. Decisions shall be filed with the Town Clerk within fourteen
days of the date of the decision.
SECTION 10.3
The period within which the Board shall make a decision on a petition for a Variance or a Special Permit
may be extended in accordance with Sec. 9 and 15, Chapter 40A M.G.L. A written copy of such
agreement between Petitioner and Board for extension must be filed with the Town Clerk.
SECTION 10.4
Notices of decision shall be mailed to all parties in interest, to the Planning Board, and to every person
16
present at the hearing who requests in writing that notice be sent to them and who gives the Clerk a
stamped self-addressed envelope.
SECTION 10.5
Notices of Decisions are available upon request from the Board for a fee of $2.00 for the decision plus
$.25 for any additional copy.
SECTION 10.6
The Board in its discretion upon written application by the grantee of a Variance or Special Permit, may
extend by up to six months the period within which such rights are required to be exercised; provided,
that the application for such extension is filed with the Board prior to the expiration of such period. Such
request shall be subject to notification of abutters and an advertisement fee of $150 payable by the party
petitioning for the extension.
SECTION 11 - RECONSIDERATION
Once a petition has been voted upon and the meeting adjourned, there shall be no reconsideration of a
decision of the Board, except in accordance with the provisions of MGL C. 40A, S. 16 and Sec. 19.8 of
the Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 12 - RECORDING OF DECISION
No variance or special permit, or any extension, modification or renewal thereof, shall take effect until a
copy of the decision bearing the certification of the Town Clerk that twenty days have lapsed and no
appeal has been filed or, if such appeal has been filed, that it has been dismissed or denied, is recorded
in the Registry of Deeds for the county and district in which the land is located. The fee for recording or
registering shall be paid by the owner or applicant. No building permit shall be issued by the Building
Inspector without receipt of proof of recording from the Registry of Deeds. In the event that the Variance
or Special Permit affects other land, in addition to the land originally affected by the petition, such other
land shall also be identified upon the notice which is recorded.
SECTION 13 - AMENDMENT AND REVISION OF DECISIONS
SECTION 13.1
The statute provides for the special permit granting authority to modify previous grantings. Permit
modifications are formally treated in terms of an amendment to the original granting, requiring a public
hearing (Sec. 11) and a reinstatement of the 20 day appeal period (applicable to the original granting).
To determine whether or not a proposed modification is of such an extent that the intent of the original
granting and conditions thereto is altered therefore requiring a special permit amendment, the following
procedure would be utilized: Proposed modifications, even of minor scale, shall be initially reviewed by
the DCD&P office with three objectives in mind. Briefly stated the intent of our review is to address the
following questions:
(A) Does the proposed revision(s) create conditions requiring variance relief and/or special permit
17
granting?
(B) Does the proposed revision(s) violate specifically any conditions made part of the original
granting?
(C) Does the revision(s) suggest significant modifications to factual representatives or assumptions
reviewed and contained under either Section 9.03 (Site Plan Review) or Section 9.05(b) (Finding
of Special Permit Grant), to an extent that a re-analysis is warranted?
Wherein, a negative finding is made in all of these areas, the proposed modification(s) may be found to
be fully consistent with the original granting and sufficiently limited not to require a review under a special
permit amendment process.
This report would be given to the Board of Appeals for all proposed modifications to projects which have
been subject to special permit granting. If the report or subsequent review by the Board finds that the
proposed change does not conform to one or more of the above noted tests, the applicant would be
required to submit a Special Permit amendment application.
SECTION 13.2
The Board, in conformity with the provisions of Sec. 14 Chap. 40A of the General Laws and the Zoning
Ordinance, may clarify any order or decision and may, within a reasonable period of time, amend a
decision by adding a statement of further reasons for its decision. The above action may only be made
for the purpose of decision clarification, clerical or otherwise, and may not serve in any way to alter the
findings or decision in a substantive manner.
SECTION 14 - RECORDS
The Board shall keep a detailed record and minutes of all public hearings and shall keep records of
deliberation sessions showing the vote of each member upon each question and setting forth clearly the
reason or reasons for its decisions and of its other official actions.
SECTION 15 - CONFLICT WITH GENERAL LAW AND ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION 15.1
All matters upon which these Rules of Practice and Procedure are silent shall be determined by the
applicable provisions of Chapter 40A of the General Laws and of the Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 15.2
In the event of any conflict between these rules and any provision of the Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning
Ordinance shall control.
SECTION 16 - AMENDMENT
These Rules of Practice and Procedure may be amended from time to time as necessary or proper by a
majority vote of the Board.
18
The above rules were unanimously adopted by the Board at a Deliberation Meeting held on December
27, 1984. The following members present: Chairman Joseph C. Leah, Member Anthony Furia,
Associate Member Alex Della Paolera, Associate Member Anthony Cristello.
The rules were unanimously adopted as amended by the Board at a meeting on April 5, 1988.
The following members were present: Chairman Joseph Leah, Members Anthony D. Furia, Stephen E.
Neel, Jenny Netzer, Anthony Cristello and Alternate members Albert Nichols and Peter Lauriat.
The rules were unanimously adopted as amended by the Board of Appeals at their meeting of October
26, 1988.
The following sections were amended: 4.2(d), 5.5, 5.9 and 10.5. The following members were present:
Chairman Joseph C. Leah, Members Anthony Cristello, Anthony Furia, Stephen Neel, Jenny Netzer and
Alternate Members Peter Lauriat and Randall Imai.
The rules were unanimously adopted as amended by the Board of Appeals at their December 27, 1989
Business Meeting. The following sections were amended: 5.2, 5.5, 5.6, 5.8 and new section 10.6. The
following members were present: Chairman Joseph C. Leah, Clerk Anthony J. Cristello, Members
Stephen E. Neel, Anthony D. Furia and Randall Imai.
The rules were unanimously adopted as amended by the Board of Appeals at their meeting of January
31, 1990. The following sections were amended: 4.1, 10.5 and New Section 5.2(b).
The following members were present: Joseph C. Leah, Anthony J. Cristello, Anthony D. Furia, Jenny
Netzer and Randall Imai.
The rules were unanimously adopted as amended by the Board of Appeals at their meeting of March 6,
1990. The following section was added: 4.2(b)
The following Members were present: Joseph C. Leah, Anthony J. Cristello, Stephen E. Neel, Anthony
D. Furia and Jenny Netzer.
The rules were amended by the Board of Appeals at their business meeting of June 24, 1992. The
following section was amended: 4.5.
The following were present: Mr. Leah, Mr. Imai, Mr. Cristello, Mr. Furia and Mr. Matthews.
The rules were unanimously adopted as amended by the Board of Appeals at their meeting of December
30, 1992. The following sections were amended: 3.3(d)(new), 4.5 (correction), 6.1 (revised), 6.4
(revised), 9.1 (revised) 9.2 (deleted in entirety), present 9.3 replaces 9.2.
The rules were amended by the Board of Appeals at their business meeting of June 29, 1994. Section
3.2 was amended to include "and Associated Members."
The rules were amended by the Board of Appeals at their business meeting of September 24, 1997.
Section 3.2 was amended to delete "June" and replace it with "September".
The following Members were present: Chairwoman Elaine V. Grey, Members Anthony J. Cristello,
Anthony D. Furia, John J. McCarthy, Jr., and Alternate Members John W. Marshall and Harry J. Vlachos.
These rules were amended by the Board of Appeals at their meeting of November 13, 2002. Section 3.2
was changed from ‘one year’ to ‘two consecutive years’. The unanimous vote of 5-0 included: Elaine V.
Grey, Chairperson; Anthony D. Furia, Acting Clerk; John W. Marshall, Member; John J. McCarthy, Jr.,
19
Member; John G. Gannon, Associate Member. Absent: Harry J. Vlachos, Clerk.
These rules were amended by the Board of Appeals at their meeting on September 24, 2003. Adopt
new Section 4.7, Comprehensive Permits, and further amend Section 5C, Fees-Comprehensive Permit,
by deleting “$150” and adding “See Section 4.7” and further amend Section 5.3, by inserting at the end of
the paragraph, “For Comprehensive Permit Fees, See Section 4.7.” The unanimous vote of 5-0
included: John W. Marshall, Acting Chair; Anthony D. Furia, Acting Clerk; Harry J. Vlachos, Member;
John G. Gannon, Associate Member; Melissa M. Santucci, Associate Member. Absent: Elaine V. Grey,
Chairperson; John J. McCarthy, Clerk.
These rules were amended by the Board of Appeals at their meeting on September 24, 2003. Amend
Section 5.2(B) by deleting the last sentence of second paragraph and deleting fourth/last paragraph in its
entirety and replace with (refer to meeting notes) and further amend Section 5.6, by deleting after the
word exceed “Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.)” and replace with “Four Thousand Dollars ($4,000).” The
unanimous vote of 5-0 included: John W. Marshall, Acting Chair; Anthony D. Furia, Acting Clerk; Harry J.
Vlachos, Member; John G. Gannon, Associate Member; Melissa M. Santucci, Associate Member.
Absent: Elaine V. Grey, Chairperson; John J. McCarthy, Clerk.
These rules were amended by the Board of Appeals at their meeting on March 29, 2006. Amend Section
5B2 and 5B4 - replace incorrect reference to Section 5.2 to correctly reference 5.1. Add Section 5E:
“Legal Notice Fee: Publication of Legal Notice is required by MGL c. 40A, §11. The fee associated with
the publication of the legal notice for two consecutive weeks will be billed to the petitioner directly from
the newspaper in which it is published.” Replace the incorrect section numbered 5.2 (with the
subsections of 5.1.2b, e&f listed below it) to the correct section 5.1. Correct the section numbered 5.2B
to 5.2. The unanimous vote of 3-0 included Harry J. Vlachos, Chairman, Anthony D. Furia, Member and
Melissa M. Santucci, Associate Member. Absent: John J. McCarthy, Jr., Clerk.
These rules were amended by the Board of Appeals at their meeting on December 28, 2011. Amend
Section 4.2(A), in middle of paragraph, replace “…no less than 21 days…” with “…in accordance with the
Meeting/Hearing Dates and Filing Deadlines schedule…”. Section 4.2(B), delete “and Town Attorney”.
Section 4.3(D), replace “Planning Board” with “Planning Staff”. Section 6.01(A), replace “…last
Wednesday…” with “…fourth Wednesday…” and replace “…at 7:30 p.m.“ with “…at 7:00 p.m.” . Section
6.01(B) add “149 Main Street”. Section 6.01(C), replace “…no less than twenty-one (21) days…” with
“…in accordance with the Meeting/Hearing Dates and Filing Deadlines schedule…”. Section 6.02
deleted after the word ‘locus’: “The number of cases to be heard at each meeting shall not be more than
three. In the event of an emergency, at the request of the petitioner and upon a showing that a delay in
hearing will cause hardship, the Chairperson may order the Secretary to schedule cases in excess of
three for hearing, provided that there is sufficient time to issue all notices required by the Zoning
Ordinance an applicable state law.” Section 9.01, replace “…on the last Wednesday of each month…”
with “...prior to or…”. Replace all references to ‘secretary’ with ‘clerk’.
The unanimous vote of 5-0 included Melissa M. Santucci Rossi, Chairman; Deborah Elliott, Clerk; David
Ferris, Member; Suneeth John, Member and Christopher Heep, Associate Member.
20
________________________________________
Chairperson
Effective 12/27/84
Amended 04/05/88
Amended 10/26/88
Amended 12/27/89
Amended 01/31/90
Amended 03/06/90
Amended 06/24/92
Amended 12/30/92
Amended 06/29/94
Amended 09/24/97
Amended 11/13/02
Amended 9/24/03
Amended 3/29/06
Amended 12/28/11
21
Addendum
Board of Zoning Appeals
COMPREHENSIVE PERMIT
RULES OF PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
(Section 4.7)
Adopted September 24, 2003
22
Comprehensive Permit Rules of Practice and Procedure
Adopted September 24, 2003
Section 4.7
1.00 Purpose and Context
2.00 Definitions
3.00 Filing, Time Limits, and Notice
4.00 Review of Applications and Review Fee
5.00 Public Hearing and Decision
6.00 Changes in Application
7.00 Appeals
1.00: Purpose and Context
These Rules establish procedures for applications to the zoning board of appeals for comprehensive
permits granted under the Anti-Snob Zoning Act (Chapter 774 of the Acts of 1969), M.G.L. c. 40B, §§
20-23. They are required by M.G.L. c. 40B, § 21 and by 760 CMR 31.02. The purpose of that Act and
these Rules is to facilitate the development of affordable housing in Massachusetts. Further
explanation of the background and purpose is provided in the regulations of the Housing Appeals
Committee, 760 CMR 30.01.
These Rules alone are not sufficient to describe comprehensive permit procedures before the zoning
board of appeals. They must be read in conjunction with and implemented in a manner consistent
with the complete regulations of the Housing Appeals Committee, 760 CMR 30.00 and 31.00 and with
the Guidelines for Local Review of Comprehensive Permits, published periodically by the Department
of Housing and Community Development. In addition, the Board's general Rules for conduct of
hearings under M.G.L. c. 40A apply to comprehensive permit applications. In case of inconsistency or
conflict between those general Rules for conduct and these Rules, these Rules shall govern.
2.00: Definitions
(a) Board means the zoning board of appeals established under M.G.L. c. 40A, § 12.
(b) Local board means any local board or official, including, but not limited to any board of survey;
board of health; planning board; conservation commission; historical commission; water, sewer, or
other commission or district; fire, police, traffic, public works or other department; building inspector,
zoning enforcement officer or similar official or board; town council. All boards, regardless of their
geographical jurisdiction or their source of authority (that is, including boards created by special acts
of the legislature or by other legislative action) may be deemed local boards if they perform functions
usually performed by locally created boards.
23
3.00: Filing, Time Limits, and Notice
3.01: The application for a comprehensive permit shall consist of:
(a) preliminary site development plans, stamped and signed by a professional engineer, scaled at
1”= 20’ or 1”=40’ showing the locations and outlines of proposed buildings; the proposed locations,
general dimensions and materials for streets, drives, parking area surface and structured, walks and
paved areas; and proposed landscaping improvements and open areas within the site. An applicant
proposing to construct or rehabilitate four or fewer units may submit a sketch of the matters in
sections 3.01(a) and 3.01(c), below, which need not have an architect's signature. All structures of
five or more units must have site development plans stamped and signed by a registered architect;
(b) an existing condition site plan scaled at 1”=20’ or 1”=40’ showing existing buildings, on-site
infrastructure and utilities, wetlands and buffer delineation, if applicable, and a summary of conditions
in the surrounding areas, showing the location and nature of existing buildings, existing street
elevations, traffic patterns and character of open areas, if any, in the neighborhood. This submission
may be combined with that required in section 3.01(a), above. However, must be shown as a
distinguishable different overlay.
(c) preliminary, scaled architectural drawings at ¼”=1’or 1/8 ”=1’. For each building the drawings
shall be signed by a registered architect, and shall include typical floor plans, typical elevations, and
sections, and shall identify construction type and exterior finish;
(d) a tabulation of proposed buildings by type, size (number of bedrooms, floor area) and ground
coverage, and a summary showing the percentage of the tract to be occupied by buildings, by parking
and other paved vehicular areas, and by open areas;
(e) where a subdivision of land is involved, a preliminary subdivision plan;
(f) a preliminary utilities plan showing the proposed location and types of sewage, drainage, and
water facilities, including hydrants;
(g) documents showing that the applicant fulfills the jurisdictional requirements of 760 CMR 31.01,
that is,
(i) the applicant shall be a public agency, a non-profit organization, or a limited dividend
organization,
(ii) the project shall be fundable by a subsidizing agency under a low and moderate income
housing subsidy program, and
(iii) the applicant shall control the site;
(h) a list of requested exceptions to local requirements and regulations, including local codes,
ordinances, by-laws or regulations.
(i) a complete pro-forma, detailing the projected costs and revenues of the proposed project.
24
(j) a preliminary traffic report/study.
3.02: The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee based upon
the number of proposed housing units of:
(a) for Limited Dividend Organizations - $ 600. flat fee plus $9.00 per unit
(b) for Non-Profit Organizations - $ 600. flat fee plus $ 3.00 per unit
(c) for Public Agencies and Local – Cost of Legal Notice and Postage for Notification to abutters.
3.03: Within seven days of filing of the application, the Board shall notify each local official of the
application by sending such official a copy of the list required by § 3.01(h), above. Based upon that
list, it shall also, within the same seven days, invite the participation of each local official who has a
substantial interest in the application by providing such official with a copy of the entire application. In
order to allow review by local officials, the Applicant shall provide the Office of the Board of Appeals
30 copies with one copy to the Town Clerk of the complete application so that the following boards,
officials and departments may review the same:
Board of Appeals; Planning Board; Conservation Commission, Fire Inspector, Police/Traffic,
Inspection Department, Department of Public Works, Town Engineer, Assessor, Health Department,
Disabilities Commission, Bicycle Committee; and one unbound copy for copying purposes.
Additionally, (5) 11”x17” copies of all plans (with matchlines) with one unbound copy shall be made
available to the Board of Appeals for copying purposes.
4.00: Review Fees
4.01: When reviewing an application for, or when conducting inspections in relation to, a
comprehensive permit application, the Board may determine that the assistance of outside
consultants is warranted due to the size, scale or complexity of a proposed project, because of a
project’s potential impacts, or because the Town lacks the necessary expertise to perform the work
related to the comprehensive permit application. Whenever possible, the Board shall work
cooperatively with the applicant to identify appropriate consultants and to negotiate payment of the
consultant fees. Alternatively, the Board may, by majority vote, require that the applicant pay a
reasonable “project review fee” of a sufficient sum to enable the Board to retain consultants chosen
by the Board alone. The Board may require that the Applicant make an initial deposit of $20,000 into
a special account established to retain consultants. In the event that such sum is insufficient to fund
the necessary consulting services, the Board may require additional deposits.
4.02: In hiring outside consultants, the Board may engage engineers, financial analysts, planners,
lawyers, urban designers or other appropriate professionals who can assist the Board in analyzing a
project to ensure compliance with all relevant laws, bylaws, and regulations. Such assistance may
include, but not be limited to, analyzing an application, monitoring or inspecting a project or site for
compliance with the Board’s decision or regulations, or inspecting a project during construction or
implementation.
4.03: Funds received by the Board pursuant to this section shall be deposited with the Town
Treasurer who shall establish a special account for this purpose, consistent with the terms and
provisions of G.L. c. 44, §53G.. Expenditures from this special account may be made at the direction
25
of the Chairman, Board of Appeals without further appropriation. Expenditures from this special
account shall be made only for services rendered in connection with a specific project or projects for
which a project review fee has been or will be collected from the applicant. Accrued interest may also
be spent for this purpose. Failure of an applicant to pay a review fee shall be grounds for denial of
the comprehensive permit application.
4.04: At the completion of the Board’s review of a project, any excess amount in the account,
including interest, attributable to a specific project shall be repaid to the applicant or the applicant’s
successor in interest. A final report of said account shall be made available to the applicant or
applicant’s successor in interest. For the purpose of this regulation, any person or entity claiming to
be an applicant’s successor in interest shall provide the Board with documentation establishing such
succession in interest.
4.05: Any applicant may take an administrative appeal from the selection of the outside consultant to
the Town Manager. Such appeal must be made in writing and may be taken only within 20 days after
the Board has mailed or hand-delivered notice to the applicant of the selection. The grounds for such
an appeal shall be limited to claims that the consultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not
possess the minimum required qualifications. The minimum qualifications shall consist either of an
educational degree in, or related to, the field at issue or three or more years of practice in the field at
issue or a related field. The required time limit for action upon an application by the Board shall be
extended by the duration of the administrative appeal. In the event that no decision is made by the
Town Manager within one month following the filing of the appeal, the selection made by the Board
shall stand.
5.00: Public Hearing and Decision
5.01: The Board shall hold a public hearing on the application within thirty days of its receipt. It may
request the appearance at the hearing of such representatives of local officials as it considers
necessary or helpful in reviewing the application. In making its decision, the Board shall take into
consideration the recommendations of local officials.
5.02: The Board shall render a decision, based on a majority vote of the Board, within forty days after
termination of the public hearing, unless such time period is extended by written agreement of the
Board and the applicant. The hearing is deemed terminated when all public testimony has been
received and all information requested by the Board has been received.
5.03: The Board may dispose of the application in the following manner: (a) approve a
comprehensive permit on the terms and conditions set forth in the application,
(b) deny a comprehensive permit as not consistent with local needs, or
(c) approve a comprehensive permit with conditions, including but not limited to height, site plan,
size, shape or building materials, that do not render the construction or operation of such housing
uneconomic.
6.00 Changes in Application
6.01: In the event that, during the public hearing, the Applicant proposes any changes in its
Application or project plans that, in the Board’s discretion, constitutes a material or substantial change
26
to the project, the Applicant shall provide a new site-eligibility letter from the designated subsidizing
agency.
6.02: In the event of material or substantial changes, the Board may request, and the Applicant shall
provide, any and all information specified in Section 3.00 hereof that is deemed by the Board to be
necessary to evaluate such changes.
6.03: In the event of a material or substantial change, any and all plans and supporting information
shall be provided to all of the local entities identified in Section 3.03, above.
7.00: Appeals
7.01: If the Board approves the comprehensive permit, any person aggrieved may appeal within the
time period and to the court provided in M.G.L. c. 40A, § 17.
7.02: If the Board denies the comprehensive permit or approves the permit with conditions or
requirements considered by the applicant to be unacceptable, the applicant may appeal to the
Housing Appeals Committee as provided in M.G.L. c. 40B, § 22.
27
 
 
 
 




 


